A SHORT VIEW OF THE PRINCIPAL DUTIES OF THE Christian Religion. WITH Plain
Arguments to persuade to the sincere and speedy Practice of Them.

To which is added, A Prayer suited to the Whole, to be used Morning and
Evening.

For the Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all Men; teaching
us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present World; looking for that blessed Hope and
the glorious Appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.
11, 12, 13. By a Divine of the Church of England, for the Use of his
Parishioners.

LONDON, Printed for I. Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Church. Yard. 1700.

Price 3 d. or 20 s. per Hundred.

To my beloved Parishioners of Ailesham, in the County of Norfolk.
Brethren,
AS my hearts Desire and Prayer to God for you is, that ye may be saved: Romans
10. 1
So it shall be my great Endeavor to guide and assist you, in this important
Business of working out your own Salvation. And in order thereto I Phil. 2. 12
have in the following Pages given you (as it were in one View) a Summary of
all those Christian Duties (with their Motives to them) which I conceive
necessary to Eternal Life, which (being such) I intend (God willing) to make
the constant Subject of my public Discourses among you. And therefore I do
earnestly recommend them beforehand to your serious and constant Perusal, that
so your Minds, by forming the same Notions of the Christian Doctrine with my
self, may better apprehend my Meaning in my Sermons, and consequently be the
better enabled, not only to keep in memory what is preached unto you, but also
to edify or profit by it.

And the great concern I have for your Eternal Welfare, makes me the more
desirous of your ready compliance with these my Endeavors, to build you up in
your most holy Faith; the end whereof is nothing less than the Salvation of
your Souls. 1 Pet. 1. 9.


It is to be observed and remembered, that our composition is not made up of
what is sensible only (though we chiefly converse with this) but that Man
consists of a Soul, as well as a Body, and our experience may convince us, that
the World is not a suitable, or satisfactory Luke 12. 15.
good for the one, though it be for the other; which plainly shows that our
chief End is, not to eat, and drink, and sleep, and carry on a few wordly
Designs; and then go out of the World as ignorant, and less innocent than we
came into it; but our great End is, to cultivate our better Part, and by the
constant exercise of Eccles. 12. 13.
Religion fit our Souls for that spiritual and immortal Life, the loss whereof,
not even the whole World it self, can compensate; Mat. 16. 26.
and yet nothing can put us into the Possession of it, but keeping the
Commandments. For so it has pleased -- 19. 17.
the Wisdom of God to make Religion, or Obedience to his Laws, at once the
Condition of our future Happiness, and the necessary Preparation for it. For
it is our likeness to, or resemblance of God, that must dispose us to relish any
Pleasure in the presence and enjoyment of him, (for no one delights in the
conversation of him, who is of a temper contrary to his own) and it is our
Obedience to his Will, that must make us like him, (i. e.) holy as he is holy,
and 1 Pet 1. 15, 16.
consequently happy as he is happy.

So that the various Duties of the Christian Religion, laid before you in the
following Pages, are the very life of your Souls; and your Right or Claim to
the one increases or diminishes, in the same Proportion, with your Practice
of the other. And therefore as ye love your Souls ye must love your Duty; Pro.
19. 16 Psalm. 119. 52. -- 165. 2 Cor. 112. Prove. 14. 32.
for there is nothing else can afford you any solid Comfort in this World, or
any reasonable hopes of Happiness in the other.

And it may be of great encouragement to your Duty to consider, that as it is
thus exceeding necessary to be practiced; So it is with all as easy to be
known. It is made so plain, that he who runs may read it, and accordingly it
seems to have been more thoroughly understood, (I am sure much better practiced)
by poor Sheperds, and ignorant Fishermen, than by the most learned
Philosophers, and Disputers of 1 Cor. 1. 21*
this World; and St. Paul, though a Acts 22. 3.
Scholar, was yet to preach the Gospel, not with Wisdom of Words; and therefore
1 Cor. 1. 17.
there is not so much need of Logic or the Art of reasoning, as of true Faith
and Piety to understand it. So that if ye bring but along with you to these
Papers an honest and docible temper of Soul, I could hope ye might (with as
little James 1. 21
trouble as ye could desire) know enough to make you wise unto Salvation. ^
Tim. 3. 15


And when once ye have attained to such a degree of Knowledge in these
necessary Duties, then all that remains to be further urged, is only that ye
would please to remember our Savior's Words to his Disciples; If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them, and that John 13. 17.
ye may, as it is the earnest desire: So it shall be the great Endeavor of,

Your most faithful Friend and loving Pastor, Jonathan Wrench.

A short View of the Principal Duties of the Christian Religion, etc.
GOD, Who would have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, has implanted in every Man a Desire of
Happiness; and in the Gospel has made true Religion, that is to say, Pref. p.
2. Matthew 7. 21. Heb. 12. 14.
a faithful Observance of the Laws of Christ, necessary for the Attainment of
that Desire. So that it becomes at once every Man's Duty and Interest to
acquaint himself with this true Religion, as being the one thing needful for
the Object of his Thoughts, and the Subject of his Practice.

And as it is your Duty thus to learn: So (having the Care of your Souls upon
me) I think it mine to inform you; what ye must do to inherit eternal Life, and
that is, in short, what the Doctrine of the Gospel, or (as the Apostle
expresses it, what the Grace of God which (brings Salvation, and has appeared
to all Tit. 2. 11, 12.
Men) teaches us, namely, that Denying Ungodliness, and wordly Lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World. This is the
Sum of what we, on our Part, promised to God and Christ to perform, when we
were baptized into the Christian Religion, for Baptism is that Ceremony, by
which God enters into Covenant with the Persons to be baptized, wherein God is
pleased to promise certain Advantages to them on his Part, and the Persons to
be baptized engage to observe certain Conditions on theirs. The Terms of
Stipulation, or the Covenant to be performed on Gods part, are (as our Church
Catechism informs us)

First, That we shall be made Members of Christ, (that is to say) Members of
his spiritual Body, the Church, whereof Christ himself is Romans 12. 5.
the Head, from whom, we are to expect all our Strength and Power to live as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, or as Christians, that walk Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
worthy of the Lord unto all Well-pleasing.

Secondly, That we shall be made the Children of God, that is, God (with whom
we are in Covenant) will adopt us for his Sons John 1. 12. Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4.
5. 6. Luke 11. 13.
through Faith in, and Obedience to, Christ our Savior, and as his Sons will
expect only a filial Obedience; will readily pass by our Infirmities, freely
forgive our Sins, and be heartily reconciled to us, in and through the Beloved,
will bestow upon us his Holy Spirit, and with Him, a Supply of all things
necessary for the Support of our spiritual Life and Growth in Grace.

Thirdly, as a Consequence of this, we shall be also made Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven; for if we are (as I said just now we were) hereby made the
Children of God, the Romans 8. 16, 17. Tit. 3. 5. 7. Heb. 1. 14.
Apostle's Conclusion is very strong, that if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of
God, and joint Heirs with Christ, which can import nothing less than that we
shall be, together with him, Heirs of Salvation,

All this is, in short, what God makes over to us in the Covenant of Baptism.
All which we can expect, only upon Condition of the Performance of our Part of
this sacred Covenant. For such is the Nature of Covenants, that when one of the
Persons covenanting or contracting receedeth from his Part of the Covenant he
does thereby actually acquit the other, with whom he covenanted, from all
Obligation to perform his Part of the Covenant. So that if we do not perform
our Part of this Covenant, made in our Baptism, we thereby discharge God from
the Obligation of performing his Part, and therefore it stands us in great
stead to be very punctual in our Observance of those Sacred Obligations, which
we laid upon our Selves ^n our Baptism, because all the Privileges belonging
to us, as Christians, together with our Eternal Life and Happiness, either
stand or fall by our well or Nonperformance of them; ^or though Jesus, and he
only, has delivered us 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 18. Acts 4. 12. Heb. 5. 9.
from the Wrath to come, and reconciled us to God by ^is Death; yet it must be
with all remembered, that the Benefits of his Death and Passion are all
conditional, and that he is Become the Author ^f eternal Salvation, only to
them that obey him. This being therefore a Matter of great Impor^ance, I shall
be the more particular (as far as my intended Brevity will admit) in my
Consideration of those Conditions, which every Christian is supposed to
promise, in his Baptism, faithfully to observe; and these are no more than what
the Grace of God, (which has appeared to all men) teaches us, viz. that
denying Ungodliness, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Eccles. 12. 13. Phil. 2. 12. Psalm. 34. 14.
1 Pet. 3. 11.
and wordly Lusts, we should live soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this
present World; for This is the Whole of Man, the Sum of all that God requires
at our hands; in order to the working out our own Salvation, our Duty consists
only in these two Things, the Eschewing Evil, and doing Good: The Evil to be
eschewed, denied, or forsaken by us is comprehended under these few Words;
Ungodliness and wordly Lusts, and the Good, in these, The Living Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly, in this present World.

1. One Condition of the forementioned Privileges is, that we Deny Ungodliness
or Impiety. Now as (...)
Piety is that Part of our Duty, which has a more immediate Relation to God: So
(...).
Impiety or Ungodliness may be supposed to comprehend in i^ all those Sins,
which are levelled more immediately against Him, which may be all reduced to
these two general Heads; Either,

1. The Disowning Him the true God, for our God; or

2dly. The setting up other Gods besides him* For,

1. The Disowning the true God for our Josh 24. 27. Psalm. 53. 9. Acts 17. 29.
Psalm. 73. 9, 11. Matt. 5. 34. James 5. 12. Job 31. 26, 27, 28. Lev. 24. 15, 16.
1 Timothy 6. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Tit. 1. 16.
God implies in it the Disowning or Denying Him in our Thoughts; either
thinking Him not at all, or thinking unworthily of him; the Denying Him in our
Words, by arguing against his Being, and endeavoring to dispute Him out of it:
Swearing falsely or vainly by his Name, Cursing, Blaspheming Him, and
Ridiculing his sacred Word. Lastly, the Denying him in our Actions, Living as
without God in the World, either by Omitting our known Duties to him, or
Committing wilful Sins against him. All which are notorious Instances of
Ungodliness.

2dly. Ungodliness consists, not only in disowning the true God any of the
forementioned Ways, but also in Setting up other Gods besides Him. Which I
conceive, may be done either of these three Ways:

1. By Substituting or Placing any other God in Lev. 26. 1. Romans 1. 23. Acts
17. 29. 2 Kings 17. 33. Zeph. 1. 5.
Room of the true God; or

2dly. By worshipping any other God together with Him; or

3dly. By giving those Acts of Worship to any created Good, which are due to
God alone.

The two former of these relate to the Idolatrous Worship of the Heathens,
which was one great Sin, that Christians formerly promised in their Baptism to
forsake, when they engaged to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works; and the
latter is what Christians, not only were, but are now adays obliged to
Renounce, and yet but too frequently adhere to ^t; in that they are apt to
Repose (as sad Expe^ience shows) a greater Reliance on their ^ordly Goods,
fixing more Hope in them, and Rom 25. 1.
^ffording a larger share of Love to them, than ^o God himself; so making them
their God, and their Happiness. And accordingly we are ^old in Scripture of
some, Whose God is their ^elly; of others, Who sacrifice to their Net, and
Phil. 3. 19. Hab. 1. 16. Psalm. 20. 7. Job 31. 24.
^^rn Incense to their Drag; of some, Who trust in Chariots, and some in
Horses; of others, Who make Gold their Hope, and say to the fine Gold, Thou art
^^r Confidence; whose Sin is therefore justly cal^ed * Idolatry; because they
affix those Acts of ^he Soul to a created Good, which ought to be employed upon
God alone. So that all these wicked Practices, being in effect Idolatrous, may
be justly styled ungodly Actions, and are therefore included in this great Sin
of Ungodliness, which we must deny.

2dly. Another Condition of the forementioned Privileges is, our forsaking
wordly Lusts. By wordly Lusts I understand all the disorderly Motions, whether
of our Understandings, Wills, Affections, or Appetites, as they are all
depraved or corrupted by the Abuse of our selves.

1. As to the Disorders of our Understandings when these, in Persuance of their
natural Inclination to Knowledge, either thirst after that which is neither
proper, nor safe to be known, Deuteronomy. 29. 29
as the secret Things of God, and the pleasures of Sin; or after that which is
both safe and proper to be known, in an undue manner, as when we immoderately
study humane Learning to Romans 1. ^1 3. 11.
the utter Neglect of divine Knowledge, and the Care of our Souls, our
Understandings are in both these cases productive of sinful Lusts.

2dly. There is a Corruption residing also in our Wills, which diverts them
from their Embraces Romans 8. 7
of chiefest good, as the Spiritual things of God, to their over-earnest
Persuit of sensual Pleasures, by which they being enslaved and brought into
Captivity to the Law of Sin, are likewise productive Romans 7. 23.
of many sinful Lusts. But,

3dly. And above all, our Affections have suffered very much by the Abuse of
our selves, are very extravagant in their Motions, and Col. 1. 21.
withal but too easy to be misled; thus nothing is more common, than to see
the two great governing Passions in us, I mean our Love and Hatred, misplaced,
by loving what we ought to hate, such are sinful Pleasures; and hating that,
which we ought to love, such Psalm. 97. 10
are God and Goodness; or if we love and hate what we ought, yet it is often
done in a Matthew. 22. 37.
disproportionate manner, either by persuing the best things with an
indifferent Affection; and indifferent things, such as wordly Goods, with our
best Affection; or avoiding the least Evils, such as temporal Calamities, with
our greatest Hatred; and the greatest Evils, viz. Sin, and eternal Death, with
a less Hate, or Aversion; in any of these Miscarriages, which (God knows) are
but too frequent, we blindly run into sinful Lusts.

4thly. And Lastly, The disorderly Appetites of the Body, together with that of
carnal Concupiscence, may in a more peculiar manner; be called fleshly Lusts;
thus when we eat and drink more than is consistent with our Health, Romans 13.
13. 14. Jer. 5. 8.
and the sprightly Operations of the Soul, or when our carnal Concupiscence is
directed to a wrong Object, or immoderately used on a lawful one, they are in
the very matter of them sinful Lusts.

And thus having enquired into the Corruptions of our Nature, it is not
difficult to forebode what (without the Application of Religion) must be the
unhappy Effects of them. It were easy to show how every one of those fleshly
Lusts in particular, reckoned up by the Apostle, flow from one or other of our
disordered and corrupted Faculties. But this were a task, as ^ot very agreeable
to my intended Brevity, so (I could hope) not very necessary, in as much as the
Lusts of the Flesh are manifest, which are Gal. 5. 19. 20. 21.
^^ese, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lascivious^ess, Idolatry,
Witchchraft, Hatred, Variance, Emu^ations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like.

These and such like, are the Lusts, which we must deny; that is, which we must
avoid; and that not only in their grosser Acts, but we must resist and stifle
(as much as possible) the ^ery first Motions in us; and in order thereto, ^e
must form beforehand firm and well-grounded Resolutions never to yield them
our Assent; and lest our Resolutions, when tried should not be found faithful,
we should prudently cut off all Occasion of Dispute, and industriously shun
even the very Shadow of a Temptation. All this Care and Caution is employed 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
in this one word Deny. And thus we see what it is to deny Ungodliness and
wordly Lusts, and that in effect it is the same as to Renounce the Romans 6. 11.
Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all
the sinful Lusts of the ^lesh, as our Church Catechism expresses it; and this
is one great Part of our Baptismal Vow. That which is further required of us to
procure us a Right to the forementioned Privileges is, That we live Soberly
Righteously and Godly in this present World; soberly in Relation to our selves,
Righteously in reference to our Neighbor, and Godly in respect to God, which
latter, being the Foundation of the other two, I shall beg leave to invert
their Order, and begin with that first, which is here set last, and that is,
the Living Godly.

Godliness (or as it here signifies) (...).
Piety, has (as I before hinted) a special Regard to those Commands of God,
which have a more immediate aspect upon God himself, and so chiefly imports our
duty toward God, the whole whereof is sum'd up by the Author to the Hebrews in
few words, namely, the believing that Heb. 11. 6.
he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. As to his
Existence, this I might evince from, not only his Works of Creation and
Providence, but from the Nature and Dictates of every Man's Conscience,
suggesting to him, that God is not far from every Acts 17. 27.
one of us. Which gives me reasonable grounds of hope, that my time and pains
would be better spent in explaining his Essence, than in proving his Existence,
that is, in showing you what he is, rather than that he is. Now God (as far as
an infinite Being can be conceived or described by a finite Understanding) is a
Spirit, the Creator of all things, Invisible, whom no Man has seen or can see.
Omniscient, John 4. 24. Acts 17. 24. 1 Timothy 1. 17. 6. 16. Joh. 21. 17. 1 Samuel
2. 2. John 3. 33. Psalm. 90. 2. Jam. 1. 17. Genesis 17. 1. Psalm. 119. 68. Psalm.
139. 7. 145. 17. Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Exodus 34. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 5. 1 John 5. 7. John 4. 23,
24. Ephesians. 3. 14. 1 Col. 6. 20. Acts 20. 36. Rev. 4. 10, 11.
or knowing all things. Most Holy, True, Eternal, Unchangeable, Omnipotent.
Perfectly Good, both in himself, and to us. Omnipresent, or every where
present. Most Just, Merciful and Loving; who, though one in Essence, exists in
three Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, from which (though imperfect)
Account of the Divine Being, it is easy to deduce or draw our various
Obligations to him, as thus. Since from this Description of God it is plain that
we owe our selves unto him, we owe withal, all possible Service to him, which
(to procure his divine Acceptance) must be suited to his Nature, and that being
Spiritual, it follows that we must worship him in Spirit, or with a spiritual
Worship, that is, we must make all possible and just acknowledgments of the
divine Perfections, chiefly by the Powers of our Souls, yet not excluding those
of our Bodies, with which we must glorify him, as well as with our Spirits, and
that, by such humble gestures of Body, as testify and extol the adorable
Perfections of God to others; we must entertain right apprehensions of the
divine Nature and Excellencies in our Minds, frequently call them to mind,
firmly believe them, really delight in Psalm. 73. 25, 28.
them, and (as far as it is possible) imitate those which are imitable by us. We
must further, out of our great Esteem for, and deep sense of these his
Excellencies, admire and adore him, -- 18. 3. 96. 4. Heb 13. 15 Acts 17. 28.
^ow down our Souls before him in Prayer and Praises to him, as to our great
Creator and ^enefactor, in whom we continually live, move, and ^ave our Beings.
All this is no more than a just acknowledgment of what God is in himself, and
here described to us; for thus our Faith and Hope, that is to say, our Assent
to the John 6. 40.
Truths, which he has revealed, and our expectation of what he has promised,
are debts Romans 10. 11.
we owe to his Veracity or Truth, as founded on his Omniscience, Holiness, and
his Omnipotence. Our love of, and trust in him, are 1 Cor. 8. 3. 1. Tim. 4. 10.
Isa. 26. 4.
the necessary effects of our firm Belief of his Almighty Power, joined with
his infinite Goodness, which renders him both able and willing to do us good.
Our fear of him or care not to offend him is but the natural consequence Luke
12. 5.
of our Belief of his Omnipresence, and Justice armed with his Omnipotence. Our
patience and submission to his Will are but Heb. 12. 9.
in us, the reasonable products of his infinite Wisdom and Greatness, exerted
in his act of Creation. Our Honor or our profound Reverence 1 Samuel 2. 30
and Respect to his super-excellent Majesty, and to all things relating to him,
as his Name, his Word, his Sacraments, his Ministers, his House, and his Day,
our profound Regard to these naturally flow from our consideration of all his
boundless Perfections.

Lastly, his Existing in three Persons, Father, 1 John 5. 7.
Son, and Holy Ghost, binds upon us fresh Obligations of Obedience to them all,
and particularly of owning and renewing our Obligations and Resolutions of
Obedience to them. in the blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Because
herein we make a particular acknowledgment of what each of these blessed
Persons have done for us; as that God the Father, who once gave his Son to die
for the Sins of the whole World, is disposed to present him here Romans 5. 8. 1
John 2. 2.
for our spiritual Food and Sustenance. The Son, as he once freely offered up
himself for us upon the Cross; So again freely offers to us his Body Heb. 9.
14-12. 2. Matthew. 26. 27, 28.
and Blood in this heavenly Feast. And Lastly, the Holy Ghost, conveys that
strength and refreshment to our Souls, which is here received from the Body and
Blood of Christ. All which enhanseth our Obligations to renew our Obedience
Acts 2. 46. 1 Cor. 11. 26.
to them all, and in order thereto to come often to this Blessed Sacrament, for
the worthy receiving whereof, the best Preparation is to live Soberly,
Righteously and Godly, in this present World. And what it is to live
Righteously is the second thing to be considered by me.

Now Righteousness is, in short nothing else but the giving to every man his
due, in all those various capacities and relations wherein he stands. Thus
there being the relation of Magistrate and Subject, of Pastor and Flock, of
Father and Son, of Husband and Wife, Master and Servant, Brethren and Friends,
there being also a common Relation to all Mankind as our Neighbor,
Righteousness consists in an exact observance, as well of those special Duties,
which each of these relations may bring us under in particular, as of all other
Duties, which the common relation of Neighbor, lays upon us in general; that
is, in the giving to every Man his due, not only as he is my Neighbor, but
moreover and above, as he may be concerned with me in any one or more of the
forementioned Relations. Thus Romans 13. 1, 4. Eccles. 10. 20. Pro. 20. 20.
(besides the common Obligation of Neighbor) our Superiors the Magistrates,
being Gods Vicegerents, and of his Appointment and acting by his Authority
justly claim of us an ^wful Apprehension of them in our Thoughts, ^e making an
honorable mention of them ^ith our Lips, submiting to them for Conscience ^^e,
paying them their Tribute, and praying for Acts 23. 5. Jud. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Romans 13. 5. 7. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
^^eir happy Government of us, and that, which in ^^urn they owe unto their
Subjects, is their Pro^^ction against the Assaults of their Enemies, a ^nstant
maintenance of their Rights and Proper^^s, their Liberty and Religion, that
under ^^ we may lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all ^^dliness and Honesty.
And as to our spiritual 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13. 17
^^ents who have begotten us through the Gospel, ^^se also we must esteem very
highly in love for ^^eir Works Sake, and if they rule well count them ^^thy of
double Honor; which we cannot bet^^ express, than by attending to their Word
and ^^ctrine with the utmost Application of our ^inds, and by falling to the
practice of it John 20. 23. 1 Cor. 16. 16. Gal. 6. 6.
^ith all our Hearts; which would not only ^event the ungrateful use of the
Censures of the ^^urch, (which we must submit unto when we ^^end) but would
better dispose us to afford ^^r Pastors an honorable maintenance, as it is our
^^ties to do, it being (as St. Paul says) a matter 1 Cor. 9. 14
^^ God's own Ordaining and Appointment that ^^y which preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel ^ Lastly, we must join with them in their of^^ing Heb. 10.
25 Luke 2. 37. Acts 2. 46. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
up the public Prayers of the Church, and ^^ily present our private Prayers to
God for them, ^or good Success on their Labors, that whilst they ^^ch to
others, they themselves may not be cast away; but ^^her may both save
themselves, and them that hear them.

Again, Our natural Parents, being (under ^^d) the Authors and Maintainers of
our Be^^gs, acquire hereby a right to our Honor ^^l Esteem, our Fear and
Reverence, our Mat. 19. 19
^^ve and Affection, our Obedience to their Col. 3. 20.
^^ful Commands, our submission to their ^astisements, and lastly our Gratitude
in Ad^^nistring Heb. 12. 9. 1 Timothy 5. 4.
to their Wants, and bearing with ^^eir Infirmities. And they, as being our
Parents, are by the Laws both of Nature and Religion, obliged to provide their
Children ^ (as far as they are able) with a competent maintenance, in respect
both of their Souls and Bodies. In respect to their Souls, that they be brought
to an early Baptism, that they be Ephesians. 6. 4.
taught to read, and as soon as possible, be instructed in the Principles of
the Christian Religion, and that a constant care be had, (by forbearing
Provocations, and showing Piety at Home, and by all other good and prudent
means) tha^ they daily increase in the Knowledge and Practice of them. In
respect to their Bodies that their Parents supply them with Food and Raiment,
and (if possible) with all the Conveniences, as well as Necessaries, of Life;
tha^ 2 Cor. 12. 14.
they may be put into the World under a possibility, and probability of
thriving in it*

There are also mutual dues between Husband and Wife, and the Duties common t^
them both are, that they love each other, and express it in endeavoring to
procure a mutua^ satisfaction in all things, and to promote the Ephesians. 5. 31
Temporal and Spiritual Welfare of each other; that they be faithful to each
other Bed, having always in remembrance the 7th Commandment; that they bear
with eac^ -- 5. 1 Cor. 2. 7 1 Pet. 3. 2. Heb. 13. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 7.
others Infirmities, and partake of each other Prosperity or Adversity; that
they pray for each other, that they honor, that is, gives respect due to each
others Person, and particularly that the Husband give Honor to the Wife in St.
Peter's sense, which is (...) 1 Pet. 3. 7
Maintenance, ^^ being the weaker Vessel; that he exercise his Authority over
Her in the milder way of Admonition, rather than in the more imperious wa^ of
Command, remembering that they twain are bu^ one flesh, though the Man be the
head of the Woman; that he gives her all due Benevolence, an^ 1 Cor. 11. 3. --
7. 3
lastly all seasonable and necessary Instructions* The Duties of the Wife,
whereby she stand^ ^^e especially obliged unto her Husband, are 1 Pet. 3^. 1.
Ephesians. 5. 24.
^^ she submits peaceably to that Authority ^^ her, which God has given to the
Man; ^^, as a necessary consequence of this, She re^^ce her Husband, and show
it in a becoming -- 33. 1 Pet. 3. 4.
^^guage, and Deportment toward him; ^^ly, that she be at all times forward to
do ^^t (she knows) he likes, and obey what he Ephesians. 5. 24.
^^mands, provided it be both lawful and ^^edient, of which, he is supposed to
be the most Col. 3. 18. 1 Cor. 14. 35.
^^petent Judge, being by the Apostle appoint^^ an Instructor to his Wife, even
in Matters ^ Religion.

Lastly, there are various Duties incumbent ^ Masters, and Servants, that
Masters take a due ^^e of their Servatnts as Members of their ^^n Families;
that they provide for their 1 Timothy 5. 8.
^^dies a competent Maintenance, and for their ^^uls, religious Instruction and
Admonition; ^^at in every respect they give to their Servants, Col. 4. 1.
^^t which is just and equal, as knowing ^^ they also have a Master in Heaven
with whom is ^ respect of Persons. That they be not in their Romans 2. 11.
^overnment of them harsh and froward, but ^^ld and gentle; that they require
nothing of ^^em, but that which is, in it self, both rea^^nable and lawful;
that they threaten them Ephesians. 6. 9.
^o more than is necessary, and give them on^^ (when need so requires) due
Correction; ^^at they perfectly instruct them in the Art or ^rade, which they
undertook to teach them; ^^at they reward them according to agreement, Deuteronomy.
24. 14, 15. Jam. 5. 4.
^^nctually paying them their Wages; lastly ^^at they restrain them from
Vicious, and love them (all they can) to Religious Practi^^s: And Servants in
return of these Dues, ^ust (as they justly ought) count such Masters 1 Timothy 6.
1.
^^rthy of all Honor, and show it upon all Occa^^ons in their respectfull
Carriage and Demea^our toward them. They must obey them in all ^^ings,
agreeable to their Contract, and that out of a Principle of Conscience, not
with Eye-service as Me^ Col. 3. 22. Ephesians. 6. 5. 6, 7, 8.
pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, with singl^ness of heart and
cheerfulness of Spirit; whi^^ will make them diligent and constant in their
Ob^dience; they must be also true to their Tru^^ Tit. 2. 9, 10
ever promoting, by all lawful means, the ^ Masters Profit; they must take care
of the ^ Goods, vindicate their Credit abroad (as far ^ they can) and conceal
their Infirmities at hom^ And lastly, they must quietly submit to the ^ unjust
as well as due Corrections, ever amending by them; for what glory is it, if
when ^^ are buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patien^ly? but if when
ye do well, and suffer for it, ^^ 1 Pet. 2. 20.
take it patiently, this is acceptable unto God. Accordingly Servants are there
commanded to ^^ V. 18.
subject to their Masters, with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward. For though Masters should not strictly observe their
Duties to their Servants, yet this would no^ free Servants from their
Obligations to their Masters; because God has in Duty bound no^ only the Master
and Servant to one another but both of them to himself. And this, (as ^ would
have it observed and remembered) hold^ true in all the other forementioned
Relation^ of Superiors and Inferiors; so that the Superior's offense against
God, in depriving the Inferior of his due, (and so on the contrary) cannot
authorize the Inferior to sin against Go^ too, by returning the injury received
upon hi^ superior; as for instance, though a wicked Father should cast off all
care of his helples^ Children, and so sin against God, as well as injure his
Children, (who have a natural righ^ to maintenance) yet this would not excus^
his Children from their Obedience to their wicked Father; because it is
impossible tha^ ever one Man's Sin should excuse that of another, when both sin
against God. And this i^ 1 Samuel 2. 25
all I think necessary to be said concerning the Relations of Superiors and
Inferiors There are other Relations, which seem to be ^^e upon the level,
those, I mean of Bre^^en; and as to these, there are some parti^^ar dues
belonging to them, whether they be ^^ natural or our spiritual Brethren. Thus
our ^^ral Brethren are, by means of their near ^^ance to us by nature, obliged
to be more ^^iceable to us (when they can) than they ^bound to be to mere
Strangers; because ^^r natural Affection for us may be well sup^^ed to prompt
them to it, by exciting in ^^n a passionate concern for our Welfare; ^^ich
supersedes the want of all those Argu^^^ts and Entreaties, which are allowable,
^ sometimes necessary to be used, in draw^ out our relief to Strangers. So that
to ^e our Brother of our Substance, and to ^^ him in every thing where we can,
and ^^ere he needs, seems to be but the ne^^ary, though just, effect of our
near Alli^^e to him by Nature. And no less necessary ^^ natural is a mutual
accord and agreement Genesis 13. 8
^^ongst Brethren, and that upon account of ^^r partaking of the same Blood and
Sub^^ce, deriving both from the same Root, ^^ as a Consequence of this, from
their like^^ of temper (for the most part) from ^^ir equality in circumstances,
and from the ^^earments of innocent and undesigned Con^^ation; all which
disposes them to delight ^^ine another Converse, freely to communi^^e their
Thoughts, and so participate of one ^^thers Souls as much as they do, of ^^r
Bodies; so that Nature it self teaches us, ^t Brethren owe to one another
love, and as ^ effect of that, union in Heart and Soul; ^ as the effect of both
these, a readiness to ^^ply their Wants, either by lending them ^ bodily
Assistance, or Ministering to them of ^ Substance, which is by the Apostle
called 1 Timothy 5. 8.
^^oviding for those of our own House or Family. But besides our Brethren by
Nature, there ^^ also such by Grace, commonly called Spirit^^ Brethren, who
become such, by being made ^^ Baptism Members of the same Catholic Ch^^ with
our selves; we being all united un^^ one head Christ Jesus. And in this
Relation th^^ Romans 12. 5. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13.
are various Duties we stand obliged to obse^^ toward one another. For,
considering that ^^ are Members of the same Body, we must ne^^ think our selves
bound to contribute, all ^^ can, both, to the Service of the Members ^^
particular, and of the whole Body in gener^^ for as it is in the natural Body,
so is it in the spir^^al One, every Member is useful to, and recei^^ 1 Cor. 12.
21.
benefit from another. The Eye cannot say ^^ the Hand, I have no need of thee;
nor again; the H^^ to the Feet, I have no need of you; so that it ^^ comes our
indispensable Duty, as Members ^^ the Catholic Church, to render our selves as
u^^ful, as we can, to all our fellow Memb^^ having the same care one for
another; which ^^ should exercise in mutual Offices of kindn^^ to one another,
as occasion serves, being obl^ged to do good unto all Men, but (as the Apo^^
observes) more especially unto them that are of ^^ Household of Faith; to
relieve at once the wa^^ Gal. 6. 10.
of their Bodies and promote the good of th^^ Souls; to admonish them of their
Faults, bri^^ing Mat. 18. 15 Romans 15. 14. Gal.. 6. Rom 15. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 10. --
12. 25.
them to a Sorrow for them, and an ame^^ment of them; to bear with the
infirmities of ^^ weak Brethren; to convince those that separ^^ from the
Church, of the Sin and Misch^^ of Schism; to persuade them to an immedi^^
return into the Bosom of the Church, and ^ constant adherence to her. To
communic^^ with them in all the common Offices of Chri^^anity, in adhering to
the same Faith a^^ Doctrine, that Faith I mean, which ^^ once delivered to the
Saints, in joining in t^^ same Worship, receiving the same Sacram^^^ Jude 3.
of the Lords Supper, in offering up the sa^^ ^^ayers, the same in substance
though not in ^e forms of expression, being presented to ^e same God, for the
same common Mercies, ^on the same terms, through the same Media^^n, 1 Timothy 2 5.
and with the same common Affection, ^d Brotherly concern for one another: And
as ^e are thus to communicate with our fellow ^mbers in matters of religions
Worship: So ^^st we also participate of their Joys and ^rrows, whether in
temporal or spiritual ^ncerns; for as the Members of the Body na^^al
communicate their Sorrows and their Joys ^ all the rest; So the Members of the
spiritual ^^dy must sympathize with one another, and ^^ether one Member suffer,
all the Members should 1 Cor. 12, 26 Romans 12. 24.
^fer with it, or whether one Member be honored, ^ the Members should rejoice
with it.

Lastly, as we are thus to partake of the Joys ^d Sorrows of the Members in
particular: So ^ so of those of the Church in general, whe^^er national or
universal. In times of Perse^ution we must condole the Desolations. Then ^^r
Miseries and Calamities should, more es^ecially, excite both our pity to see
her in the ^^st, and our Repentance of our crying Sins, Psalm. 102. 14. Hosea.
5. 15. Psalm. 51. 18
which justly draw down direful Judgments ^n her. Earnestly beseeching God that
he would ^^ good in his good pleasure unto Sion, that he ^ould build up the
Walls of Jerusalem. And in ^er flourishing Condition, we must rejoice ^ith Her,
expressing our Joy and Gratitude in a ^aithful Obedience to, as well as in a
constant Communion with Her, that God may be thereby disposed to hear our
Prayers, which we should ever offer up on Her behalf, saying, O Psalm. 74. 19
^eliver not the Soul of thy Turtle Dove unto the ^ultitude of the wicked,
forget not the Congregation ^f thy poor for ever, but strengthen thy Spouse.

Lastly, There is one Relation more, which I shall mention to you, and that is,
a very Inti^ate one, I mean that of a Friend, who is as Deuteronomy. 13. 6.
ones own Soul; and though this Relation Christianity calls by the name of
Charity, (which, a^ such, is to be extended to all Mankind) yet because our
Capacities are finite, and we cannon exercise those Offices of Friendship to
all the World, which we can to some few particula^ Persons; therefore this
Frindship or particula^ Charity, must be confined to those few, whom either the
convenience of Neighborhood the Probability of their Usefulness, our natural
Relation to them, our delight in them, our special Affection for them, and
above all their known Worth and Goodness shall invite us, to admit into our
Friendship; and when upon any, or all of the foregoing Considerations, we have
made some few Persons our Friends, then Christianity, as well as the nature of
Friendship requires, that we love our Friend with the greatest Affection; that
1 Samuel 20. 17.
we serve him to the utmost of our Power; that we freely communicate our
Thoughts to him, when there be occasion; that we advise Prove. 27. 9.
him in his Doubts and Scruples; that we admonish him of his Faults, restrain
him from Evil; faithfully keep his Secrets; that we comfort Ecclus. 22. 22.
him in Afflictions, rejoice with him in Prosperity, doubling his Joys and
dividing his Griefs; that we heartily wish and pray for his Welfare; Prove. 27.
10.
and lastly, that we be constant to his Friendship, and all these Offices of
it. All this is (as I before hinted) Charity extended to a Few. But Christian
Charity is in its own nature much more comprehensive, and takes in all Mankind;
for so the Gospel enjoins us, to love our Neighbor as our selves. And Matt.
22. 39.
in the Scripture sense, whosoever is another; is our Neighbor; so that,
according to the Christian Law, we must do all the good we Matt. 5. 24.
can to all men, not only Friends, but Enemies, whose injuries must never be
otherwise Romans 12. 20, 21.
returned than with Prayers and Kindness, but must forgive them as heartily as
we desire to be forgiven, and deal by them (as well as by all other Men) as
kindly, and as justly as we desire to be dealt by, for this is the great Rule
of the Gospel, and of Universal, as well as of eternal Obligation, All things
Mat. 7. 12.
whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this
is the Law and the Prophets. So that if we would not be abused, and injured in
our Persons, robbed or plundered in our Estates, overreached in our Bargains,
slandered or defamed in our good Name, or the like: So neither must we offer
any of these or the like Abuses to any Man, whether Friend or Foe, but as in
reason we desire to avoid Injuries, to have our Rights defended, and nothing of
them lost; so must we, in our Observance of this equitable Rule, not only not
injure, but maintain and defend our Neighbor in all his Rights, as far as we
can, otherwise we are not just unto him. For if the Nature of Justice be the
giving to every Man his due, then the Practice of it must certainly consist in
never taking away, but preserving (what we can) the Life of our Neighbor, in
defending his Body from Injuries, and his Soul from Sin, in granting him the
Liberty of reasoning and judging for himself, in not slandering him, or James
4. 11
lessening his good Name, but as far as we can in clearing it when it is
aspersed, in imparting Ephesians. 4. 2^. Psalm 15. 2, 3-4. Jer. 33. 15, 16. Lev. 19.
13. Mark 10. 19. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6
our true meaning to him by our Words, in performing punctually what we
promised to him, in fairly using him in our Dealings, in never coveting his
Goods, but rather desiring to promote his Profit. In these and such like things
consists our justice to him; because he being a rational Creature united to us
in Society, holds his Life, his Body and Soul, with all the Benefits of
Society, such as Truth, Love, Peace, Credit, Protection, and the Profits of
Trade, by the same Law of Nature with our selves, and so can make as good a
Title to them, as we can to what we have; so that according to the stated
Notion of Justice, and this unalterable Law of Equity, the doing as we would be
done by, we can no more injure our Neighbor than our selves, but are strictly
bound to defend his forementioned Rights, and consequently to free him (when we
can) from those Miseries and Misfortunes, which either do, or would invade them.

And though this is often called by another name, I mean, that of Charity, yet
it still retains the Nature of Justice; it being no more than the miserable
Man's due (as by consequence it appears) to receive relief from his Fellow
Creatures, when it can be had. And to this Notion the Psalmist seems to
incline, when he gives the Charitable Man (as he does very often Psalm. 37. 21.
25. 29. etc.
in the Psalms) the Name and Title of Righteous.

So that Justice to our Neighbor obliges us to relieve the various
Necessities of the miserable, whether they relate to the Soul or Body. In
regard to the Soul, sorrow of Mind justly 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. James 5. 19. 20. Romans
14. 19 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. Romans 15. 1, 2. Acts 20. 35 Psalm. 41. 1. Luke 10. 33,
34, 35, 37. James 2. 15. 16. 1 John 17, 18.
demands our Administration of Comfort; Ignorance and Error calls for our
Information and Forbearance; Perverseness and Obstinacy o^ will for our
wholesome Advice and seasonable Reproof, Weakness of Judgment for our Direction,
Pity and Compassion. And as to the Body, its natural Blemishes and Defects
ought in justice to solicit more our Pity than our Scorn or Laughter; its
Weakness and Infirmities should stir us up to contribute all we can to its
support and recovery, and as for its outward wants, Food and Raiment, these
call loudly for our Supply, as being necessary to the Preservation of the
Individual. Now in supplying our Neighbor (that is, every Man that wants)
with all these things, as far as our Abilities will serve, or his Necessities
require, is that Duty of Charity, which Justice obliges us to exercise toward
him.

And thus in a faithful discharge of all the forementioned dues to our
Neighbor, in all his Capacities and Relations, consists this great Duty of
Righteousness, or living Righteously.

The last Duty to be considered is, that which respects our selves, (and that
is) the living Soberly. By (...)
Sobriety, I understand a Subjection of all the Faculties of the Soul, and the
Powers of the Body, to the Rules of right Reason, and the Laws of God; that is,
that we employ our Understandings in searching Psalm. 119. 15, 27. Psalm. 19. 7,
8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 20, 20. Psalm. 37. 4. Ps. 119. 127 Mat. 22 ^ Col. 3. 2. 1 John 2.
15.
out the noblest Truths and our chief End, which are God and Happiness; that we
bend and dispose our Wills to prosecute our chief End by the fittest Means,
that is, by the Practice of Religion; that we proportion our Affections to the
Value of things; that is, that we set our best Affections on the best things;
that we love the Lord our God with all our Heart, with all our Soul, and with
all our Mind, and bestow no greater Affection on the things of this World, than
their intrinsic Worth requires; that we hate and avoid the greatest Evils, Sin
and Death, with our utmost Hatred; that we Mat. 10. 28
be less fearful of less Misfortunes, and patiently suffer those that are
unavoidable; that 1 Pet. 2. 1. Heb. 13. 5. Ephesians. 4. 31.
we envy not the Fortunate, or covet any thing that is our Neighbors, but
content our selves with what we have; that we revenge not injuries, or grow
angry at Contempt; but show forth the Fruits of the Spirit in Peace,
long-suffering Gal. 5. 22.
gentleness, goodness and meekness. That we value not our selves above the real
Merits of those 1 Pet. 5. 5. Phil. 2. 3 Romans 12. 10 1 Pet. 2. 11. 1 Cor. 9. 25.
1 Cor. 6. 18 1 Cor. 9. 27.
Gifts, which either Nature, Grace, or Fortune has bestowed upon us. That we
restrain our bodily Appetites from the excessive use of Meat and Drink, and
Venery; that we indulge them no farther than answering the End for which they
were given us, which is the Refreshment of Nature and the Preservation of
Mankind, and not, (as too many make them) the unhappy Occasions of those
notorious and 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Mat. 5. 27, 28. Romans 13. 13
crying Sins, Drunkenness, Gluttony, and Whoredom. Lastly, that we be moderate
in the Use and Enjoyment of Pleasures and Recreations, enjoying them no further
than as they serve to refresh our wearied Bodies, and restore the languid
Faculties of our Souls, to their sprightly Operations. In a due Observance of
all these things consists the great Duty of Sobriety. And these I take to be
the best Proofs of a (...)
sound Mind, which is what the Greek and original Word signifies.

And thus having shown you what it is to deny Ungodliness, and wordly Lusts,
and what to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World, I am
to tell you next, that This do and Luke 10. 28
thou shall live; the Practice of these Duties will most certainly give you
abundant Reason to expect with Comfort; or look for the blessed Hope Tit. 2. 13.
and glorious Appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. And
therefore this, amongst other Arguments, is what I would insist upon, to press
you to the faithful Observance of the forementioned Duties. But besides this
great and general Motive, there are some other Topics of Argument, or Heads of
Discourse, by which I intend (more largely in my Sermons) to dissuade you from
the forementioned Sins, and persuade you to the Practice of these Religious
Duties.

And my Dissuasions from these Sins shall be drawn,

First, From the great Slavery and Drudgery of our Lusts and Vices.

Secondly, From the Consideration of their being the most disingenous, and
ungrateful Returns of the most inestimable Mercies.

Thirdly, From the Consideration of their being very prejudicial to all
Societies.

Fourthly, From the ill Effects they have upon our Souls, Bodies and Estates.

Fithly, And Lastly, from the Certainty of their betraying Men into eternal
Ruin and Destruction in the other World.

And my Persuasions to the Duties of Religion shall be taken.

First, From their Agreableness to the present Circumstances of humane Nature.

Secondly, From this Consideration, viz. that these Duties of Religion directly
consult the Good of our Souls, Bodies, and Estates.

Thirdly, From the Consideration that there are great Assistances given us, to
render these Duties not only easy, but pleasant to us.

Fourthly, And Lastly, that the Practice of our Duty is the indispensable
Condition of our future Happiness, the only ground upon which we can reasonably
look for that blessed Hope and the glorious Appearing of the great God and our
Savior Jesus Christ.

First, I would dissuade you from the forementioned Sins, upon Consideration of
the great Slavery and Drudgery of them. Thus the impious disowning God in our
Thoughts, and the more monstrous Denial of him in our Actions, fills the Mind
with such uneasy Scruples and Horrors, as are never to be stifled; Men's vain
and unnecessary Curiosity serves only to puff them up with Pride, which is
directly 1 Cor. 8. 2
opposite to the Charity that edifieth; and therefore when Men are not content
to rest in the plain wholesome Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, they are scarce
fit for humane Society; because by being Proud and doting about questions and
strifes of Words, they unhappily occasion envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of Men of corrupt Minds, and therefore St. Paul
advises his Son Timothy 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.
from such to withdraw himself.

Again, the Disorders of our Wills, in persuing Misery under the false
Appearance of Good, rob us of our true Satisfaction, and in exchange thereof
give us nothing but real disappointments. And so Men's inordinate desires hurry
them upon strange and unaccountable Attempts, betray them into Injustice,
Passion, and Revenge, besides the many distracting Cares and Fears, to which,
at the same time, they expose their unhappy Souls. Lastly, their rebellious
Lusts and Appetites put them oftentimes upon hard Service, make them toil and
sweat for the gratification of them, and so in a literal sense they become mere
Slaves and Drudges to them, and accordingly the holy Scriptures represent such
Men as wearying themselves Hab. 2. 13.
to commit Iniquity, and to labor in the very Fire, to spend their Strength
for naught, to sell themselves 1 Kings 21. 25. John 8. 34.
(as it is said of Ahab) to work Wickedness. So true is our Savior's Assertion,
whosoever commits Sin is the Servant of Sin, a Servant too that gets nothing
for his Pains, but spends his Labor for Isa. 55. 2.
that which satisfies not. For what Fruit had ye of those things whereof ye
are now ashamed; says Romans 6. 21.
the Apostle to those who had once been the Servants of Sin, for End of those
things is Death. Nothing you see, but Shame and Death is to be gotten by such
unprofitable Service, and these will prove but a sorry Recompense for all that
Labor and Vexation, which you see the Sinner must be condemned unto, in the
Gratification of his Lusts.

Secondly, Consider again, that they are the Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
most disingenuous and ungrateful Returns of the most numerous and inestimable
Mercies. God's Redemption of the World, by the Incarnation and Death of his
Son, is an admirable Instance of the Love of both to Mankind, and John 3. 16.
received no little Addition, by being free on their Part, and undeserved on
ours; they had Romans 3. 24. -- 5. 6, 7, 8. Job 22. 2, 3.
no Interest to promote, no by ends to serve, nothing inviting in us, no
Argument of any sort to move them to it, but only infinite Kindness and
Compassion, beholding the Miseries of wretched Humanity, disposed the Father 1
John 4. 9. 10. Ez. 16. 6. Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
to send his only begotten Son, and the Son to take upon him our Miseries, make
them his own, and that too, by dying for us that were his Enemies, and yet
dying for us, to procure us the greatest Blessings, such as a Freedom from the
Power and Punishment of our Mat. 1. 21. Heb. 2. 14, 15. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Tit. 2.
4. Heb. 5. 9.
Sins, from the Malice of Satan, from the Sting of Death, and to settle us in a
state of Holiness here, and Happiness hereafter. Now there is nothing can
thwart this generous Love, or baffle all it is gracious Designs, but our Sins;
which are so contrary to the Purity of his Divine Nature, as well as to his
gracious Designs upon us, that he cannot but hate and abhor Psalm. 5. 4. Heb. 6.
6. Ephesians. 4. 30.
them. They wound and crucify his Son afresh they vex and grieve his holy
Spirit, and therefore to entertain them against all these endearing Obligations
to the contrary, would be monstrous Ingratitude, such as wants a Parallel, and
was never named among the Gentiles; for what greater Argument, can we have of
our Insensibility of the Divine Favors toward us, if these inexpressible ones
cannot work upon our Ingenuity so far, as to banish our Lusts, those implacable
Enemies both to God, and Heb. 1^ 28, 29.
our own Souls; we are certainly lost to all that is tender and apprehensive in
humane Nature, if such mighty Benefits cannot move us, to express our grateful
sense of them, in suitable returns of Care and Endeavor, not only to abstain
from those fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul, but to exchange them 1
Pet. 2. 11.
for such good Dispositions, as may move us to express our thankfulness to God
for all his Benefits, in Arts of new Obedience to him.

Thirdly, it may be further considered that these Lusts and Vices, which I am
now persuading you to deny, are very prejudicial to all Societies; for besides
that they justly expose Men to the Judgments of God, Who turns a fruitful Land
into Barreness, for the Wickedness of them Psalm 107. 34.
that dwell therein, they have a natural tendency to introduce Mischief. Thus
it is evident without any further proof of Argument, that Drunkenness, Gluttony
and Whoredom, breed Prove. 23. 21, 29, 30. -- 7. 26.
Diseases, which weaken the Force and Strength of a Nation; Malice, Envy and
Revenge render Men very troublesome to others, as well as to themselves, turn
them into Beasts of Prey, fit them more for a Den of Lions, Wolves and Tigers,
than the Society of rational Creatures; James 3. 16.
and so Pride, Covetousness, Injustice and Perfidiousness administer occasion
of Contention, and set men directly together by the Ears, so much reason have
we to answer or resolve St. James his Question in the Affirmative, from whence
come Wars and Fightings among you, come James 4. 1.
they not hence, even from your Lusts which war in your Members?

And as Men's Lusts have thus a very ill Influence upon them, as private
Members of Society: So they fail not to communicate their Malignity to them in
their public Capacities, as Governors; for when Magistrates are not just,
ruling in the Fear of God, they weaken their Authority, lessen themselves in
the Eyes of their People, and make their Subjects very uneasy and
unmanageable; and on the other hand, when Subjects by submitting to their
Lusts, violate and abuse their Conscience, they deprive the Public of it is
best Security of their Obedience. For this is the only firm and lasting
Principle of Obedience, which can hold Men fast, when all other Obligations to
it, will fly in pieces. He that is Subject only for Wrath, and not for
Conscience sake, will be sure to submit no longer than till he can resist with
Safety. But he that is subject for Conscience sake, will continue so, as long
as his Conscience keeps up her Authority, which when his Lusts have once
dethroned, then farewell all Submission and Obedience; nothing then succeeds but
Strife, and Contention, and every evil James 3. 16.
Work; and this will turn to our own great Disadvantage, being by Nature not
only fitted for, but made to stand in need of, those Benefits of Society of
which our Lusts are very destructive.

Fourthly, Ye may please to consider further, that Ungodliness and wordly Lusts
have very ill Effects upon the Souls, Bodies and Estates of Men. Thus as to the
Soul, Sensuality and Intemperance naturally darken the Understanding, Ephesians. 4.
18, 19.
for these by overcharging Nature load the animal Spirits, keep them low, and
render them gross, which by being low, cast a Damp upon the Soul, and hinder
her in her sprightly Operations. So Anger, Envy, Malice and Revenge pervert our
Judgments, raise such Prejudices in our Minds, as hinder our clear and due
Perceptions of things. Sensual Pleasures and Delights overcast the Mind with
such thick Mists of Darkness, that neither are our Understandings able to
discern, or our Wills to pursue, their true and chief Good. Romans 7. 15.
Lastly, the extravagant Motions of our wild Affections, and the Rebellions of
our brutish Appetites against our Reason, hurry us into all manner of
unaccountable Follies, make us forget our selves, and dispose us to act like
the Beasts that perish. Besides many other necessary, but uneasy Effects of
these Disorders, and Violences offered to our Reason, such are the ungrateful
Recoilings of Nature, the uneasy and perpetual Struglings between the Flesh
and the Spirit. The miserable Distractions of their Minds which are drawn first
one way and then another by contrary and impetuous Passions, the great and just
confusion of Face, Shame, and Self-condemnation, the continual frettings at
their past Follies, their grievous Suspicions of an After-reckoning, their
insupportable Horror Pro. 18. 14. Isa. 57. 20. 21.
and anguish of Mind, arising from their unwelcome Reflections on their past
Guilt, these are such intolerable Mischiefs, as are enough to discourage the
most daring Sinner, from giving any longer Entertainment to those Lusts, which
are the unhappy causes of them; especially if it be considered,

Secondly, That they incommode not only our Souls, but our Bodies too, by
robbing them of their Health and Ease together. Thus the forementioned Vices,
Luxury, Drunkenness and Wantonness have a natural Tendency to ruin our
Stomachs, spoil our Digestion, Corrupt our Blood, consume our Spirits, and
waste our Strength. Envy, Malice, Discontent and Passion rot our Bones, sour
the Humors, stir them up to Excess, and put the Pro. 14. 30.
whole Body into Combustion. Covetousness with all it is Train of carking cares
and distracting Thoughts, drives away Sleep, one of the supports of Nature,
oppresses the Heart, damps the Spirits, sets the Humors upon the Fret, and in
what can we think all these Disorders should end, but in all manner of Dis^^^^^
Paroxysms, Epilepses, Catarhs, and I know not what hard Names, and harder
things, as being the natural Effects of these Lusts, And these ill Effects me
thinks should the more effectually prevail with wicked Men to forsake their
Sins by how much the more they value their Bodies above their Souls, and
therefore may well be supposed to use more care, in shunning those Things,
which are destructive to them.

Thirdly, It may be considered also that your Lusts will as certainly ruin your
Estates, as they do your Bodies, or your Souls, and that not only by hastening
the just Judgments of Pro. 23. 21.
God upon them, but by that natural Tendency which there is in some particular
Vices to consume them. I need to instance only in Sensuality and Revenge; as to
the former I will leave you to judge, whether men cannot by eating fine, and
drinking hard, and using their Palates to both, (and so render the
Gratification of them necessary) whether they cannot by these means sooner
spend an Estate than satiate their Pro. 21. 17.
craving Appetites. For an Estate though large, is yet limited, but so are not
our Desires, and therefore the one must needs be much sooner spent, than the
other. As to our Revenge, how chargeable the Gratification of that is, every
Lawyer can inform you, and now since it is so chargeable to be wicked, our
Lusts being very expensive to us, it is undoubtedly ill Husbandry, and therefore
worth no Man's while, to give them Entertainment, especially considering in the

Last place, what is worst of all, and that is, that they most certainly betray
men into eternal Ruin and Destruction in the other World. For misery (as ye
have partly seen) is the necessary Consequence of Wickedness, and therefore
will be so in all Places, and at all times; so that Men's Lusts and Vicees
which they have cherished in this World, accompanying Eccles. 11, ^.
their Souls into the other, will still work the same direful Effects upon them
as they did here, only with this Difference, that whereas they have here some
refreshing Intermissions, some little Diversion from the forementioned
Miseries, they will there be continual and heightened to the utmost Capacities
of their Souls to receive them. So that the unhappy Sufferers will be condemned
to lie roaring upon the Racks of their guilty Minds, without Intermission, and
without end. And accordingly we are in the Scripture assured, that the Worm
there never dies, nor the Fire ever quenched, Mark 9. 44. Rev. 20. 10.
but that they are tormented Day and Night forever and ever. And yet this is to
be the Portion of those that live after the Flesh, so that he Romans 8. 13.
who indulgeth his Lusts and Vices here must expect no Indulgence or Favor
from God hereafter; for know ye not that the Unrighteous shall 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God; but what is worse, shall have
their Portion assigned them in that dismal Mat. 25. 46
Place, where there is nothing but Weeping, Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth.
Consider seriously of these things, and then tell me whether ye have not
sufficient reason to Deny Ungodliness, and wordly Lusts.

But as this is the least Part of our Duty; So the greatest Motives are yet to
be proposed to you, those I mean which are to encourage you to live Soberly,
Righteously and Godly, in this present World. And here it may be considered,

First, That the Observance of these Duties is very agreeable to the present
Circumstances of our humane Nature. Thus our Duties toward God, as owning him
in our Thoughts, Words, and Actions, hearing his holy Word, Praying to him and
receiving the Sacrament, are all easy to be performed by us, and very
beneficial to us when they are performed. Our 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Justice to our Neighbor in all his Capacities and Relations; and our Charity
to him in all his Necessities, naturally tend to our Good, both as private
Persons and as Members of Society. As private Persons, they promote the good of
our Souls, Bodies and Estates, (as I shall show you presently) and as Members
of Society, they consult our Good, in that they promote mutual Good Will, Love,
Peace, Unity, etc. Thus Justice preserving our own as well as others Rights,
makes us easy in our Stations, and promotes mutual Confidence in one another,
which would naturally produce Peace and Unity, and so our Charity to our
Brethren gains us an universal Love and Respect from Men, together with a
Readiness to relieve our Necessities, upon Occasion, in a grateful return.
Lastly, the unviolated Authority of Conscience disposes Magistrates to rule
well, and Subjects to be strictly obedient to them; thus Religion in all its
Parts is so good natured that it tends to make Men peaceable and beneficial
toward one another, and so advance the Interest of Mankind in general. And no
less profitable is it in the

Second Place to every private Man in particular. For it consults the Good of
our Souls, Bodies and Estates. As to our Souls,

In our Observance of our Duty toward God, and worshipping him suitably to his
Nature, our Understandings are directly led to the Contemplation of the noblest
Truths, our Wills Ps. 73. 25, 26, 27.
to their embraces of their chiefest Good, and our Affections are hereby fixed
on what they ought to be, viz. the Things above. And so all the Faculties of
the Soul being kept in their due Order, and employed to their proper Ends, our
Souls live and act according to the ^^w of their own Nature, and consequently
must needs enjoy great Peace and Tranquillity. Because there are no Disorders of
the Passions, no Fears of Guilt to interrupt it. And therefore great peace have
they who love thy Law, and nothing shall Ps. 119. 165
offend them.

Secondly, The Practice of the forementioned Duties consult the good of our
Bodies, and that by preserving them in a perfect state of Health; for what can
contribute more thereto, than a cheerful temper of Mind, and a moderate Phil.
4. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. 1 Pet. 4. 7. 1 Cor. 9. 25.
use of Meat and Drink and Recreations, and these things Religion teaches and
requires of us.

Besides, the Practice of Religion may reasonably be supposed to procure a more
than ordinary Blessing upon these prudent, and probable Means of Health, from
that God who kills and makes alive, who brings down to the 1 Samuel 2. 6.
Grave, and brings up. And he accordingly has promised, in the Scriptures,
Health and long Life as a Reward to the Practice of Religion; for for length of
Days is in her right hand, and she is a Tree of life to them that lay hold upon
her. Wherefore it was an Advice well becoming the Prove. 3. 16, 18.
the Wisdom of him that gave it. My Son forget not my Law, but let thine Heart
keep my Commandments; for length of Days and long Life and Peace shall they add
unto thee.

Lastly, the Practice of the forementioned Duties brings down and entails a
Blessing upon our Estates; and that not only by engaging the Kindness of
Heaven, to have a more especial eye of Providence toward us, both by directing
Psalm. 34. 10
us to those Duties which naturally promote our wordly Interest. Thus Justice
and Honesty bring Men into Repute, that gives them an Opportunity of enlarging
their Credit of Trade, That their Stocks, and These their Revenues; and though
Fraud and Falsehood may sometimes chance to bring us in a present Advantage,
yet when it is once detected, we lose more Reputation, and with it more
Customers, than ever the dishonest Gain can compensate, so that Truth and fair
Dealing will bear a Man out, when little and sharking Tricks will fail him. For
as the Wiseman observes, he that walks uprightly walks surely. And so
Temperance and Chastity Pro. 10. 9.
prevent all unnecessary and extravagant Expenses; whereas they who indulge
their sensual Appetites, to the Violation of their Conscience, ruin their
Estates to rights; if we may believe our own Observation, or the the Wiseman's
Word, who tells us, that he who loves Pleasure shall be a Poor Man, and he Pro.
21. 17.
that loves Wine and Oil, (i. e.) love them to Excess, shall not be rich.
Lastly, Industry and Diligence in our Callings not only cut off some
Opportunities of Extravagance, but directly tend to increase our Fortunes;
Reason and Experience both, confirming this as an undeniable Truth, that the
Hand of the Diligent makes Prove. 10. 4.
rich. So that when all is done, it is most certainly the best Husbandry to be
Religious.

Thirdly, I would further urge you to the Practice of the forementioned Duties,
from the great Assistances that are given us, to render them not only easy,
but pleasant to us. For God has recommended them to our faithful Observance,
with all the most powerful Means and Arguments, to engage our Practice of them;
he has showed thee, O Man what is Good; and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to do Micah 6. 8.
Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. He has not only
proposed these Duties to us in the Gospel, with the Promises and Terrors of the
Life that now is, and of that 1. Tim. 4. 8. 1
which is to come, with the Examples of the best of Men, especially with that
more pregnant one of our Blessed Savior, together with all those prevalent 1
Pet. 2. 21.
Motives arising from what he did and suffered for us, with those mighty
Arguments that may be drawn from his Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and
his Return to judge both the Quick and the Dead; with Pleasure and Peace from
the Nature of the Duties themselves, Ps. 119. 165
and with all the Endearments of Love and Kindness from him that enjoins them;
he not only urges us (I say) to our Duty upon these many and weighty
Considerations, and that with all the Importunity possible to gain our
Practice, but has also promised the Assistance of his Almighty-Spirit to make
all things 1 Cor. 2. 12.
easy and pleasant to us. So that if we do but set our selves in good earnest
to the Practice of the forementioned Duties, if we do but heartily beg the
Divine Grace, which, we are assured, shall be sufficient for us, and then apply
2 Cor. 12. 9.
our own Endeavors in a faithful and diligent use of it, it is impossible that
we should fail of Success; for I can do all things, says the Phil. 4. 13.
Apostle, through Christ that strengthens me. And this Omnipotent Assistance we
may have, upon the easy terms of putting up a Petition for it; for God has
engaged to give the holy Spirit to them that ask him. And what more easy
condition Luke 11. 13
can we desire than this, that If we seek we shall find, if we ask we shall
receive, receive too that which, Mat. 7. 7.
though we cannot of our selves, will yet empower us, through our joint
Endeavors, to do our Duty with Pleasure and Delight, and so render us both
happy here and hereafter too; for This,

In the 4th and last Place is (or ought to be) a further Inducement to our
Practice of all the Duties of Religion, because God has made our Duty the
indispensable Condition of our future Mat. 7. 21. Romans 8. 13.
Happiness, and (as I showed you in the ^eginning of this Discourse) the
necessary Pre^aration Heb. 12. 14 1 Timothy 4. 8.
for it. So that it is just as necessary ^or us to be Religious, or to do our
Duty, as ^t is to go to Heaven, or to keep out of the ^lames of Hell. And this
ought to be a Con^deration of great Weight with us, because ^hatever our
Condition be in the other World. Whether a happy or a miserable one, it must
Luke 16. 26 2 Pet. 1. 10.
^e so for ever; so that we had need give all Digence to make our calling and
Election sure.

Thus having, I hope, by these Considerations ^onvinced you of the Necessity of
doing the ^orementioned Duties, my next Work is to tell ^ou, that what is thus
necessary to be done, at ^ne time or other, had best be done now out Eccles. 9.
10.
^f hand. And indeed unless we set our selves ^^ the immediate Practice of
these Duties, is plain that we are not heartily convinced ^f the Necessity of
doing them at all. Because ^ur continuance in our Sins do too manifestly ^rove
our Good-liking to them; and if we ^^ll approve and cherish them, we are not ^
good Earnest reconciled to the Practice of ^^e contrary Duties; because we can
neither ^pprove of two different things, nor act two ^ifferent ways, at the
same time. So that if ^^ve be the Servants of Sin, (as our Intentions ^o
continue in it for a while plainly show) ^e cannot be the Servants of Christ:
Either therefor we must quit our Sins and our favorable ^^oughts of them
immediately upon the Spot, ^r else foregoe our Intentions, to fall to the
^ractice of Religion some Years hence; ^or he that is a true Convert, is
suppo^^d to be perfectly convinced of the Mischiefs ^f his Sin, and the
reasonableness of his Duty; ^^d therefore immediately strikes in with his ^^st
Conviction, which, by being full and clear ^revents him making those little
Shifts and fri^olous Excuses, which others take sanctuary in, ^^ excuse their
Delay of this necessary Work. Though with what little, or rather against what
great reason, may be made appear from the following Considerations.

First, It Is extremely necessary that Men immediately betake themselves to
their Duty, because it is (as appears from what has been already said) of very
great Concern and Consequence to them, and what is so, we are apt, in other
Cases, to bestow our first and chiefest Care upon. Thus we see in wordly
Affairs, how every prudent Man is, more especially, careful to drive on, what
he calls the main Chance, and is at little ease till this be secured, or at
least, is in a fair way of being so. Now would but the Children of Light be as
wise in their Generation Mat. 5. 33.
as the Children of this World are, they would be as sollicitous about the
Concerns of their Souls, as these Men are, of their Bodies. They would no more
delay securing the Life of the one, than these men do, of the other, when it
lies at Stake, which if any Man should be so foolhardy as to nelect, and by
that Neglect lose his Life, which his care would have saved; he would be
deservedly thought to die like a Fool. And certainly much more would that
Christian deserve the Imputation of Folly, who, when his eternal Interest is in
Danger, shall yet suffer it to continue so, and not exert his utmost Endeavors
for the Security of it, and consequently embrace the first Occasion to secure
it in; especially considering in the

Second Place, that the Nature of Religion is such, as requires a great deal at
our hands, before it gives us any Right or Title to that great and necessary
Reward; without which we are undone for ever; our sensual Appeties must be
subdued, the Deeds of the Body mortified, Romans 8. 13. Ephesians. 2. 22, 23, 24. Col.
3. 2.
our Desires resigned, our Affections weaned from this World, and raised to the
things above, in short, our Minds must be transformed ^^om Carnal to Spiritual,
and this requires more ^^me and pains than most Men think for; let ^^en but try
the Experiment upon one Lust, ^^d see what Pangs and Throes of Mind, what
^^ruglings and Conflicts, what Watchings and ^rayers, are necessary before they
can make a ^erfect conquest of that one. And then they ^ill tell me, that a
greater and more early ^^re, than e're they dreamed of, is but requi^e to carry
on the great Design of Religion which is the Life and Happiness of their Souls)
^ith good Success. And therefore Religion as wisely, as well as kindly,
provided us with ^^rious helps, both to prevent the Trouble of ^^forming a bad
Life, and to promote an early and succesful progress in a Good one, to which
^urpose we are, when Children, admitted in^o the Christian Religion by Baptism,
and by ^eing therein made Members of Christ, Children of ^od, and Inheritours
of the Kingdom of Heaven, we ^ngage all the Powers of Heaven on our side, ^^
enable us to begin, continue and end our ^ives, in a constant Observance of our
Duty; ^s which end, there are Securities given of ^ur being educated in the
Truth; and as we ^^ow up, we have the daily Administration of ^he Word and
Sacrament, the one, to put us ^n mind of our Baptismal Vow, the other, ^o give
us the Opportunity of renewing it. We have also the inward Influences of the
Di^ine Grace to encourage, and assist our constant ^ndeavours of proceeding on
from one degree ^f Grace to another in our Christian Course; ^or so we are
required to add to our says Virtue, 2 Pet 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. -- 3. 18
^^ Virtue, Knowledge, to Knowledge, Temperance, and ^^ on, and so to grow in
Grace, and in the Know^^dge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And ^astly,
to perfect holiness in the fear of God. By 2 Cor. 7. 1.
^ll which you plainly see, that to defer, or ^ut off our Duty for the present,
with design ^o betake our selves to the practice of it, 20* or 30 Years hence,
or at the latter end of our Days, is directly contrary to the Nature and Design
of Religion, and is an open Violation o^ Breach of our sacred Vows and
Obligations made in our Baptism; which is so far from being innocent, that it
is highly sinful, and will infallibly betray Men into eternal Damnation in the
other World, if Death should chance to cu^ them off (as it is probable he will)
before they have executed their Intentions of conforming to the Duties of
Religion; and it is yet more unlikely, that they may not have (what they so much
trust to) the Opportunity of being Religious afterward: As will further
appear, if we consider,

Thirdly, That as this Life is the only Time of Probation, on which our Eternal
Happiness or Misery depends; so it is but a very uncertain Cast, to have things
of so great Moment depend upon it, for What is our Life? it is even a Vapor,
James 4. 14.
that appears for a little Time, and then vanishes away; a Vapor, which we
can take no Hold of, but, for all we know, may slip through our Fingers before
to morrow Morning: So that Prove. 27. 1.
the only Time we can be sure of, is the present, and That is so swift, that
whilst we are thinking Job 7. 6, 7, 8, 9.
and speaking of It, it is gone, and past Recovery: And therefore there is no
Delaying with Things of so slippery a Nature, and so quick a Motion. It Is in
vain to think, that Time should leave its natural Property, to stop a while,
and wait our Leisure; it were Impious as well as Vain, to desire, that God
would alter the Nature of Things, to gratify our lazy Humor; no, fond Men!
Time as it stays for no Man, so, (whether ye will think fit to enjoy it or
not,) will most certainly hurry you o^ to a long Eternity. And therefore, to
make suitable Preparation for This, ye had need be as nimble as Time it self,
and employ every Minute that is given you to the best Advantage; whereby ye
should best comply with the wise Design of the Donor of it; for how liberal
so^ver God has been of all his other Blessings to ^s, yet this of Time he has
been pleased to ^ispense in a less plentiful manner, choosing rather to give it
by Minutes, to signify how pre^ious It is, and that we should be sparing and
^hrifty of it, diligent to Redeem That which is Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. 1 Pet. 4. 2.
Heb. 3. 13.
^ast, and careful to improve That which is to ^ome, To Day therefore, whilst
it is called to Day, ^e exhorted to the Practice of your Duty, lest any of ^ou
be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin: For,

Fourthly, Supposing that God should be so ^ind to us beyond our Deserts;
though not our Desires, as to prolong our Days, yet it were un^easonable to
expect, that the Divine Grace should be always at our Beck, and continually
^ait our Leisure. This were to desire, that ^he Grace of God would be more kind
and ^onstant to us, than we are to our selves, that whereas we intend to bestow
no more than our ^xpiring Breath, in calling upon God, we would have his Grace
attend us, through the several ^tages of our Sins, and court us to our Duty, ^o
the very last Gasp. But, Be not deceived, what^oever Gal. 6. 7. Prove. 21. 24,
28.
a Man sows, that shall he also reap. What God threatened to the Old World, he
will most ^ertainly, make good to all old habitual Sin^ers, viz. That his
Spirit shall not always strive Genesis 6. 3. Luke 19. 42.
^ith Men; but, the Things belonging to their Peace, if they will not know them
now in this their Day,) ^ill, most assuredly, be hid from their Eyes. And his
our Blessed Savior has signified to us in the ^arable of the Talents, where he
says, at the Conclusion of that Parable, from him that has Matthew. 25. 29.
^ot, shall be taken away even That which he seems ^^ have. It is therefore
the most seasonable and ^holsom Advice, that either the Prophet could ^ive, or
We could take, viz. Seek ye the Lord Isaiah 55. 6. 2 Cor. 6. 2.
^hilst he may be found, call ye upon him whilst He ^^ near. For now is the
accepted Time, now is the Day of Salvation. But as for the Time to com^ it is
every whit as uncertain, whether we sha^^ fall to the Practice of our Duty
hereafter, if w^ live, as whether we shall live to Hereafter, ^^ fall to the
Practice of our Duty. For if Go^ should now withdraw his Grace (as Men ^^ their
resolved Contempt of it justly provo^^ him,) they are left in as great an
Incapaci^^ of becoming Religious, as if He had withdraw ^ their Lives: It being
as possible to repent without Life, when we are Dead, as without God's Grace
wh^^ we are Living, (as a late Divine has observed Dr. Scot's Christ. Life,
Part First.
So that here are two Hazards to be run at onc^ which, if either fail, (and yet
both are out ^^ our Power,) will irrecoverably ruin our ete^nal Salvation,
which is staked upon Them; a^ those are, that we shall certainly live to be Ol^
and as certainly have the Divine Grace to b^come Religious when we are so;
wherea^ (God knows) we may be dead by the ne^^ Job 24. 22. Matthew. 13. 12. Ephesians.
2. 1.
Hour, and perhaps already are, or at least w^^ be, (if we resolve to delay our
Reformation, dead also in Trespasses and Sins. For,

Fifthly, If we defer the Practice of our Dut^ it will grow every Day more
difficult than ^^ther, and so That which is now easy to be pe^formed, will not
hereafter be done without great deal of Trouble; for all the Time w^ indulge
our Lusts, we do but the more strengt^en them against our Selves; for bad
Inc^^nations, the longer they are let alone, the mo^^ they improve; and vicious
Habits, the often n^^ they are repeated, grow but the more confir^ed and
inveterate: For, what a mighty Po^er there is in a Habit in general, may be se^
in almost every Concern of Life: How eas^^ and almost necessarily do Men those
Things whereof they have the Habit? insomuch the they cannot without trouble
act otherwise, ^^ they have broken the Habit, either by Dis^^^ or a contrary
Practice. What then shall we thi^ of the Habits of Sin, which bend the Sinner
to vicious Courses, not only by Means of their strong and natural Tendency that
is in Them, as Habits, but moreover and above receive an additional Strength
from the too too willing Inclinations of Men, which strike in with the Habit,
and by a wonderful Force hurry the poor Sinner into Wickedness, almost beyond a
natural Possibility of a Recovery, especially when such an Habit has been a
long Time settled and confirmed in him? For it then becomes a Governing
Principle, and is as it were, a Second Nature; so that he is almost under Jer.
13. 23.
the fatal Necessity of continuing in It: And accordingly we read in Scripture
of some Sinners who are arrived to that Perfection in Vice, that they sin with
a peculiar Glee, working all Ephesians. 4. 19.
Uncleanness with Greediness; they commit their Sins with such a vehement
Thirst, that they are said to drink Iniquity like Water; and are therefore Job
15. 16.
become such perfect Slaves to their Vices, that They are sold under Sin, led
captive by Satan at Romans 7. 14. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
his Will. Now this is the Effect of those sinful Habits, which the Delays of a
good Life, or (which is all one) the Practice of a bad one, do necessarily
bring us under. And this is an Effect, which, by cutting off our chief Hopes of
being truly Re^igious, after a long and habitual Course of Sinning, renders it
highly reasonable, nay, even necessary to make haste, and Ps. 119. 60.
delay not to keep God's Commandments; especially considering in the

Sixth Place, That the longer we defer this great Work, the less able shall we
be on our Parts to perform it. For when Sickness or Old Age comes (the Seasons
I suppose, to which Sinners intend to put off the Practice of their ^uty,) they
bring a World of Troubles along with Them; which must needs weaken the Powers
of our Souls, and indispose them for that great Work, which we have cut out for
Them: For does not Experience testify, That every little Indisposition of Body
indisposeth our Souls also? Do we not find, that Sickness many times impairs
our Memories, raises in us such Heats and Fumes as confound our Senses, and
distract our Thoughts, if not rob us wholly of the present Use of our
Understandings? And when we can neither remember, perceive, nor understand, but
are all Agony, Confusion, and Distraction, we are very unfit Persons to perform
a Work, that requires a perfect Memory, a sound Judgment, and steady
Resolution; a perfect Memory to call to mind the many Failings and Miscarriages
of a long and sinful Life; A sound Judgment to state the Case fairly between
God and our own Souls; and steady Resolutions to live and die in Acts of new
Obedience. This is the least we must do, and yet it is many times more, than
what our Sickness will suffer us to perform; the Violence of some Distempers
being such as takes away at once, our Reason and our Senses, and with them all
possibility of Reforming: But supposing that through the Blessing of God, and
an extraordinary strength of Nature, we escape this dreadful Enemy to a late
Repentance, and arrive to an unrelenting Old Age; yet we cannot in reason think
This a proper time to begin the Mortification of our Lusts, the Renovation of
our Natures, and Our growth in Grace. For is it likely we should grow in This,
when we have done growing every Way, but in Age and Wickedness? Or, is it
possible to revive our perishing Souls, when we our selves are already dead in
Trespasses and Sins? Or, can we hope to conquer with feeble Joints and
trembling Knees, those powerful Lusts which have been so long victorious over
all our bravest Resolutions? Alas! these Enemies which have been all our Life
long strengthening Themselves against us, are not so easily mastered by us now,
now that our Strength to resist Them is decayed and gone, so that we cannot now
reasonably hope to work any other Mortification upon our Lusts, than what Age
has already given Them. This indeed may weaken their Strength in time; but what
is that to us? What Old Age of it self does, is not our Act; nor does it
concern us further, than only to show us, with Reproach and Shame, what we
ought to have done, viz. to have made that Act our own, and have mortified our
Lusts our selves; for which, we are now beholden to our Old Age: So that
whatever Goodness we shall, or can now exert, we may reasonably suspect to be
more the Effect of our Impotence and Weakness, than of a sound Judgment and a
free Choice; and if so, we cannot assume the Performance of it to our Selves,
because, That which is done with hindered and disabled Faculties, with an
imperfect Knowledge and Consent, is not properly our own Act and Deed; and yet
this is much the case of old Folks, who, as such, are distempered, that is,
have all the Faculties of their Souls, the Members of their Bodies; and in
short, all their Powers of Action very much worn out, cramped, and disabled. So
that to put off the doing our Duty to a Time of Sickness, or Old Age, is next
Door to not doing it at all; and therefore we must not think to put it off from
Day to Day, but now or never resolve upon it: For,

Lastly, Now is the most proper Season to do our Duty in. For now our Enemies
are fewer, and less able to offend us, and We more able to defend our Selves
against Them. Now our sinful Habits are not so strong, nor our Sins so numerous
as they will be afterward: And therefore we have now less Work than ever we
shall have upon our Hands; and, what is a greater Encouragement, our Faculties
are now most vigorous, most fit to engage in this necessary Undertaking; and
Now too, is the only Time to serve God acceptably. Now is the proper Season to
exercise our Graces, to show the Reality and Strength of them; Now, that there
are proper Romans 5. 3. James 1. 12. Eccles. 11. 9.
Temptations both to try and improve Them. For, it is now in the Days of our
Youth that the World besets us with Enchantments, and that our own Bodies turn
Tempters to us: It Is now that the Gaities of the World are apt to allure us!
It Is now that the Unruliness of our Blood, and the ill Propensities of the
Flesh, prompt us to the Breach of those Vows, which we have taken up against
Them. So that Now is the proper Season for the Exercise of Religion. For now,
if we can resist these unruly Motions, and keep our Selves unspotted from the
World, we shall James 1. 27. Prove. 23. 26. Mark 12. 33. Prove. 14. 14. Eccles.
12. 1.
manifestly prove our Faith and Piety to be sincere, which will infallibly
recommend it to the Divine Acceptance, and afford no little Satisfaction to our
Selves. It was therefore an Advice well-becoming the Wisdom of Solomon;
Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the evil Days come
not, nor the Year draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no Pleasure in them.
For in such a Time of Trouble as Old Age is, (which the Wise Man here
describes,) we cannot reasonably hope, that our Souls, without any previous
Preparation, should be duly qualified to perform any Service acceptable to Him,
who is Hab. 1. 13.
of purer Eyes than to behold the least Iniquity. Alas! all the Faculties of
our Souls will, long before that Time, be grown Restive for want of Exercise
and Improvement, and what is worse, They will be overrun with our Lusts and
Vices. And Now to devote the Powers of our Souls to the Service of our God,
when weakened as much as possible by our Lusts, would be to offer him the
Malach. 1. 8.
Blind, the Lame, and the Sick, for Sacrifice: And should he accept such an
Offering at our Hands, Offer it now to thy Governor, says God, and see if 1 Timothy 6. 15.
he will be pleased with Thee or accept thy Person? Much less will he, who is
King of Kings and Lord of Lords. And indeed, if Sinners would but speak out and
tell the Truth, they must needs own, that their Religious Exercises, like all
their other Actions of Life, are at that Time of Day very troublesome and
uneasy to Them: And would it not be very unreasonable to expect, that God
should delight in those Dregs of our Lives, which we our Selves can take no
Pleasure in? Sinners surely must have a very mean Opinion both of God and
Religion too, to think Themselves fit enough for the Service of Both, when they
are disabled and unfit for every thing else: Though properly speaking, it is no
Service, but (as you have seen) only the Effect of Impotence and Weakness, that
they can then present him with; for what Virtue can there be in Men's
insignificant Intentions to begin to be Good, at a time when perhaps they cannot
(if they would) be actually Bad? This is only in plain English, to have the
Thoughts of serving God, when they can serve the Devil no longer: And what a
sad Thing is it to live so long in Wickedness, as at length to be forsaken by
It? And then, when our Sins have left us, rather than we them, we will even
look out for a better Master, and begin to serve God, who never fails Them
that seek him: And therefore, Amos 5. 4. Psalm. 9. 10.
Why should he not be Gracious unto us now at last? Why may not we find as much
Grace and Favor at our last Minutes as the Labour^rs Matthew. 20. 1. Luke 23. 42.
did, who came into their Lord's Vineyard at the last Hour, or as the Thief
upon the Cross? who could not have converted Later, nor yet had a more
comfortable Promise made over to him upon his Conversion, as Late as it was.

Now as to the former of these Instances alleged in Favor of a late
Repentance, namely, That of the Laborers going late into the Vineyard to work;
it is by Learned Men thought, that the whole Design of that Parable is, only to
exhibit or set forth to us the Justice and Goodness of God, in tendering the
Light and Mercies of the Gospel to the Gentiles, and rewarding their late
Acceptance of them equal with the Jews, that were called before us; and so it
reaches not in the Opinion of some, to the Case of private Sinners. Though I
will (for once) suppose it does; but withal must observe, That this gives no
Encouragement to any Sinner to defer the Reformation of his Life, or the
Practice of Religion to the last, no, nor yet to the next Hour; for supposing
the Eleventh Hour in the Parable to signify the Last of our Lives, and that
God did accept and reward Those that converted to Him then; yet it does not
appear, that They who were then Hired into the Vineyard, or called to
Repentance, had rejected more early Invitations to it; but whether Idleness, or
whatever was the Occasion of their late Call and Conversion, this is certain,
that at what Hour soever, whether at the First, Sixth, or Ninth, they were
called, they immediately obeyed the Motion, and needed not a second Call, as
Men now adays do, who stop their Ears Psalm. 58. 5.
at the Voice of the Charmers, charming never so wisely; and so they add to all
their Sins this One, (and that a very great One too,) of Obstinacy and
Incorrigibleness, which render their Case different from the Laborers, it
being far more unlikely that such stubborn Tempers should be ever wrought unto
Repentance and Reformation, especially to that which is sincere; it is far more
likely that God, being by their Stubbornness provoked, should give them over to
a reprobate Mind. Romans 1. 28.


And then as to the other Instance of a late Repentance, that of the Thief on
the Cross. Here I will suppose, (because I know Sinners do) that this late
Penitent's Life was as theirs is, but one continued Course of Wickedness, of
which he repented not till his last Minutes; and that as God did graciously
pardon him then, so may he forgive them also, if they do but then repent as
heartily as he did; yet I hope to show them, that they have no reasonable
Encouragement from this Example, to continue in their Wickedness at Present, in
hopes of finding Mercy upon their Repentance at Last, or at a dying Hour, as
will appear if they consider, That it is possible, nay probable, that this Thief
might never have heard of the Name of Jesus before, or if he had, it might not
have been proposed to him with sufficient Motives of Credibility; and if this
(as I could show you we have reason to think) was his Case, it was more his
Unhappiness than his Crime, that He converted and believed no sooner. Yet when
He was converted and did believe, He lived up strictly to the Terms of the
Gospel, that little while he had to live: For he here on the Cross confesses
his Sin; begs Pardon for it; accepts the Luke 23. 40, 41, 42.
Punishment of his Iniquity; commiserates that unhappy Condition that was but
just now his own; He pityeth the Innocent; confesses with his Mouth the Lord
Jesus; believes in his Heart. And these were the only Things he had then at
liberty; and therefore he could do nothing more, to show himself a Faithful
Disciple of the Crucified Jesus. He owns him King, even when there was the
least Appearance of his being such, and fixes his Hope as firmly in Him as if
all Power in Heaven and Earth had been already given to him. He shows an
extraordinary Charity both in Opinion and Action, in Opinion in judging our
Savior to have done nothing amiss. -- 41.
His Charity in Action, in endeavoring to reclaim his Fellow, by reproving him
for his Sin, -- 40, 41.
which he does (as St. Chrysostom observes) before he asks any Thing for
himself. Now what is it that Sinners do like this, in all their Life, to give
them Hope in their Death? Can they, who from their Baptism have lived the rest
of their Time to the Lusts of Men, and not to the Will of God, pretend to an
immediate Acceptance of the Terms of the Gospel? Can He, who lives in open
Contradiction to the Divine Commands, intending only to conform to Them when he
has no further Strength to break Them, can such a one say, that he strictly
adheres to the Covenant of Grace? Or can He, who by his long continued Habits
of sinning, has weakened all the Powers of his Soul, and strengthened nothing but
his Lusts; can He (I say) in reason suppose, that he has not made himself
twofold more a Child of Hell than a Saint of Heaven? Can he be said to be
strong in Faith, who, notwithstanding our Savior's Resurrection, the Consent
of the best and wisest Men, the wonderful Conquest made by the Gospel over the
Hearts and Lives of many, (showing It to be the Power of God unto Salvation,
Romans 1. 16.
) who, (I say) notwithstanding all this clear Evidence of Belief, can yet show
themselves the only obdurate Wretches, and disown their Savior, now that He is
in his Kingdom? And what reasonable Grounds of Hope can such Men have, who are
so far from being pure from their Sins, that they daily strengthen Themselves
in their 1 John 3. 3.
Wickedness? And as to their Charity, Is it possible that they should have any
true Love for their Brother, who have little or none for themselves? How can
they commiserate another unhappy Condition, when they do not so much as pity
their own? Or, How can they pretend to any Love for God, whom they intend to
affront John 14, 15. -- 15. 14.
all their Lifetime, and at their Death to seek him, more out of Dread and
Fear of him, than an ardent Affection toward him? How shall they delight in
the Presence of him hereafter, whom they could not endure to think of here? or
supposing They could hereafter relish any Pleasure in the sweet Society of Him,
who now is least in all their Thoughts, yet what Foundation have they laid for
such a Conversation in Heaven? Alas! their Graces are all to seek, and yet
without these, it is impossible that they should ever be meet to be Partakers
of the Inheritance Heb. 12. 14.
of the Saints in Light.

But further, The Circumstances and Manner of this Penitent's Death were such
as never any Sinners were before Him, nor ever can be again, unless our Blessed
Lord should once more become obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross;
and one of those, (who desires to make this Penitent's Case his own,) had never
heard of the Name of Christ, till he chance to suffer with him, and then, by
instantly believing in him, should once again procure an extraordinary share of
Mercy from our merciful High Priest, who was pleased to give the first Proof of
his being such to this Blessed Penitent, when he said to Him, To day thou shall
be with me in Paradise. Now such another lucky juncture as this can never occur
again, (because Christ was not to offer himself often; Heb. 9. 25.
) but supposing it could, yet this surpassing the standing Measures, and
Methods of God's Grace, cannot be fairly drawn into Example, no more than Acts
of Mercy and Oblivion from a Prince upon extraordinary Occasions, can encourage
his rebellious Subjects always to expect the like Favor. The only Ground
whereon they can found any reasonable Hopes of Pardon, is their immediate
return to their Duty and Obedience; and this must be every Man's great Care and
constant Lev. 26. 41, 42. Luke 15. 12, etc. Job 8. 5, 6. 1 John 3. 3. Prove. 10.
9. Prove. 14. 32. Psalm. 23. 4. Prove. 12. 2. Romans 2. 7.
Endeavor in respect to God, in order to procure Pardon and Acceptance of him.
His early Application to all the Duties of Religion, and his final Perseverance
in Them, is the only hope of Mercy. This is certainly most acceptable to God,
most safe to himself, and will afford him the greatest Comfort when he shall
stand in the greatest need of it, I mean, at a dying Hour: For a well-spent
Life infallibly secures to us (as ye have seen) the Favor of God here, which
is better than Life, and his Glory and Happiness hereafter, which is the Life
and Perfection of our Souls.

A short Prayer to be said upon our first Kneeling down at Church.
PArdon, O Lord, all my Sins, which make me unworthy to come into thy Presence,
or to tread thy Courts: Quicken my Devotions to Thee. Open my Heart to attend
unto Things that shall be spoken, and grant that we may all come together for
the better, and not for the worse, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A short Prayer to be said at Church immediately after Prayers, or Sermon.
BE pleased, O Lord, to accept this my Duty and Service, and to pardon the
Imperfections of it. Grant it may so tend to my Spiritual Improvement, as may
enable me to serve Thee better for the future; that going from Strength to
Strength, I may at length appear before thee in Zion, even in thy heavenly
Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Divine Grace to assist us in the performance of the various
Duties mentioned in the foregoing Treatise.
MOST glorious Lord God, the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, and our most
merciful Father in Christ Jesus. Thou art the Fountain of all Perfections, and
the very Life and Happiness of all our Souls; we therefore thine unworthy
Cereatures sinful Dust and Ashes, present our Selves before Thee, to praise
thee for the infinite Perfections of thy Nature, and to beg of Thee the
necessary Supplies of thy Grace and Holy Spirit, that we may give thee the
Honor due unto thy Name, and Worship thee suitably to thy Nature, with an holy
and a spiritual Worship. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold the least
Iniquity; and therefore how shall such polluted Wretches as we are, dare to
approach thy dreadful Majesty, who by our Sins and Follies have made our selves
so unlike to thee, who art righteous in all thy Ways and holy in all thy Works?
How then shall we presume to come into thy holy Presence, who are defiled in
our very Natures, having nothing but Vanity and Blindness in our Minds,
Perverseness in our Wills, both spiritual and carnal Iniquity in our Affections
and Appetites, and what is worse, have defiled our Selves yet much more, by our
many actual and habitual Sins against thee, so that we are altogether unworthy
to approach thy Presence, or expect thy Favor, and yet have so great need of
both, that without them, we are lost for ever: O therefore cast us not away
from thy Presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from us! but out of Pity to thy
defective and diseased Creatures, receive us graciously, and heal our Souls,
though we have sinned against Thee. Rescue us from the Power and Bondage of our
Lusts by the greater Power of thy Grace. Renew and purify our corrupted
Natures. Create in us a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within us.
Teach us a perfect Denial of all our Sins, and establish us in a steadfast
Obedience to all thy Laws. To which End, enlighten our Minds to form clear and
true Notions of Thee, and open our Hearts to attend upon all the Means that may
help us to discharge our various Obligations to Thee. Inspire our Souls with
thy heavenly Graces. Strengthen our Faith, confirm our Hope, increase our Love,
quicken our Fear, establish our Trust, inspire us with Patience, Constancy and
Sincerity. Inflame our Devotions, and envigorate our Endeavors, in a faithful
Discharge of our Duty to Thee. Give us thy Grace also to assist us in the
Peformance of our Duty to our Neighbor, that we may ever remember, and
constantly observe thy great and righteous Law, to love him as our selves, and
to this End grant, That we may never defraud Him of his Right, but give him his
due in all the Relations toward us wherein he stands. Dispose us therefore,
good Lord, cheerfully to obey Them that have the Rule over us, whether in
Church or State; and bless them in an happy Government of us; that under them
we may lead qulet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty. Bless all
Sorts of Parents and Masters; grant that they may faithfully discharge the
various Duties of their Stations, and their respective Inferiors may, in a
grateful Return thereof, ever Love, Honor, and Obey them. Grant to all Men, we
beseech thee, the Spirit to think, and do all such Things as be rightful, ever
adhering to that equitable Rule, the d^ing as they would be dealt by. And grant
us, O thou Fountain of Mercy and Love, a universal Charity toward all Men,
even to our Enemies, that we may be ever ready both to forgive and also to
provide, that they which are in need and necessity have Right in a suitable
Relief of their various Wants; and because our Prayers to Thee, from whom every
good and perfect Gift comes, are often the best and only Helps we can afford
them, therefore do thou, O Lord, abundantly for them, more than we can ask or
think. Suit thy Mercies according to their various Necessities; sanctify their
Afflictions to them, and when thou see it best for them, give them a happy
Deliverance out of all their Troubles. And Lastly, O Lord, we come unto thee
for a Blessing upon our Selves, who, as we are here Living Instances of thine
Almighty Power and Goodness, so be pleased to make us the happy Instruments of
thy Praise and Glory; to which Purpose enable us to subject all the Faculties
of our Souls, and the Powers of our Bodies to thy blessed Will, which is the
Law and Perfection of our reasonable Nature. Direct our Understandings to the
Knowledge of those glorious Manifestations which thou have been pleased to give
us of thy self. Clear up our Apprehensions both of the Perfections of thy
Nature, and the Excellency of those Perfections. Direct our Wills to the Choice
and Imitation of such thy Perfections as are imitable by us. Teach us the
Wisdom to proportion our Affections of Things, according to the Nature and
Value of them, that having a less Concern for this World, we may fear thee
more, and love thee better: Give us a r^ght Understanding of our Selves, of our
own Insufficiency, and of our entire Dependence upon thee, that so we may not
think more highly of our selves than we ought to think. Teach us a cheerful
Submission to thine all-wise Dispensations, and in whatever State we are,
therewith to be content. Endue us with a calm and gentle Temper of Soul, such
as may invite thy Blessed Spirit to come, and take up his Abode with us, that
through his Blessed Operations, we may bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit in
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance.
Subdue our bodily Appetites to the Laws of our Reason, and the End of their
Creation, ever remembering that our Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Spirit;
and that he who defiles the Temple of God, him thou have threatened to destroy.
Out of an holy Fear and Dread of this, and all other thy reasonable Threats,
grant that we may be ever careful to keep under our Bodies, and cleanse our
Selves from all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, that so we may (as we are
in Duty bound) glorify thee in our Body, and in our Spirit, which are Thine;
and we not only beg thy Grace to assist us in, but thy heavenly Wisdom, to show
us the reasonableness and necessity of our Performance of these Duties, that we
may make haste and delay not to keep thy Commandments.

AND as we desire this Morning to enter into For the Morning.
the World upon our lawful Occasions, with this holy Frame and Disposition of
Soul, so grant, that we may never lose it, either through Surprise, or wilful
Neglect, but guide us safely by thy Grace, through all the Dangers and
Temptations of this, and all other Days of our Life; that, escaping the
Corruption that is in the World through Lust, we may live and die thy faithful
and obedient Servants.

AND now, O Lord, that we are going to repose For the Evening.
our selves, keep us from all Dangers and Adversities that may happen to our
Bodies, and from all evil Thoughts and Dreams, which may assault and hurt our
Souls, that we may rise in the Morning with a fresh sense upon our Minds of thy
Mercies to us, and a full Conviction of the absolute necessity of expressing
our Thankfulness, not only with our Lips, but in the constant Obedience of our
Lives, spending that Strength which thou have given us, to thy Honor and
Service; to whom we owe our utmost Praises, for all thy free and undeserved
Mercies: Therefore

We not only pray unto thee, but desire to bless thee for all thy Benefits from
time to time conferred upon us, for thy Creation of us out of Nothing, for thy
Preservation of us ever since we had a Being, for all the Accommodations of
this Life, and the plentiful Provision thou have made for our Happiness in the
other; for all that thy Son our dear Redeemer, has done and suffered for us,
for his wonderful Incarnation and Birth, for his exemplary Life, his
meritorious Death and Passion, for his glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and
for his sending the Holy Ghost to comfort us; for all thy Saints and Servants
departed this Life in thy true Faith and Fear, beseeching thee to give us Grace
so to follow their good Examples, that with them we may be Partakers of thy
heavenly Kingdom: These Prayers and Praises, with whatever else thou in thine
infinite Wisdom, see most necessary and expedient for us, we humbly offer up
in the Name and for the Sake of thy Son, our blessed Savior and Redeemer, who
has commanded us, when we pray, to say, Our Father which art in, etc.

This Prayer may be used by one Person, only changing the Words We, Us, and
Our, into I, Me, and My, and saying instead of Creatures Creature, etc.

FINIS.

