A Brotherly and Friendly CENSURE OF THE ERROVR Of a dear Friend and Brother in
Christian affection, IN An ANSWER to his four Questions lately sent abroad in
print to the view of the world.

PROVE. 27. 5, 6. Open rebuke is better then secret love. Faithful are the
wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. Published
according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Webb, 1645.

To the Reader.
CHristian reader, I will take it as a great favor from thee, if in reading
this my Answer thou will judge me to be, as indeed, and in truth I am, an
adversary of the cause, and not of the person. He who is commonly reported to
be the Author of the four questions in hand, is one whose person I have, from
my first knowledge of him, dearly loved, honored, and admired, for his
excellent parts, profitable pains for the public good, and his unwearied
labors, and patient sufferings in the cause of Christ. If he has but once in
all his life stumbled upon a bad cause, and pleaded for it, (which is a common,
and in some sort a necessary evil, hardly to be avoided by men of his
vocation:) let not this blemish his great learning, nor his judgment, sound in
all other points, and least of all his approved piety and zeal for true
religion. His name, which was happily concealed, and not annexed to these four
questions, shall ever be precious with me, and I hope with all Gods people
also, who truly fear the Lord, long for the peace of Zion, and unfeignedly
seek the reformation of Christ's Church, in all these three Kingdoms. It is no
small grief to me, that I am compelled to move my pen in writing against any
paper, published by an hand so dear to me: But in the cause of Christ, and in
a point so prejudicial to the peace and pure reformation of the Church, Who
can be silent? The nearest relations of love which one Christian can have to
another in this world, must not hinder us, nor stay our hands, tongues or pens
from performance of any duty, in which we all stand obliged to the Lord Christ
our Redeemer, and to his Church our dear mother. And wherein can we be more
necessitated to show our duty to both, then in resisting with all our power
whatsoever tends to the common and continual profanation of the holy
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood? which cannot possibly be avoided, if the
power of the keys, which Christ has given to his Apostles and their
successors, with a promise to be with them to the end of the world, be taken,
under any pretense, out of the hands of the Pastors and Presbyters of the
Church, and no power left unto them to put by any sinners, openly scandalous
and impenitent, from the holy Communion nor to exclude such spiritual lepers,
most loathsome and infections, from the sacred meeting at the Lords holy Table.
Who does not see that the maine cause of the Schisms and separations of diverse
godly and zealous Christians from our Communion, is the mixture of the profane
among the pious and godly, and the admission of persons openly scandalous to
the holy Sacrament? This is that which has moved many out of their blind
zeal to proclaim our Church, a whore a strumpet, a Synagogue of Antichrist;
and our faithful Ministers, Baals Priests, and limbs of the beast. All true
Christians, and most of all the Ministers of the Word, are bound to put to
their hands and shoulders for the removing of this stumbling block and rock of
offense out of the way: And I especially more then others, by reason of that
singular love I bear to this dear brother erring in this point, and least I
should offend against that commandment, Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not have thy
brother in thine heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him, or bear sin for him. His paper is gone forth in public,
private rebuke will not hinder the hurt which it may do: It has given such
public wounds, as cannot be cured but by a public remedy. The Lord, the great
healer of souls, give a speedy cure to the maladies of his Church, and all our
soule-sicknesses: to him be praise for ever and ever.

A brotherly and friendly Censure of the error of a dear friend and brother in
Christian affection, In an Answer to his four Questions lately sent abroad in
print, to the view of the world.
The Inscription.
Four serious Questions of grand Importance, concerning Excommunication and
Suspension from the Sacrament; propounded to the Reverend Assembly and all
Moderate Christians, to prevent Schisms, and settle Unity among us, in these
divided times; by a lover both of Peace and Truth.

The Answer to the Inscription.
WHen I did first meet with this paper of four serious questions, fleeing
abroad in print into every Booksellers shop in London, and ready upon the wing
to take flight into all parts of the land; That flying toll, which appeared to
the Prophet Zecharie (presently upon my viewing of the matter and scope
thereof) came to my mind, which is said to be a curse going forth over the
face of the whole land, Zech. 5. 3. For as that was a curse to punish, cut off
and consume even to the timber and stones of the houses, into which it entered:
So I feared this would be a corrupting curse in the heart, house and family of
every one that entertained it with approbation, and did welcome it with
applause, seeing it proclaims liberty for all sinners, though openly scandalous
and impenitent, to come boldly to the Lords supper, and to eat and drink their
own damnation, without control of the Pastors and Presbyters of the Church,
whom Christ has ordained to have the rule over them, and to watch for their
souls, Heb. 13. 17.

And whereas the questions are by the Author professed to be serious, and of
grand importance, propounded to the Reverend Assembly, for the settling of unity
among us, in these divided times: First, I must profess that I am much
grieved, that any learned Christian brother should seriously urge such
arguments* so weak, so fallacious, and of so little strength, to maintain so
bad a cause as this, even the opening of a wide gap to Libertinisme, and
profanation of the holy Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and giving this
liberty to carnal and profane men, of dissolute and scandalous life, that
they without repulse may intrude themselves among godly Communicants, to the
just offense and scandal of the whole Congregation: which they may have
opportunity to do at several times, before the sentence of Excommunication,
can in a way of orderly proceeding (especially when there are appeals made to
higher Consistories one after another, by obstinate and contentious offenders)
come forth against them, and be put in execution.

Secondly, I hope it will be made to appear by this, and other Answers of more
able brethren, that here is no matter of grand importance in these questions,
except encouragement of men to live in scandalous sins, without fear of
suspension from the Lords table, and to intrude boldly thereunto, which is a
power of grand tyranny, and oppression of the Consciences of Ministers, may in
any but an evil sense, be called a matter of grand importance.

Thirdly, I wish with all my heart, though now too late, that these questions,
as in the title is pretended, had first been propounded to the venerable
Assembly. For I doubt not but they then should have received such a solid and
satisfactory Answer, as would have staid the publishing of them in print, and
prevented the infection of the minds of the vulgar people of weak judgment,
and saved us the labor of composing Antidotes against them.

Fourthly, I pity the Author, in that he has so erred from his intended scope
of these questions: for his handling and carriage of them, is so far from
preventing Schisms, and settling unity among us in those divided times: that on
the contrary we find by experience to our grief, that they work strongly in
corrupt and perverse minds, to the breeding, and increasing of Schisms, to
the disturbance of the desired reformation, in a point of greatest concernment,
and to the raising up of divisions and dissensions, not only among others, but
also between the Parliament and Assembly, which is a strange practice, in a
lover of peace and truth.

The Preface.

The business of Excommunication and Sequestration from the Sacrament, etc.

The Answer to the Preface before the questions.
1. The business appears plainly to be of no difficulty, unless men will be
difficult, and through their own averseness* hardly persuaded to grant and
establish that which Gods Word expressly holds forth and commends, and
which we hope, and humbly pray, that the Honorable Houses of Parliament will
be willing to do without difficulty. You your self do quote diverse texts of
Scripture which establish Excommunication, and you presuppose it, in this your
paper several times, where you say none is to be suspended from the Sacrament
but such as are excommunicated, and in your Excommunication (for which you cite
Tertullian, Schoolmen, and Canonists,) you are more rigorous then any
Presbyterians, whom you closely intimate to be indiscreet, passionate,
oversevere and revengefull: which is a point of unchristian jealousy, and
uncharitable surmise. For they dare not by excommunication exclude obstinate
offenders from all ordinances, but suffer them to hear the Word, though not in
communion as members of the Church, but as infidels may do; or else what hope
can we have of an illiterate person excommunicated, that he will ever repent
and be restored? As for suspension from the Sacrament, it is a thing more easy,
in it self, and may be done orderly with less labor then excommunication,
and with great ease and facility, and more frequently, and with good success
is practiced in all the best reformed Churches, which also our late abolished
liturgy did allow largely to all Pastors and Churchwardens: and it had been
more easy to them that were godly, and also more usual in our Congregations,
if the proud Prelates, fathers of profaneness, had not taken that power
wholly to themselves: Which intolerable usurpation of theirs, we hope is with
themselves quite taken away: but not the power from the Church, nor the lawful
exercise of it according to the rules of Christ.

Secondly, Whereas you make no medium between profanation and scandal on the
one side, and Arbitrary, tyrannical, papal domineering over the Consciences
and spiritual Privileges of Christians on the other, herein passion and
partiality seem to blind you: For there is a plain open way between the two
extremes, that is, the lawful power which Christ has given to Ecclesiastical
rulers, Pastors and Elders in his Church, which all godly Ministers, and all
orthodox members of the Assembly stand, plead, and petition for, that it may be
backed and confirmed to them by civil sanction, even power to prove and try
who are fit, and who are unworthy to come to the Lords Table, and by admitting
the one, and putting back the other, after strict trial, and due proof and
examination, profanation and scandal may easily be prevented, and Arbitrary,
tyranicall, papal domineering over the consciences of Pastors, and godly
Christian people shall have no place in Gods Church; Scandalous proud
impenitent sinners shall not come desperately to outface Christ and his
Ministers at his own table, nor have an action against Ministers, who out of
tender conscience, and fear of God, refuse to reach to them judgment and
damnation, and so to partake with them in the guilt of Christ's body and blood;
The Congregation of the godly shall not be scandalized, nor tyrannically forced
either to countenance and harden the impenitent in their open wickedness* by
communicating with them, or to separate from our Congregations, and abhor the
ordinance of the Lord, as men did in old Eli's days, when his wicked sons made
them to abhor the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. But on the contrary, let
scandalous, obstinate sinners have liberty to intrude and come boldly to the
Lords table, and the Pastors and Elders have no power to keep back from them
the holy signs and scals, which belong not to them, this is more then
arbitrary, tyrannical, papal domineering over the consciences of Pastors,
Elders, and godly people.

3. But here me thinks you speak very untowardly, to the great offense of all
godly people, against all Christ's Ministers and ecclesiastical rulers; for in
these words ( If it fall into indiscreet, over-severe, ambitious, passionate,
or revengefull hands) you either suppose that generally the hands of Ministers
and Elders of Christ's Church are such, and therefore they ought not to be
trusted with power of Suspension and Excommunication; which if you do, your
heart is not f^ee from malignity against their holy calling, and the Lord
Christ, who has trusted them, will find you out. Or else your meaning is,
that, as in the days of the Papacy and Prelacy, so now it may again under
Presbyteriall Church Government happen, that some of the rulers Ecclesiastical
may act with such hands. What then? Do you infer thence that all of that high
calling are to be abridged of that power? A desperate inference, striking at
the prerogative and power of Parliaments, and all civil Judges, and Courts of
Justice. For upon the same grounds, viz. because under the Papacy, Parliaments
made Laws for suppressing true religion, and establishing Idolatry and
superstition, you may go about to abridge them. And under the late domineering
Prelacy and tyranny, Judges wrested laws to take away the Subjects birthright
and liberty, and to maintain oppression, and they made (you know whose) will
and lust, law. And Lawyers soothed them, and you know when, not one (in all the
bunch) could be found, nor hired to plead in the just cause of an innocent. And
even then many Presbyters and Ecclesiastical persons stood out courageously,
and feared no persecutions, bonds or losses, in the cause both of religion and
justice. Why then will you not take away all power also of judging from Judges,
and of pleading and expounding the Law from Lawyers, and leave all civil
government in the hands of the common people? Take heed, Sir, you be not
partial and unequal to one side more then another. Aretius has given you a
very good caveat, not to strive so earnestly against this point of Christian
discipline, in those words of his by you cited ( impossible praesentibus
moribus colla submittere ejusmodi disciplinae) which words tell us, That the
corrupt manners and profane lives of men desperately bent, in these evil times,
to continue in their lewd and scandalous courses, make it impossible to bring
them to submit their stiff necks to this discipline of Excommunication, and
Suspension from the holy Communion, which is Christ's light yoke to tractable
Christians. If you proceed to take part with such refractory opposers (which, I
hope, your religious heart will not permit you to do) and spend your strength
in so unworthy a cause, in hope by justifying these Questions, to prevail
against the votes of your best friends, and most faithful lover which you have
in this world, who truly honor you, and wish all good to you: I trust in God,
you shall fail of your hopes, as Aretius did in his judgment, where speaking
of this discipline set up by some in the Churches of Germany, he seems to
deride it in those words by you rehearsed, Cecidit in spongiam ridiculus mus;
For now this despised mouse is become an high mountain in all the best reformed
Churches of Germany.

4. As for your address to the Assembly, whom you charge unjustly with falling
into extremes, and indeed calumniate them, as if they seemed to affect a great
lording power over the consciences and privileges of their Christian brethren,
which of right belongs not unto them, usurping that to themselves, which they
vehemently declaimed against, and caused to be taken quite away from the Pope
and Prelates.

To this I answer, that you utterly mistake the matter. For they abhor all
affectation and usurpation of lording power over the consciences of any
Christians, but have condemned it in the Pope and Prelates; and their humble
Petition to the Houses of Parliament is; That none may usurp lordly power, as
the proud Prelates did, over them, and the people of their flock, compelling
them either against their consciences, and with great offense and scandal to
the godly, to admit scandalous sinners to the Lords table, and to profane the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, by giving the seals thereof to them, or
else to decline the administration of that holy ordinance, and their
Ministry, choosing affliction rather then iniquity. In plain truth, this is
the lordly tyrannical power over their consciences, and the iron yoke which
you in your Question seek to lay on them.

After the Preface answered, I proceed to your Questions; The first of which is,
Quest. 1. Whether those places of Scripture, Matthew. 18. 16, 17. and 1 Cor. 5.
5. 11. and 1 Timothy 1. 20. Joh. 9. 22. 32. and 12. 42. and 16. 2. and^ These. 3.
14. and 2 John 10. 11. and Joh. 3. 10. and Numb. 12. 14. and Deuteronomy. 23. 1. be
properly meant of Excommunication, which you take upon you to prove from
Fathers, Schoolmen and others, to be an exclusion from all ordinances, or of
Suspension from the Lords Supper only. The first you hold, and we will grant
it to you. The latter you deny, and I affirm, that it is here also meant
inclusively, but not only. The first place you seem to weaken and enervate, by
intimating that our Savior speaks of private personal trespass between man
and man, and not of public scandalous sins against the Congregation, and that
the censure is private not public, because it is said, Let him be (not to the
whole Church and all others, but) to Thee, as an Heathen man and a Publican;
and you quote, Luke 17. 3, 4. to prove that such private trespasses must be
forgiven, if seventy times seven: which no man will deny, if the trespasser
repent, as often as he offends. But now suppose be stand out and persist in his
sin, and scorn private admonition; yea, when he is convented before the Church,
he will not hear nor obey public admonition, do you not think that this is
public scandal against the Cong^egation, and deserves Excommunication?
Surely, if it were not so, our Savior would not have passed against it that
dreadful censure of Excommunication, saying, Let him be to Thee as an Heathen
man and a Publican. And if to the private person for his private wrong, much
more to all others in the Congregation, for public contumacy and scandalous
obstinacy in his sin against the Church. It is a dangerous doctrine to teach
any private person to censure and judge a brother to be in the state of an
Ethnike, and as a Publican, for a private trespass; if for his contumacie
against the whole Church, and obstinacy in that sin, the sentence of
Excommunication be not by the Church publicly given against him. Whereas you
make it a branch of your Question. What warrant there is in Scripture for
Ministers to suspend men from the Lords Supper only, and not from the
Congregation, and all other public ordinances with it. I answer this very
easily: That because Suspension from the Sacrament is a step, yea the next
degree to Excommunication (as reason, and the practice of all the best Churches
of Christ do teach us) the Scriptures which warrant Excommunication, do also
warrant it as a profitable and necessary means, either to prevent that
dreadful sentence by bringing the sinner to repent and be ashamed, or to make
his impenitency more evident and notorious, and to justify the more the
Excommunication of him. But I marvel, that you should think it so strange and
unwarrantable a thing to suspend a man from a Sacrament, who has communion in
all other ordinances of the Church, seeing it was the practice of all the
ancient Churches to exclude the Catechumeni from Baptism, till by catechizing
and hearing the Word publicly preached they were better instructed. And how
dare you dispute against that which is resolved in this present Parliament? To
wit, That ignorant, and some scandalous persons shall not be admitted to the
Lords table.

Q ^. Your second Question is the same which you propounded last before as a
branch of the first: belike you are well pleased and affected with it, and have
some thing more to say in urging it. I omit what I have answered before; and
here I do first add, That Christian compassion, and moderation in dealing
with perverse men is commended and commanded in the Scripture, 2 Timothy 2. 24*
25, 26. and Jude 22, 23. And this is a maine point of compassion and moderation
in Ecclesiastical rulers, to try all inferior means; whereof suspension from
the Lords Table is one; before they proceed to the last and greatest censure of
excommunication. Though the Popes and Prelates excommunications, which belike
do still run in your mind, were brutish thunderbolts thrown out upon every
small occasion presently, and like the fools dagger which is out to stab, at
every cross word, and makes but a word and a blow: yet Gods Word teaches
godly wise Pastors and Presbyters more meekness and gravity, in proceeding to
the utmost censure, that is, first to reprove, admonish and rebuke, and if
those more gentle means do not prevail, then to suspend from the Sacrament;
which by experience is often found to humble stubborn offenders, and bring
them to repentance, and so prevent cutting off from the Congregation; And all
godly Christians do here see a double warrant of divine Authority. First, from
Gods Word: secondly, from his blessing of this proceeding with good success.
This is my first answer. Secondly, to your bold assertion, That in the Old
Testament we read of no circumcised person ever debarred from the passover by
the Priests, that was desirous to eat it. I Answer, that it is as void of
truth, as full of boldness: For Levit. 22. 3. and Numb 9. 5. and diverse other
places. Every circumcised person who was legally unclean, is forbiden to eat
of the passover, or any holy thing, under pain of being cut off, and might not
eat of it till he was cleansed and rightly prepared as appears, 2 Chronicles. 30. 3
the very chapter by you quoted, according to the express words of the law,
Numb. 9. 11. And therefore much more ought baptized persons, now under the
Gospel, who are manifestly unclean with the spiritual defilement of
scandalous sin, be suspended from the more holy Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood, until he be cleansed by repentance. Thirdly, to the instance of Judas
whom our Savior knew to be a devil and a traitor. I Answer first, that Judas
was not admitted to the Sacrament, for Judas went out before the Supper was
ended, immediately upon his receiving of the sop, Joh 13. 30. But our Savior
did not ordain this Sacrament till after Supper, Luke 22. 20 When he had
supped, 1. Cor. 11. 25. Secondly, if Judas had been admitted, it makes nothing
to the matter, for Judas professed faith in Christ, and in his outward
conversation appeared so unblameable, that when our Savior told them, that one
of them twelve should betray him, they did not suspect Judas more then
themselves, but every one asked, saying, Master, is it I? And indeed let a man
be an hypocrite, traitor or devil inwardly, the Minister is not to judge of
such secret things which belong to God, but to look to the outward profession,
life and conversation, and accordingly deal with them. Fourthly, S. Paul's
admonishing of the Corinthians of the great danger of unworthy receiving,
namely, that it was eating damnation to themselves, and making them guilty of
Christ's body and blood; and thereupon enjoining a strict examination of every
one before he eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, does sufficiently
instruct the elders, to put back all such as did outwardly appear to be
scandalous impenitent sinners, and so most unworthy to receive the holy signs
and seals of the Lords body and blood. Fifthly, To that question of yours,
Whether a Minister has not discharged his full duty and conscience, if he does
admonish his flock of the danger of unworthy receiving, and seriously dehort
such as he deemes unworthy, from receiving the Sacrament, till they become more
fit to participate, under pain of eating and drinking their own damnation and
other judgments? I answer, that this is no full discharge, neither do those
Scriptures which you quote, Ezekiel, 33. 1, 2, etc. Act. 20. 16. or ours and
French Liturgies prove any such thing in this case. For they who suspend
scandalous persons, do also admonish all others to examine themselves, and
mention the danger of unworthy receiving, that none unprepared may presume. It
is a discharge of a Ministers duty, when he admonishes only of the danger of
a sin, in which when it is committed, the party admonished has only an hand:
But here the Minister is partaker of the sin, and as much guilty by giving, as
the other by receiving. I pray you tell me, Sir, if you have a cup in your hand
which will poison and kill a sick distemperd man if he drink of it, will you
give it unto him if he desires it? and do you think it enough to admonish him
that it is deadly poison? and first dehort him from drinking of it, and then
immediately reach it to him, with intent, that he shall drink of it? I persuade
my self, that as he shall perish, so his blood shall be required at your
hands, and that you shall as guilty hold up your hand at the bar for it.

Quest. 3. The third Question intimates that you conceive unworthy hearing of
the Word to be as great, as dangerous, as damning a sin, as unworthy receiving
of the Sacrament: That Ministers are no more partakers of other men's sins, not
more guilty of their sins, and of giving holy things to dogs, and casting
pearls before swine, by giving the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood to
unworthy receivers who are openly scandalous, then by preaching the Word to
unprofitable hearers, to whom he is the favor of death unto death. And
hereupon you would infer, that Ministers may as well refuse to preach the
Word unto their people, lest it should not profit them, as they may refuse to
give the Sacrament to scandalous persons, who eat their own damnation.

To this I answer* that there is vast difference between these two, preaching
the Word to unprofitable hearers, and giving the Sacrament to persons openly
scandalous, impenitent and profane receivers. First a Minister preaches the
Word to many that are unprofitable hearers, not knowing them to be such, and in
hope to convert and profit them, if there be any such in the auditorie, and so
also he gives the Sacrament to some unworthy receivers, unwillingly, not
knowing them to be such: and in such cases he is blameless: but if he gives
the holy seals of Christ's body and blood to scandalous impenitent persons, he
knows that he gives them damnation to eat and drink, and he is half sharer
with them in the sinful act. And therefore though the sin of unworthy hear^^^
of the Word is as dangerous and damning, as unworthy receiving of the
Sacrament, to the hearen and receivers: yet to the Minister in the one, to
weet, preaching without knowledge of the hurt which some receive by it, there
is no fault; but in giving to the scandalous receiver he wittingly acts and
partakes of the profanation of the holy ordinance.

Secondly, The Lords holy Table in the holy communion, is for the time a place
of Gods more special presence then the common Auditory, and there we come
nearer to God, and receive with the word and promises particularly applied to
us, the seals of our communion with Christ, and of our right and interest in
him and all his benefits. But preaching to a common Auditory, is only a
general propounding of the word and promises to all, not a particular applying
of it to any, especially that hear unprofitably: for that were giving holy
things to dogs: therefore there is more danger and greater sin in admitting
unworthy receivers to the Lords Table. A small error in such an holy ordinance
does provoke the Lord to wrath, who will be sanctified in them that come near
to him, as appears in Aarons two sons, Levit. 10. ^, 2, 3. and Vzza^, 2 Samuel
6. 7.

Thirdly, Preaching the Word to such as are openly known to be scorners of the
Gospel, and persecutours of the Preachers, and do more rage and are hardened
thereby, is a profanation of an holy thing, and a casting of pearls before
swine, which our Savior expressly forbids, Matthew. 7. 6. and Matthew. 10. 14.
Bids his Apostles turn from such, and shake off the dust from their feet, as a
testimony against them; and so Paul and Barnabas did, Act. 13. 51.

Fourthly, In preaching the Word, the Minister of Christ propounds the truth to
many wicked men generally, but does not particularly apply any word of comfort,
or promise of blessing to any but profitable hearers, and upon condition of
repentance: But in giving the Sacrament to known impenitent persons, he
preaches most palpable lies against his own conscience, when he says. The
body of Christ was broken for you, and his blood washed for you: And therefore
the points urged in this Question are very dangerous, and diverse Scriptures
herein quoted, are wrested and grossly perverted.

Quest. 4. The fourth Question (upon that received truth, That God only knows
the secrets of men's hearts, which Ministers do not, but mistake hypocrites for
worthy receivers, and more honest simple weak men, for unfit Communicants)
would infer, That Ministers ought not to have power to judge or censure. I^
which reasoning; First, I find gross absurdity: for what can be more
ridiculous then to argue, that because Ministers know not secret things which
belong to God, therefore they know not revealed and manifest things, as open
scandalous sins, and impenitency professed in the face of the Church, and by
consequent may not judge and censure them by the Word of God, which does
plainly reveal their wickedness to them and the whole Consistory.

Secondly, Observe how the Scriptures, which forbid rash judgment concerning
men's estate before God, which is secret, or concerning men's last end, and the
like, as Matthew. 7. 1. Luk 6. 37. Romans 14. 4. are wrested to overthrow all
judging and censuring in general, both civil and ecclesiastical.

Thirdly, How vainly the power of God is abused, to prove that he will in the
midst of a profane wicked act change notorious sinners hearts in a moment,
which if he should do, how shall these sinners manifest their repentance in a
moment to the Church, which they have offended, that they may he admitted
orderly, and not rashly without just ground or satisfaction?

Fourthly, The breaking of a bruised reed, and quenching of smoking flax, is
most miserably applied to the suspending of proud, refractorie, impenitent
sinners from the holy Sacrament; between which two sorts of persons and actions
there is as vast a difference as between heaven and hell, light and darkness.
For the bruised reed signifies men of broken heart and contrite spirit,
groaning under the burden of their sins, and fleeing to Christ for ease: And
smoking flax signifies such as have a weak but true faith, which like a spark
in flax shows by smoking that there is fire, striving to break forth, and to
show light of holy life. Now how contrary these are to proud, scandalous
impenitent sinners, let reasonable men judge; the first are such as the
Publicans and sinners, who came to Christ repenting and confessing their sins,
and by him were received, cherished and comforted; the latter are like those
trees which brought forth no good, but bad fruit, unto the root of which the
axe was laid, to hew them down, and cast them into the fire. The not breaking
nor quenching the first is a point of mercy, and a work of Christ; the
tolerating of the other and cherishing and encouraging them in their scandalous
sins, by admitting them to the holy Communion of Christ's body and blood, is a
point of great impiety, and a diabolical act of profanation. Here therefore
the Scriptures are dangerously abused and wrested, where scandalous, impenitent
and refractory persons are confounded with humble penitent sinners, breathing
after comfort and communion with Christ.

Fifthly, Here is a strange supposition, that all, bearing the name of
Christians, even scandalous, impenitent sinners, are invited to the Sacrament,
and are bound to come and receive it under pain of sin and contempt. I am sure
the French and our Liturgies before cited do admonish all impenitent persons
to abstain, lest they eat and drink their own damnation. And the Scriptures
here quoted, 1 Cor. 11. and Heb. 10. 29. do show that unworthy wicked sinners
do by unworthy receiving count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing.
Therefore to infer that no Minister in point of conscience can refuse to give
the Sacrament to such, is to conclude, quidlibet ex quolibet. But whereas it is
added, that Ministers may not refuse any Christian, not actually
excommunicated, the Sacrament, if he desires to receive it, in case he profess
sincere repentance for sins past, and promise newness of life for the time to
come: this we embrace with all our hearts, and if he obtrude on us no other but
only such, we will not be so uncharitable as to judge them unworthy, neither
need we fear to partake of their sin, or suspect their unworthy receiving. For
our rule is to proceed with men according to that which manifestly appears,
whether it be in truth or in hypocrise; if any so professing does eat
unworthily, he eats damnation to himself, not to the Ministers, who therein do
nothing against their consciences, but proceed according to the judgment of
charity, and he shall bear his own burden. The Ministers act of administration
to them who profess sincere repentance, is an holy and divine institution; but
to open scandalous impenitent persons, it is a manifest profanation, and they
are partakers in the guilt and punishment.

The Conclusion being the result of the former arguments, which are plainly
showed to be weak and of no strength, does of it self fall to the ground and
vanish. For I have showed, that unworthy hearing and unworthy receiving are
equally sins in the hearers and receivers; but in the Preachers of the Word and
the givers of the Sacraments it is far otherwise: the Preacher does only
propound the Word generally, and not falsely apply the promises of blessing and
life to any particular scandalous persons, but upon condition of their
believing repentance and obedience. If he knows any in the auditory, who are
scorners of the Word, and haters and persecutours of him and his doctrine, he
denounces a curse from God against them, and desires them to keep away, and
holds himself guilty of sin, if he should cast the pearl of the Gospel before
such swine, when they are alone and separated from other hearers: he will not
wittingly be to any the savor of death unto death. But the Minister who gives
the Sacrament to open scandalous sinners in their impenitency, does wittingly
profane Gods holy ordinance, and lies against his conscience in saying that
Christ's body was broken, and his blood shed for them, and makes himself guilty
of their blood, while he gives them wittingly to eat and drink their own
damnation, as is before showed. Whatsoever power takes from Christ's Ministers
the lawful and necessary liberty to exclude from the Lords table scandalous
sinners openly impenitent, that is such a transcendent arbitrary, unlimited
power, as lordly Prelates sometimes exercised, and no less then tyranny and
oppression of the consciences both of Ministers and their godly people. And
therefore here the Divines of the Assembly are charged most unjustly and
calumniously, who have humbly desired, by way of Petition to both the
honorable Houses of Parliament, that their consciences may not have this yoke
of oppression laid on them, which will force them either to profane the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, by giving it to unworthy persons, or to
decline their Ministry and administration of that holy ordinance, choosing
affliction rather then iniquity.

FINIS.

