CHARACTERS AND ELEGIES.

BY FRANCIS VVORTLEY, Knight and Baronet.



Printed in the Year, M DC XLVI.

TO THE LOVERS OF HONOR and POESY.
GENTLEMEN,
YOu whose constitutions are even and equal, not over-balanced with earthly
and base metal, love Honor and Gallantry in any man, and virtus in host
probatur. You who know God made all things by his own Rule of Proportion, (in
weight, measure and number:) you who are friends to that Divine, Noble, and
Royal Art of Poesy, for what is it but well weighed words, made even by that
Lesbian Rule of Proportion? you can best judge of these phancies dedicated to
you, as they are meant. The subject of my Poetry is noble, and the noblest of
Gods creatures, Man, brave men, loyal men, who have dyed like Jonathan and his
brothers, either with the King, or in his Cause, (most of them) the other were
worthy a better Muse as well as they.

This way of service to the memory of the dead wants not presidents worthy our
imitations, Kings and Prophets, and the greatest Lawgiver, whom I will take
for my first president of Poetry, even Moses, who from Gods own mouth gave the
Law to his own people: he composed such a song, as the Lamb and Angels make
use of it, ( Apoc. 15.) which was his song of deliverance he left composed, and
so first sanctified Poetry, as Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament by
the allegation of the Psalms and Prophets, who were both Poets and Vates. Also
S. Paul sanctified the Heathen Poets. David, vir secundum cor Dei, that pious
Prince, that martial King, that glorious man of God, truly deserved that
glorious Epithet, Princeps Poetarum. Solomon, the wisest of men, composed his
Songs and Canticles. David in this way of Poesy made an (...) for Saul and
Jonathan. And Jeremy made the (...) for good Josias. He that goes up to the
mountain of God, shall meet the Prophets with musical raptures. The Jews
buried their dead with great ceremony, and had their Praeficaes, women singers,
their (...), their songs of mourning and lamentation, their burning of Incense
and sweet odours for their Kings, and solemn mournings for their Princes. They
mourned and fasted (1 Samuel 31. 13. and 2 Samuel 1. 12.) for their Kings, they
mourned many days, as for Moses and Joshua, and so for Josias; for whom (as I
said) Jeremy made the (...). The chief mourner at every resting place sung the
usual (...), or as we call it, the burden of the song; like that in Ier. 9.
18. that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with
waters. And this they did in hope of Resurrection, as well as honor of the
dead, for they comforted their friends with places of Scripture fullest of
comfort, as that of Esaias 25. 8. He will swallow up death in victory, and wipe
away all tears: And Psalm. 72. 16. They shall flourish and spring again as the
grass on the earth. And they called the Churchyard, or burying place, BETH
CHAIIM, Domus viventium, the house of the living.

The Primitive Church used such Ceremonies in this way, as would pass for
Popery amongst us now adays* though it was in the purest times of the Church
used, (so much as it was by mistake abused) and turned to Idolatry. But if that
were a just exception against lawful Ceremonies, it may stand as well against
Doctrine as Discipline, for both have been abused, the one by Heretics, the
other by Schismatiques, and both ought to be observed, the one in ordine ad
esse Ecclesiae, the other ad been esse. So this kind of Poesy has warrant
beyond exception, and this ceremony of Buryall: He who wanted it amongst the
Jews was said to have the buryall of an Ass, so Ier. 22. Ieconia was said to
have such a buryall.

Thus much I have said to satisfy the curious, or rather ignorant concerning
Poesy, and the honorable mention and memory of the dead: And they who had it
not in the Primitive Church (if it could be had) were said to have insepultam
sepulturam. As for my Characters and Translations, they are fruits of Fancy,
and were but as Salads are to solid dishes, to sharpen the appetite: so these
to my serious studies were, or as David's Harp, to the melancholy thoughts of
my imprisonment. I must acknowledge (with thanks to God) I found singular
comfort in this way, and this sufferance, and that it set an edge upon my
over-tyred and dulled brain, and these Phancies were the fire vvarmed them.
My vvish is, they may be accepted of such as know how to judge, and have so
much honor not to misinterpret good meaning, and my zeal to the Cause
wherein I suffer. I thank heaven, God has supplied me with a large measure
of patience and comfort, as pledges of his favor, and so much charity* I wish
them rather a right understanding, then any ill; and such a proportion of
inward comfort as may make them as happy in their Liberty as I am in prison.
Let them therefore with Charity read, what they find in this little Volume,
and such an encouragement may produce to the view of the world, my more serious
Studies, to which these were but a preparative, and as I said before, a salad
to more solid dishes, which I will promise you shall be served up, if this
please; if not, I have not lost my patience, much less the comfort of my
phancie, (which none can take from me) and I can content my self with that
Greek saying, which suits me as well as if it had been made for me,

(...). The Motto of my Family.

AMICITIAS VOLO, INIMICITIAS SPERNO.

I study my friends, and scorn my causeless enemies.

This is the Resolution of your Servant, Fr. Wortley.

CHARACTERS AND ELEGIES.
CHARACT. I. The Character of His Royal Majesty.
MY Sovereign is a King, whose Virtues make his claim as good to a Crown, as
his blood and his birthright does to this: yet no King in Europe can derive
his right from more royal, virtuous, and victorious Predecessors then he, nor
better prove his title in relation to all three, then my Master can. What the
Britains lost to the Saxons, they to the Danes, and the Norman got from both,
is his birthright, besides the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, and
Principality of Wales, additions to the Normans Conquest: Had he begun his
first Quinquenium, as he has spent these last, and drawn that blood abroad
which has been spilt at home; had he been as quick in justice, as he has been
apt to mercy; had he brought in the Scots into this Kingdom, (as his Father
did;) had they not been called in, my Master had been the most powerful and
the most happy King in Christendom, but he was born to reign when the Aspects
of the Planets were malignant, and in unhappy conjunctions or oppositions, in
relation to his Kingdoms, disposing Subjects to innovation in Religion, and
immoderate desires of liberty, (as that great Master in Astrology,
Tichobrahi, in his Observations upon that fatal Comet preceded the Germane
war, foretold.) It Is true, Planets may dispose, but cannot necessitate; Imperant
astra sensui, non rationi, nil voluntatem impellunt, for otherwise they should
be guilty of our sins, not we. When my Master is upon his Throne of Justice, he
is like the tongue of the Balance, and makes the Scales stand right and equal
betwixt the extremes, Mercy and Judgment: but God cast into the scale of
Mercy some grains of his favor, which turned the scale, and made him the most
mild, pious, and best beloved Prince of Christendom: yet who can say that ever
he feared to do justice, or spared it, if not over-intreated by such as made
too great an advantage of his goodness? It was a saying of Seneca's, that
Parcere omnibus and nullis est aequa crudelitas, but it is greater cruelty to
the good to spare all, then to the bad to spare none. Seneca says, Clementia
tutum Regem in aperto ostendit, for that, he said, begot the love of the
people, and I say it should make him reign in the hearts and affections of his
Subjects; but never good King was worse understood, nor more unhappily
mistaken. All I can or will say, is, the faults which were laid to his charge
in the beginning of his troubles, (but whispered) are now thwarted so, that
they become (...), contradictory one to the other, and one of them must fall.
At first he was weak, now he is thought too politic; at first easy, now too
stiff; at first too peaceful, now too martial: In a word, I need not write
his Character, if his History be not wronged; I cannot make so good an one, as
that will prove him: To which I leave him, but with hopes to see him break
through this cloud, (which over-shadowes him) and shine as bright and
gloriously as ever, or more, (improved by these sad trials) which shall be my
Prayer for my Master, and ought to be of every loving Subject for his
Sovereign.

II. The Character of the Queens Majesty.
THe Queen is a Lady of Illustrious blood and birth, as any of Europe, (except
her own daughters) whose Father casts the scale, and gives it them, derived
from him, who is really one of the best borne Princes of Christendom, except
his own Son. She was daughter to that Mars of France, Henry the Great, (truly
the greatest France ever had) as well for Royal blood, Heroic virtues, as
power and dominion. At home few Princes were so beloved, abroad none more
feared, for his Sword was as glorious as his Wisdom. Her mother was a Lady of
great blood and wisdom, as appeared by her Government of France, (a people
incapable of (...), the government of Woman) that must, and will confess it
self more happy in her regiment, then it has been ever since (although
victorious) under the service or command of her two great States men the
Cardinals, she commanding that in love and obedience, which reason of State
has since conquered in France. The beauty of our Queen was as royal and
sovereign as her blood and virtues, and true parallels, yet concur in the
center. Wisdom and Constancy are her portion in this world, and her Piety
bids fair for the next. Her Wisdom appears to all admiration, for she has
outdone all agents of her sex, much more of her quality, in her negotiations,
her love adding wings to her spirit, and that strength to her body, to expedite
what the most active here or abroad thought improbable, nay impossible to be
effected. For her Constancy, I wonder at that, more then this, that for a
Crown she dare not change her Religion, having such a President as her
glorious Father, (in all but that) and yet admire it more, considering her love
to the King, and the advantage her wisdom assures the change would bring to
their designs, the perfection of the presidents, the one in constancy, the
other in change, Ladies being more apt to follow the old French, then the new
English fashion. If I knew her not wise, as royal and pious as either, I could
most admire her favors to those of our Nation in France, considering her
sufferance, and her Husbands here; yet she is still a Sanctuary to her Husbands
friends, (a rare president of Charity) and in all this so cheerful, she
rather encourages others, then seems to sink under such a weight of
afflictions, and in this exceeds her self as much as her sex in the other.
Though I would not have her mutable, yet from my soul I wish her conformable
to the King in her Religion, which must be the work of heaven; In the mean
time I wish that we were as really charitable, as she is truly pious, that she
could see our faith by our good works, that they might as much convince her
conscience to change, as reason of State might and does move her reason to that
conformity, and truly binds her to it. In a word, were she thus, I know no
Nation under heaven so happy as we must then confess our selves, who have now
made our selves Ludibrium mundi, the scorn of the world, as much despised
abroad, as we lately were glorious: who like Esops dog, have forsaken the
substance, and snatched at shadows, and our loss is really as irreparable, as
his is fained, if heaven help not.

III. The hopeful Prince.
AS the sea is the Center of the Element of water, to which all rivers tend,
and in which they empty their fullness: So is my Prince the Sea of Royal
virtues, the Center of Princely blood, from which we hope springs of virtues,
and honor, nay rivers will break forth and enrich the world in future; As all
Rays have a point where they begin, and a Center or point of concourse either
directly or by reflex where they meet or terminate, so there is no line or ray
of virtue, that meets not in this point of concourse, no point of piety of
honor which we may not petere principia from his Royal Progenitors, and
terminate it in him. Fashions follow the humors of the people, and they the
dispositions of men's minds, dispositions are much governed (in respect of the
remote cause) by the influence and aspects of the Stars, and that by the
supreme cause of causes: If we look with the eyes of nature, we may wonder at
the times; if of grace; we have deserved the worst we suffer, by abusing the
best blessings we enjoyed. If this hinder not, I know no reason, but we may
look for happy times, and derive them from these lesser wheels, moved by the
greater. Look on my Prince, if you (Martial spirits) expect action, and
derive him from that Boanerges, the son of Thunder, Henry of France, the
greatest of that name, nay of her Kings: If for peaceful and politic
government, look northward upon King James the Solomon of his time, the Prince
of peace on earth: If you look to be glorious in foreign conquests, derive
him from William the Conqueror (who began younger then he) and with happy
success subdued his Rebels, joined with the power of France, and made both
Henry of France and Philip his Son know, that he meant to be a Conqueror: If
you look for glorious action further from home, derive him from the First
Richard, or the First Edward, whose names were as terrible to Infidells, as
William to the Saxons, and as much renowned amongst all Christian Princes: If
nearer home, draw his line from the Victorious Edwards, the glorious Henry's:
If you would have him subtly politic, with less respect to Sovereign
honor, fetch him from the Eleventh Lewis of France: If more wise and truly
valiant, and better skilled to govern the English, either in the Martial or
Civil way, or Politic, derive him from him, from whom he derives his right
to the Crown, the Seventh Henry: If you would have him pious and patient,
and struggle with his Stars with prudent magnanimity: joined with these
virtues, look upon his Royal Parents, and pray that like our third Henry,
they after these storms may be as happy in my Prince their Son, our hopes,
as he and his Queen were in our First Edward, in relation to both Kingdoms:
that after as long a reign of his Royal Parents, he may (as he did) give law
to both Kingdoms, and settle the three Kingdoms, and leave them in as much
glory, as he did this.

IV. A true Character of the Illustrious James Duke of York.
THe Duke of York is a Prince for his birth may compare with any of Europe,
(being my Master, his Brothers parallel) and I dare say cannot suffer in the
comparison. He ownes his Royal Father, and is as like him as Nature could cast
him in so Princely a mould: so like he is, we may invert that Royal Epithet
was given his Father, Jacobissimus Carolus, to Carolissimus Jacobus: and he
makes it good. Those who know him, know I flatter him not, if I say his
disposition ownes his Illustrious blood, and his Gallantry speaks the languages
of his birth. I dare promise his Princely Brother a gallant second, and as
faithful as he can hope him. As valiant Clarence was to our glorious 5. Henry,
so shall James be to his victorious Brother. Had Frances Mars her glorious 4.
Henry seen these blossoms springing from his Flower-de-luce, he would have
rejoiced as much as so great a King could, to see his dearest daughter, and his
so lively Character their mother so happy in this blessing, as it repayres or
counterballances the sad condition of her present fortune: And he would have
righted his interest in them, and have made England know he was their
Grandfather, (which the world shall see by their glorious actions.) It is not
novelty, out of our Histories to produce examples, that our wisest and most
victorious Kings and Princes have by a supreme power been raised out of the
dust, and have erected stately monuments and glorious Tropheys upon such sad
foundations as ours must build on; So William triumphed over his Rebellious
Normans, in spite of the power of France, and after over the English: so our
second Henry, our third, our fourth, and seventh, (to omit others) made
themselves glorious in spite of suppression and sad trials, and were (like gold
refined in the furnace) made more glorious, happy, and wise by their
afflictions, for the sweetness of changes appears best in oppositions. He
knows not true happiness, who has not felt some adversity. Sharp Schools
make the best Scholars. Who knows not the sad effects of War, cannot value
Peace. And no Prince manages Peace so happily, as he who knows the evil of
War, yet knows how to put on his Arms, as well as to lay them aside. In a
word, this hardship our hopes have suffered, has much improved them, and I
dare promise to the world happiness from it, and I hope a share in his, whose
title entitles my hope and interest in him, as well as my Princely Master.

V. The Character of a Noble General.
A Noble General is a man who has peace with heaven, and forgets not he is to
make his account to God, as well as man, and therefore dares not do that he
knows not how to answer to God, in respect of his conscience, nor man in
regard of his honor: he knows he is not fit for command of others, is not
master of himself, and therefore studyes that first; yet is not such
selfe-lover that he forgets his duty to either God or his Prince, it being no
question, whether a General should obey God, or man, he first examines the
quarrel before he accepts his Commission, and that satisfied dares dye in it,
and that is his rule by which he directs his service. And as the Seaman by his
compass stears his course by that Card, yet varies his course as he does in
his voyage, applying his experience to Occasions, yet still with an eye upon
his Card, he often turns his eyes inward, and there finds his Character of
his own charge: An Army of as different humors, and dispositions, as
Hannibals Army was, and desires to govern his way: never one Nation was more
entire in obedience, never General more absolute in command, never General
studied his Commission more, never Army executed it better. Had Carthage been
as good a master, as he a servant, he had mastred Rome. He cannot be happy in
command, that knows not to obey, and by that learnt to command. That Prince or
State puts an Army into a young Soldiers charge, its probable may pay as dear
for his Learning, as he that trusts his fortune in a Ship without a Pilot: If
he speed well he is more beholden to chance, then discretion; this
disadvantage is too great for a wise man to adventure the trust, and an honest
man the charge: Passions and sensualities are not more obnoxious to the soul
in the natural Body, then these are to a General in relation to the body
Politic, good servants they are, but dangerous masters: As the senses present
objects to the Phancie, and that to the intellect, yet still the Will commands:
so he is not in this without his well-chosen and well-rewarded intelligence and
correspondency, nor without his own Jugdement, and his choice Counsels, yet
keeps still the prerogative of his command, not so premptory, as absolute. And
as the soul loves every member, yet makes use of it, and communicates
liberally to its occasions, as it relates to the body, so he commands not but
with as much love, yet indulges not so any member of his body, nor sense, or
faculty of his soul, but he prefers the body to any member, and the soul to any
sense, and will rather curb, and suppress an insolency or presumption in
either, then endanger the whole, and knows that is less cruelty to the good to
spare all, then to the bad to save none. He looks upon his Officers as his
senses, and his Soldiers as his members, yet had rather cut off a finger then
be deaf, or lose a hand then his eyes. And this care of his is happily requited
with a dutiful regard and affection unto his Soldiers. And yet he in respect
to his Officers accounts himself singulis major, and to his Army, universis
minor. In a word, as God trusts the soul with the charge and command of the
body, so is he trusted with his Army, and is as loath to hazard that, but
fears not: Much less denies to deliver up his commission, or make his
account, when called for, by the supreme power, and has always his account
ready in respect to that supreme Commission of Gods, or that inferior of
Man's, and therefore fears no more to hazard or leave it (when a just occasion
commands it) then a well satisfied Christian to dye in God and his Princes just
cause, whose faith has already Crowned his head with glorious Martyrdom, and
such a General deserves as well the glory of a Rom^ Triumph, as the Martyr his
Aureola.

VI. A true English Protestant
IS one who professes the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England,
established first by General Councels and Synods, and after confirmed by the
known Laws of the Kingdom, and professes against the contrary. He sticks to
the Protestation of Ausburge, whence he had his name; he loves the unity of the
Church so, that he endeavors next her verity in faith, her unity and
conformity in Discipline with that Church, not daring to broach new opinions,
nor preach them to disturb the peace of his aged Mother. Private
interpretations of Scripture he approves not, but submits his own, and
maintains none against the received and approved Doctrine of the Church,
whereof he is a member: He thinks that Evangelicall counsel is to be observed,
that all things must be done in order and decency: He conceives the King to be
the Head of the Church, as it is personal, not spiritual, and has sworn him
Gods Deputy in Government, and trusted with the sword, which he must not bear
in vain: He dares not question his Authority, who is only answerable to God,
but in his heart honors him as his Vicegerent, and knows that to resist his
power, is to resist him that gave it; and though the penalty be damnation, yet
he fears not that so much as the offense given to God, who gave the power: He
confesses an obligation to Gods Moral Laws, and Man's Judicial, and that
there must be as well obedience active as passive, to the one, as the other: He
knows Christ's spiritual Kingdom opposes not the temporal claim and power
of Kings, but Caesar must have his tribute (the badge of Conquest) as God must
have his in the acknowledgment of his protection. He dares call his Sovereign
the Anointed of God, since God called Cyrus a Heathen so, not for the holiness
of external unction, but the internal character of supreme power, and Saul a
demoniack, a persecutor, a murderer: so he can make a difference between types
and metaphors, the one being in persons, the other in words. He conceives
passive obedience always due to the power of the King, where active cannot be
performed with a good conscience. He believes faith alone cannot, nor does
justify without works, but both together, the first before God, the second
before men. He believes God rewards above merit, yet that there is difference
in glory, and reward, though all have fullness. Traditions and Ceremonies he
reverences, as they are in Antiquity, and stream from the springs of original
purity, not to the necessity of Doctrine, but Discipline. He detests Parity in
Church or in Commonwealth, as tending to Anarchy, and destroy those it will
follow. He thinks it not fit to pull down the Cantrells of an Arche till the
key-stone be settled, and then the greater the weight is, the stronger it will
be; he likes the fabric of the old so well, he thinks the change may be
dangerous. He dares not swear against his conscience, nor vow implicit
obedience to occasional ordinances. He thinks no authority but the same, or a
greater then that to whom he has made a Judicial vow, can disanull it. He is
loyal for Conscience sake to his Sovereign, charitable for Gods sake to his
Neighbor, and dares not do that unto another, he cannot be content should be
done to himself; much less rob his Sovereign of his birthright, or deface
Gods character; he thinks Dixi vos dii estis belongs supremely to his
Sovereign, ministerially to his subjects: he dares not distinguish betwixt the
King and his Person, and think the one at Westminster, the other in his Army;
and hazard that in the field to save that at Westminster, he likes not that
nice distinction forged in the Scoole of the Jesuits, derived from the Devils
Logic: His heart thinks no disloyal thought, much less dares he speak a
word to lessen the reverence due to Majesty, not for fear of punishment, but
the sin; who dares not forsake his Sovereign in his adversity, lest God deny
him in his necessity; who in a dungeon can find more comfort, then they who
commanded him thither. He with Joseph finds his Keepers wrought by a supreme
power to mercy, if not trust, whose cheerfulness is a comfort to his
Fellow Prisoners, and no less advantage to himself, God making him the
instrument of their happiness in their adversities, and him happy in his
gallant cheerfulness, and magnanimous patience. In a word, he dares in his
Princes just quarrel meet death with as much courage, as David met Goliath, as
Daniel went into the Lions Den, or the three Children into the fiery furnace,
and in the midst of his tortures, can with as much cheerfulness sing his Nunc
dimitte, as Simeon did with his Christ in his arms.

This is your true Cavallier.
VII. An Antinomian, or Anabaptisticall Independent
IS one who wonders that S. Paul would refer himself (though for conformities
sake) to a Council, he having an equal share with Peter in the division of
the Circumcision, and the uncircumcision: he cannot endure to hear of
Counsels or Synods, and is much troubled that he approves of the Altar, and
yet well pleased that he refers the Minister for his livelihood to it, though
he tithes not mint nor anise (as not approving tithes) yet he neglects the
waightiest matters of the Law, and in this agrees with the Pharisee. You shall
find him pointed in the New Testament (with a Vae vobis) who love the chief
seats at feasts, and make long prayers in Widows houses, and lead silly women
captive; He approves not that Evangelicall council, to work out salvation
with fear and trembling, for this touches too much upon our obligation to the
Law; Besides, fear is opposite to faith, and trembling to boldness; he is as
bold as blind Byard, and scarce will be beholding to Christ for his security;
He thinks himself of a higher form in the school of Gods Church, then to submit
to the pedagogie of the Law Moral, Judicial, or Ceremonial; he has found a
shorter cut to heaven then the Catholic Church ever heard of, and a cheaper,
(faith without works) he thinks Canonical obedience a badge of the beast, and
subordination to temporal or ecclesiastical powers, of a forfeiture of the
freedom of faith; An oath he avoides as a snare for his Conscience, and is so
tender in this kind, he wisely refuses the National Covenant; if he has
taken the oath of Supremacy, or that of Allegiance, he has repented it with
more sorrow and detestation then any of his sins; he is confident the
spiritual power of Christ's Kingdom here, disingages him of all temporal
obligation; The Hornet is not a worse Neighbor to the Be, then he is to the
Presbyterian, and robs his Hive as often both of his Honey and Bees; he talks
much of a new began Kingdom of Christ, set up in the hearts and souls of the
Saints, which discharges him of all Secular duty. He is confident, that this
is that Kingdom of Glory here, which shall last a thousand years, and expects
no other. He has heard the last Trumpe, which like the voice of an Angel is
not heard, but of those to whom it was sent. He is confident Christ has
already divided the world into two parts, the Goats and the Sheep, and they are
severed. He thrusts the Presbyterian out of the flock, as Linsey Wolsey was out
of the Jewish Temple. He will not allow a Bishop and Presbyter to differ in
power, but Roman-like takes that himself as his due, which they could not
agree on, and would make a Congregationall Hierarchy as absolute, as the
Presbyter a Classical, or the Bishop an Episcopal. In a word, he has spun
his Religion to so fine a thread, that it may more fitly be termed a Mystery
then a Profession: his Charity is as invisible as his Faith, and his Hope as
his Charity: he is in this indeed to be praised, he is of so public a spirit,
that he would have a community of all things: he can endure no prerogative but
that of theirs, (that of Faith) which gives him a title to all ours: and of so
harmless an humility he is, he avoweth that we need no fig leaves to cover
nakedness, Crescite and multiplicamini is the first command, and all he sticks
to, he would have none baptized but such as can give an account of their faith,
but thinks it needless to give any either to God or man of their works: he
thinks that Faith is the form that gives the esse to the Sacraments, but not
good works the been esse to Faith, and so either he will go to heaven without
them, or else he thinks that God does his Faith wrong, and his own promise
more.

VIII. A Jesuit
IS to the moderate Papist, as the Puritan to the Protestant; For his original
he is descended from Ignatius, and begotten in spiritual adultery upon the
Popes Spouse: he was nursed with much care, and educated with as much in the
Popes School, at the Austrian charge, better read in the Politics then
Divinity, though in both learned beyond the common reach. The Anabaptist and
he look several ways, yet they are like Sampsons Foxes tied together by the
tails with firebrarnds, and commonly endanger the Country that harbors them.
The Esseni were not more austere in the Jewish Church, then he in the
Christian. They agree in this both alike, enemies to Caesar. He is to the Pope,
as the Pharisee was to the High Priest, always of his council, commonly of
the Quorum: he will compass as much ground as either to gain a Proselyte: his
endeavor is thankfulness to the Pope for care of his education, and to the
Austrian for his charges: he requites them both, and becomes an useful
instrument to advance the Hierarchy of the one, and the Tyranny of the other.

The Pharisee was not a greater observer of Traditions then he, nor prouder of
his Philacteree, then he of his Order; he is so well versed in Questions, that
the Pharisee did not trouble our Savior more with Dilemmaes, then he with
dangerous Problems does the Catholic Church; none improves an Order more then
he, nor is a greater husband of the common stock, which is so great an one,
that with his golden key, and his pick-lock, or his scrue of Confession, he
rules the Councels of most Princes, and crooks them to his own ends. Though he
seems to deny the world, no man has a greater share in it; No man pretends
greater piety to God, purity and humility in himself, nor charitable equity to
Man, then he. He dares challenge God to account, and thinks him so great a
debtor, that he is able to leave a huge treasure of Supererogation to the
Church, and quit scores with him; yet in conclusion proves a Bankrupt, and owes
more then he can ever hope to pay; and yet so proud, he scorns to compound
with his Redeemer, or make use of his Surety. He thinks Christ did himself
and his Master the Pope wrong with his humility, and blames him he made no more
use of his Legions of Angels to establish a Temporal Monarchy. There is no
Text troubles him more then Peter's paying tribute to Caesar, (...), and ter
negabis, are far more easy of digestion, and trouble him less to answer.
Pro te and me he conceives are words of dangerous consequence, and had he been
of Christ's council, should have been spared. In a word, he has gotten more
for his Master and himself, then Christ ever challenged, or meant to Saint
Peter, or his Successor, either in that Hierarchy he claims, or the
Temporal power he usurpes, which he pretends is propter bonum Ecclesiae, with
which clause or caution, he can absolve any Judicial Oath, though sealed with
the Sacrament, and signed by a Legion of Cardinals, as Pope Paschall did his
with Henry the Emperor; so he prefers the Churches Liberties in Temporal
things before his own salvation, and the royal signature of the Sacrament.

IX. The true Character of a Northern Lady, as she is Wife, Mother, and Sister,
IS the Wife to a Husband as intollerably hard as harsh; yet like the Be, she
sucks honey out of this Hemlock, and gains a good stock of honor and
happiness out of this misfortune, and lets the world see it is more his then
hers. She manages her little deduction out of his fortune so, that by her
discreet disbursements he may see the true use of wealth, which he thinks is
rather in possession then use; so he has no more comfort of his wealth then
the Indian mole in the golden mines, if he cast up any it may cost him dear,
yet he gains not by it, it is for others use, not his own; not with any
intention to enrich others, but by chance. That the Masculine is more worthy
then the Feminine Gender, is a rule we take up in our childhood, and lay down
with our lives; but she gives Lilly the lie, she proves that the Theological,
and Cardinal virtues are of the female gender, and (...) and (...), potestas
and potentia, power and ability too; and concludes (like a Mathematician)
demonstratively. As a chaste wife and happy mother she brought her husband a
son, in whose education she shows her self more like a father in her discreet
management of his youth in travel, then a tender mother in distrust of Gods
providence abroad, and does in this like the wise Merchant, who trusts the Sea
with his bullion and stock, and transacts it where exchange runs highest, and
so balances his trading by the probability, not certainty of advantage in the
return; whereas her husband would wrap his talent in a napkin, or hide it in a
dunghill, and breed his son no better then himself, were not she the better
Merchant; yet hers is but a mothers interest, his a fathers; hers in blood, his
in perpetuity. As for the sisters part, she has outdone all presidents in
that more then both the other, it being hard to find a sister can be so tender
a mother to her Brothers Orphane, that the child (were he come to her own
sons age) could scarcely miss his mother, such is her care of it. And that
which most commends her, is, she in her Noble Brothers imprisonment, has
managed his misfortunes with as much or more advantage then her own, wasting
her weak body in those noble services, nay over-witting those engines employed
to ruin her Brother. Like Moses she stood in the gap betwixt her Brother and
the Parliaments displeasure, nor would give over until (like him) she by her
intercession had set him free, and delivered him from the judgments which hung
like a cloud over his head. She lost not the least advantage in relation to her
Brothers honor, fortune or happiness. In a word, she is to her husband a
loyal wife, to her son a discreetly indulgent mother, to her Brother such a
Sister, as the wisest man would wish his own, and I mine.

Mothers, Wives, Sisters, you who would not err,
Steer all your courses by this Character.
This is no feigned Character, but true,
My soul could wish it were my Sisters due.
Nor wealth nor titles could enrich our blood
So much as this would, could they make it good.
X. The politic Neuter
IS an Hermaphrodite partaking of two sexes, and as unfruitful to his Prince
or country; a man that dares not profess the Religion he was baptized to, nor
protest against an Innovation, and so no Protestant: he reserves his choice for
the prevailing party, and for the present professes that which they do:
wonders at the distractions in the Church, and Commonwealth, and in the mean
time is more distracted in himself: he dares not own his conscience now, and
therefore that will change Masters, and turn witness against him, when he
stands most need of it: he would fain serve two Masters at once, and please
both, but finding our Saviors words true, that he must hate the one, and love
the other, he resolves to hate him he fears most, and to love neither, not
firm to either: he loses the good opinion of both, and so falls betwixt two
stools: God calls on him in the Old Testament with a quere how long he will
halt betwixt two opinions, and Christ in the New promises him the Laodiceans
reward: he is so far from trusting Gods mercy in Martyrdom, that he dares not
trust his providence in wants; he is as much troubled as David at the
prosperity of the wicked, but has not the patience to go to Gods House with
him to enquire of their ends; he will not believe David's experience concerning
the Children of the righteous, whom he never saw begging their bread; he had
rather lean upon the rotten reeds of his own policy, then trust the firm
rock of Gods providence: if he ever professed to be for the King, when his
cause prospered, he presently repented it, and purchased the Parliaments pardon
and protection, and paid at least two years purchase for it; if he be a
Prisoner, it is with accommodation, and by it he saves the charges of
hospitality; yet hopes that moneys thus disburst makes him a Martyr, and may
be pleaded as well in bar of further assistance to the King, as a Privy seal,
though it be disburst for the Parliaments use; if for the Parliament, you shall
never find him without a Royal protection, and purchased friendship at Oxford,
and that sometimes is mistaken, and shown to the wrong party, and then he
pays for it; if either party prevail, he is in Misericordia; if an
Accommodation (for which he prays more heartily then the forgiveness of his
sins) help not, he has so long endeavored to get a dexterous use of his left
hand, that he has almost lost the perfect use of his right, and is become an
imperfect perfect Ambodexter, or at best so cunning at leger-demaine, that he
gets the repute of a notable Jugler; In a word, he dares not seem what he is,
nor be what he seems, but like lukewarm water having neither heat enough to
warm the Stomach, nor being cold enough to cool it, is rejected of both, and
spued out as friend to neither.

XI. The City Paragon
IS a woman whose birth was greater then her portion, but her virtues greater
then her birth; who was married to a husband whose fortune exceeded his
wisdom, yet his fortune in her was greater then his wealth, who manages his
fortune so, that she improves his conscience as much as his wealth, and her wit
makes him eminent in the City. She loves not (with the Pharisees) the highest
places at Feasts, nor salutations in Assemblies, knowing Envy attends the
first, and Pride the other. Her dress is more comely then costly, modest then
garish; her visits, like Sabbath days labors, not frequent, and never without
charity, or necessity undertaken: her entertainment to her husbands friends, or
her own, suits both their conditions; more neat it is then curious; and is
more real and solid then ceremonious. She desires her children may be so bred,
that they may be seasoned in their childhood with those virtues which may make
them happy in their age. And knowing Examples prevail more then Precepts, she
gives them none, but such as she would have them follow. Those troubles
incident to rich men (which they call misfortunes) she makes blessings by her
right use of them, knowing it is not the fruition, but right use, that makes us
truly rich, nor the loss of wealth can make any so miserable as the abuse of
it. If she hear any ill of her neighbor, she had rather suppress it, then
report it; if any good, she will rather improve it, then enviously diminish it.
If any uncertain evil be reported of any good man or woman, she breaks it in
the egg, and will not give it the reputation of credit, much less of report:
if any uncertain good, she had rather believe it then question it; so she makes
her worst neighbors better, and her good she improves. In bargains for her
husband, she rather makes a wise bargain then a crafty; she had rather save
then circumvent; the loves not to hide leven in the lump of her husbands
fortune, nor dares trust her stock with laying up what Oppression must make
good again. She likes not gilded pills, she knows they may prove too
Cathartick. In a word, the State suffers what her husband gains, that she
wanted the power of a greater man, to do more good, since her will is
answerable to the best, and her wisdom not inferior to her will.

You City-dames who imitate
Court-Ladies in their greatest state,
Learn but the dress which here you have,
You may much cost and labor save:
And be esteemed better far,
Nay honored more then Ladies are.
Then thank my Country which has lent
Your City such a president.
XII. A sharking Committee-man
Is one trusted with more then he is worth: he is like Ezechiels lesser wheel,
moved by the greater* if he do discharge his trust, yet there may be Treason
in it; if not, there must be knavery. He reads the Turkish History with
passion, when he considers the great Turks policy to employ greedy slaves, and
the cunningest, in the places of greatest profit, that he may satisfy his
people with his justice, and get all that by escheat, which he had heaped by
oppression. He fears not God so much as the people do him, who sacrifice to
him (as the Indians to the Devil) ne noceat. He has still in his bosom the
horror of two days of Judgment, the one at Westminster, which he fears more
then the last when ever it come. The faces of the Committee for Examinations
are more dreadful to his sense, then the thought of the last day to his ^eared
conscience. His Antidote is a Paramount friend of the Quorum, and if he fail
him, he is a lost man. No Sheriff was ever quicker with his Elegit, then he
with his Capias for Body, Goods and Lands, which they call a Sequestration,
though the party may justly plead the Statute of this Parliament in bar of
his oppression, if the privilege of person, or propriety of goods were as
really intended as pretended, yet he fears no futura contingentia but his
Paramounts favor, in which he has no more term then Villains have in
Villanage, (during pleasure) that is, Dum been se gesserit in omnibus. He heaps
wealth to purchase favor, and gets that to purchase wealth, with which he
buys his Heir a Command, and in conclusion gets a Garrison of ease, where he
and his Cub may kennell, and like the Fox retreats to his hole when he is
hunted, this will make his peace (if well managed) with either party. In a
word, if ever he come to a Jury, his countenance will cast him, for that is as
full of guilt, as his conscience of horror. He who has the least skill in
Phisiognomie, shall find furcam in front, or crucem in facie; and if any cast
his nativity, and will be at the charge of a Scheame, you shall find Saturn
and Mars in conjunction in the house of Mercury, all malignant: yet he a
sincere Professor, alias, a knave in grain, or a Traitor gradibus intensis.

XIII. Britanicus his pedigree. A fatal prediction of his end.
I Dare affirm him a Jew by descent, and of the Tribe of Benjamin, lineally
descended from the first King of the Jews, even Saul, or at best he ownes him
and his Tribe, in most we read of them. First, of our English Tribes, I
conceive his Fathers the lowest, and the meanest of that Tribe, Stock, or
generation, and the worst how bad soever they be: melancholy he is, as
appears by his sullen and dogged wit; malicious as Saul to David, as is
evident in his writings; he wants but Saul's javelin to cast at him; he as
little spares the Kings Friends with his pen, as Saul did Jonathan his Son in
his reproach; and would be as free of his javelin as his pen, were his power
suitable to his will as Ziba did to Mephibosheth, so does he by the Ziba of
Saul's Tribe.
King, he belies him as much to the world, as he his Master to David, and in
the day of adversity is as free of his tongue, as Shimei was to his
Sovereign, and Shimei of Saul's Tribe*
would be as humble as he, and as forward to meet the King, as he was David,
should the King return in peace. Abishaes there cannot want to cut off the
Dogs head, but David is more merciful then Shimei can be wicked; may he first
consult with the witch of Endor, but not worthy of so noble a death as his own
sword, die the death of Achitophel for fear of David, then may he be hanged up
as the Sons of Saul were against the Sun, or rather as the Amalekites who
slew Isb^sheth, and brought tidings and the tokens of the treason to David; may
his hands and his feet be as sacrifices cut off, and hung up, and so pay for
the Treasons of his pen and tongue; May all heads that plot Treasons, all
tongues that speak them, all pens that write them, be so punished. If Sheba
paid his head for his tongues fault, what deserves Britanicus to pay for his
pen and trumpet? Is there never a wise woman in London? we have Abishaes.

XIIII. The Phaenix of the Court
IS a Lady whose birth and beauty called her to the Court, as fit to attend
Majesty; yet her virtues and discretion fixed more honor upon her then either,
though admired for the one, as much honored for the other. Though her beauty
like Hellens might beget a war in competition, yet these command a reverence,
as much as those enforce affection: her words hold weight as well as her
actions, she waighes them before she utters them, much more her actions which
are twice waighed, and give authority to others, and are rather admired then
imitated, yet ought as well to be imitated as admired: for her company it is
(if voluntary) such as she would be thought to be: her real devotion is
canonical in relation to order, if occasion fail not, and to her self, yet
none more duly observes the assigned hours for Gods Worship: her frequent
attendance on Gods service is not enjoined as a penance, but spontaneous; not
with hope of merit, for that spoils and prejudices even charity, which is the
seasoning of our works, but looks upon mercy with humility, rather then
merit with confidence, for she works her salvation out of the fire with fear
and trembling, yet she wants not a grain of lively faith, nor charity, the
one assuring her Soul, the other the world of that happiness, which neither
the subtlety nor malice of the wicked, or their master can rob her of, nor the
world take from her: As for her dress, she had rather own any infirmity,
either in color, shape, or feature, then cover them with an undecent, much
less an immodest attire, though her judgment even in this be like the royal
stamp to bullion, which gives it reputation and denomination, and makes it
current, so does her approbation any fashion; In a word, she is honored of
those she reverences, and reverenced by those she loves; she had rather know
her self truly wise, then be thought so, yet would not only be virtuous, but
be esteemed so; she knows there may be envy in the first without cause, and
dishonor in the other without reason.

Come Ladies you at dear rates buy
The French wash and Italian dye:
All you who paint they say will trade,
Here is true beauty will not fade.
Look well into this right Court glass,
And learn by it your selves to dress.
AN ELEGY Upon the Right Honorable The Earl of LINDSEY.
1.
GReat Lindsey's fallen, yet did not fall by chance,
For Sparrowes fall not but by Providence.
What are our sins when such as Lindsey fall?
One who so often had been General.
One nere deceived our hopes by Sea or Land,
And had been now as glorious in Command,
Had our Reserve of Horse as bravely stood
To their great Charge, as Lindsey made it good.
But they pursue the chase, therefore we may
(And justly too) say they lost us the day.
Sure their Commission was not left so large,
That a Reserve without Command should Charge.
For a Reserve for safe Retreat should stand,
And should not stir without express Command.
Their Zeal to honor, and the Kings just Cause,
Might make brave men forget strict Martial Laws.
So Lindsey fell, as when the Phoenix lies
In her rich Urne, another does arise
Even from her ashes: So from Lindsey's grave,
Another Phoenix (we) or Lindsey have.
A gallant man, and of most noble parts,
As great a Master of his trade, as hearts;
But the old Phoenix (in his Martial heat)
Did great Gustavus, past his Cannon beat:
With reverence yet old Christian speaks his name,
Then boasts from Danish blood the English came;
We must acknowledge and confess it is true,
The Normans their descent from Rollo drew.
And Rollo was a Dane by birth, yet we
Thought Lindsey (among the Danes) as brave as he:
And we believe that our young Lindsey rather
Improves his stock, then borrowes from his Father.
Hic jacet Robertus Bartu, Baro Willoughby, Dominus de Ersby, Comes de Snidsey,
Magnus Angliae Camerarius, apud Edghill Serenissimi Regis Caroli (...), A
turmis Equitu^ (in regis presidiu^ relictus) in prelio vulneratus (etiam ad
mortem) sed non sine Victoria cecidit.

An Elegy upon the right Honorable the Earl of Northampton.
I Must acknowledge, now I love thee more,
(When thou art not) then ere I did before.
The love wherewith I living loved thee,
Is changd to honor of thy memory:
As rarifi'd air turns to the purest fire,
So what I lately loved, I now admire.
Many profess, they for the King would die;
Thou for his sake, did offered life deny;
Thou would not beg, but Martyrdom command,
They offered what thou would not understand;
There Is not a hair, which from thy head was torn,
And in despite to Loyalty was worn
In Triumph; not a wound to thee was given,
But they are in the black Records of Heaven:
And when the Grand Inquest for blood shall come,
They must strike Tallies for thy Martyrdom.
How many Scotch Bawbies, cast in account,
Would to the Talents David left amount?
For if we reckon, we cannot go less
Then this proportion, this they must confess;
They noble loyal blood, I dare be bold,
Compared with theirs, will this proportion hold:
What disadvantage has our Cause, since* we
Become such loosers by a Victory?
Hic jacet Spencer Dominus Compton, Comes Northamptontae, progeny nobilis, and
Conjugio foelix, and filiis utrisque dignus, qui sanguineo regi fidelitatem
martyrio obsignivit: Nec magno Gustavo dissimilis victor in praelio; juxta
Stafford, per infortunium cecidit, Anno salutis, 1644.

An Elegy upon the right Honorable the Earl of Kingston.
KIngston, thy loss was Epidemicall;
It was indeed a general loss to all.
I will not name thy Ladies interest,
Childrens, nor servants, theirs were far the least;
Though I dare say thus much, for all the three,
They Have lost as much as in a friend could be;
No better husband lived, nor kinder father,
Nor nobler master, joining these together.
I speak the loss but as it did relate,
To God his Church, the King, and to the State:
For his Religion it was pure and sound,
And no man better understood his ground:
A Protestant he lived, a Martyr died,
Professing truth, his truth by death was tried:
This I dare say, the King had none more able
Nor really loyal at his Council Table:
Of brave resolves, and of a public spirit,
Who knew him best, knew he conceald his merit;
Discreet he was, and providently wise;
Kind to his friends, and faithful in advise.
No man his Country better understood,
Nor was more apt to do it real good.
Though he was rich, I dare pronounce him just,
No man was more religious in his trust;
Nor better understood this kingdoms Laws;
Yet he with noble blood durst seal the Cause;
Nor would great Kingston in the Cause have dyed,
Had he not been in Conscience satisfied
As well as Law. These two he durst not sever,
Since God in this Cause joynd them both together.
Hic jacet Robertus Comes de Kingston, ortu nobilis, conjugio nobilior, sed
prole nobilissimus. (...).

An Elegy upon the right Honorable the Earl of Carnarvan.
HEre lies the highest Fancy of our Times,
Who Lucian like could sharply scourge our crimes.
Whose wit Mercuriall was, high, and sublime,
So near ceration, '^wanted only time:
For he had all our Artists could require
To m^ke th'Elixar, matter, art, and fire:
All three sublimed to as great a height
As Art and Nature could; (and all set right)
Thus near perfection brave Carnarvan fell,
Who left behind him scarce a parallel.
If men shall rise in judgment, then I fear
This loyal Lord shall condemn many a Peer,
Who more obliged to the King then he,
Have scarce returned or thanks or loyalty.
Hic jacet Comes de Carnarvan, and Baro Dormar, Mercurio magnus, sed Marti
major, qui vitam hanc in Regis causa, cum armis deposuit, vulnere sed nobili
ictus (heu) cecidit invictus.

An Elegy for the Princely Brothers of the Illustrious Duke of Lenox.
STay passer by, and fix thine eye,
Oh see who here Entombed does lie;
Three Brethren of Illustrious birth,
Loyal as ever breathed on earth:
Stuarts, and of the Noblest blood,
But more because they made it good;
I dare pronounce their deaths as loyal
As was their births, and actions Royal.
Mistake me not, it is their dust*
(Not they) the earth has here in trust.
Their souls are mounted up far higher,
Above the Element of fire,
And shall unto this dust return,
Nay shall this very dust inform,
When all this world shall be calcined,
And in that general urne refined:
Nay which is more, they shall appear,
More glorious then they ever were:
If Chemists by their art can show,
What vegetives from salt may grow;
And make them in a glass appear,
In specie, as they growing were.
If salt of flowers, their forms can keep,
Till fire shall cause them from their sleep;
How much more when that Trump shall sound,
Shall fire, and air, the sea, and ground,
Their treasures to their forms restore,
More glorious then they were before.
If Martyrs as the Romists say,
Can Merit an Aureala;
I dare pronounce these three lie here,
Deserve those Diademns to wear.
It is the Cause men undertakes,
Not sufferance, the true Martyr makes:
The Cause is Gods, and therefore good,
They sealed this Cause, with Royal blood:
If these to any can be due,
Why not (brave Brothers) then to you?
En jacent hic tres Heroes Illustrissimorum Principum Lenoxiae, nec non
Richmundiae ducum filii, and fratres, nec tanto patre, nec fratre (quamvis
Regali) Indigni, qui diversi in preliis, sed unanimiter cecidere, qui Regi
fideles, sanguine nec minus Regali, Regis causam obsignarunt, and morte vere
nobili triumpharunt.

An Elegy upon my much honorable friend the Lord Viscount Falkland.
HEre Beuclark lies, Arts monopolist rather,
Who engrost more then that most painful Father,
Great Origin* who so out-vi'd the rest,
Even all the glorious* Fathers of the East.
Besides he was a complete Courtier too,
Yet could the Soldier in his trade out do;
His noble fancy was indeed so rich,
No pen of Europe flew a higher pitch:
Envy it self must needs confess that he,
Was Mars in the Camp* yet the Court Mercury.
Faukland too forward pressed in his advance*
Hoping to beat them from their Ordinance:
An ill meant shot both to the King, and State,
Untimely put a period to his date:
Gods powerful hand turns that great wheel we know,
The lesser moves, so Stars work here below;
How else should Twins so differ in their fate,
If Stars man's fortune did necessitate?
When heaven does with its punishments begin,
It often makes sins the punishment of sin.
We were Rebellious unto heaven, it is reason
We should be scourged with the Whips of treason.
This is not done by fortune, chance, or fate,
Our sins heavens justice does necessitate.
Vicecomes de Falkland vir Regi merito Charus, ex intimis ejus conciliis, and
fidelitate clarus; Musarum Militumque patronus, vir pius and virtute plenus, en
jacet hic intempestive sepultus: Qui apud praelium juxta Nuebery vulneribus
transfixus, in Regis causa (Rege test) ^ecidit invictus, Anno Domini 1644.

An Elegy upon the truly honorable Sir Charles Cavendish.
WE won thee Gainsborough, but with thee lost more
Then thou were worth, or all we got before.
There noble He^ne, Marcham, and Beeton fell.
(Men whom their Armies could not parallel.)
There Candish fell, a man whose very name,
Like Ziscus drum, struck terror where it came.
A man whose virtues justified his blood,
And proved his own of Cavendish's as good,
As that of Bruces, both did run in's veins,
And in his actions, men might read both streynes.
Who knew him, knew there never lived a creature
Of a more noble sweet engaging nature;
Yet to his daring nothing was a task,
Should he his courage, not his reason ask:
His error was still where he had command,
In action he would have too deep a hand.
So by his own example, thought to make
The too reserved, their cautious fears forsake:
And so too far engaged brave Candish fell,
A m^n whom both the Nations loved so well:
As it was with Homer in the Grecian Story,
Both Nations claim an interest in his glory;
Where ere the Sun is by his journeys known,
As his companion, there we Candish own.
Hence we derive and prove his title good,
The Scots derive him from great Bruces blood.
Although the Scots in competition are
With us for Bruces blood, we have our share
In him, as well as they: from subjects we,
They from their Kings derive his pedigree.
But as for Candish we derive a claim,
As just as their's both in his blood and name.
Hic jacet Carolus Cavendish vere miles, Gulielmi secundi Devoniae Comitis
filius, and tertii frater, qui sub Illustrissimo Gulielmo Cavendish Novi Cast^:
comitis, nec non Marthiniae, Equitum Cohortium praefectus, insolita
magnanimitate Equitum Rebellantium Cohortem Caedens, heu cecidit invictus.

An Elegy upon his noble friends and Allies the Earl of Chesterfields Sons.
BRave Stanhops you have really made it good,
You are descended from true Royal blood:
Few Fathers have in this kind been more crossed,
But fewer could so gallant sons have lost.
But they are not lost, who suffer in this cause,
If we respect, or God's, or humane Laws:
Did Christ to Caesar tribute money pay
(The badge of Conquest?) what can subjects say?
Would he submit himself to Caesar's Law,
Who was a King? must not his subjects draw?
You paid your Caesar's tribute, in such blood,
That I dare say, few subjects have so good:
You drew your sword for Caesar, and you tried
Your Fathers right (which cannot be denied.)
Who is it has done the cause more right, then they?
And none could die more nobly for the way:
There are but few to whom the King owes more,
(Except the Duke) look through the Royal score,
Then unto you; he has lost more then you,
Three of the Royal blood, and you but two.
Your sons have such a stock of honor won,
They have enrich the blood of Huntington:
What they had purchased, they on yours bestowed,
And bravely paid to nature, what they owed.
Pernobilis Philippi Chesterfeldiae Comitis, and Clarissimae Conjugis ejus,
Regali stemate Huntingtoniae Comitis filiae, filii en jacent hic qui sanguinem
sanguine sublimarunt, and morte etiam illustri ditarunt.

Upon the right worshipful and my valiant Countreyman Sir Richard Hutton
Knight.
DIvide the World *twixt Peace and War,
And these two have a glorious share;
This for them both I Will boldly say,
There Is none can go a Nobler way.
What Honor can be due to either,
Must needs be due to both together.
The one a Judge, of whom we must
Confess, his Epithet, The Just:
The other, his renowned Son,
Who has far greater justice done,
That to his Conscience bravely stood,
This sealed his Loyalty with Blood.
Our groans are but like wombes of earth,
Which labor in a second Birth,
When all the World shall be calcined
These shall appear like Gold refined:
Our Savior shall his Mintage own,
Stamped with the Miter and the Crown,
For this Badge all his Saints shall wear,
Who in this Cause have suffered here.
Hic jacet Richardus Hutton, Miles praenobilis, Iustissimique patris ejusdem
nominis filius togatus: Prior, ban^ obiit senectute, fama foelix, patriae
charus, and in pace: Marti dicatus alter, Regi fidelis; apud praelium juxta
Sherburne, in patria propria; nec minus patriae quam Regi charus, in Regis
causa, Bello (heu sed civili) cecidit.

Upon the truly noble and valiant Sir Bevell Greenfield Knight.
I Loved thee dearly Brother I confess;
And shall I now begin to love thee less?
Thy death was truly noble, as thy blood;
Had not this been so, that had made it good.
Thy Grandsire had a Noble Spanish grave,
And to thy name, a stock of Honor gave.
Were our Chronology lost, Spain for her glory,
Will in her Annals write thy Grandsires story:
We must confess, a Gallant man we lost,
But let Spain speak, how dear the victory cost.
IN have heard the Donnes themselves confess it here,
They scarce would buy a Navy now so dear.
Neptunes in's bounds* near saw a bloodier fight,
He never feared so much, to loose his right.
The Proverb was made true, the Sea then burned,
And all the Elements, to fire were turned;
The fearful fishes, fled into the deep;
The unweeldy Whale then an even course could keep*
With the swift Dolphin; they could not endure
That horid fight, nor think themselves secure;
Neptunes Sea-mantle, was turned Scarlet then,
Stained with the precious blood of dying men.
This was thy Gransire; yet we understand,
Thy Noble death as glorious was by land.
For thou have added to thy Grandsires blood,
And made that better which before was good.
Hic jacet Dominus Benellus Greenfield, miles, sanguine clarus, Deo and Regi
fidus, ad aras; Amicis and patriae charus, Devoniae gloria, perpetua dignus
historia.

An Elegy upon the Honorable his noble friend and Countreyman Sir William
Evers.
BRave Evers, men were borne to die we know;
How happy were thou then, who could die so,
That when thou did this troublesome life lay down,
Thou could exchange thy Helmet for a Crown;
And with the 'xchange, could so enrich thy blood,
To make that better, was before so good?
Thy blood was noble, that we knew before;
But all men must confess that now it is more:
Thy loyal death being added makes it mount,
As figures enrich ciphers in account.
If heavenly souls knew ought of earthly bliss,
Thy happy soul would then rejoice in this.
Few who are now with thee in heaven above,
Have left behind a greater stock of Jove:
Yet you in stock of loyal honor were
Thought to be richer then in that by far:
What would a soul have more then he'vens joys there*
And such a stock of love and honor here?
When such a life shall such a death precede,
We need no prayers; nor offerings for the dead.
Hic jacet Gulielmus Evers, Vita, sanguine and fidelitate clarus, qui Equitum
turmacum praefectus apud Hessam juxta Eborarum in Regis causa cecidit: sic
Martyrii Corona meruit aureola, sed certius a nobis aeterna meruit memoria.

A remembrance dedicated to his noble friends and Allies, Sir Thomas Metham and
Sir William Wentworth, who were slain at Marston Moore near York.
SInce you two durst so bravely die together,
My Muse dares not presume such friends to sever.
I am no stranger to the noble blood
Ran in your veins; I know few have so good:
Yet you have gone the Chemists subtle way,
And have by death improved your blood we say.
Chemists the noblest vegetives destroy,
Before they can their quintessence enjoy.
Your bloods you two have quintessenced now,
We to your memories reverence must allow:
You have with honor both your lives laid down,
And shall be styled Martyrs for the Crown;
And in your Graves you shall that honor have,
Which glorious Martyrs merit in the grave.
An Elegy upon the truly noble and valiant Sir John Smith.
He who a Roman Citizen could save
From being made prisoner, was by Law to have
A Civick Crown, which he might justly bear,
As a distinction, and at Triumphs wear.
So thankful was wise Rome in her reward,
And to her Citizens had such regard:
What Honor then, what value, and esteem,
Was due to him, the Eagles could redeem.
Our Royal Standard at Edgehill was lost,
At least engaged, so that much blood it cost.
Yet this brave man, made him who got it know,
What duty Subjects to that Standard owe.
Have you e're seen a chafed Lion stand,
With Hunters vexed, and galled on every hand:
Whilst all the Hunters various ways contrive,
To take this Lion if they can alive:
So galled, so vexed, our noble Champion stood,
The English earth died with rebellious blood.
Whilst none within the Lists presumes to enter,
Least he should pay too dear for his adventure.
At last resolved, he cuts himself a way,
Not through mean Troops, but Regiments they say:
Then straight he does this welcome present bring,
This new redeemed Prisoner, to the King;
The King does both himself, and service right,
He with that sword had served him, made him Knight.
Would this were written in the hearts of Kings,
Both Peace and War, are managed by two things;
It Is Punishment, and just Rewards that are
The Weights and Balance, both of Peace and War.
From Noble Houses he, and Loyal came,
Marcham he was by blood, and Smith by Name.
But he made better, what before was good,
I mean his Loyal name, and Noble blood.
Hic jacet Dominus Johannes Smith sanguine satis nobili natus, qui Regis
insignia (etiam capta) Regi, sed non sine Caede restituit, fidelis in bello
(heu civili) dolo cecidit circumventus.

An Elegy for Sir Henry Spilmam Knight.
Whilst thou yet livedst ( Spilman) I honored thee,
I reverence now thy sacred memory;
There Is none I know has written heretofore,
Who has obliged this Church, and Kingdom more.
Thou have derived, nay proved our Church as high,
As Rome can boast, and given her pride the lie.
Thou have the series of her story shown,
So have over us her Hirarchy overthrown.
I read thy books, and I admire thy soul,
Thy daring soul that durst proud Rome control:
Thou with their own Authorities, do prove
That which they would, but never shall remove:
Thou prov'dst that Gregory's Monk found Bishops here
Durst check his pride, who after Martyrs were:
Who held the rites and customs of the Fast,
Which Polycarpus durst approve the best.
Who twice to Rome as an Official came,
To fix that feast, which now we must not name:
Thou'st proved our Church as glorious as Romes,
For Doctrine, Discipline, and Martyrdomes.
Thou'st proved to us the mighty power of Kings,
In calling counsels even in spiritual things;
And temporal rights the Churches pedigree,
Her frequent councels even in Brittany;
As a choice piece of evidence a story
Which we may style great Britains chiefest glory,
The British Church, our Kings owe this to thee;
Shall we not reverence then thy memory?
Had thou been Rome's, thy supererogation,
Had raised a stock of merits for our Nation.
But thou 'art ours, I joy I live to know
I had a friend good men shall reverence so.
Henricus Spilmanus Eques auratus hic jacet, cujus solertissimae industriae non
minus Ecclesia debet, quam Respublica Brittanorum; namque Saxonum nostrorum
mores, Concilia, Leges, etiam amissa nobis restituit. Nec in se magis, quam
Prole Faelix: Obiit Anno Salutis 1642.

Upon his Noble Friend Colonel Slanning.
HEre Slanning lies who was the second best,
Brave Greenefields rival Vesper of the West;
As Pompey was to Caesar, so would he,
None should his equal but a Caesar be:
For when he heard how bravely Greenfield fell,
He would not over-live his parallel;
But covetous of as brave a death as he,
He crowned his with glorions loyalty:
Of all the West the King had no two friends
More really his, more glorious in their ends.
An Elegy for my dear Godson and Nephew Henry Morton, Son to my good brother
Sir George Morton Baronet.
HAve you observed a Cedar wondrous straight?
Admired for its freshness, youth and height;
Cut down before it came to its full growth,
Such the proportions were of this sweet youth:
And such his fortune, loyal to the Crown,
Scarce writing man (though man enough) cut down.
I must confess (brave youth) thou have made good
My share both in thy name, and loyal blood;
The first I gave thee (that's thy name) the other
Thy blood, my sister was thy virtuous Mother:
A Mother worthy of so brave a Son;
If heavenly souls know what on earth is done,
Here Is would rejoice, that thou could so improve
So small a stock of time to purchasse love:
And die so rich in that and reputation,
Thou were an honor to thy blood and Nation.
All this in noble Morton was; lies here
A name will force from every eye a tear,
Nay, from the soldiers heart knows not to weep.
Yet know he is not dead, he does but sleep.
As soldiers being alarmed rub their eyes,
So when the trump shall blow, Morton must rise,
Not to a battle (there no more shall be;)
But to triumphant glorious victory.
The crown of glory (such as Martyrs there
Are crowned with) shall loyal Morton wear.
An Elegy upon my honored friends and Countrymen the valiant Colonels
Howard, Heron, Fenwick, Lumpton, Claverin, and Carnaby.
FIrst high born Howard to Heron led the way,
Fenwick and Lampton, both fell on one day:
Brave Claverin's heart was burst with grief that he,
Without revenge should their survivor be:
The next to these stout Carnaby he fell,
To make the number a just parallel.
Six braver men then these the fruitful North,
Of Martial spirits, in one age near brought forth:
If we may nature check without offense,
She was too prodigal in her expense:
Six such brave men to be borne in one age
And fall so soon must some sad fate presage.
Had these six lived, the King had had no need
To Have rais*d the South-parts, to make good the Tweede.
These six I dare say had secured it more,
Then Rome did with her Legions heretofore.
Had Claverin lived to have been their general,
He Had more secured the North-parts then that wall
Severus raised so high, had it still stood,
The presence of these six had been as good:
But those same sins which cut of these, I fear
Will make the passes over Trent as clear:
Our sins have brought in strangers heretofore,
(As friends proud conquerours) and may do once more.
An Elegy upon the right honorable the Countess of Dorset.
DOrset is dead, even she who could support
Unenvied power; and honor in a Court:
Who by a wise King was placed there to be,
The Tutresse of his Royal Progeny.
She for the Mirror of the Court might pass,
Who ever looked virtue reflected was.
This Glass was wrought and polisht with that skill,
That would reflect still truth, but nothing ill;
She by sweet Gravity reproved youth,
As God does lying, by his steadfast Truth;
High Close Committee proof her virtues were,
A Spanish Inquisition she could bear.
Should both the Houses join, should they advance
That powerful Engine called their Ordinance,
And raise a Battery, I dare undertake,
It scarcely would the least impression make
Into her Honor; for her virtues were
Above the proof of that strange Engine far.
No pen is so Malignant, will not write,
The Virtuous Lady, was her Epithet.
Hic jacet Comitissa Dorsetiae, animae, corporis, and fortunae dotibus clara;
marito chara, and mundo: pro liberis provida, nec minus suis benigna, filiis
foelix, fama foelici^r, sed fide foelicissima: Sic Vixit etiam in Aula ut
Aulic^s vivere, Principes mori doceat.

In this mean Grave which scarce appears,
A Lady lies, embalmd in Tears.
That you may know these Tears to prize,
They were distild from Princes eyes.
Committed to this Ladies Care,
Who in the loss had greatest share.
Poor Princes you have lost much more
Then you could value heretofore.
Your Father stranger to his crown,
Scarce to his own dear children known:
Nay, which is worse then this, you are
Deprived of your mothers care.
What loyal heart reads what is writ here,
Can choose but sacrifice a tear;
I must confess when this I writ,
With loyal tears I watered it,
To think how glorious I have seen
My royal Sovereign and his Queen;
And to think how some now endeavor
These two whom Heaven has joynd, to sever;
It Is Heavens Decree, it must be so,
This is our faith, and this we know;
They both are pious, God is just,
The Cause is his, and there is my trust.
Upon Francis Quarles.
I Must confess that I am one of those
Admire a Fancy more in Verse then Prose;
Yet thou in both workst on my judgment so,
I scarce know which to choose, which to let go,
As if Platonic transmigrations were,
The Harp of David still me thinks I hear.
Thy powerful Muse has so strong influence,
Upon my troubled Soul, and every Sense:
For when thou Solomon's mystic strayns do sing,
Thy Muse then speaks the language of that King.
And when thou undertakst the Kings just Cause,
Thy strength is such; thy Reasons bind like Laws.
This does thy reason and thy loyalty praise,
That crowns thy Statues with eternal bays:
Thy muse has raisd, a Monument for thee,
Thy prose a Pyramid of loyalty.
Thy memory shall be precious here below,
Whilst men the use of sacred learning know.
Thy soul is with thy dear beloved Kings,
And there with them new Halelujahs sings.
Upon a true contented Prisoner.
What Is liberty it should be so desired;
It Is only when denied to men, admired:
We Are more displeased with the least negative,
Than pleased with all that God to man can give.
We are scarcely pleased with Gods great'st blessings, health
And liberty, unless God give us wealth.
A little toothache, a fit of the stone,
Or gowt, destroys them; and all these are gone:
We are imprisoned in our beds and then,
We wish the use of these good things again.
Yet whilst we had them, we scarce knew their good,
They were heavens blessings, but scarce understood.
The wretched slave is chaind unto his Oar,
Now prizes that, he valued not before,
His liberty; yet may be in that State,
He is more happy then he was of late
In all these blessings free men could enjoy;
For their abuse, does all their use destroy:
If want of these a thankfulness produce
For blessings, which we had not in their use:
Are we not then more happy in their loss,
(Had we all that Lucullus did engrosse?)
It Is then the use, makes happy men, not having
Of that we use not well, or still are craving
More then we have; be it or more or less,
A thankful state is man's true happiness.
Imprisonment, admit it near so close,
Is to a wise man but his souls repose;
And the less room he has, his soul's more free
Then when she had her wanton liberty.
Weak eyes cannot endure the glaring light,
Of the bright Sun; nor things which are too white.
These do disperse the Radii of the eyes,
We better can endure the cloudy skies;
Were I immured so I could see no Sun,
My soul her winged horses could out-runne:
I could with heaven a correspondence keep,
As Jonas did close prisoner in the deep.
The Prophet in the Dungeon was in heaven,
John in the Isle had all his visions given:
Men in the deepest pits, see best by far
The Suns Eclipses; and find every star,
When sight's contracted and is more intent;
(So is men's souls in close imprisonment,)
We then can upwards look on things above,
Worthy our contemplation and our love:
We are not Sun* blin'd with reflections then,
Of dazzling glory, nor depend on men;
These mediums cannot then the soul deceive,
Its in a dungeon can more clear perceive:
And lights most welcome; then the least is more,
When thus contracted, then the Sun before.
Are we not happyest when we least desire,
And nothing that is below the sun admire?
When we are united to our God above
(As wives to absent* husbands whom they love)
By our souls union, when our souls on fire
Inwardly burning with zeal melt in desire.
A Nunc dimittis, with old Simeon sing,
And wish each bell we hear, his knell should ring:
And yet not weary of our lives, for then
Imprisonment is a hell on earth to men.
I have sometimes seen an indulgent father
Make his dear child, rods for himself to gather,
And then his wanton liberty restrain,
Nay make him fetters of a slender twine,
Sharply correct him, make him kiss the rod,
Tries his obedience: And just thus does God
With his dear children, (if well understood)
Wise parents know it is for their childrens good.
And know we not, God is more wise by far,
And more indulgent then our parents are?
Art thou injured? yet take thus much from me,
Who sent thee thither, knows what is best for thee.
Remember Job was for a trial lent
To Satan; how he bore his punishment:
God crowned his patience, for he gave him more
(Besides the honor) then he had before.
Yet if in this thou love thy reward,
God will not then thy patience regard.
Nor pains nor patience the true Martyr makes,
It is the Cause the Martyr undertakes.
Martyrs are witnesses of truth to death;
This is but duty, so falls far beneath
The weight of the reward: we dare not say
That Saints can merit an Aureola.
For we say when man does, what he is able,
Come to Gods Scale, he is unprofitable,
Our hairs are numbered by our God we know,
He sets them highest, whom he finds placed low.
He in the Lions den, did Daniel own,
And set upon his head the Favorites Crown.
Art thou imprisoned? look up thou shall find,
Thou have a strange enlargment in thy mind.
They Are more engaged far, Imprisoned thee;
And shall come to account, when thou art free.
I.
Scilicet ut fulvum spectatur in ignibus aurum,
Tempora sic du^o est inspicienda fides.
Dum Juvat, and vultu ridet fortuna secundo,
Indelibatas cuncta sequuntur opes:
Vix duo tresve inter, tot restatis amici
Cetera fortunae, non me turba fuit.
Illud amicitiae sanctum, and venerabile nomen,
Re tibi pro vili sub pedibusque jacet.
Donec eris faelix, multos numerabis amicos,
Tempora si ^uerint nubila, solus eris.
Horrea formici tendunt ad mania nunquam,
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.
Mobile sic sequ tur fortunae legitima vulgus,
In duris autem, remanentem rebus amicum
Callebit inviso Caesar in host probatur.
AS Gold's unknown, by fire not purified,
So Friendship by Adversity is tried.
Whilst we can help, or Fortune seems to smile,
Friends follow bounty, as the Soldiers spoil.
Scarce two or three of all my crowds remain:
The rest were Fortunes rabble, and not mine.
That reverend, sacred name of Friendship lies
Without regard, as things they most despise.
Whilst thou art happy, thou some friends may count,
If the time cloud, thy sun will scarce amount
To Ciphers: For these friends like Ants will run
To better Stoics, when all thy store is done.
The giddy people follow Fortunes flows,
It Is adverse fortune real friendship shows.
Caesar ever in his greatest foe approves
This pious friendship, and this virtue loves.
II. De Ape. Martial. lib. 7. 32. inclusa electro.
ET latet and lucet, Phaetontida conditu gutta,
Ut videatur Apis nectare clausa suo.
Dignum tantorum pretium, tulit ille laborum;
Credibile est ipsum sic voluisse mori.
HId, yet transparent, in an Amber drop,
As if enclosed whilst she did Nectar sup,
It Is like enough, the Be chose so to dye,
Her pains cast in, might raise her price so high.
III. De Formica. Martial. lib. 6. 15.
DUm Phaetontea Formica vagatur in umbra,
Implicuit tenuem, succina guttu feram.
Sic modo quae fuit contemptu vita manente,
Funeribus facta est, jam preciosa suis.
THe Sun-bred Ant, being traveling in the shade,
An Amber drop the flender creature staid.
So she, who living, was despised of late,
Being thus embalmed, becomes a jemme of State.
IV. Martial. de Vipera.
FLentibus Heliadmi ramis, dum vipera serpsit,
Fluxit in instanti, viperafera Gemam.
Quae dum miratur, pingi se rore teneri,
Riguit; obstante factu repent gelu.
Metetam nobili placeas Cleopatra sepulchro,
Vipera si tumulo nobiliore jacet.
A Viper creeping up an Amber stem,
The weeping Heliads turned her to a jemme:
Whilst she admires to find her self thus held,
She instantly was in that ice congealed.
Why should that rich tomb Cleopatra please,
Since Vipers have such noble tombs as these?
V.
-- O prodiga rerum
Luxuries, nunquam parvo contenta paratu,
Sed quaesitorum terrae, pelagique ciborum,
Ambitiosa fames, and lautae gloria mensae,
Discite, quam parvo, liceat producere vitam,
Et quantum natura petit. --
Non Auro Myrrhave bibunt, sed gurgite pure
Populis satis est, fluviusque Ceresque.
OUr Prodigal Riot will not be content
With mean provisions, Caterers must be sent
To search both Sea and Land; and scarce are able
To serve the ambitious hunger of one Table.
Learn with how small Allowance, man may live;
Nature does no such vast Allowance give.
The people drink brook water, clear, and cold,
Not perfumed wines with Myrrh in Cups of Gold:
Of wholesome Bread, let them but have good store,
And clear brook water, they desire no more.
VI. De Archmedis Sphera.
JUpiter in parvo cum cerneret aethera vitro,
Risit, and ad Superos talia dicta dedit:
Huccine Monopolis progressa potentia cura,
Jam men's in parvo triditur orb labor.
Jura poli, rerumque fidem, legemque deorum,
Ecce Syracusus, transtulit art senex.
Percurrit totum mentibus signifera annum,
Et simulatu nova Cinthia, mense redit.
Jamque suum voluens, audax industria mundum,
Gaudet, and humana sidera mente regit.
Ergo quid insontem, tonitru, Salmonea miror,
Emula natura, parva repertu manus.
JOve when in Glass he saw a Sphere was made,
He smild, and this unto the Gods he said;
Of man we need to take no further care,
They Jeere our pains, they now such Artists are:
Old Archimedes undertakes our Trade,
He in a Sphere, has all heavens motions made.
In which a Spirit included, seems to move,
The several Orbs, and Stars, like those above.
A Sun runs through the 12. signs, makes the year,
Cynthia, with all her Aspects, does appear.
The Rapid motion men dare undertake,
To rule their stars too; since they heaven can make.
Why should we vex at Salmons guiltles thunder,
Since emulous man, has framed a greater wonder?
VII. De remora, piscicula.
SOlus ego Actiacum potui retinere carinam,
Et potui Baii rostra tenere duci^
Semipedalis ego, quis haec corpuscula cr^dat,
In* cursu tantas detinuisse naves.
Caesar for Actium bound, even I alone,
Could stay; when with his fleet he would be gone.
My length but half a foot, my Body small,
How could I stay Ships, under sail so tall?
VIII. De flamma perenni inventa in urna apud Patavium, qua fracta extincta
fuit flamma.
PLutoni sacrum munus ne attingite fures,
Ignotum vobis est, hoc, quod in orb latet.
Namque elementa gravi clausit, digesta labor,
Vase sub hoc modico maximus Olibius.
THis sacred Gift to Pluto I forbid
Your thieves to touch, (for it is a secret hid)
With Art and pains has great Olibius shut
In this small Urne, the unruly Elements up.
IX. De vicissitudine rerum.
PAuperies, pacem; pax, opes; copia, luxum;
Sed luxus bellum, bellaque pauperiem.
Pauperies turbam causat, turbaque quietem,
Stant qui deciderent, quique stetere cadunt.
Captivi capiunt, and qui domuere domantur,
Jam victi suplex, qui modo victor erat.
Sic plebae ^ndomitae, sic sunt sua fata tyrannis,
Sic Deus alternas versat in orb vices.
OUr Poverty makes peace; Peace, wealth and riot;
Riot makes war; War makes us poor and qui et:
Our wants breed troubles; after troubles, rest:
They fall, who stood; those lately fell, stand best.
The Prisoners take those captives, them even now
The Conqueror late, must to new Conquerors bow.
So God disposes of all earthly States,
Kings, and wild Commons, take by turns their fates.
X. De Ethiope baptizato.
ILle niger sacris lotus quam exit ab undis,
(Nec frustra) Ethiopem nempe lavare fuit.
Mentem quam niveam, piceae cutis umbra fovebat,
Jam volet ad nigras sancta columba lares.
HOw white the Sun-parcht Moor from Jordan came
To wash the Blackmore thus, was not in vain,
So white a soul lives in that pitch-staind Cell,
The sacred Dove in that makes choice to dwell.
XI. De quinque panibus, tot mill pascentibus.
QUis novus Agricola, quae nova semina crescit,
Cum perit, and major fit minuendo ceres.
Millia tot virum panum sed quinque putasses
Millia tot panum quinque fuisse virum.
Who that new seeds, man, or that seed can guess,
Which spending, grows, and wasting does increase,
Five loaves whereof so many thousands fed,
Yo'ud think the five were men, the thousands bread.
XII. Ovidius in Ibim.
DEsinit esse prius, contrarius ignibus humor,
Et tepidus gelidus, flavit ab axe nothus.
Et ver autumno, brume miscebitur aestas,
Atque eadem regio vesper, and artus erit.
Quam mihi sit tecum positis, quae sumpsimus armis.
Gratia commissis improbe ruptatuis.
Pax erit haec nobis semper dum vita manebit*
Cum pecore infirmo, qua solet esse Lupis.
Terra tibi fruges, amnis tibi deneget undas,
Deneget a^flatus ventus, and aura su^s.
Nec tibi sol calidus, nec sit tibi lucida Phoebe:
Destituant oc^los, sydera clara tu^s.
Nec tibi Vulcanus, nec se tibi praebeat ^er:
Nec tibi det tellus, nec tibi pontus iter.
Exul inops erres, alienaque limina lustres,
Exiguumque pet^s ore tremente cibum.
Nec corpus querulo, nec men's vacet aegra dolor,
Moxque die gravior sit tibi nocte dies.
Sisque miser semper, nec ^is miserabilis ulli:
Gaudeat adversis faemina virque tuis.
Qui mala cum tuleris plurima, plura feras.
Causaque non desit, desit tibi copia mortis,
Optatam fugiat vita coacta necem.
Luctatusque diu cruciatos spiritus artus
Deserat, and longa torqueat a^te ^ora.
My Translation transferred in wishes, to him, deserted and betrayed Cesars
Cause, and his Comrade in adversity.
FIrst fire and water shall to friendship grow,
And from the North Pole warm South-winds shall blow,
The Spring shall change to Autumn, snow shall burn,
The Eastern Regions shall to Western turn
Sooner then I friendship renew with thee,
Once my Comrade, forsook thy Arms and me.
Such peace shall henceforth betwixt thee and me,
As wont betwixt the Wolf and Lamb to be.
May Brooks their waters, Earth her fruits deny,
Nor wind, nor air, thee with their breath supply;
May not the sun lend heat, nor moon shine clear;
May never a star by night to thee appear.
May fire and air grow concreat as the glass;
May sea and land refuse to give thee pass.
All tattered may thou go from door to door,
And beg thy bread amongst the wretched poor.
May nere thy soul or body want their grief;
May days give thee no ease, nor nights relief.
May thou most wretched be pityed by none;
May they rejoice, who should thy state bemoane.
May all thy evils still increase and grow;
May thou desire to die, and no means know.
May thy strong heart strive with thy will to die;
As in the rack may thou in sickness lie.
Like those that dye by piece-meale, or slow fire,
May thou both fear to die, and death desire.
XIII. A Paraphrase upon the Verses which Famianus Strada made of the Lutanist
and Philomell in contestation, Page 399. Jam Sol, etc.
WHen past the middle Orb the parching Sun
Had downward nearer our Horizon run,
A Lutenist near Tibers streams had found
Where the Echo did resound.
Under a holme a shady bower he made
To ease his cares, his several Phancies played,
The Philomell no sooner did the Music hear,
But straight ways she drew near.
The harmless Siren music of the wood
Hid in a leavy bush, she hearking stood,
She ruminates upon the Ayers he played,
And to him answers made.
With her shirl voice does all his pains requi^^.
Lost not one note; but to his play sung right,
Well pleased to hear her skill, and envy, he
Tryes his Variety.
And dares her with his several notes, runs throw
Even all the strains his skill could reach unto:
A thousand ways he tryes, she answers all,
And for new straynes dares call.
He could not touch a string in such a strain,
To which she warble and not sung it plain;
His fingers could not reach to greater choice,
Then she did with her voice.
The Lutenist admired her narrow throat
Could reach so high, or fall to any note:
But that which he did think in her most strange,
She instantly could change.
Or sharp, or ^lat, or mean, or quick, or slow,
Whar ere he played, she the like skill would show:
And if he inward did his notes recall,
She answer made to all.
The Enraged Lutenist he blushed for shame,
That he could not this weak corrivall tame,
If thou can answer this I Will break my Lute,
And yield in the Dispute.
He said no more but aims at such a height
Of skill he thought she could not imitate:
He shows the utmost cunning of his hand
And all he could command.
He tryes his strength, his active fingers fly
To every string, and stop, now low, now high,
And higher yet he multiplyes his skill,
Then does his Chorus fill.
Then he expecting stands to try if she
His envy late would yield the victory,
She would not yield, but summons all her force
Though tired out and hoarse.
She strives with various strings the Lutes bast chest,
The spirit of man, one narrow throat and Chest:
Unequal matches, yet she is pleased that she
Concludes Victoriously.
Her spirit was such, she would not live to hear
The Lutenist bestow on her a jeere,
But broken hearted fell upon the Tomb
She choose the sweet Lutes womb.
The warbling Lutes do yet their Triumphs tell,
(With mournful accents) of the Philomell,
And have usurpt the title ever since
Of harmony the Prince.
The Moral this, by emulation we
May much improve both art, and industry;
Though she deserve the name of Philomell,
Yet men must her excel.
Comparison.
Cobblers are called Translators, so are we,
(And may be well called so) we so agree:
They rip the Soale first from the upper leather,
Then steep, then stretch, then patch up all together.
We rip, we steep, we stretch, and take great pains,
They with their fingers work, we with our Brains.
They trade in old shoes, as we do in feet,
To make the fancy, and the Language meet.
We make all smooth (as they do) and take care,
What is too short, to patch: too large, to pare:
When they have done, then to the Club they go,
And spend their gettings, do not we do so?
Cobblers are often poor, yet merry blades,
Translators rarely rich, yet cheerful lads.
Who thinks he wants, he is in plenty poor,
Give me the Cobblers wealth, I Will ask no more.
FINIS.

