THE MODEST VINDICATION OF HENRY WALKER. In answer to certain scandalous
Pamphlets, forged and vented abroad in his name (without his privity.)

Against which, as also the authors thereof, together with the popular
aspersions of many other turbulent spirits, He does protest; and before
Almighty God, clear himself to all the world.

MAL. 3. 16. Then spoke they that feared the Lord, every one to his neighbor,
and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written.
Augustine in Psalm. 31. prae. Vnusquisque audiat, and sicut sibi conscius fuerit,
ita vel doleat corrigendus, vel guadeat approbandus.

Let every one hear, and as he is conscious to himself, so let him either
grieve being to be corrected, or rejoice being to be approved.

LONDON, Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1642.

The Epistle Dedicatorie*
O Pierce my heart with fervent love of thee! God.

The beauty of thy face, Lord, let me see!
Rise from thy cloudy Eastern cloisters black,
Spread forth thy glorious beams and be not slack,
To thawe my Icie heart, which sin has frosen,
Assure my conscience, Lord, I am thy chosen.
And thou my Sovereigne, The King.
Charles, all Europs splendour,
Thine enemies terror and true Faith's Defend^r,
Thy love preserved my life, not heathenish fate,
In thy Majestic face, true Princely state:
When malice plotted mischief every hour,
Thy clemency prevented all their power:
That God which graced thee with a Royal Crown,
Crown thee with grace, thy Honors with renown.
* All you poor souls whose ears have been abused, People.

With scandalous reports and eyes traduced
With charms of turbulent spirits; new take and view,
This Declaration honest, plain, and true.
Per Henry Walker Cantab.

The modest Vindication of Henry Walker.
IT is an ancient saying of the learned. The Cinick Philosopher
If a man would be in safety, and partaker of happiness, he must of necessity
have good friends, or sharp enemies, that the one by good and wise admonition,
or the other by notable injuries may cause him to withdraw himself from doing
of evil. They from the instinct of nature, but we by the Law of God are taught
to govern our selves with the reason of a true Academicall prudence, who being
Christians are bound to show forth the effect of that title which we bear. And
I pray God, that I (with the Philosophers industrious Bees) may gather the
driest, Xenophon.
and most precious honey of faith, and patience, from the bitter time of these
my troubles, As Theophr^stus says.
not desiring revenge, (for that would hurt me more then them) but praying for
their conversion who causelessly have sought my ruin, bequeathing unto them
Antistines blessing: even all the good in the world, except valor, which may
make them rashly to venture upon my life. As Lisander Admiral of^^ of the
Laced^moians be^^^i reviled with many bitter speeches said to him who offered
him that inj^^^ry.
And I could heartily wish, that all those who have spued out their envy
against me, may, (by humble contrition before Almighty God) empty their souls
of that wickedness wherewith they appear herein to be replenished;

Concerning a foolish ridiculous Pamphlet of Tobie and his dog, put by the
author into Taylours hands, and (by him) bastardly fathered upon me, hoping
thereby to advance the profit of the press: As also another, (as false as
foolish) of my life and conversation, composed by, and printed for those who
never knew a reason of what is therein maliciously forged: with Sermons
printed, pretended to be mine: and many other inveterate fictions so far from
modesty, Religion, or humanity, that (however some poor souls may be traduced
to believe them yet) upon mature deliberation, I am confident, that any
rational understanding may easily perceive the gilded poison of invective
lies wherewith I am therein maligned, by such who have not only fathered their
own filthiness most impudently upon me, but have so far abused others, that
they have gloried in the vast conceit of prevailing to make such men odious to
the world, who indeed are happy patterns of Piety: amongst whom I am no ways
worthy to be named, though their enemies have now been mine. ^hil iniquius
^^am ut ode^^t homines ^^^os ignorant ^^omsi res me^^ur odium, ^^ertull.
Nothing is worse (says a Reverend Father) then to hate men whom they know
not, though they deserve to be hated. But what would that good man have said,
had he now lived to see Religion thus maligned, and Peace violated, whereby so
great a destraction is raised, both in Church, and state? the settling whereof
who can expect whilst so many are separated from, and will not be reconciled to
God? for (as Bernard says) how shall man's Peace be ratified before God,
^^aenam mo^^stabit pax ^^minum co^^ Deo, si to apud ho^^nes non po^^tua esse
sua ^^ria?
when Gods glory is violated with men: his worship despised, his faithful
Ministers contemned, and the fruit of the Altar, and the meat of it not
regarded? Mal. 1. 12.

Concerning the Petition to the Kings Majesty, for which the Law has passed on
me, I do not, neither did I ever deny, that the written copy was mine, (...)
Epist. (...). 1. 12
with which how the printed Pamphlet agreed, and wherein it differed, I pass
by it with a modest silence: the law has passed on me, and I freely submit to
the censure of the Court of Justice, ^^^gust. on (...). 8 5.
knowing the truth of Augustine his words, Justice and Peace, are two friends.
Yet can I not pass by the providence of God herein, rendering thanks to my
dread Sovereign, that his gracious Majesty would be pleased to cast the eyes
of his clemency on so poor a subject, pleased (...) Majesty to (...) a
special (...) to the ^ges, not to ^^^ddle with life, or any (...) or mem^^^ of
my body
(when so distressed) to limit the fury of my adversaries; which gracious
favor of his has obliged my subjection to the highest pitch of Loyalty: and
soared my affection so high, to love and honor him, that could I lay down my
life to do him service, I should think my death a blessed sacrifice.

And thus much I can safely, and ingenuously protest before Almighty God, (and
let my best thoughts fade, and hopes of blessing vanish, if my pen dissemble
with my heart) that the uttermost of my intents (therein) extended no further
then the glory of God, the honor of His Majesty, and the peace and tranquillity
of the Church and State; being confident, that as England was under his Royal
father of blessed memory, so is it under His Royal Majesty the happiest nation
in the world, in a Prince endued with true Majesty, and piety; Humilisspir
sedulus cor^^ facilis assat^^^ etc Forcis i^ praelio, mans^^erus in imper^^
etc. merito (...) go expetirus estab univer^^ populo, ut omnes ad eum venirent
d^^centes, ecce nos ossa sua, etc. Ambros. lib. ^ Offic. cap. 7.
humble in spirit, diligent in heart, affable in speech, valiant in battle,
merciful in government, the Princely qualities commended in David by Ambrose.
Who does not know the luster of the Throne to be so glorious in His Majesty's
pious Reign, that all the Princes in the world, in their greatest glory, are
but as shadows before His splendour? O Royal Sovereign, how art thou worthy
to be honored, worthy to be loved, worthy to be desired of all that come unto
thee, saying we are thy bones? etc.

And concerning those clamorous speeches, which are rumored abroad, that I
should throw the said Petition into His Majesty's Coach, upon what grounds or
by whom it should be raised I cannot tell, neither can I say any thing of it,
only thus much I can ingenuously protest, that I am not only innocent, but
ignorant of any such act, and so far clear, that I am absolutely free from
all such intention in my self, or privity in others: I took none of them from
the Press, because I then apprehended danger in what was printed, and had the
Printer put out what I forbad to print (yet never writ) that which was chiefly
questioned had not been printed: But for my part because I was not charged
with it, neither hear it reported by any credible person of their own
knowledge: I doubt the truth of it: yet thus much I say, that if any man did
presume to do it, it must needs be censured an high attempt, and worthy of
condign punishment.

But that which strikes me into the greatest admiration, is, to think upon what
grounds the imagination of any man's judgment should apprehend mine to be
tainted with Brownisme, or faction; yet have some malicious turbulent spirits
branded me for a Separatist, and scandalized me with preaching in Conventicles,
when as God knows I am so clear from any such action, that I was never yet a
member of any separated congregation: I pray God so to hear my prayers, as I
have been a faithful member of the Church of England, established by the Laws
of the Land, and free from conventicling with Papists, Brownists, Anabaptists,
or any factious Assemblies whatsoever; I have still labored to practice that
grave advice of Augustine, which teaches me not only to assemble in divine
worship with the Congregation my self, ^^dduce eos (...) domum ^ei tecum, qui
(...) in domo (...) recum. ^ugust. epist. ^0.
but also to bring those into Gods House which remained under my roof.

I deny not, but I have, and still do desire, and heartily pray to God, that
there may be a Reformation of such things in the Church as by Authority shall
be found fit to be reformed, according to that direction which God himself
prescribes in his holy word, yet with this caution that it is not for private
persons, but belongs to authority to regulate the differences, and dissentions
both in Church, and State, Romans 13.
to the guidance whereof every subject is bound to submit because they are the
powers ordained of God, Romans 13. Therefore I say no more of that, only thus
much; I cannot but take notice what great cause we have to give thanks to
Almighty God, that we have so Religious a King, whose splendor shines brighter
amongst the glorious stars of His prudent Senators in the two Honorable
Houses of Parliament then all the Princes in the world. When can we expect a
through Reformation if not now? Should Gods poor saints expectations in
England now be thwarted, how would their glory then be veiled? but God be
blessed their hopes, though deferred, are not lost, for the glory is not
departed from Israel.

Others question my calling, which was never yet questioned by Authority,
stumbling at my former life, because mechanic, to so holy a function. Give me
leave to speak plainly, because truly, it is well known where I was born, that
I was bred a Scholar, though taken from the School to the shop; I returned
again to that in which I most delighted, namely, learning; and remained a
student in Queens College in Cambridge, till not only by a Certificate from
the said College, but also by a Testimony under the hands of several able
Divines I was held fit to be received into Orders; after which being examined
by the Archbishops Chaplain of these Diocesses, I gave him such satisfaction
of my fitness that he subscribed examinavi* and approbavi, whereupon the
Archbishop gave me a f^^t, under his own hand which produced Letters dimissary
out of the Court: Then repairing to the Archbishop of York, then Bishop of
Lincoln, I was presented to him by a Minister, who supplied the Archdeacons
place; and from the said Bishop received the charge of a Deacon, and he laid
his hands upon me, at which time almost twenty more Students of the two famous
Universities of Cambridge, and Oxford, were also received into Orders. And
moreover I am resolved to appeal to Authority so soon as opportunity will
permit, by whom if I be not held fit, and to whom if I give not good
satisfaction, I will freely submit to their censure, calling upon God to direct
both the^ and me.

Me thinks I hear those words of S. Augustine (as it were) sounding in mine
ears, O homo! in praeceptione cognosce quid debeas habere, in correptione tua
te vitio non habere, in oratione quid vis habere. In English thus, O man!
acknowledge in every precept what strength thou should have, in every
reproof what strength by thine own fault thou want, and in every prayer,
whence thou may have what thou want. Lord grant, that I may so pray, so
know, and so practice that I may glorify thy name, honor my King, do my
duty, practice love, know my self, and discharge my conscience before Almighty
God, and all the world, which that I may do, God of his infinite mercy assist
me with his holy Spirit. Amen.

FINIS.

