THE ADVOCATE.



LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, Printer to the Council of STATE. 1651.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Council of State.
Right Honorable!
I Am often in very great doubt (if I may so speak), That the Goodness and
Wisdom of God, and his Thoughts of these, are very rarely met with, in the
Paths, which the scantling of Man's Reason and Judgment walk in; And as I dare
not but own the Belief of the Coming of his Appearance, and the breaking forth,
very shortly, of his Glory: So I believ likewise, this will be a sight very
strange, and very unexspected to men; and not only greatly above, but in some
measure even contrary (and perhaps, very unwelcom) unto the most enlarged and
raised thoughts we have yet prepared our selves with, to Receiv it.

The sign of which Coming, will be the Detection, by little and little, of all
Imposture, and the laying of all things low, naked, and mean before him; the
stripping men of that Honor, Credit, and Repute, that they had by several means
been gaining with themselves, and (by themselves) with others, either through a
Not-knowledg, or through an artificial concealing of themselves.

In these very things lying, and within these indeed, being spent and
consumed, the whole Endeavors, Practice, Study and Wisdom (if not Religion) of
All, States, Nations and Men, viz.

Either in devising shifts (by acquisition of such and such Habits, or
otherwise) not to appear uncomly to themselves, but to beget rather an esteem
and satisfaction of themselves;

Or, in Concealing and keeping close (by several Glosses) the Imperfections and
uncomelinesses, (known to themselves) from the sight and apprehensions of others.

The most exquisite humane Wit exceeding the more inferior only in this, That
the former is able to find out more Tight and exquisite Textures for it self
then the other; And the most Fortunate man in this world, having the Advantage
of the more Unfortunate, but after the same manner also, viz. That the Covering
of this falls off a little sooner, and the other wrap's himself up in it a
while longer.

And thus all Lusts, (as well those of Acquisition) in the mind (as others to
exterior things) both in their first Issuings forth, and also in the
Accomplishments of them, are still but to give countenance unto, and keep up a
Repute and Esteem in us. The Assumption (on the other side) of Repute and
Esteem to our selves, is the very ground and original of all Lusts (These two,
observing tune, and keeping time each to the measures and motions of the other)
and within this Circle is concluded whole Humane Nature, with all the Parts,
and the most perfect Actious of it.

Upon these Thoughts (Right Honorable!) I finding none not very ready to have
asscribed to himself the name of being (in some measure) wise, find none that
can endure the Manifestation (in any kind) of their Folly; or that can be
willing to have this their Wisdom and Glory to be flatly and plainly called
Pageantrie, Mumming, or a playing at Bo-peep with themselves and others; and yet
(it really being no honester) if we cannot bear the Judgments thus one of
another, how shall we abide the Trial, or be able to stand before the
Judgment of God, which sees us, (and will shortly search us) with more pure
and incorrupt Eyes? And how miserably then are the Imaginations of men muffled
up in their own dressings? when the Truth is our Beeings, at their best
(natural, or acquired) Appearances, are yet such feigned subsistences, and
Propp'd up with such fundamental mistakes of themselves, that they would moulder
and shatter themselves to pieces, should they be taken quite asunder from the
disguises and patchings they have put upon themselves, bare-facedly and
undeceivedly to see themselves but one half hour.

Being convinced, by these thoughts, therefore (Right Honorable!) of the low
Condition we are herein, I not knowing what the Councils of God intend to
bring forth for the settlement of this Nation; Nor how he has resolved in his
Wisdom to dispose of it, as to its outward Condition, whether He intend's we
shall be oppressed by other Nations about us, that he may the more manifest
his Power and Protection over us: Or that we shall be advanced in prosperity
above others, that so he may perhaps show us our vanity (the Casting of the
Scale either way in appearance much depending upon the present Councils) I say,
not knowing This, I can as little Judge what means Providence will pleas to use
in order to the bringing to pass these his purposes, whether he will choose
This, or reject That.

But in this Case, remembering the advice of Solomon, and Eccles. 11. 5, 6.
knowing nothing (for I can affirm it but as to mine own understanding) that
has presented it self of more Import to be looked after, or to be very
heedfully taken into Consideration, then Matters of Trade (if we shall either
regard the Safety, Unanimity or Defense of this Nation) Nor any other way
possible but This, to preserv and maintein this Country: calling also to
mind, how many times I have heard it urged, That there is no other means to
quiet or keep up the spirits of the poorer sort of people: No other to give
them Imploiment, or to find a vent and Encouragement for their Labors (when
they have wrought) and consequently no other to provide against the wants and
distempers of them, and of the Generality, but solely by Trade, and by a due
Order and Regulation of it. All these things making up a strong Affection in
me, I judged it my duty (Right Honorable!), and what necessarily became the
faithfulness I ow to the Commonwealth's service, to endeavor the representing
of this Truth (for your Honor's fuller Information) with the clearest Grounds
and demonstration I could, which being a thing that did much depend upon
Experience, I knew not how to bring this more home, then by propounding a
President; and such an one as is still in sight, which may at once witness, The
Advantage of Trade, By themselves, and the benefit they found by it; The
Disadvantage of neglecting it, By what they brought upon us; And the clear way
of Governing it, By the Courses they Actually took, and have practiced to
effect both these.

All which Conceptions, nevertheless, are with all humbleness Submitted By

Your Honor's servant (...).

THE ADVOCATE: OR, A NARRATIVE Of the state and condition of things between the
English and Dutch Nation, in relation to TRADE, and the consequences depending
thereupon, to either Commonwealth; as it was presented in August 1651.
IT has been a thing for many years generally received, That the Design of
Spain (and which, to this day, he still in his Councils carrie's on) is, to
get the Universal Monarchy of Christendom. Nor is it a thing less true (how
little soever observed) that our Neighbors [the Dutch] (after they had settled
their Liberty, and been a while encouraged by Prosperity) have, likewise, for
some years, aimed to lay a foundation to themselves for engrossing the Universal
Trade, not only of Christendom, but indeed, of the greater part of the known
world; that so they might poiz the Affairs of any other State about them, and
make their own Considerable, if not by the Largeness of their Country; yet,
however, by the Greatness of their Wealth; and by their potencie at Sea, in
strength and multitude of Shipping.

For the clear and certain carrying on of which, there being none (that was)
like to be so great a Bar to them, in this their Aim, as the English Nation;
nor any that lay so conveniently to keep up a Proportion of Trade with them.
It concerned them, therefore, by all means and ways possible to discourage and
beat out the English in all places of Trade, as far (at least) as was discreet
for them, without too much Alaruming them; or having too early or hasty a
Breach with them.

Their particular Practices to which purpose in the East Indies, at Guiny,
Greenland, Russia, with the several unfair Carriages (of some among them) to us,
in those places; and even in our own Seas, is not intended to be here
mentioned: It suffices, that these following Advantages they had clearly
gotten above us:

1. In the great Trade they did drive to East-land, and to the Baltic Sea; for
Masts, Timber, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Copper, Iron, Saltpeter, all sorts of Grain,
Potashes, etc. the like most necessary Commodities.

2. In their Herring-fishing; employing yearly upon the Coast of this Land
only, above 2000 Sail of Shipping

3. In the preserving and advancing their Manufactures; their Clothing Trade
of late arising and increasing (as it is judged) to above 60000 Cloths yearly.

4. In their East India Trade; and by it, Monopolizing three sorts of Spices
almost to the whole world; as, Cloves, Nuts, and Mace, and lately much Cinnamon.

The means whereby they have pursued and upheld these Advantages, were

By the great number of Shipping they have constantly built; and by the manner
of managing their Trade and Shipping, in a conformity and direction to their
Grand End:

For,

1. Few Merchant's Ships among the Hollanders were Ships of much Defense,
unless these going to India; and so they were neither at so great a Charge of
Guns in building them; nor did carry a proportion of men, or victual (in
setting them out) near, or answerable to English Shipping of the same Burden.

2. Several Trades they did drive in Fleets, with great Flutes, or Vessels,
having never a Gun at all in them, nor more men then would possibly sail them,
as most of their East-land Trade, their Herring-Buss Trade, and their Salt
Trade, which were driven after this manner.

3. Those their Fleets were, and have been always carefully and constantly
attended with a Convoy at the Public Charge; and which was always ready
beforehand, and had their directions given them not from the State, but from
the several Admiralties; whereby they were held to their duty, and strictly
tied up to that service.

4. Much of the Trade which they did drive to the Southward (not in Fleets, nor
with Convoy, but in single Shipping) they would often ensure in England; so
that when loss came, it was we sometimes that bare it, and our stock that was
lessened and diminished by it.

By all which means,

1. They did engross the whole Trade of all Bulkie Commodities (to themselves
singly), as Timber, Clap-board, Masts, Grain, Salt, etc.

2. And were, in some Commodities, able to go as cheap again for Freight, as
we: in some, half as cheap; and near in all, a full third penie cheaper then
we.

Which Cheapness of Freight produced again other great Advantages to
themselves; For

1. In some Commodities it was above 20 in the Hundred gain; in some 15; in
others 10; and near 4 or 5 per Cent. in most; (which was a years Interest with
them) And by which,

2. They were sure to get the preference of the Market of us in other
Countries, and if occasion were, to under-sel us also as much per Cent. in all
places, and upon all Trades; yea, sometimes in our own Commodities: And this
together with an easy pretense of the unsafetie of our English shipping
through our late Troubles.

3. Compelled our Nation (that we might maintein a Stock going with them) to
hire and freight the Holland shipping, without which, indeed, we could not
well have held up a Trade here with them, either out or home: And this being
once begun by some, was immediately (by reason of the Advantage of it) followed
by as many others as could: Which (though a good and beneficial expedient for
the particular Merchant) begat notwithstanding several very great mischiefs to
this Nation in general:

For,

1. By this we encouraged the building more and more of our Neighbors
Shipping, and discouraged our own; which hereupon were laid up by the walls in
great numbers.

2. We increased (by this) their great Trade for the Baltic Sea, and
East-land, and gave them still the greater opportunity to make themselves the
Mart and Masters over us, of all Commodities belonging to the building or
furnishing of Shipping, whereby their Trade still came home in a Circle; they
(like wise men) laying such a Course, as one part of it strengthened another.

3. We dis-obliged and discontented our own people and seamen, and
insensibly weakened the strength and defense of this Nation: For by this course,
we must at length have been reduced to have hired their Mariners, when we
come to set out our Men of War: nor was it possible (had it held) to have
prevented it.

4. They, by this means, carried away much unnecessarie Treasure out of this
Nation, taken for freights; and so insensibly impoverished also this Country;
our money occasioning a Luxe to their people, while our own Seamen starved at
home for mere want, and through lack of imploiment.

5. As the Cheapness of their Freight enabled them to under-sel us abroad, in
many Commodities carried to Foreign Markets by them, and by us, to sell: So it
enabled them equally to over-bid us abroad for the Foreign Commodities, which
they and we bought, and to raise the price of them upon us, which while they
had liberty to bring in hither, they either prevented our Merchant of the
first of the Market, and then made us pay Sauce for them: or, if not, they
carried them into their Country: on here watched the opportunity of another
seasonable vent of them. And thus they served us; as for all our Norway,
East-land, and Russia Commodities; so also lately in our VVines, Fruits, Oils,
Currants, etc. which were the Commodities of Spain, Canaries, and the Straights:
By both these means (viz. by discouraging and beating us down abroad in the
selling of some Commodities; and by raising and enhansing us abroad in the
price, or buying up of others) concluding with themselves, to weary us out at
length from all Trade, and to have the sole buying and selling of all
Commodities for us.

For this method and manner of managing their affairs, daily adding to Their
stock, and answerably diminishing the Stock and Treasure of this Nation: and by
laying it so, as it run thus in a Circle, each part of it (as we said)
strengthening another part: it would unavoidably have tended to a greater and
greater disenabling us to hold any Trade with them: and to have made
themselves, for Wealth and Shipping, the Masters over us: Of sufficient
testimony of which (over and above what we have said also) we might further
see in the actual progress that they had gained upon us in our Shipping.

For,

1. In our Trade of East-land, whereas we did use formerly to send thither 200
Sail of Shipping in a year, we now did not send 16 Sail: The Hollanders in the
mean time employing not less then 600 Sail thither; and whereby (had not a good
Providence crossed or hindered a strict Alliance and Conjunction between some of
those Eastern States and them) we must soon have given them their Price, and
been at their disposing for all Commodities belonging to Shipping: and then it
had been too great an hazard for us (by any Law made here) to have recovered
our Trade from them.

2. In our Plantations they had three, if not four Sail of Ships, for our one:
whereas they never suffered us so much as to Trade at all in any place or
Plantation settled by them.

3. In India they have 20 Sail and above for our one.

4. At Spain, Canaries, Zant, with several other places in the Straights, where
they formerly rarely laded hither one ship of Goods; they now lately laded
hither more then we.

And thus, in the way and manner of the managing the Trade in their shipping,
lay much of their vigilancie to gain their advantage and design upon us.

A second Course (therefore) whereby they do and have upheld their Advantages
above us, is, The greatness of the Stock they imploie, which (as we now
intimated) was more and more increased by the wisdom of this their Method in
Shipping: And which, on the other side, as it did encreas and grow great, did
enable them the more to give the Laws of Trade to us, both in the Government of
the Exchange, and of the Markets abroad for Foreign Commodities.

A third Course for the gaining and upholding their Advantages of us, was, The
singular and prudent care they took in preserving the Credit of most of those
Commodities which are their own proper Manufactures; By which they keep up the
Repute and Sale of them abroad; taking hereby a very great advantage of the
contrary Neglect in us; and by this means, likewise, very much damnifying and
spoiling us.

Which that we may clearly see of what Import this one thing alone is to us,
we shall here set down certain general Canons or Rules belonging to
Manufactures.

1. That although Divine Providence, in the greatness of his Wisdom, has
placed natural Commodities, some here, some there; yet no Manufacture or
artificial Commodity, but may possibly be had or transplanted into any
Country.

2. That all Manufactures (especially such as are of Necessity) if they are of
a certain goodness, They are (like Coin) of a certain value and price also; and
so on the contrary.

3. That two persons selling or making Commodities of a like goodness, he
shall have the preference of the Market, that will sell them the cheapest: And
so two Nations likewise.

4. That the Cheapness of Manufactures, and artificial Commodities, does
altogether depend upon the plenty and cheapness of the matter, and upon the
like cheapness of price, for Handie-labor.

And these (though few) being unalterable Laws in all Manufactures, it cannot
but be acknowledged, that it is through our want of the like Care, as our
Neighbors, and only through that, that the Hollander has any kind of
Woollen Manufacture:

For,

1. The matter of no Woollen Manufacture grows in his Country at all; but
he is forced to fetch it from other places; whereas we have it here, within
this Nation, plenty.

2. The price of labor depending much upon the price of victuals, hous-rent,
and other things necessary, It is certain (especially to any that know both
Countries) that all this is much cheaper with us, then with our Neighbors, and
are like so to be.

3. Our Nation, as they were heretofore the only workmen of these Commodities;
so none can excel them for Art, Skill, or Goodness, were but encouragement
given them, and an Order, Regulation, and Government of the Manufactures
settled among them: And therefore

It is not our Neighbor's singular Industry above us, as it is the Carelessness
of this Nation, in keeping our Manufactures to their due contents, weight, and
goodness. Their Neglect in settling a Regulation, Government, and Superspection
over them, and in Inflicting due and just punishments for the fals-making of
them. That is (humbly conceived to be much) the Cause of the so great thriving
of our Neighbor's Clothing, and of the so great Ruin and Decaie (on the
contrary) of our own Woollen Manufactures, and of the people depending upon
them.

A fourth Course taken by our Neighbors, Is, The Improvements of Trade that
they have made by their Treaties or Articles of Confederations with other
Princes; and by making this their Care and Protection of Trade abroad in all
places their Interest of State. Thus taking hold of the Juncture of
Circumstances, and making use of the Necessity of the King of Denmark, they
have farmed the Sound of him: Thus also at the Treaty of Munster have they
reserved a power of shutting us out of the Scheld, and have carefully in that
Peace concluded on several other Articles and Provisions in order to the
securing and promoting of their Traffic, And thus -- etc.

A fifth Course (and not the least means for the upholding and increasing their
Trade) Is, The smalness of their Custom, or Port-duties; also their prudent
laying on and taking off Impositions, for the furtherance of their own
Manufactures, and for the Encouragement of bringing in some, and Discouragement
of bringing in other Commodities; and of which they have given us two ill
Instances, The one in laying on a great Tax upon our English Cloths and
Manufactures; The other in forbidding our Cloths wholly to be imported, if
dressed or died in the Cloth; of both which we have had some cause to complain
long, as being plainly an Inhibition of Commerce, and if not strictly against
the Laws of Nations; yet at least against the Course of Amity, Alliance, and
Friendship.

A sixth Course has been, The Constant Reward and Encouragement given to
persons bringing in Inventions; making of new Discoveries, and propounding
things profitable for public and common Interest: which (how little a thing
soever it may seem to some, yet it) has ever been, and is constantly, a very
great spur to Industry.

And these are humbly asserted to be the principal Causes of their so much
greatness and flourishing in Trade above us.

Other Causes that have been less principal and accessarie to these, are,

1. The Easiness or Lowness of Interest in that Country.

2. The great facilitating of their Trade by a Bank.

3. And last of all (the only thing proper to them) the dearness and scarcity
of Land: and the dividing their Estates equally to their Children: whereby
Trade is (as it were) continued in a Line without Interruption; the contrary
being customarie with us.

Animadversion.
All which Discourse being only an Evidence given in from matter of known
fact; It will (as is humbly conceived) manifest it self.

I.
That our Neighbors have no such extraordinary advantage in matter of Trade,
either through their Country, its Situation, or otherwise, as is proper or
peculiar to them only, beyond all other Nations, as has been long the opinion
of some, but it is the manner of their Care, and of the Government that is among
them, and the mere vigilancie of the Method observed by them:

For,

If the Nature of those Courses, which they have taken and pursued for the
Encouragement of Trade, be looked into and considered (as they are obvious to
any other that will pleas to heed them) it cannot be imagined but they shall
make any people great, rich and flourishing in Trade; and therefore that they
will do the like in any other place as well as in Holland, if put in
execution, especially, if it be a place seated for Trade, and the people of
the Country apt for it.

II.
It is presumed, That our Neighbors would not think it Just, if we should
condemn them, merely for the taking these good Courses for themselves; or because
they have given all Encouragements that were requisite to their Trade in their
own Country: Much less then would they exspect, that we should actually
impute these things as Crimes to them, or ground hence any occasion to
Estrange our selves, or make a Breach with them: Nor will they therefore (as it
is hoped) take it more ill from us; if we (having now likewise recovered our
Liberties) see the Necessity of providing for the Defense of this
Commonwealth by Shipping (as being Islanders); or if we take up some of the
like Courses as They, for the Encouragement of Trade among us: As without
which, indeed, Shipping can neither be had, or maintained; which now also to
neglect, were a very great Carelessness, and would, indeed, be an Argument
rather of our being to be Blamed, then otherwise; having been so well taught,
even by their own Example and Practice, That

1. It is by Trade, and the due ordering and governing of it, and by no other
means, that Wealth and Shipping can either be increased, or upheld; and
consequently by by no other, that the power of any Nation can be sustained by
Land, or by Sea: It being not possible (as is humbly thought) according to
the Course of humane affairs, for any Nation (having no Mines to supply it
self) to make it self powerful in either of these (that is, either Money, or
Shipping) without Trade, or a through Inspection into Trade, and the Course of it.

2. That it is by a Knowledge of Trade and Commerce, and the Course of it, that
one Nation or State know's perfectly how to straighten and pinch another, and
to compel a Compliance from them, which may be, Either

By debarring or deriving the Course of some necessary Commodities from them; as
for War, for Shipping, for Food, etc. Or

By obstructing the Sale or Vent of the Native Commodities belonging to them: Or

By weakening their Shipping, and dreyning them by degrees of their Treasure
and Coin.

By any of which Courses, if not spied, or (when spied, if) not able to be
prevented, a People or Nation must at length be straightned and subjected: and
every one of which Inconveniences we were very manifestly liable unto (as
appears by the foregoing Narrative) through the Advantages our Neighbors had
over us, and through the Wisdom of those Courses they had laid in their Trade
with us: we being so near pinched, that it had been very hard, fairly to have
wrested our selves out of the Nets of our Neighbors, had Sweden been as much
shut to us, as Denmark; and that the King of Poland likewise could have
exercised his Arbitrarie Power on us at Dantzick: And had not (at length) that
Course about our Shipping and Navigation been so happily and timely established
by the Parliament: which, as the Necessity of it could not suddenly be so well
judged of by those that had not considered or been acquainted with the
substance of the foregoing Relation: So certainly, being laid upon so equal
and Necessary Grounds, if continued to be exercised, It will be a means, in
some measure, to recover us.

For besides what we said of the Constraint, that for the foregoing causes,
lay upon us, It must even, from the Primitive grounds of Reason, be
acknowledged, That a Commonwealth cannot be enriched, nor the People thereof
provided for, by any other means, then by reducing those very Courses into
general Practice, which are used by Private men; And Therefore as Private men,
that buie and sell to suit the Conveniences of others, as well as themselves,
do Constantly observe these, or the like Rules:

1. To buie at the first or best hand, or there, where they may have the
Commodity cheapest.

Answerable to which, Is,

To fetch Commodities at the Immediate places of their Production, or Growth.

2. To carry Commodities to places where they are most needed.

Answerable to which, Is,

To send all Native Commodities to their farthest, or utmost Market, where they
yield greatest price.

So these Canons and Rules must be as inviolably observed also by any Nation
who will pretend an Interest, hope, or benefit from Trade: otherwise they may
justly be reproved of less Care and Knowledge, then common or ordinary
Shopkeepers. Which Rules, notwithstanding, are not to be pursued, nor can be
imitated, without giving all the possible Indulgence and Encouragement, that
may be, to Shipping.

And this whole state of things, and these reasons that have been produced,
being all of them duly and equally considered, It is hoped, little will remain
of Dis-satisfaction (or Objection upon us) about the PARLIAMENT's late Act for
the Encouragement and Increas of our Navigation; Which was, indeed, the Thing
principally propounded to be here Argued, and the Censure of which is
therefore freely Submitted.

FINIS.

