woodcut of three men surrounding the scales of reason sdom. manus Prouidentia.
Judgment Reason dependency Vild Rerum Precius Vicessitudo



WORCESTERS APOPHTHEGMES.

OR WITTY SAYINGS OF THE Right Honorable HENRY (late) Marquess and Earl of
WORCESTER, Delivered upon several occasions, and now Published for the benefit
of the READER.

By T. B. a constant observer, and no less admirer of his Lordships Wisdom and
Loyalty.

Et prodesse volunt et delectare.

LONDON. Printed by J. Clowes, for Edward Blackmore, at the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard, 1650.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD, Marquess and Earl of WORCESTER and
GLAMORGAN, Baron of Chepston, Viscount Grossmount and Caldicott, my very
Honorable Lord.
My very good Lord,
The many favors, which I received from your Noble Family, especially, from
your Lordship, ^rought, upon a disposition, some-deale a pretender unto
gratitude, how it might in some measure, or other, answer the respect, and
clear the heart, that had layen charged so long, with benefits; but it found
no means but (only thus) to let your Honor see, that the favors which were
conferred upon me: were not spilt, but powered into a Violl, that (what it has
received and contains, bears Paper of acknowledgment, and that, neither the
distances of Time, nor Place, nor all the (Left Handed) strokes of fortune,
which have lately fallen so heavily, upon your Illustrious Family, shall ever
be able, to beat down a respect, that emulates the Cypress which bears up
(still) in growth maugre the heavy weights, which the hand of fate (ignorant of
its virtue) has so hung, on all her branches. My Lord, it may be it will not
be unpleasing to your Lordship, to read your Father, speaking after death;
especially, when you read him, dying, with such speeches in his mouth. I laid
your Noble Father in his grave, with my own hands, but I could not let such a
memorial of him, lie buried, under my own Manuscript; but thought it a duty
belonging to his fame, and your merit, to dedicate this book unto your
Lordship, Heir to all: but apparently to nothing, but his virtues, and this
memorial of them; which in all humility, (together with my self) I prostrate
at your feet; who think it the greatest honor, still to be owned,

Your Lordships humble, and faithful Servant THOMAS BAILEY

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
HAving lately published a private Discourse concerning Religion, between the
late King, and the Marquess of Worcester in Raglan Castle, as also certain
papers which went so between them; and this in justification of the late Kings
constant affection to the Protestant Religion, which has been much oppugned by
diverse, both before, and after his death; yet, I hear there are some, who
pretend to love and honor the memory of the dead King, and glory, in the
relation of being servants to his late Majesty, that will not admit of that
controversy, otherwise then as a parable: First, because they were there, and
heard of no such thing. Secondly, because they believed not the Marquess of
Worcester to have been so able a man, and as I hear, it has been said so by
some of his Majesty's field-Chaplains; who envying that a loyal pen should
wagge, where they can be contented to sow pillowes under the elbowes, to beat
cushions over the heads of a people (against whom shaking the dust from off
their feet, as a witness against them, had seemed more like an Apostolical
imitation then preaching to them.) And preach such wholesome and sound Doctrine
of Mortification, Sanctification, Justification, and Good life, that they
thought they might safely get up into any Pulpit, not caring what bottom it
had, nor what canopie was over head, not much unlike the man who went to search
after the surenesse of the foundation, when his house was all on fire. These
men will tell you that this was no real thing, because they were there all the
while, whilst they were not there at all, except at meals; and when, I tell
you that they were the Doctors that were better at smelling out a good dinner,
then a disputation; I have as good as told you their names. I expected better
reason from those Doctors, then from the Knight that said he was sure there
should be no such thing at Raglan, for his boy Tom was there all the time; as
if the Marquess of Worcester could not watch his opportunity in a months time
to have two hours private Discourse with the King, while he was in his own
house, but all the Castle must take notice of it, or that papers might not pass
between them, but all the world must know it.

But you will say, you do not believe that there was any such private
discourse. Choose then, who cares? let him believe it that will; it was writ for
satisfaction of Christians, not infidels. But it may be Mendax fama means to
require me for the wrong she did my father, who writ a good book, and some
would not believe it to be his; and now I have set out a book, as none of mine
own, and she will have it to be mine. I thank her kindly, but I had rather be
without her praises, then to be thought such an ingenious liar. As to the
objection of the Marquesses inability to talk so to the King, I shall assure
you by his Apophthegmes in this book [which I never had the least thought to
have published but upon this occasion] that he used to talk so wisely, that all
the wisdom that I had thought them worthy of record, and [now] of publication.
To a great many of which sayings, there are a great many witnesses to justify
a truth that cannot be denied, and must needs verify the former: and so Good
morrow, or Good evening to you, according unto the time of the day that the
book lighted into your hands, I am

Your servant Tho. Bayley

WORCESTERS APOPHTHEGMES.
APOPHTH. I.
THe first time that ever I had the happiness to be acquainted with this
Nobleman, was by accident, upon the Welsh Mountains: where I met him, flying a
danger with a softer pace then it made after him: whose condition so dangerous,
was the more desperate, because he was unsensible of the approach of any Enemy,
and his security the sooner wrought, because Intelligence had not given the
enemy any Information, how near they were unto him: it was my fortune, first to
inform my self, and then his Lordship of the one, and afterward his Lordship
of the other particular, as also of the rub that I had cast in the way, that
had turned aside the Bowl that was running so fairly toward the mark. After
that I had told him all the particulars of what I had done, and what I further
meant to do, in order to his preservation with a composed countenance, wherein
you might read, not the least perturbation of mind: he gave me this Language:
Sir, it is fit that you should have your reward, I am yours: and (embracing me
said.) Now I put you in full possession of your own, I pray dispose of me as
you please: from which time forward until the time that I laid him in his
grave in Windsor Castle, I never parted from him.

APOPHTH. 2.
ABout the same time recovering the top of an high Mountain, by the advantage
of the ground, we could see the Enemy marching another way; at which sight, the
Marquess dwelt with his eyes a little longer upon that Object. The Lord John
Somerset (his Son) thought convenient: whereupon the Marquess made his
reply. O Son, I love to see mine own danger, especially when it is marching
off.

APOPHTH. 3.
AFter that my endeavors were crowned with success, and my diligence had
wrought his security, in a place that was as private as he had made himself;
having parted with all his retinue, we began to commune with our selves,
concerning our own happiness; and some there were who told his Lordship, that
though the place were unworthy of him, yet it was better then a prison: to
which the Marquess made this answer. It may be not: It may be my sins did
not deserve so great a favor, for that is always better which God sends. To
which I had a Sister, which was Mrs. of the house who thus replied unto him:
then sure (my Lord) this is best, for God has sent you hither. But Lady, (said
the Marquess,) it had not been best, if God had disposed of me otherwise: why
should we repine at that freedom of the Almighty over us, which we daily
exercise over other Creatures? We imprison harmless Creatures, and innocent
Birds, within Cages, only to sing to us and make us melody, and why should I
do otherwise then submit unto the will of God, if it should be his pleasure to
make me a close Prisoner, seeing he may delight in hearing, how prittily I
would complain?

APOPHTH. 4.
I Have lived in Ragland Castle, 3 years, and in all that time, I never saw man
drunk, nor heard an Oath, amongst any, of all his Servants: neither did I ever
see a better ordered Family, and that which is most wonderful unto me, was,
the Servants of his house, (being half Papists, and half Protestants) were
never at variance, in point of Religion: which was brought about, by
prohibiting disputations: neither was any man the less accepted for his
Religion, if his service were acceptable; but when the Castle was filled with
Officers, and Soldiers, he used to be much grieved, to hear, and see the
Oaths, and drunkenness, that was (then and there) too much practiced:
insomuch, that when some of his chief Officers, had told him, how that they had
fortified such and such a place, so and so: and that here the Enemy could not
come, and there it was impossible; I but (said my Lord) you have left the main
place open, and unfortified: you have made no fortifications against Heaven;
for there is such swearing, and drunkenness amongst you, that I fear me that
from thence will come your greatest enemy; and you have made no provision
against him.

APOPHTH. 5.
WHen the King had made his repair to Raglan, after the Battle of Nasby,
taking occasion to thank the Marquess for some moneys lent his Majesty, the
Marquess returned his Majesty this answer: Sir, I had your word for my money;
but I never thought I should be so soon repaid, for now you have given me
thanks, I have all I look for.

APOPHTH. 6.
ANother time, the King came unto my Lord, and told him, that he thought not to
have stayed with his Lordship, above three days, but his occasions requiring
his longer abode with him, he was willing to ease him of so great a burden, as
to be altogether so heavy a charge unto him. And considering it was a Garrison,
that his provisions might not be spent by so great a pressure, he was willing
that his Lordship should have power given him, to take what Provisions the
Country would afford, for his present maintenance, and recruit: to which his
Lordship made this reply. I humbly thank your Majesty, but my Castle will
neither stand long, if it leanes upon the Country. I had rather be brought to
a morsel of bread, then any morsels of bread should be brought me, to
entertain your Majesty.

APOPHTH. 7.
SIr, Henry Bard, who was Lord Bellamount, coming into the Hall at Raglan, and
seeing so many Tables furnished with food, and feeders, swore a great Oath,
that the King had a plot to destroy that Family. First, in borrowing all the
old man's money: and then in coming (thus) to eat up his victuals; which being
told unto the Marquess, the Marquess asked the man (who made this Relation
unto him) of what Garrison the Lord Bellamount was Governor: it was told his
Lordship that he was Governor of Cambden house: the Marquess replied, That
when the King had done as he said, that then his Majesty might go to his
Garrison, and there he might have Cambdens remains.

APOPHTH. 8.
WHen the King first entered the Castle of Raglan, the Marquess kissed the
Kings hand, and rising up again, he saluted his Majesty, with this Complement,
Domine non sum dignus. The King replied unto the Marquess. My Lord I may very
well answer you again, I have not found so great faith in Israel; for no man
would trust me with so much money as you have done: To which the Marquess
replied, I hope your Majesty will prove a defender of the Faith.

APOPHTH. 9.
SIr Thomas Somerset, brother to the Marquess, had a house which they called
Troy, within five miles of Raglan Castle: this Sir Thomas Somerset being a
neat man, both within, and without his house, as he was a complete Gentleman
of himself, every way delighted very much in fine Gardens, and Orchards, and in
replenishing and ordering them with all the varieties of choicest fruits, that
could be got: and in defending his new Plantations from the coldness of the
climate, by the benefit of art; the earth that was so much made of, proved so
grateful to him, at the same time that the King happened to be at his Brothers
house at Raglan: that it yielded him wherewithal to send his Brother Worcester
such a present, as at that time of year and place was able to make the King,
and all his Lords believe, that the Sovereign of the Planets, with all his
Prince Electors, had new changed the Poles: and that Wales the reffuse, and
outcast of the fair Garden of England had fairer and riper fruit, growing
upon her stone rubbish, then Englands levels, had on all her beds: this,
presented to the Marquess, the Marquess would not suffer to be presented to
the King, by any other hands, except his own. In comes the Marquess to the
King, at the latter end of supper, led by the arm, having such a goodly
presence with him, that his being led, became him, rather like some ceremony of
state, then show of impotence: and his slow pace, (occasioned by his infirmity)
expressed a Spanish gravity, rather then feebleness: thus (with a silver dish
in each hand, filled with rarities, and a little basket upon his arm, as a
supply, in case his Majesty should be over-bountifull of his favors to the
Ladies that were standers by.) He makes his third obeisance, and thus speaks.
May it please your Majesty, if the 4 Elements could have been robbed to have
entertained your Majesty, I think I had but done my duty; but I must do as I
may. If I had sent to Bristoll for some good things, to entertain your Majesty,
that had been no wonder at all: If I had procured from London, some goodness,
that might have been acceptable to your Majesty, that had been no wonder
indeed. But here I present your Majesty (placing his dishes upon the Table)
with what neither came from Lincoln that was, nor London that is: nor York*
that is to be; but I assure your Majesty, that this Present came from Troy:
whereupon the King smiled, and answered the Marquess, truly my Lord, I have
heard, that Corn now grows where Troy Town stood; but I never thought there
had grown any Apricocks there before. Whereupon the Marquess replied. Any
thing to please your Majesty. The fruit was very much admired by all, and it
was acknowledged by all that were in the presence at that time, that they never
saw the King served in greater state in all their lives. There were some about
the King, who followed my Lord Marquess, when he departed the presence, and
told his Lordship, that he would make a very good Courtier. I (said the
Marquess) I remember I said one thing that may give you some hopes of me. Any
thing to please your Majesty.

APOPHTH. 10.
THe first night his Majesty came unto the Castle, the King desired to see the
great Tower, which was the place where his Lordship did use to keep his
Treasure: His Majesty spoke unto me to fetch the Keys. I ran down to the
Marquess, and acquainted him with the Kings pleasure, who would needs bring
them to the King, and show him the Tower himself; when the King saw the
Marquess bringing the Keys himself, he thus spoke unto the Marquess. My Lord,
there are some men, who are so unreasonable, as to make me believe, that your
Lordship has good store of gold yet left within this Tower; but I knowing how
I have exhausted you, (together, with your own occasions) could never have
believed it, until now I see you will not trust the Keys with any Lady but
your self: To which the Marquess made this reply. Sir, I was so far from
giving your Majesty any such occasion of thought by this tender of my duty,
that I protest unto you, that I was once resolved that your Majesty should have
layen there, but that I was loath to commit your Majesty to the Tower.

APOPHTH. 11.
THere was a poor Freeholder, who had a small Tenement, close underneath
Raglan Castle, in value about six pounds, per Annum: the Marquess had a mind
to buy it of the owner, it lying within his land, and so near unto his Castle:
treating with the owner about it, he found him extremely averse from hearkening
to any conditions whatsoever: the Marquess (hereupon) told the man, that he
made not any such proposition out of any evil intention toward him, but to
his great advantage; for he would give him sixteen pounds per Annum, in any
place of England or Wales, where he had any Land, or opportunity to purchase
such an inheritance for him; but the man remained obstinate, telling the
Marquess, that he would not loose the sight of so goodly a Castle as Raglan,
for ten pounds per Annum: this construed (as indeed it was) an Answer no
less peevish then insolent: the Marquess told him that he would spoil his
prospect, and so dismissed him, causing (forthwith) a double row of Trees,
which should (in time) take away two thirds of the Revenue, which should accrue
out of the poor man's eyes. The Kings coming to Raglan, being at the time when
these Trees were grown to their height, when the tall Ceder of our Lebanus, was
brought so low, and those Sycamores flourished, when the royal Oak was in the
fall of the leaf; It happened that his Majesty was at bowls upon Raglan
Castle Green (a place so proudly situated, that you might as well command all
the Country, round about with your eye, as the Lord thereof the Countrymen by
his power and authority, where you might find a goodly prospect without loosing
your own eyes,) where after that he had ended his recreation, his Majesty was
pleased to delight himself, which observing the Country round about: It
happened, that one Pritchard, the Kings Partner at Bowls (whose
unmannerlinesse had informed him that Bowls had the same virtue in them, that
the Foot-balls had, (viz.) to make all fellows, presuming more upon his good
bowling, then good manners continued the familiarity that should have ended
with the rubbers, showing the King where his house stood some three miles off,
and told his Majesty that he must look through the wood, and he might see a
white thing, and that was it; moreover, acquainting his Majesty what the Lord
of Worcester had advised him (viz.) to cut down some of those Trees, that the
house might be plainly discerned from the Green, whereby his Lordship when he
wanted a good Bowler, might make a sign, and so have him at a beck: To which
the King replied. Mr. Pritchard, let me give you better advice: put up more
Trees, where the Trees are so thin, that my Lord of Worcester (if it be
possible) may not see thy house at all. The Marquess of Worcester supposing
the King had touched upon this greediness of purchasing all the Land which was
near unto him, showed His Majesty the Rows of Trees, and told the King that
beyond those Trees stood a pretty Tenenement, and because he would not have
Naboths Vineyard to be an eyesore to him, he had planted those trees to
hood-winck his eyes from such temptations; whether the King had heard of it
before or no, I cannot tell, but his Majesty happened to light upon the true
cause of their setting up: telling his Lordship, that he was as conceited in
the setting up those Trees as his Father was witty in cutting down the great
Wall-nut-tree, which the Earl of Salisbury, gave an hundred pounds to my Lord
of Worcesters man to persuade his Lordship to cut it down, because it hindered
his prospect toward the Thames, but being cut down, the Earl of Worcester set
up such a house in the place thereof, that Salisbury that way could not see the
Thames at all. Whereupon my Lord of Worcester, said that the Earl of Salisbury
would be even with him, for he was afraid that he would pull down his house ere
it be long: to which the King made answer, that when the time came that he
durst pull down his house, he and such as he, would pull an old house over
their own head; the Marquess replied, if they will make so bold with their own
heads, I will give them leave to be so bold with any of my houses.

APOPHTH. 12.
WHen the King first entered the Gates of Raglan, the Marquess delivered his
Majesty the keys, (according to the odinary Custom) the King restoring of
them to the Marq; the Marq; said, I beseech your Maj. to keep them, if you
please, for they are in a good hand; but I am afraid that ere it be long, I
shall be forced to deliver them into the hands of those who will spoil the
Complement.

APOPHTH. 13.
AT the Kings being at Raglan, there were some informations given, of some
Gentlemen of the Country, who were supposed (and not without cause) to have
done his Majesty many ill Offices, by withdrawing the hearts of the People from
his Majesty, and obstructing many aids, and assistances, which otherwise his
Majesty was likely to have had out of these parts: these men (being thus
accused) were ordered to be laid hold on, and it was executed accordingly, and
they being brought before his Majesty, it was moved by some, that they should
be forthwith tried by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer; others advised his
Majesty, that they should be sent to Hereford, and there to be kept in safe
Custody, until further consultations might be had concerning them, they
excusing themselves as well as they could. One of them protesting his innocence
with tears in his eyes, the King ordered that he should forthwith be released,
being always prone to lean to mercy rather then justice, and to favorable,
rather then rigid construction of his very enemies. The King, coming back from
Abergaveny, where this was put in execution, The King told the Marquess what
he had done, and that when he saw them speak so honestly, he could not but give
some credit to their words, so seconded by tears; and withal, told the
Marquess, that he had only sent them to prison; whereupon the Marquess said,
what to do, to poison that Garrison? Sir, you should have done well to have
heard their accusations, and then to have showed what mercy you pleased. The
King told him, that he heard that they were ac^used by some contrary faction,
as to themselves, who out of the distaste they bore to one or other upon old
grudges, would be apt to charge them more home, then the nature of their
offenses had deserved; to whom the Marquess made this return, well Sir, you may
chance to gain you the Kingdom of Heaven by such doings as these; but if ever
you get the Kingdom of England by these tricks, I Will be your Bondsman.

APOPHTH. 14.
THe Marquess had a mind to tell the King (as handsomely as he could) of some
of his (as he thought) faults, and thus he contrives his plot, against the time
that his Majesty was wont to give his Lordship a visit, as commonly he used to
do after dinner, his Lordship had the book of John Gower, lying before him on
the Table. The King casting his eye upon the book, told the Marquess that he
had never seen it before. O said the Marquess, it is the book of books, which
if your Majesty had been well versed in, it would have made you a King of
Kings. Why so my Lord? said the King, why said the Marquess, here is set down
how Aristotle brought up, and instructed Alexander the great in all the
rudiments, and principles, belonging to a Prince, and under the persons of
Alexander and Aristotle, he read the King such a lesson, that all the standers
by were amazed at the boldness; and the King supposing that he had gone further
then his Text would have given him leave: asked the Marq; if he had his lesson
by heart, or whether he spoke out of the book: the Marquess replied, Sir, if
you could read my heart, it may be you might find it then. Or if your Majesty
please to get it by heart, I will lend you my book: which latter profer, the
King accep^ed of, and did borrow it; nay said the Marquess, I will lend it you
upon these conditions, first, that you read it, secondly, that you make use of
it; but perceiving how that some of the new made Lords, fretted and bit their
thumbs at certain passages in the Marquesses discourse, he thought a little to
please his Majesty, though he pleased them the men, who were so much displeased
already, protesting unto his Majesty, that no man was so much for the absolute
power of a King: as Aristotle, desiring the book out of the Kings hand, he told
the King, that he would show him one remarkable passage to that purpose,
turning to that place that had this verse, viz.

A King can kill, a King can save,
A King can make, a Lord a knave,
And of a knave, a Lord also, etc.
Whereupon there were diverse new made Lords, who slunk out of the room, which
the King observing, told the Marquess, my Lord at this rate you will drive away
all my Nobility, the Marquess replied, I protest unto your Majesty, I am as
new a made Lord as any of them all, but I was never called knave and rogue, so
much in all my life, as I have been since I received this last Honor, and why
should not they bear their shares?

APOPHTH. 15.
AS the Marquess was in his travel from Denbyshire (where he had layen
concealed some while) toward Raglan, we had determined to lodge in a poor Town
called Bala, in Merionethshire, the Marquess being invited to take some repose,
at one Mr. Owen Salisbury of Keeg, I and one more, went before to provide
accommodation for his Lordship in that Town, where we found that some had played
the knave with us, and had informed the Town, that about such a time there
would come a party of the enemy through the Town; the Townsmen neither being
prepared nor able to make any resistance, nor willing to harbor any such
guests, were very much divided and confounded in their cousultations, but
seeing none but two Horsemen coming toward the Town, they admitted us in, but
not without some suspicion, and many scores of men, women, and Children,
following us at our heels, wheresoever we went, we marvelled very much at
them, and they at us: we went into several poor Innes, and we were told every
where there was no lodging for us; I inquired for the Mayor of the Town, he was
not to be spoken with, I inquired after the Deputy Governor of the place, or
any Officer, but cold not come to the speech of any of the^, the multitude
increased, so did our wonders; at the last I spide a young man, who had a
ribbin in his hat, with vive la Roy in it: I applied my self to him, and told
him that he by his favor should be one that loved the King, and that there was
such a Nobleman who had served the King in no small measure, who was likely to
lie in their streets for want of a lodging: the young man showed me
(forthwith) great respect, telling me that his Lordship should be very welcome
to his Mothers house: who kept a poor Inn, and withal told us the reason of
the peoples shienesse to harbor us, as aforesaid, we went into the house,
finding it a most lamentable receptacle for such a person; but yet better then
none at all, the parlour where my Lord was to lie, was a soft and loose ground,
wherein you might sink up to the anckles every step, the top of the house being
thatched with ill-threshed straw, the Corn that was left in the straw where
with the house was thatched; grew, and was all as green as grass: the Marquis
(by that time that we had got a good fire, and had laid some loose boards, and
strawed the new made floar with rushes) came into the Town, and seeing the
manner of the housetop, and the parlour bottom, said, That he lay over a
Bogge, and under a Meddow. But it being known who he was, the Mayor of the
Town, with singular respect, and much humanity came unto the Marquess, and
excused the rudeness of the Tovvnsmen, and shevved his Lordship the mistake,
offering his Lordship his own house, and many other civilities, and what else
his Lordship thought might lie within his power; for which my Lord gave him
many and hearty thanks, breaking out into this Meditation. Lord what a thing
this misunderstanding, I warrant you: might but the Kign and the Parliament
confer together, as you and I have done, there might be as right an
understanding betwixt them, as there is now between you and I; some body have
told the Parliament, that the King was an enemy, and their believing of him to
be such, has wrought all the jealousies which are come to these distractions,
the Parliament being now in such a case as I my self am, having green ears
over their heads, and false ground under their feet.

APOPHTH. 16.
IN the same Town (at my Lords departure) by the carelessness of his Servants,
1000 l. in gold was left behind, being hid under the bench: and forgot to be
taken away, this money was never mist until we came to our Journies end, at
night: and it being told my Lord that so much money was missing, and where they
had left it. My Lord made no other words of it, but these, you talk of a cheap
reckoning, but I never paid so dearly for a nights lodging in all my life; who
would think that a man should leave so much money behind him, in such a lousy
Inn: one that stood by told the Marquess, that it was a hundred to one, if
ever he heard of his money again, it was such a beggarly house. O peace said
the Marquess, if they will not be known of the money, you shall see it will be a
brave Inn in time. This money was sent after, and very honestly restored, and
delivered into the Messengers hands, that came for it; being brought unto the
Marquess, there was much wondering at the honesty of the woman of the house:
others praised the whole Town, for their general and honest dealing, seeing it
was generally known: the Marquess told them, That it may be the Town never saw
so much money before, and therefore they knew not what to make on it.

APOPHTH. 17.
THe Marquess journying on his way to Raglan, happened to come to a place that
was called Strata del florida, in Cardiganshire, (which made him ask us
whither we meant to carry him? saying, That we had brought already to the West
Indies,) an old ruinated, but sometimes a most famous monastery; with whose
ruins was built a pretty tolerable Welsh Gentleman's house, where my Lord
lodged that night; in which house there was showen unto us, an old, old woman:
who was credibly reported, to have been living, and of years able to remember
when that Monastery was in its flourishing condition, and to have been at mass
oftentimes when the place was inhabited with Monks and Friars; this strange
Relation, was no sooner carried up and presented to my Lords ears; But my Lord
was as greedy to glut his eyes, with such an Object, as they to fill his ears,
with the Relation. The woman being sent for, came, coming, the Marquess
questioned her concerning the manner of the Monks behavior, both in their
Service, their Orders, Habits, Customs, and all other particulars; who gave
his Lordship so exact an account, that he believed it to be true, and confessed
that it must needs be so; and questioning of her further, about her age? she
said she was one hundred years of age; then the Marquess asked her: And what
when the Religion altered, you altered with the Religion? she answered no, in
truth Master, I stayed to see, whether or no, the People of the new Religion
would be better then the people of the old; and I could see them nothing, but
grow worse and worse, and charity to wax colder and colder, and so I kept me to
my old Religion, I thank God, and by the grace of God mean to live and die in
it: The Marquess turned to the Gentleman of the house, who was a Protestant,
and asked him whether or no, she had been noted for a Papist all her life: the
Gentleman said that she had, and could never be brought from it, and that she
would oftentimes, steal into the Church alone with her beads, and there she
would be praying by her self; The Marquess dismissed her for the present, but
after supper, sent for her again, and had some more private conference with
her; amongst other things he asked her, how she did do to serve God, and when
she had seen a Priest last, when she had been at Mass, or received the
Sacrament? the woman answered that she had not seen a Priest, not in 60. years;
but she did ber Office daily, and never mist, and once a year upon good Friday,
she received the Sacrament at the Parsons hands, praying to God, that since she
could not attain unto the means that God would make the Parson, a Priest to
her at that day: which she believing God Almighties goodness to be such, as that
he did hear her prayers: the Marquess fell into such a fit of laughter, and
thence into such expressions of admiration, that I never saw any man so
transported between such extremes, in my life, till at the last they both ended
in pity, and commiseration, which wrought in the Marquess this effect, and to
the poor woman this intended advantage: The Marquess gave her 10. pieces of old
gold (which so glistered in the woman's eye, that it would have been both a
loss to her self, and an undervaluation to her Benefactor to have taken them
for Angels) telling her that if she would go with him to Raglan, and spend the
remainder of her days with him, she should be welcome, and there enjoy the
means of bringing her thither, where now she had but a little way to go,
meaning Heaven, and that she should want for nothing, neither whilst he lived
nor afterward, and if there were any friends of hers that were poor, she
should give that 10. pounds amongst them, and she should have more: the woman
fell a crying, saying, over, and over again, constantly, God had sent him, God
had sent him; he was a good man. And so she departed, resolving to go as soon
as possible, toward Raglan: the next news that we could hear in the morning,
was, that the poor woman was dead. Whereupon the Marquess excessively grieved
and wept: all concluding that she dyed with excess of joy; whereat the Marquess
said thus unto us. If this poor soul died for joy, that she should come into a
place, where she might serve God: how joyfully, will she serve him, where she
comes into a place, when she shall never die.

APOPHTH. 18.
ON our way, we were told, that we should come by a place which was famous for
miracle, which the tradition of those parts reports, to have been wrought,
occasioned upon St. David's preaching unto 3000. people: who that he might the
better be heard: the ground it is said, to rise up, in a round knob; whereupon
St. David pitched his Cross, whereon he leaned, whilst he was preaching; which
Cross, was yet standing, with some words and letters, which time had made
unlegible, and that St. David had caused a Church, to be erected in that place,
as a memorial of so great a miracle; this Relation made the Marquess very
desirous, to view the place, the Church and the Cross; and standing in the
Churchyard, every man endeavoring to make something of the obliterated
superscription, and no man could, for there were only these worn pieces of
Characters to be seen, viz. Crx. xti. dd. and a piece of an S. which my Lord
presently read it Crux Christi Davidis, which we all wondering, that no man
could find it out, it afterward appearing to be so plain. He told us, Look you
now, I without my spectacles and ill eyes could read it sooner then all you,
that needed none, and had good eyes; it is not a good eye, but a good Faith,
that attaines to the knowledge of such things, whilst you pore so much upon the
like, you loose the meaning, now I will tell you, how I came to find it out: I
considered what had been told me, with the help whereof, I came to understand
what the words might signify, so that in this, I am sure tradition was a
means to help me, to the true understanding of the Scripture; leaving the
place, as we were going along by the Churchyard Rail, there was an old woman
naked as ever she was borne, who kept her Hermitage between the roots of an
overgrown hallow Tree, she was the most lamentable spectacle of mortality that
ever eyes beheld; her eyes as hallow as a dead man's scull, and her head as
bare, nothing but skin and bone, her breasts hanging down like two old lethern
pockets, and her belly like a satchel, her tawney skin, looking rather as if it
had been loose Garments to the bones; then confines to any flesh and blood; In
a word, it frightened us all, only the Marquess was in love with her,
protesting That he never saw a sight that did him so much good, saying, how
happy were it for a man that is going to bed to his grave, to be first wedded
to this Woman.

APOPHTH. 19.
THe Earl of Glomorgan, (the Marquess of Worcesters eldest Son) accompanied
with diverse Officers, Knights, and Gentlemen of high rank and quality, all of
them of the red letter, as they were on their journey for Ireland, quartered in
the Town of Carnavon (a Sea Town) in North Wales, where they were entertained
with discourse at their Table, by some of the Gentlemen of the Country, which
informed them, of the fulfilling of an old Welsh Prophecy, at that very time
and place, which was, viz, That there should come a Mag-pie and build her nest
in the Crown, then should come a Jack-daw, and beat away the Mag-pie; and after
that, there should come a Buzzard, that should beat away the Jack-daw; and then
there should be seen no Crown but that of thorns, upon the Kings head; at last
there should come a band of men from a far Country, and take away the
thorns, and then the Crown should appear again: this they said was (thus)
hitherto accomplished. viz. over the gate of Carnarvon Castle, there was the
Picture of King Edward 1. in full proportion, with a Crown upon his head; there
did come a Mag-pie, who did build her neast in the said Kings Crown, and a
Jack-daw did beat away the Mag-pie, and the Buzzard the Jack-daw: this (said
the Townsmen) we assure your Honor to be true, and all our Townsmen have
observed it; whereupon the Earl of Glamorgan replied, why may not we be that
band of men, that shall take away these thorns, from off the Kings head, first
in type, and then in substance; we come far enough off, and thereupon, all
concluded themselves to be the men; in order whereunto, they all resolved, that
as soon as ever they had filled their bellies, they would satisfy their eyes,
with the sight, as well as their ears, with the Relation, and lend their
helping hands to alter the figure. Dinner being ended, they all went to the
Castle gate, being come, there they beheld the sight, the neast being
disordered, with the fightings of the Combatants, the materials made such a
mournful aspect, as if they had been artificially pleated upon the Kings head,
which made Sir Vinian Moleneus say, that he never beheld a sadder spectacle in
all his life. The Earl of Glamorgan could not endure the sight, but streightway
Commanded the neast to be pulled down, which was done accordingly, and being
thrown down, they found the materials of the neast to be such, as wherewith
never any bird did build her neast, viz. with white thorn, which for a
memorandum or rarity, every one of them, stuck a thorn in his Hat-band, and
wore it.

This story was related to the Marquess of Worcester, having heard it, after
some pawse, he asked those about him, what is the nickname which the
Roundheads use to give to the Bishops? there were none about him who could
guess at his meaning; which he perceiving, said, as I take it, they used to
call the Bishops Mag-pies, whom they reproach for building their neasts in the
Crown; then came the Presbyterian Jack-dawes, and beat them out; and the next
thing that you shall see will be the Independent Buzzards, will drive them
away, and who shall come next, God knows. One with a Roman nose, made answer.
I hope my Lord, that after that these men have played their prancks
sufficiently; no man will presume to build his neast hereafter in the Crown,
but I hope there will be a knot of good fellows, that may ease the Kings head
from the pricking of those thorns, and clear the Crown from those
encumbrances; whereupon the Marquess replying, asked the party that related the
story, what manner of Crown it was, that was upon the Kings head? the Gentleman
replied, a Royal Crown. I, but I mean said the Marquess, was it an open or an
imperial Crown? the Gentleman made answer, an open Crown, O then, said the
Marquess, that was the Reason the Kings Crown was too open; had it been close
at top, with the Cross over head, such unluckie birds could never have come
there, to have built their neasts; but one thing I mislike in the story, that
after they had taken the thorns from the Kings head, they should afterward
wear them in their own Hat-bands.

APOPHTH. 20.
I Cannot (well) tell, whether it was, upon the marriage of my Lord Edward
Herbert, with the Earl Carnavons sister, or the Lord Matague, with the
Marquess of Worcesters Daughter; that there happened this merry passage, or
mock-wedding (as an echo to the voices, that were heard in Hymeneus Chapel,
between those lovely couple (think which you please) who had newly left being
wholy themselves, by being half of each other) viz. One of those two pair of
Lovers, had no sooner united two hearts in one, and had seated themselves, by
one of the too many proprieties belonging unto the honorable state of
matrimony, viz. the board, but this Tom Deputy an old bachelour, chanced to
cast his eye upon a pretty piece of waiting woman, (one of the appurtenances
to this honorable bride) he this jovial Tom (having vvhetted his wit by the
sides of the marriage bovvle) fixes upon (being enabled sufficiently thereby to
follovv any humor) as a fit subject to make their Ladyships some sport, which
happened to be so suitable to the occasion, and so well performed, that it soon
captivated the ears also, of all the masculine Nobility. (Thus encountering the
fair Bride.) Madam, you have the prittiest piece of necessity yonder, at the
side Table, that I know not how any man can be without her, that may have her
for asking, Madam will you give her me? I protest I will marry her, and fancy
my self to be a Lord, and her self a Lady: My mind to me a Kingdom is, which
shall make her a sufficient jointure. Tom, Tom, (said the Marquess) such men as
you and I, whose joints are enfeebled, with the strokes of many years, must not
think to win young maids, by promising to make them joyntures of the mind;
but will you make her Deputy of Deputy-Hall? and Landlady of all the Land that
is belonging to it? and Mrs. of all the stock that is upon the Land, and Goods
that is within the house? and then, you shall hear what my Daughter, and her
woman will say unto you. With all my heart (said Tom) and all the Hoggs, and
poultry, that is about the house to boot: and she shall lie upon six
Feather-beds the first night; why then it shall be a match (said the Lady)
withal my heart. Give me your hand Madam, (says Deputy) I will have her, if
there be no more necessary evils in the World, and presently makes his
addresses to the pretty little Gentlewoman of the said Table, who had heard all
the discourse, and was persuaded then upon his approach, to answer his humor,
with a condescension at the first word, and informed, that he was an old rich
whoreson: he accosting her after this manner, this pretty moppit, now thy Lady
has given her consent, that I shall have thee, if thou say so too, we will be
in bed as soon as they, with all my heart, and thank you too, said the young
Gentlewoman) by my troth a match (said he) give me thy hand, it is done: I Will
break such a jest (this day) as I never broke in my life; but do not break your
promise (said the Gentlewoman.) What, before all this Company (said Deputy)
that were a shame. Up he goes again, to the Lady, and tells her, that they were
agreed: my Lady drank to him, upon the same condition, he pledged her, and
wished the wine might be his poison, if he did not marry her after dinner: The
Lady (willing to prefer her woman to such a fortune) held him to his word,
and required performance of his promise (giving her many and high
Commendations) Tom, went not from any part of his promise, only the time
excepted, and that in regard he meant to buy himself some wedding Clothes: the
Marquess (willing to remove that Obstacle) told him, that he thought his
Clothes would fit him: and bid him go unto his Wardrope, and take what he had
a mind to: give me your key (said Tom) it was delivered unto him; up went he,
and then came down, with his Bever Hat, satin Cloak, laid with plush, daubed
with a gold and silver lace, suite of the same, silk stockings, with roses and
Garters suitable, inside and outside, capape, all as brave, as if he carried a
Lordship on his back. The Lady Bride takes her woman aside, and dresses her in
one of her richest and new Gowns, (that should have made every day of that
week sensible of an exchange) with all things answerable thereunto: not without
some store of slight Jewels, and brings her down, as glorious, as the morn,
that breaks from the eastern hill, and chases night away, they look upon one
another, and all upon them both. Tom cries out, I had best be in good earnest,
said my Lady, I thought you had been in sober sadness, neither (Madam) said the
new Bridegroom and old Tom, I hope (said the Lady) you will not make me take
all this pains for nothing; no by no means (says he) if ever we repent, we
will sell our fine Clothes, and buy Cattle. It is better being a Lord for a
week, then a slave for ever. Come thy ways; happy is the woing, that is not
long a doing: married they were, in the greatest pomp and Ceremony; and the
Queen of beauty, took delight, in loosing the eyes of the vulgar, which by this
time, were altogether fixed on the Lady of the May. Tom acted his scene of
mirth in the Hall, which proved to be a thing of that convenience, as if it had
been an act of some set policy, to keep the crowd out of the parlour, that the
Masquers might have room enough to dance in, at last when the Masque was
ended, and time had brought in Supper, the Cushine led the dance, out of the
parlour, into the Hall, and saluted the old-new-made Bridegroom, and his Lady,
leading them into the Parlour, to a Table which was furnished, with the same
allowance that was allotted for all the Nobles, where they were soon forced
to sit down first. (Tom taking upon him as much as they could give him.) In
fine, Supper being ended, the Marquess of Worcester asked the Lady Bride, if
she had a hundred pounds about her: she answered, no my Lord, but I can send
for as much, I pray do, (said the Marquess) but it must be all in gold; she
sent for it, and presented it to her Father, who pulled out another purse of an
hundred pieces, and put the two hundred pieces in the Basin, saying, Madam, if
you do not give earnest, Deputy will tell you, in the morning, that he married
your woman but in jest: Whereupon, some gave fifty, others forty, some gave
twenty, others ten: the least gave five pieces, who sat at the Table in all,
700 l. The Apparel and other gifts, amounting to no less a value, then one
thousand pounds, which so transported the old man, that he protested, that now
he was in the humor, he would marry all the waiting Gentlewomen they had. One
every day in the week, as long as the wedding lasted: my Lord Marquess
replied, I but Tom, you have left out one thing that you should have said, viz.
at this rate. Not to be too tedious, the man, what with bounty, and what
with that, which was as free to every man, as was their purses unto him,
which was good wine, the man was not himself, when he should have gone to bed
to another, which being related to my Lord, his Lordship took an occasion, to
tell the Company, the story of the beggar, who was made believe, he did but
dream of the happiness, that was really acted; and thereupon, the Marquess was
desirous, to make experiment whether it could be related in the person of old
Thomas: in order whereunto, he gave Command, that my Friend Thomas, should be
disrobed of his next wedding Garment, the rest of his fine Clothes taken from
him, and himself carried unto his old Lodging in the Porters Lodge, and his
wife to respit the solemnization of the Marriage Bed, until his comportment
should deserve so fair an admission: which was done accordingly, the next
morning made the experiment to answer the height of all their expectations; for
news was brought unto the Marquess, (all the rest of the Lords and Ladies
standing by) that Tom took all yesterdayes work but for a dream, or at least,
seemed to do so, to humor the fancy. I should be endless, if I should relate
unto you, the sport that this fellow made. To conclude, the Marquess called
them both before him, and delivered unto them the money, with many good
exhortations to them both, thus moralizing upon the premises, viz. That which
was first in intention, is oftentimes, both with God, and man, the last in
execution: as for example, God had before all Worlds, determined, to show his
love to mankind, by wedding his only Son to his Church; so that thus much
we have gained already, viz. That the Marriage, that was made in Paradise,
between Adam and Eve, though it was the first in time, yet it was but
secondary, to the first intention; and he that said, before Abraham was, I am:
was also, before Adam was, and though the first Marriage, was but a type of the
second, yet the second, (according to the foresaid intention) was an antecedent
to the first. God, who having an intention, to wed his Son to his beloved
spouse, the Church: gave way to this type or figure, or (to bring the
similitude a little homer) mock-wedding, which was between Adam and Eve, whom
to make appear more worthy and glorious, in the eyes of his beloved, and all
other Creatures, he arrayed with full Majesty, and the Robe of righteousness
his mercy (the Lady and Empress of all the glorious attributes of God) arrai^
this type and figure of his Church, with the Robe of innocence, and gives thom
both a large proportion of his grace. These blessings, Adam (by tasting the
forbidden fruit) lost his Paradise and slept in death.

Gentlemen. I will not make any application hereof, least I may seem to
mistrust your wisdoms, but I have nothing to say to the Woman.

APOPHTH. 21.
THe Marquess of Worcester, calling for a Glass of Claret Wine, it was told
him by his Physician, that Claret Wine was naught for his Gout: What my old
Friend, Claret, nay give it me (said the Marquess) in spite of all Physicians
and their Books, it never shall be said, that I forsook my Friend for mine
Enemy.

APOPHTH. 22.
DUring the time of the siege of Raglan, there came a Musket Bullet in at the
vvindow of the withdrawing room (where my Lord was used to entertain his
Friends, with his pleasant discourses after dinners and suppers) which glancing
upon a little marble pillar of the vvindow, and from thence, hit the Marquess
upon the side of his head; and fell down flatted upon the Table, which breaking
the pillar in pieces, it made such a noise in the room, that the Countess of
Glamorgan (who stood in the same vvindow) ran away, as if the house had been
falling down upon her head: crying out, O Lord, O Lord, but finding her self
more afraid then hurt: she returned back again, no less excusing her (as she
was pleased to call it) rudeness to her Father; then acknowledging her fears
to all the Company: to whom the Marquess said, Daughter, you had reason to run
away, when your Father was knocked on the head: and pawsing some while, and
turning the flatted bullet round with his finger, he further said, Gentlemen.
Those who had a mind to flatter me, were wont to tell me, that I had a good
Headpeece in my younger days; but if I do not flatter my self, I think I have
a good Head-peece, in my old age, or else it would not have been Musket-proofe.

APOPHTH. 23.
ONe was telling the Marquess, how strangely I escaped a shot, by the Bar of
a vvindow (looking out into the Leager) as thus: standing in a vvindow of the
Castle, there came a Musket-bullet, and hit full against the edge of an Iron
Bar of a Chamber vvindow, so that it parted the bullet in two, the bar
expatiating it self (by degrees) toward the middle; one half of the bullet
flew by me, on the one side, and the other half on the other side, so that (by
Gods providence) I had no hurt: the Marquess hearing this, asked me, in what
Chamber it was, I told him, his Lordship said, as I remember, the window was
cross bard, and you will never believe me, how safe it is, to stand before the
Cross, when you face your Enemy.

APOPHTH. 24.
THe Marquess of Worcester, was always wont (toward his later times) to dine
and sup, by himself, and being asked the Reason (by one who thought he might be
so bold) and told that it would be more delightful, and cheerful to him, then
to dine and sup by himself; he made answer, That he knew not what delight any
man could take, to show himself mortal. The Inquisitor made answer, that every
man did know, and believe that he did eat, and therefore he did not appear
less mortal, by appearing so mortal: My LORD replied, Every man knows and
believes, that I empty, as well as fill, my body: yet it is not necessary, that
I express that mortality, but rather seek out privacie: The party that
broached the Discourse, further said: My LORD, it is the maine occasion of
humane society, and if humane society were debarred of that occasion of
complacence; mirth would have no room to dance, according to the old Proverb,
it is merry in Hall, when beards wagge all. O (said the MARQUESS,) SOLOMON was
a wise man, but he appropriated music to a Banquet of wine: and not to a Table
filled with the mangled flesh, and Carkesses of so many slain Creatures: that
should rather put us in mind of our own mortality, and sins, (seeing our
lives are necessitated thereby, to be repaired by the death of so many Martyrs)
and the Heathens supposed, their Gods to drink wine, but never to eat any
meat.

APOPHTH. 25.
THere was a great man in the KINGS Army, between whom and the house of Raglan,
there was (at that time) animosity. The Marquess of WGRCESTER had heard, that
this party should cast a dubious saying, (as the case then stood) viz. That he,
intended to take RAGLAN in his way, and was so far as good as his word as
that he marched into the Park, and there drew up his men, and faced the Castle;
whereupon, the line was manned and Command was given, that none should be
suffered to come near the line (within such a distance) which Command was so
observed, that some of the Officers of the Army (approaching within the place
prohibited) the Centry bid stand: they did not, the Centry called upon them
again, to stand: they refused, the Lieutenant called upon the Centry to give
fire: the Centry (preferring the knowledge of his Friends before his Duty to
his Officer, did not give fire; but swore, he would give fire if they did not
stand: whereupon, one of them told him, that it was such a General, and
wondered, that the Officer would bid the Soldier give fire upon him: the
General forthwith, coming to the Drawbridge, desired to speak with the Lord
CHARLES: whom he no sooner saluted, but required satisfaction for the affront;
he was desired to come into the Castle, and told that the matter should be
examined before him, and if any affront were given, he should receive
satisfaction: whereupon, being come within the Castle, the Lieutenant was sent
for, who told the General, that though he knew him to be the General, yet (as a
Soldier,) he was not to take any notice of him, until such time as he had
declared himself, which when he did, he respected him accordingly: furthermore,
telling him, that he had been an old Soldier, and that he had in other parts,
seen rewards given unto Soldiers (who stood Centry) for firing upon their
General, having the like occasions, but never knew it a fault before. All this
would not serve turn, the General said he was affronted, and must have
satisfaction, requiring my LORD to call a Council of War, and to do him
justice, and so took his leave, and went his way. The Marquess of WORCESTER
sleeping upon his bed all this while, and not dreaming of any of all this that
had happened in the interim, hearing the whole Relation, he asked all his
Officers, whether or no the Lieutenant had offended? they all answered no, and
commended him, for what he had done: then said the Marquess, This is but a
pretense, they have a mind to quarrel with us: If ye should call a Council of
War, and acquit him: that is it that they desire, and thence they would
ground their quarrel, and if ye should inflict any punishment upon him, to give
them satisfaction, that were baseness and injustice: therefore I will have it
thus, send a Guard with him, to the General, of such Soldiers as are able to
witness the truth, and let him try him at his Council of War, and see what
Law he has for it, and so we shall break the neck of the quarrel: and so said
the Lieutenant, I shall hang by the neck for my labor: whereat the Marquess
replied, What friends have thou in the Garrison? The Lieutenant made answer, I
have a Wife and a Daughter; then said the Marquess with some vehemence, I
protest unto thee, if they hang thee, I Will marry thy wise, and provide for thy
Daughter: The Lieutenant replied, I had rather you would marry my Daughter, and
provide for me. I protest, said the Marquess, so I will, I will marry thy
Daughter, and I will provide for thee -- an honorable grave, but you shall be
hanged first. My Lord, said the Lieutenant, shall I bespeake my grave? Thou
shall, said the Marquess, then said the Lieurenant, I will be laid in the
vault in Raglan Church, between your Father, and your Grandfather, and I pray
God I may be hanged before I see you again: and so flung out of the room,
leaving my LORD in the merriest vain, that ever I saw him: who remembering
himself, sent him five pieces to bear his Charges. The Lieutenant being
brought to the General, to Monmouth: The General dismissed him of his Guard,
and sent him to Hereford, with an Oath at his heels. that he would hang him,
if there were no more men in England.

Then the Lieutenant cried out, this makes for us, I do but think how finely, I
shall lie between the two old EARLS; and how finely the old EARL will lie
between my Daughters two young legs. The particulars hereof, being brought to
the Marquess, the Marquess was not a little perplexed, between fear of having
his new Mistress, and loosing his old Friend: which he had run himself into,
between jest, and earnest: The time was come, that the Marquess was not so
much merrier then we, heretofore; but we were as much merry as he, upon the
return of this news. But the greatest sport of all, was, concerning the
hopeful Lady Marquess, who was ever and anon, inquiring and asking many
questions, concerning the Marquess, whom she never saw) what manner of man he
was? how old? whether he went with a staff or no? what was the reason he kept
his Chamber so much, and did not come abroad some times? what Diseases he had?
and how long ago it was since his Lady dyed? with many other necessary
questions to be asked, by a woman in her condition: sport enough there was for
both the Garrisons, Raglan and Hereford: nevertheless, it stood the Marquess
upon, to be sollicitous in the business, being sore pressed, between two strong
passions, love and pity, Me he sends to solicit the business, with
instructions; whose telling me (never so often) that it was no laughing matter,
could not make me forbear laughing. But having taken my leave, his Lordship
called me back again, and with a loud and angry voice said to me, tell the
General, that if he hang my Lieutenant, I Will hang the Centry, for not giving
fire upon him when he was bid: whereupon I said unto his Lordship, what does he
care how many you hang? God bless us all (said the Marquess) if he neither
cares who he hangs, [of the Kings party] nor who other folks hang, for ought I
know, he cares not, and they were all hanged. So taking my second leave of the
Marquess, and then my humble leave of the Lady Elizabeth, who fearing nothing
more but that I would prove too good a Sollicitour for her good, I went to
Hereford, and made some sport there, and so brought home the Lieutenant to his
Wife and Daughter, who ever after was called my Lady Marquess.

APOPHTH. 26.
THe Marquess would often say, That all the inconveniences, that the frailty
of humane nature, was incident to fall into, ever happened, through the want of
this consideration, had, at the end of every action, before ever we
enterprized, a beginning, viz. What then.

APOPHTH. 27.
HE was wont to say, That a plain dealing Friend, whose friendly Council, was
requited with choler, and disgust, was like a turfe, that (whilst a man
bestowed breath upon it to inliven it) returns thanks to the well-willer* by
spitting fire in his face.

APOPHTH. 28.
WE were talking of an old drunken fellow, who (having used his body to
disorder, in drinking all his life time, and at last giving it over) presently
dyed. O [said the Marquess] if you take a brand out of the fire, that is
thoroughly burnt, it will fall in pieces; but if you let it lie there still, it
may remain a pretty while, before it turn to ashes.

APOPHTH. 29.
THe Marquess was a very devout man, and used prayer very much, and you should
never see his closet door open, but you might perceive he had been weeping,
which he would endeavor to conceal, by wiping his eyes; but he could never
wipe away either the swelling, or the redness [as it was commonly observed by
all the Servants, that had nearest relation to him, and indeed to all those,
who had any familiarity with him] for after dinner, he admitted all Gentlemen
into his presence, whom he would constantly entertain with a Chapter either out
of the book of patience, or else out of Derxelius upon eternity, or out of an
excellent Manuscript called, The love of God, which had 100. Chapters all upon
that Subject, which he would read with such devotion, that oftentimes his
tears would overthrow their banks, which I having observed to be so
frequently performed told him, I thought it did him much hurt. No [said the
Marquess] This issue of the soul must not be stopped, if you knew but what a
fire I have to quench, you would rather wish me to provide more water. Have you
not such a saying in Scripture, that they who sow in tears shall reap in joy?
I wish that I could so weep, all my life, that I might laugh in death, and
sing in Heaven, and I were a happy man.

A^OPHTH. XXX.
I Was walking one day with his Lordship in a private walk that was about the
round Tower: and there we spied where a bird had made her nest, whom we
disturbed from hatching her young ones and sitting upon her eggs: which act of
nature my Lord compared unto the manner of the creation; for said he, God
having made his nest the world, and brought forth his young at first
unperfected, did by his spirit incubare and by his wings of providence spread
over them he gave them life and power, and by his word he brake the shel, et
sic pullulavit mundum.

APOPHTH. XXXI.
WE were talking upon occasion of Christ's miracles; viz of his turning water
into wine, and of the five loaves and two fishes, why (said the Marquess)
these miracles he works amongst us every day; but that they are so ordinary
unto us that we take no notice of them: God sends rain upon the earth: this
water gets up into the vine: and the sap of the vine-tree, God turns into
wine. And as few grains of Corn, as will make five louves (being sowed in the
earth) will multiply, and increase to such advantage as will feed 5000 with
bread; and two fishes will bring forth so many fishes, as will suffice so many
mouths.

APOPHTH. XXXII.
WE were discoursing before him, concerning the error of the Manichees, who
held that there were two causes of heaven and earth, viz. that the good and
white God, made the heaven and man, from the middle upward: and the black and
evil God, was the efficient cause of the earth, and of man, from the middle
downward. That was but a foolish Conceit (said the Marquess:) so Gods power and
wisdom is shown and seen, as well in an Ant, as in an Elephant: as well in a
worm as in an angel: so his Godhead and might appears, as well in the earth,
as in the heavens: but methinks it had been (on my conceit) a pretty fancy,
and not so far from truth or reason, if they had held, that heaven and earth
had been man and wife, or male and female: seeing the heaven was made as the
male part of the world, by whose influence, motion and dewes the earth as the
female part thereof (out of her womb) brings forth all necessary and living
Creatures.

APOPHTH. XXXIII.
THe Marquess, was of a disposition, allways inclining to charitable
constructions: which suffered him to want excuses or some cloak or other to
throw over any man's imperfection. There was a Gentleman of high desert, who
chanced in the Marquesses hearing to come under the lash of some men's Censures:
Alas Gentleman said the Marquis, will you have Corn to grow without chafe? or
light to be without its adjoining darkness? or the sweetest honey without
unsavory wax? or the pleasant wines or liquors, without their lees and dreggs?
as soon shall corn grow without chafe, as a man of his parts shall be free
from vain glory: worthless chafe keeps the corn warm, and vain glory fires
him to all those brave achievements: if you set a man on an horse let him have
his spurrs.

APOPHTH. XXXIV.
THe Marquis was one day reading us a Lecture of patience in our adversity:
among the rest of those witty sayings which came from him, he told us, that
there was nothing so bad but was good for something, for (said he) if there
were no silence, there would be no music; for the sudden stops that are in
music, add to the grace and perfection of the Art: ignorance, is a spur to
knowledge: darkness, a pavilion to the Almighty: a Cabin or drawn Chamber, for
us to sleep in a Dungeon for the Judge to punish his Delinquents, and a foil
for the Painter to make his shadows: so are afflictions, good for our
instructions; and adversities for our amendments.

APOPHTH. XXXV.
THere was an old rich Usurer and fornicator: who had a plot upon the body and
estate, of a handsome young Widow and an inheritrix of an Estate, which this
old miser thought, rather convenient, then great enough for him: wherefore
having a mind, rather to enjoy, then have her: and knowing that she was in
debt, courted her with offering to leave her moneys, as an argument of his
affection, which she accepted of, offering to bind her Estate for the
repayment: hoping that the tie of his person, would be a freedom of her Estate:
thus with his money, he got his foot into her Estate, and by a false promise
stepped into her bed as often as he had a mind to lie doubly, six years he
stav'd her off, who bedstav'd him in, within her own sleeping-room: but at
last, that she might be sure of the substance: she urged him to the ceremony,
and that so much, that at last he gave her a flat denial; whereupon she denies
him the former familiarity: he enters upon her Estate, and answers the kindness
of her admittance of him into her own bed, with the discourse, of turning her
out of her own doors: she makes the Marquis her friend, declaring unto him how
much she had been abused by him: and withal, that she was willing to pay him
his money, but not the use of it, as he required: who thereby thought that he
had struck her deep enough, for ever obtaining a recovery: the Marquess sent
for this whoreson, and offered himself a mediator: the man was unwilling to
that; yet knew not (well) how to deny him: which the Marquess perceiving,
called him aside, and bid him get her to be bound with him in a bond of 500
pound, to stand to such an award as he should make between them: promising him
faithfully, that he would award him use upon use. O my Lord: if you do so, I
shall be much obliged to your honor, and will be bound with all my heart: and
will send you a couple of the bravest colts, and of your Lordships own breed,
as any is in the Country: well, well, said the Marquess, let it be so then. All
was done accordingly; and when the business was examined, and found to be as
was before related, the Marquess made this award, viz. Sir, said he to the man,
she has had the use of your money so long, and you have had the use of her
body so long: and there is use upon use; so I have allowed you what I promised;
whereupon the poor man, looked, as if he would have sunk down dead in the place;
which the Marquess perceiving, asked, why would you have both your principal
and your interest? And reason good my Lord, said the fellow, why then, you shall
have both, (said the Marquess) here take her; for if you will not take both in
her, you shall take neither without her; for I award you, either to marry her
forthwith, or else to loose both your principal and interest: could you have
so little conscience, as to take so much consideration for the use of a little
pie^e, and allow no consideration, both for the use and abuse of such a
creature as this, whose preferment you have marred: whose credit you have taken
away: and whose fortunes you (thus) go about to deprive her, and her children
of? can you think a bond made before a Scrivener, and signed by such Witnesses,
such a strong tie on your part? and do you think that such an obligation made
to her, before such a public not ary as God Almighty: and witnessed by men and
Angels, should be no tie on her behalf? go, go, take her to you, and marry her,
and let me hear no more of it; for if I do, you shall soon hear from me. The
man being by this time schooled into some conformity, protested unto the
Marquess, that if she had proved with child, he would have married her. O (said
the Marquess) if that be all, I Will run a hazard, if she brings you no children:
you shall pay me my two colts, but at the day of the birth of your first child.
And thereupon he dismissed them who were soon after married.

APOPHTH. XXXVI.
IT was ordinary with the Marquess, to entertain discourse with every man,
according to the condition and profession he was of: And most commonly from the
beginning of his discourse, you should never know what the end would be; Taking
delight to deceive the expectation of his auditor. Upon a time there was
presented unto him a Lawyer, and he was informed before hand, how excellent a
man he was in his profession. The Marquess thought with himself, how he might
pose him, and being brought in with other Gentlemen. After they had dined, he
was presented unto the Marquess: Sir, (said the Marquess,) I have received a
very good Character of you: they say, you are very learned in the Law: I would
very fain ask you one question, any thing my Lord, said the Lawyer, that lies
within my poor ability. I pray (said the Marquess,) who was the first man that
ever had a Dedimus potestatem granted unto him? The Lawyer was so confounded,
that he knew not what to say, for a long time: at last he made a long and
learned discourse, concerning the original of that writ. And the Marquess gave
him the hearing, but when he had done, He told him, that he came far short of
the Origin thereof. For Adam was the first that ever had plenitudinem
potestatis granted unto him, viz. when God gave him power to subdue the earth,
and to have Dominion over every living creature, the Lawyer thankt his
Lordship, and told him, that he thought the Law, had not been so ancient.
Ancient (said the Marquess) there was the beginning of all your Courts of
Justice. But I see you are but a common Lawyer that cannot derive your pedigree
from thence.

APOPHTH. XXXVII.
THere was a new married couple, presented before the Marquess: the Bride a
goodly, proper woman, her face well featured, an excellent eye she had; but was
pitiful dis-figured with the small pox: the Marquess looking much upon her,
and saying nothing to her a long while: we all know that silence was in labor
for some notable production. At last, he advances toward the young Bride, and
asked her, Gentlewoman, do you know, why it is said that God Almighty created
man, and builded woman? the Gentlewoman somewhat out of countenance answered,
no indeed my Lord: the Marquess asked her again, do you know why you (women)
are called housewives? I think my Lord, said the Bride, because good wives
should keep at home, and not gad abroad. It is a good answer (said the
Marquess) but not the right: for women may be bad wives at home as well as
abroad: or else they would never scold their husbands out of doors. The answer
to my first question is: woman is not said to be made, as Adam was, which only
signifies plain work; but to be built, which signifies curiosity, and
contrivance: and therefore as to my second question; a woman is called a
housewife, because she is a house, out of which all the Royal Families of Kings
and Emperors, derive their extract; nether are you only compared unto houses,
but unto Cities Kingdoms, Churches and Commonwealths: but do you know what
house you are like? no indeed my Lord, said the Bride, why then I Will tell you,
when God builded the first woman, he made her his Storehouse, wherein he had
laid up all the race of Mankind, wherewith he replenished the whole earth; but
I must tell you Lady, God Almighty did not make you Coaches nor Wagons, that
you should be always gadding abroad: whereat the Bridegroom made answer, my
Lord, I thank you for this, I hope my wife will remember it; my Lord, said the
young Bride, you will read such a lecture to my husband, that he will never let
me go abroad; O Lady (said the Marq.) he must not debar you of that liberty,
provided that you never go abroad but when you go out like the snaile, who
seldom stirs abroad, but whilst that blessing (the dew of heaven) is upon her
earth, that she may gather benefit, and by her greatest care, and equal
management still carries her house upon her back: O my Lord (said she) If I
should go abroad like the snaile, I should carry a house upon my back, and
horns in my forehead; No Lady, (said the Marquess) though she forkes at you,
yet they are no horns: the snaile can soon draw them in if you touch them,
which no horned creature can perform; but she carries them in her head, to
teach you what you should provide, and bear in your mind, against you go to
haymaking: but the Marquess fearing that he had a little displeased her, he
thought to make her amends by this following discourse. Sir, (said he, to the
new Bridegroom) you know I have compared your wife unto a building, and I must
commend your choice; for (said he, alluding unto her disfugurement) a goodly
house, must not be chosen by the smoothness or whiteness of the wall: for such
a one, may be but a dairy-house, or a milk-house: nor according to the colors
or paintings of the outside, for such a one may be but a Tavern or an
Alehouse: but if I see a house that is lofty, and stately built, and have
fair windows, though the outside be but ruffcast, yet I am sure, there are
goodly rooms within. And so both parties were well pleased.

APOPHTH. XXXVIII.
IT was told the Marquess, that such a Roman Catholic being sorely pressed to
take the oath of supremacy, and being acquainted with another Gentleman, who
was a Protestant, and so like unto him, that you could hardly distinguish them,
whilst they were together, much less asunder: this Imago sui, as if nature had
chosen him to be his representative, as the others part, (the right stone being
pulled out, and a Counterfeit set in the right ring) and what with the likeness
of his countenance, and the identity of apparel, he past for current, which
jest my Roman thought so good, that he must needs brag of it to the Marquess;
but the Marquess no way liked it, asking him, would you put another upon that
which you would not do your self? what if the Devil (you two being so like one
another) should mistake you for him? I assure you he would go near to mar
the conceit.

APOPHTH. XXXIX.
THe Marquess had an old Servant, one Redman; this man was so much his
Lordships, that in all his lifetime (which for the most part was spent in his
Lordships service) he was never heard to contradict his Lord in his opinion;
but to every thing that his Lord should say, (right or wrong) he still would
answer his Lord, I an't like your Lordship. It happened that upon a time when
the Marquis was much divided within himself, and rackt by Council, that this
Redman being in the Room, the Marquess chanced to ask Redman his opinion,
(declaring his own) old Redman constant to his old resolution, answered his
Lordship according to his old wont; I an't like your Lordship; whereupon one
that was by, who at that time was contrary to the Marquis in his opinion, and
not a little angry with this Redmans cukcow play, was thus bold with his
Lordship, my Lord you have a man here, that I dare say, should your Lordship
say unto him, well Redman, thou know how I have served God all my life, and
now thou see how he deals with me at last, in delivering me up into mine
enemies hands: in troth now Redman, we will even change Masters, and serve the
Devil, and see what good that will do us; and if Redman do not answer you, I
an't like your Lordship I durst be hanged; whereat the Marquess replied no no,
I do not think so: would thou Redman? Redman either not hearing well what had
been said, or else, more to follow his own Vote, then to take off Objections,
answered, ant' like your Lordship, I would even take that course, and let them
all say what they would. The next day after the Castle was to be surrendered,
and the Marquess had Commanded, that word should be brought him, when the
General was entered the Castle, that he might meet him in the Hall, the General
being entered the outward gate, this Redman came unto his Lord, and told him,
An't like your Lordship, Sir Thomas is entered the Castle. The Marquess being
disposed to express an undauntedness in that revolution of affairs, did in
this merriment of behavior at that very instant reply. Redman (says he, as he
was going to meet the General) this is the end of all flatterers, to flatter
us whilst we are in prosteritie, and then to jeer us as soon as ever we come
into adversity. I protest my Lord, I speak, said Redman, really; he is coming.
O Redman (said the Marquess) if thou speak really, thou would never make a
question, whether it like me or no. Redman replied with a greater vehemence
then before, I protest before God, an't like your Lordship, it is true. Look
you, (said the Marquess) Sir Thomas is no sooner entered the castle but he is
turned protestant, and by this we could see through the window, the General
with all his officers entering the outward Court, as if a flood-gate had been
let open: which the Marquess perceiving asked Redman, how be thought that that
could like him, and leaning toward me, whom he (then) leand upon as the
Genenerall was advancing toward him, he said these words in my ear, let these
men say what they will; and do what they can, we shall never be undone till we
be damned: which was a saying which he often used when he heard of any man's
undoing.

APOPHTH. XL.
There was a very ingenious man, and a good artist, one Duckworth the Queens
servant and Cabinet-maker this man falling low under the Common calamity, I
found in Oxford somewhat impoverished, whom I brought along with me to Raglan;
supposing there might be some use made of him: he was no sooner there, but
beholding the Cutting down of certain trees, which stood near unto the Garrison,
and might be a shelter to the besiegers standing by some woodmen, who were
selling down a maple-tree, the hatchet of one of the fellers chanced to strike
out a chip of the excrescency thereof; which being naturally curld and
singularly various both in shape and colors, this Duckworth takes it up in
his hand, saying, I will make my Lord Marquess the finest Tobacco-box that
ever he had in his life, and so did, and presented it unto his Lordship. The
Marquess knew not whether it was wood or marble, nor any man else, nor what it
was made of; all admire it; at last being told the particulars, the Marquess
when he had admired it sufficiently, gave him a piece, Duckworth told him that
it was too much in regard that his Lordship found the Materials; what a
grateful man is this (said the Marquess) to acknowledge a benefit which would
have been nothing worth without his labor? and thereupon he began (as his
custom was, to apply every thing to some divine and heavenly meditation) God
Almighty gives every man a stock or measure of grace, which he must polish and
improve by his own endeavors, for (Sir) had you brought me my chip as you
found it, I would not have given you thanks.

APOPHTH. XLI.
NEver was there a noble house so pulled down by Prophesies, ushered into its
ruin by predictions, and so laid hold upon by signs and tokens; I shall tell
you no more but what I have both read and seen long before the fall of that
proud fabric, which had the honor to fall the last of any that stood upon the
terms of honor. There was an old book of Prophesies which was presented to
the Marquess, because it so much concerned Raglan Castle. Wherein there were
these predictions, viz. That there should come an Earl that should first build
a white gate before the Castle-house, and after that should begin to build a
red one, but before that red one should be finished, there should be Wars over
all the Land, this was fulfilled in the Marquesses time, who having built the
one, and begun the other by reason of the distractions of the time, left the
later work unfinished; some standing requested his Lordship to make haste to
finish his red Gate House, because we should have no quiet until that were up.
Hark ye said the Marquess, none shall prophecy so much money out of my purse
in such times as these, besides the prophet does not say until, but before, and
for ought I know, if I should make haste with that building, I should hasten
the War to my own door; for the Prophet says, that before the red Gate House
shall be finished, there shall be Wars over all the Land; but what if I had
built neither the one nor the other, how would this Prophecy have concerned
me? O my Lord, said one, it is done, and you could not otherwise choose but do
what you did, I but (said the Marquess) I can choose whether I will believe the
Prophet.

Another Prophecy there was, that the King should lose a great battle, and
afterward fly to Raglan, the enemy should pursue him, and then should leave
the Castle, and that then the Enemy should besiedge and put fire to the
Castle-wall, which was fulfilled, for they burnt the Castle: Also of an Eagle
that should come into the Park, and be there slain, which should be a
forerunner to the destruction of that house. Which I saw literally performed,
but executed by one who heard not of the prophecy: Also of a Cloud of Bats
that should hang over the Castle a little before its demolishment, this three
days before, all the Castle beheld to their no small astonishment. Which
continued about a quarter of an hour, about twilight, so thick, that you could
not toward the middle of them, see the sky, though clear, which being shot at
with haile-shot, some of them fell down, and the rest fled away: the Marquess
being told of this, he asked what those kind of Creatures might signify? some
about him told him, that they were emblems of ruin and desolation. He asked if
they were all gone? it was told him that they were; whereupon the Marquess
asked us whether or no the Enemy had begirt us round? it was answered, that
they had: then said the Marquis; I am glad of it; for then these emblems of
ruin cannot fly a way from us, but they must fly over some of their heads.

But the strangest Prophecy of all, if you will pardon the digression, both
for signification and accomplishment, is this which I shall set down unto you in
terminis, which I read before I saw it in this book 14. years before the War,
craving pardon of the English Reader, for troubling him with so much Welsh,
whilst I intend a serene to those who understand both languages, viz.

Coronog fab-Anne a tynir I danneth
O weilod lhoygir hid a gogleth
Vnidyn Eschilth a gedwir un wynneth
A unnilth predaine a hunny a vith rheveth
Un I vienglith a vernir un angalth
Un I henaid ve lath a Bwyalth.
I shall endeavor howsoever to let you understand it, but then I must crave
pardon of my Countrymen if I do it not well.

Fabanne as it is one word signifies a baby, so that Coronog fabanne thus
taken, signifies a Crowned Baby, which made many to expect how that it should
be fulfilled in K. James his time, because he was crowned in his Cradle; but as
you make two words of it, fab which signifies a son, and Anne the proper name
of a woman, Coronog fab Anne, signifies the Crowned son of Anne; King Charles
whose two elder Brethren were never Crowned: this Crowned son is prophesied to
have his teeth pulled out of his head, or to be lead by the teeth (for as I
take it, the Welsh bears both significations) all the Kindom over, or from the
center to the uttermost circumferences thereof: This Crowned son, this Prophet
tells us, shall be at first, or in his younger years, deemed to be none of the
wisest, but in his latter years, ve lath a bwyalth, which is an expression so
copious and enigmatical, for it deciphers him and his condition several ways,
and may be taken in several kinds, for first it signifies a man that is, and as
we commonly say, a notable kil-cow, or a man that bears down all before him
with the weight of his argument and acuteness of wit, like a man that lays
about him with a battlear bearing down all before him, or else it signifies
otherwise, and the words will bear the sense as well, ve lath a Bwyalth, that
is, he shall be slain with an Ax.

APOPHTH. XLII.
THe time being come, that the prophecy of Henry of Windsor must now fit the
fatal destiny of Henry of Raglan, (like a Thunderbolt that splits downward,
from the higher to the lower branch of the same Tree) viz. that he should live
long and loose all: that Garrison had the honor to make good the rear hope
for a time, when the main body of the whole Kingdom, was quite forlorn. And in
her last fortunate and succesful sally, (like a dying taper) to make one great
blaze before she went out. In which exploit, some of her Gentlemen, were so
gallant, as to bring home, (as Trophies of her Victories) colors, which were
no sooner unshrivel'd, but they spread (together with themselves) the praises
of their takers; these being presented to the Marquess, he turned away his
face: saying, these are no natural colors: they are but borrowed, intimating
how unnatural the war was, and how soon these colors must be restored.

APOPHTH. XLIII.
THere was a young and beautiful Lady, who was showing the Marquess that the
colors that hung upon such a Tower, was one of the Curtains of her bed. To
which my Lord replied, Madam: I would you would set the little boy, (that uses
to stand behind that Curtain) on the top of that Tower. That we may see,
whether or no, he would drive away all those men with his Bow and Arrows: to
which the Lady replied, Cupid never raised a siedge in his life; but he has
taken many a strong-hold, then said the Marquess, I will tell you how you shall
make yours impregnable, how my Lord? (said the Lady,) the Marquess said unto
her, whenever you see a handsome young man be sure you shut your eyes or else
he will take the fort of your Virginity, flying in at your windows.

APOPHTH. XLIV.
THere was an old Servant of my Lords, who would needs make a young Captain,
and at last took an opportunity, to show himself an arrant Coward; this Captain
upon a time was to command a party to go out, to make a mock-sally, but as
soon as ever he came within sight of the enemy, he squatted upon his belly,
behind the refuse of an old Brick-kill, for which his behavior, he was laughed
at sufficiently, after that he came into the Castle: some there were who told
this unto the Marquess, who (being willing to bring his old Servant off, with
better credit, then he had brought off himself) told the informers, I thought I
had heard you say, that it was a mock-sally, to which they answered that it was
so, then (said the Marquess,) if it was but a mock-sally, he can be but a
mock-coward, if you had bin in earnest, it may be, he would not have played the
fool.

APOPHTH. XLV.
THere was a Roman Catholic who had bin converted to the Protestant Religion
(and giving the Marquess of Worcester a visit) the Marquess questioned him
(very seriously) concerning his revolt, and the ground of his desertion, the
convertite told him that the ground of his departure from the Church of Rome,
was, because she had departed from her self. You say very well, (said the
Marquess) but how do you prove that? to which demand the convertite made this
reply, viz. The Scriptures tell me so: whereupon the Marquess called for a
Bible, giving command it should be a Bible Cum privilegie Regis, which being
brought unto him, he said unto the Gentleman I will see whether it will tell me
any such thing, and (holding it in his hands a pretty while) at last he opened
the Bible, and held it open as long: then, he protested unto the foresaid
Gentleman, that the Bible told him no such matter, and that he believed it to
be so full of truth and sincerity, and that it respected the salvation of men's
souls so much, that if there were any such thing, it would (in charity (with
which it was so fully fraught) do no less then acquaint him also with it: to
which the Gentleman replied; my Lord, it is not the letter, cover, or paper,
that tells me so, it is the sense and meaning, I cry you mercy (said the
Marquess,) who shall be judge of that meaning, you or I? to whom the Gentleman
gave his Lordship this answer, he who comes nearest to the truth. Then (said
the Marq:) how shall we know who comes nearest the truth? we shall know that
(said the Gentleman) by the word it self; I have told you (said the Marquess)
that the word it self says nothing* then (said the Gentleman) there is a
persuasive spirit, that directs every man, and leads them into all truth, who
are seekers of her, merely for love of her self, Indeed (said the Marquess) I
have heard of such a Sect that is newly sprung up, which go under the name of
Seekers, but I had rather be on the finders side; to which the Gentleman made
answer, Seek and ye shall find; to which my Lord replied, you must have
daylight or candlelight, or else your own eyes will do you no good; the
Gentleman made answer, that Christ was so easily to be found of all that sought
him, that if we did but groap after him we should find him: I (said the
Marquess) You say well, but not when there is a light in the room: and
thereupon the Marquels entered into a large discourse, persuading the Gentleman
to return to his Mother again, whose arms were always open, ready to embrace
all that should return into her bosom, to whom the Gentleman thus spoke: my
Lord, if I should turn now, I shall be despised on all sides, by the
Protestants, because I have left them: by the Papists, because I sometimes left
them too, and they will repose no confidence in me hereafter, fearing that I
may do the like again: O (said the Marquess) if that be all, then all is
nothing, for what can any man say more to you then thus? you have been abroad,
and you are come home again.

APOPHTH. XLVI.
THe Marquess had a Daughter whose mind gave her to be a Nun, thinking to make
choice of such alover as no way regarded any bodies imperfections so the mind
was straight, the Marq; fearing that she might ground her resolutions upon this
discontent, told her, Daughter, if thou runn'st thy head into a Nunnery,
because thy shoulder is a little out, I Will strike it in with a bag of money,
that shall make thee as straight as any of thy Sisters; but if thou do wedde
thy self out of pure affection to thy Savior, I shall think my self happier in
thee, then in all my Children besides, that he thought me worthy of being
Father unto such a Child, that should dedicate her self so wholly unto Christ:
She asked her Father how much he would have given her in marriage, if she had
otherwise resolved, and should marry to his liking, telling him, that she did
not ask him that question, because she had any such thoughts in her, but that
the husband to whom she had vowed her self a spouse, should take notice of what
profers she had refused for his sake; by this means the Marq; told her not
with the least, then said she unto her Father; Sir, I am going where I shall
never see you more, nor never ask you for any thing hereafter: therefore I
beseech you to grant me this one request, which is: that the portion which you
were willing to give me, if I should marry, you will not grudge me as my dower,
to bring to such a husband, who is my Lord and Savior: the Marq; perceiving
himself caught, gets out of the gin in this manner, Daughter (said he) the
husband you talk of, will make you a very fair jointure without any portion at
all but your self, he wants no money; give him your heart, and he is satisfied.

APOPHTH. XLVII.
THe Marquess had taken a new Servant to wait upon him, who had the ill luck,
to think himself wiser then he was thought by others, in so much, that upon an
occasion, he told the Manquess, that he was not wise in such a thing, and that
if he were as the Marquess, he would do so and so, the Marq; hearing him, made
him this gentle reply, Truly if I knew where to find a Servant that were wiser
then his Master, I would give gold for such a one; but to have a Servant that
thinks himself wiser then his Master, I would not give a rush: and therefore
Sir, I pray provide for your self, for you are not for my turn, and so dismis'd
him.

APOPHTH. XLVIII.
MY Lord Herbert of Raglan (eldest Son to the Marq;) came into Raglan Castle,
attended with 40 or 50 Officers, and Commanders: and his business with his
Father being about procuring from the old man more money for the King, the L.
Herbert in his request unto his Father, (unhappily and unawares) chanced to use
the word must: which his Father (the Marquess) laying hold on, asked him, must
you? I pray take it, and threw him the keys of his Treasury, out of his
pocket: whereat his Son was wonderfully out of countenance, and abasht, (being
otherwise ever a dutiful and respectful Son to his Father) replied; Sir, the
word was out before I was aware, I do not intend to put it in force, I pray
will you put up your key again: To which the Marquess returned his Son these
words, Truly Son, I shall think my keys not safe in my pocket, whilst you have
so many Swords by your sides, nor that I have the Command of my house, whilst
you have so many Officers in it, nor that I am at my own dispose, whilst you
have so many Commanders. My Lord (replied the Son,) I do not intend that they
shall stay in the Castle, I mean they shall be gone: I pray let them (said the
Marquess,) and have a care that must do not stay behind. Whereat (after that my
Lord Herbert was gone out of the room) there were some who (as mannerly as they
could) blamed the Marquess for his too much severity to his Son, after that he
had seen him express so much of sorrow for that over slip; whereupon the
Marquess replied, Hark ye, if my Son be dejected, I can raise him when I
please; but it is a question if he should once take a head, whether I could
bring him lower when I list: Ned was not wont to use such courtship to me, and
I believe he intended a better word, for his Father; but must was for the King.

APOPHTH. XLIX.
MY Lord Herbert, after that he had sufficiently exhausted his Father, by all
the means he could possibly use, for his Majesty's relief, and had taken up
all his Fathers moneys far and near, where he could either prevail with force
or argument; he chanced to hear of a sum of money to the value of 6000l. which
the Marquess had committed to the Lord John (his Son) his care and trusty
preservation abroad; this money, my Lord Herbert happened to hear of, and
acquaints the King therewith, engaging the King in the business, and tells the
King, that if he would send for his brother the Lord John, to come unto him,
and would say but thus and thus unto him, that he would undertake, he might
have the 6000 l. the Kings occasions were then urgent (being then before
Gloucester, and hard pinched for lack of money) through My Lord Herberts
persuasion, my Lord John was sent for, came; and the business took effect, the
King promising to repay it by such a time: when time and suspicion persuaded
the Marquess to call in this money; excuses made delays for a time, but at
last all excuses being set apart, by importunity: the Marquess wished his Son
John to go and fetch the money, or else never to see his face any more; part of
which injunction the Lord John performed, but never the other. Not long after
the Lord Herbert coming to his Father, his Father received him with wonted (but
unexpected) cheerfulness: it so happened that my Lord Herbert began to excuse
himself unto his Father, concerning this business; on whom the Father bestowed
this language: Son, I pray save your self the labor, for I do not blame you at
all, neither am I angry with you; for I never trusted you with the money: I
love no man the worse for following his profession; and you have made it your
profession (all along) to deceive your Father, to help the King, but I do not
love a man that will take away another man's profession from him, and deceive
his own Father of his money, and his brother of his calling.

APOPHTH. L.
WHen it was told the Marquess that some would warrant him, that if he would,
he might be Duke of Somerset; he made them this reply: When I was Earl of
Worcester, I was well to live: since I was a Matquess I am worse by one hundred
thousand pound, and if I should be a Duke, I should be an arrant beggar:
Wherefore I had rather (if I might) go back again to my Earldome, then at this
rate keep on my pace, to the Dukedom of Sommerset.

APO. LI.
AT the beginning of this Parliament, there were certain rusticks who came unto
Raglan Castle, to search the Castle for Arms, my Lord being a Papist, the
Marquess met them at the gate, and with a stern countenance, demanded of them
what they would have: they somewhat daunted at his presence, told his Lordship
that they were come to search his house for Arms, the Marquess told them,
surely no, they were come to take the Castle, and all that was in it; they told
him not, then he asked them, why they did disarm him, if they did not intend to
take away his money, they said because he was a Recusant, the Marquess told
them, that he was a Peer of the Realm, and no convict Recusant, and therefore
the Law could not in reason take notice of any such thing, and demanded of
them, whether or no they had been in any such authority before? they answered,
no: then (said the Marquess with a loud voice) I Will make you before I go hence
-- and (as if some desperate and cautious resolution had kept back some words
which might have discovered some design before that he had brought them to the
place of execution) there making a stop, calling upon them to come along; The
fillie people amazed and full of horror hung back, and asked the Marquess,
what my Lord? what will you make us do? show your Commission (said the
Marquess) they glad it was no worse, told the Marquess that they were
satisfied, but I am not satisfied (said the Marquess) for now you are come you
shall search, if your Lordship will have us search (said the searchers) we
will, but otherwise we will take your word. O I thank you heartily (said the
Marquess) but pray come along; they followed him, but knew not what to think
on it, nor what should become of them following the Marquess, as if they had
desired that his Lordship should have shown them the Castle, rather then as if
they went with any authority to search for any Arms that were there, the
Marquess still asking them if they had a mind to search here or there, they
still answering his Lordship, no, no, my Lord, we know you mean no hurt, never
asking him which was the way to the Armoury or the like, at length the Marquess
brought them over the high bridge that archt over the moat that was between the
Castle and the great Tower, wherein the Lord Herbert had newly contrived
certain waterworks, which when the several engines and wheels were to be set a
going; much quantity of water through the hollow conveyances of the aquaeducts,
were to be let down from the top of the high Tower, which upon the first
entrance of these wonderful Asinegoes; the Marquess had given order that these
cataracts should begin to fall, which made such a fearful and hideous noise, by
reason of the hollownesse of the Tower, and the neighboring echoes of the
Castle, and the waters that were between and round them both, that there was
such a roaring, as if the mouth of hell had been wide open and all the devils
had bin conjured up, that the poor silly men stood so amazed, as if they had
been half dead, and yet they saw nothing; at last as the plot was laid, up
comes a man staring and running, crying out before he came at us, look to your
selves my masters, for the Lions are all got loose; whereupon the searchers
gave us such a loose, that they tumbled so over one another down the stairs,
that we thought one half of them had broken their neeks, never looking behind
them, till they were sure they had got out of sight of the Castle.

APO. LII.
WHen General Fairfax came into the Leaguer before Raglan, and had sent us
Propositions, wherein all the Officers and Soldiers were offered fair
conditions, but none at all for the Marquess: we thinking it a thing so
unanswerable and dishonorable in our own opinions, as to deliver it upon such
conditions, were resolved to stand it out, to the last; which resolution of
ours, begat in us an expectation of a storm; which expectation of ours, was
improved, by some intelligence which we had to that purpose: which the Marquess
having notice of, called all his Officers before him, and made this Speech unto
them.

Gentlemen, I have somewhat to say to you, which it may be you may take for a
complement; but this is no time for complement: I understand that you expect
(this night) to be stormed; wherefore I have called you before me; and do make
it my suit unto you, that rather then this storm should be raised for my sake,
only (which must be so, seeing that you are all offered large Articles for
your selves) that I may be the Jonas to be cast over board, rather then that ye
all should perish; for I have but a little old, and cold blood running in my
veins, which is not worth the effusion of so much precious and youthful
blood, as is running in yours: and therefore you shall do me a pleasure, and
your selves a benefit if you grant me my request: To which it was answered by
all, that the terms were not honorable, whereat the Marquess replied;

Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem, was the maxim of a Soldier as much as
any thing; but being denied his request, the Officers all told him, that they
would all dye to a man, but they would have like Artiles for him, as for
themselves: to which in mild terms and Princely gravity, he told them: I do
not like that way of imbalming, neither to be served up to my eternity, as a
thing newly taken out of the sowse of so many friends blood.

APO. LIII.
WHen the Garrison was surrendered and the General had entered the Castle, the
Marquess met him in the Hall, and (asking which was he) the Marquess saluted
him thus: Sir, I hear you are a man of you word, that was it that took the
Castle: otherwise, had you been never so tall a man of your hands, you should
have stayed a little while longer, before we had bid you welcome: the General
told his Lordship, that knowing him to be a man of honor, he thought himself
obliged to make that journey, on purpose to see his Lordship fairly dealt with,
according to Articles, and to be delivered into civil hands: the Marquess
replied, I thank you for your courtesy, but I wish that you had let it alone
until some other time, for there was no haste.

APO. LIVE.
AFter much Conference between the Marquess and the General, wherein many
things were requested of the General by the Marquess, and being (as he thought
himself) happy in the obtainment, his Lordship was pleased to make a merry
Petition unto the General, as he was taking his leave, viz. in the behalf of a
couple of pigeons which were wont to come to his hand, and feed out of it
constantly: in whose behalf he desired the General; that he would be pleased to
give him his protection for them, fearing the little command that he should
have over his Soldiers in that behalf, to which the General said, I am glad to
see your Lordship so merry: O (said the Marquess) you have given me no other
cause, and as hasty as you are, you shall not go, until I have told you a
story. There were two men going up Holborn in a cart to be hanged, one of them
being very merry and jocund, gave offense unto the other, who was as sad and
dejected, in so much as that the down-cast man said unto the other, I wonder
brother you can be so frolic, considering the business we are going about:
tush answered the other, thou art a fool, thou went a theeving, and never
thought what would become of thee: wherefore being all of a sudden
surpised, thou fallest into such a shaking f^t, that I am ashamed to see thee
in that condition, whereas I was resolved to be hanged, before ever I fell to
stealing, which is the reason, that (nothing happening strange or unexpected) I
go so composed unto my death. So (said the Marquess) I resolved to undergo
whatsoever (even the worst of evil) you were able to lay upon me, before ever I
took up Arms for my Sovereign; and therefore wonder not that I am so merry.

APO. LV.
THere was a Colonel (whose civility in other respects, deserves to have his
name unmentioned) who came unto the Marquess (after the Castle was delivered)
at the first as not remembering himself a Conqueror, whom the Marquess
receiving as not forgetting himself to be Lord of Raglan, until such time as
the Colonel desired reparation of certain losses which he had sustained by his
son Glamorgan, the Marquess prayed him not to call him to account for other
folks, for he had enough to do to answer for himself: hereat the Colonel clapped
his hat upon his head, and sat himself down in a chair of State, which was
upon my Lords right hand, which the Marquess observing, gently said unto one of
his servants, I pray reach him the footstool.

APO. LVI.
WHen the Marquess of Worcester was brought up to London, and was committed to
the Black-rod, he asked me, now what have they done with me? I answered, they
have committed your Lordship to the Black-rod, his Lordship presently made me
this reply: I had rather be under the Blackrod, then under a black cloud.

APO. LVII.
WHen it was told his Lordship not many hours before he dyed, that leave was
obtained by the Parliament, that he might be buried in Windsor Castle: (where
there is a peculiar for the family) within the great Chapel, and wherein
diverse of his Ancestors lies buried) with some sprightlinesse he spoke aloud,
God bless us all! why then I shall take a better Castle when I am dead, then
they took from me whilst I was alive.

APO. LVIII.
A Little before he dyed, lie fell into many heavenly ejaculations, and Divine
raptures (as those who knew him b^st, knew those things to be but ordinary with
him, and therefore no wonder that they would not leave him, till death had set
Divine meditations to close his eyes) and in that intervall of deaths pangs
(which we use to call a lightning before death) he happened (as if his pious
soul (like a candle going out) had made one great blaze) to speak these words a
little before he dyed, to those who were about him. I pray rejoice with me you
that love me, and thank God for it: I have my liberty, my health, and my
deliverance, from all mine enemies granted unto me: and thereupon he paused, as
if he expected (some body to speak to him, which being understood by one who
was nearest unto him, he asked, how so my Lord? to which he returned this
answer, My soul shall shortly have her liberty from the prison of my body, my
health shall be my salvation, and the riddance of mine enemies, shall be my
Saviors deliverance from all my sins; and thereupon he fell into a kind of
laughter, such an one as might become a dying man, transported with inward joy,
and entering into his triumph over death, and said, Lord bless us, what a
fearful thing was this Black-rod? when I heard of it first: it did so run in
my mind, that it made an affliction out of mine own imaginations: but when I
spoke with the man, I found him a very civil Gentleman, but I saw no Black-rod;
so if we would not let these troubles and adversities of ours, be made worse by
our own apprehensions, no Rods would be black.

APO. LIX.
I Had procured for the Marquess of Worcester (being a Commissioner for the
surrender of Raglan Castle) these Articles in his behalf, viz. that he should
have his liberty to march and sail away with all his goods and necessaries to
any part of land beyond the Seas, and that he should have under the Generals
hand, passes granted unto him, both by Land and Sea, with carts by Land, and
waftage by Sea, and Convoies by both, paying the ordinary rates, and that in
regard that he was an excepted man, a cessation from arms and work was agreed
upon for seven days, in which time an Ordinance of Parliament was to be
obtained for the ratification of the foresaid Articles; but it seems the
Marquess had let some insinuations of the enemy, batter his wisdom, where it
lay not so well fortified as it should be, against so prevailing an enemy as
covetousness, for if he had any fault it was that, and if any weakness it was
that, which was rather incident to his age then him, suspicion, these two
agreed very well together (like fire and charcole that makes a most excellent
fire to consume themselves) and destroy the subject of their residence, in quo
quis peccat in eo punitur, beware of covetousness and suspecting your friends,
for this wise man lost himself, and made shipwreck of his wisdom, even in the
Harbor after so long a voyage as threescore and sixteen years tossement upon
the waves of this troublesome world, and lost so great a bottom, and so goodly
a fraught, as Raglan and all that was within her, out of a mere itching humor
of getting in with that very tide: for it was that faction (that common disease
that had spread it self through all the parts of the Kings Army) had now played
his last prize, so that the ears that had let in so much wisdom all along, were
now at last stopped with poison so, that he could not hearken unto the advice of
his best friends, after that the subtle instruments of his worst enemies had
persuaded him to acts tending to his own ruin and destruction, for (the place
appointed for the Treaty being at one Oats his house, a place indifferent
between Raglan Castle, and the General Fairfax his Quarters then at Vske) the
Marquess of Worcester had caused a spy to creep into such a part of the house
appointed for the Treaty, that he might supervise and hear all our words and
actions (being drawn thereunto rather by profer'd service then cause of
jealousy) whereby insinuation had now got some advantage of ground whereon to
place its engine, for this fellow after that we had concluded upon the
foresaid Articles (with much insistance) the Commissioners for the General as
their last arrow, chanced to shoot this unlucky shaft which hit the mark they
aimed at, for they desired us notwithsanding al these procurements, that we
would persuade my Lord to throw himself upon the mercy of the Parliament, and
that if he would do so it should be better for him, and that the General
should mediate for him in his behalf, that he might have some allowance out of
his Estate, whereby he might live like himself; also there was an overture of a
Petition to be drawn by the Committee of the County in his behalf, which should
declare unto the Parliament how little hostility he had used until such time as
he was provoked within the pales of his own Park, and that he never gathered
any Contribution from the Country, but paid the Soldiers of his Garrison out of
his privy purse, etc. all which and more they might very justly have done, if
it had bin possible they could have been so honest; the truth whereof made the
poor Marquess the more confident of the reality: all this we thought not fit to
acquaint the Marquess with upon our return, lest delusion should get into that
ear that was too open for such a reception, and pester and infect the clearness
of his judgment with the evaporation of an apple out of Palestine: the
nonperformance whereof, this man makes to the Marquess, a failing of trust,
and a falling short of duty in us, and withal, puts a jealousy into the
Marquess of his own childrens, and some others, resolution to carry him away by
virtue of these Articles, and then to use him as they listed, and do wirh him
what they pleased, and therefore it were better for him to throw himself upon
the Parliament, who cannot possibly be so unreasonable as not to let him have
what he might have had without them, whatsoever more that he was sure of, to
dispose of as he list: and all this was to the end, that if he could cause
distrust to be given to his own children and his faithful friends, he and such
as he should have the secret conveyance of most of his money, plate and jewels,
which they had; for the Marquess following their councels, threw himself upon
the mercy of the Parliament, which was no otherwise then as is before related,
which being once done, the trustees never saw his Lordship more, but sent him
word that they were bound in Bonds for his sons in as much as that came unto,
and now ^hey had the means in their hands, they would save themselves
harmless: Thus Kings may be lost by their too much goodness, and wisemen may
be overthrown by overwisdome, the Marquess by such hard usage on all sides,
being brought so near his end, asked us what was the name of the place where
they had brought him, it was answered Covengarden, he demanded of us, what we
thought of Fortune Tellers? it was answered, that some of them spoke shrewdly:
It was told me (said he) by some of them before ever I was a Catholic, that I
should dye in a Covent, but I never believed him before; yet I hope you will
not bury me in a garden: and directing his speech to me in particular, he
desired me that I would go to the General and tell him how it was with him,
and that now he was not in a condition of desiring any earthly favor, or
making use of any humane mercy, yet in regard that the General had engaged
himself in some particulars concerning him, which he was confident he did
perform on his part, but was abused in that the bare Articles of the surrender
of his house were only delivered into the Parliament and not his letter, which
should have signified the Articles which he waved, throwing himself upon their
mercy, that he would be pleased to have some respect unto his own honor, lest
that should suffer with him, and that he would certify the house of Lords how
ill he had been used, and that their favors might reach to that if it went no
further, that he might dye a freeman. I did this message to the General, whom
I found touched with a sense of true Nobility, hating those false dealings, and
sorrowing for his Lordships hard usage, both which procured from him, a Letter
to the House of Peers, which testified unto them the truth of all the
particulars required; which Letter was read in the House, but all the mercy or
justice it procured to the Marquess, or respect to the General, was, that they
carped at the Generals writing unto them, and not coming himself being he was
in Town: and wondering that he should offer to call him Marquess and not Earl of
Worcester, and so flung off all further considerations with this only
satisfaction; that they knew as much before: wherefore let no man pity their
fall, though their Lordships were al set up like so many dumb statues in the
House of Commons; but when the Marquess had an account of all the passages, O
(said he) when the noblest and highest element courts the noise of the waves,
the truest Emblem of the madness of the people, and when the highest region
stoops unto the lower, and the lowest gets up into the highest seat, what can
be expected but a Chaos of confusion and dissolution of the universe? I do
believe that they are so near unto their end, that as weak as I am there is
Physic to be had, if a man gold find, to prolong my days, that I might
outlive their honors.

APO. LX.
A Little before he died (reflecting upon the Articles which he had waved, upon
the surrender of Raglan into the Parliaments hands) Ah Doctor (said he) if I
had made use of those Articles which you had procured in my behalf, I had not
been now so near unto the end of my life, and the beginning of my happiness: I
for sook life, liberty and estate (which I might have had) and threw my self
upon their mercy; which when I had done, if, to seize upon all my goods, to
pull down my house, to sell my estate, and to send for up, such a weak body as
mine was, so enfeebled by diseases, in the dead of Winter, and the winter of
mine Age, be merciful; what are they whose mercies are so cruel? neither do I
expect that they should stop at all this; for I fear that they will persecute
me after death. You tell me (that when I am dead) you will petition the
Parliament for money to bury me; then will they appoint those, who will dispose
of the time, and manner of my Burial; and you shall see, that they (being it
is so near this good time) will cause me to be buried according to the
Directory: In spite of Christmas day: upon Christmas, and so they did.

FINIS.

