The Earl of Glamorgans NEGOTIATIONS And colorable Commitment IN IRELAND
DEMONSTRATED: OR THE IRISH PLOT For bringing Ten thousand Men and Arms into
England, whereof Three hundred to be for Prince CHARLS's Lifeguard.

Discovered in several Letters taken in a Packet-boat by Sir Tho: Fairfax
Forces at Padstow in Cornwall.

Which Letters were cast into the Sea, and by the Sea coming in, afterward
regained.

And were read in the Honorable House of Commons.

Together with diverse other LETTERS taken by Captain Moulton at Sea near
Milford-Haven coming out of Ireland, concerning the same Plot and Negotiation.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be
forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. ^om.

London: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
March 17. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
THese enclosed Letters being brought to my hands by Divine Providence, I held
it my duty to speed to you, because of the great importance of them, and to
acquaint you how I came by them.

Having some Dragoons at Padstow, a Packet Boat from Ireland came into the
Harbor; The Dragoons presently endeavored to board her; and after some small
resistance, wherein the Captain and the Master of the Vessel were slain, they
entered, seizing upon one Captain Allen; the said Allen threw a Packet and
diverse loose Letters overboard, of which, only these enclosed were recovered:
I shall send Allen with all convenient speed up to you, whose Examination you
have also herewith enclosed: I find him to be a dangerous and subtle man; I
believe he has much in his breast which may be got out of him, by reason he is
obnoxious as a Spy, and a man I perceive loves his life so well, that good use
may be made thereof, to discover by further Examination what we have not
opportunity to do here, but yet may be worthy of your knowledge: For it appears
by some of the Letters, that he has much entrusted by the Earl of Glamorgan to
him, to give a verbal Account of; I have given Captain Moulton who is upon the
Irish Seas, advertisement of the Enemies intentions. To say no more, you will
perceive by the Date of the E^rl of Glamorgans Letters, That he has the Honor,
Trust and Liberty of a very good and Loyal Subject. I suppose you will see by
these Lette^^, what reason there is to hasten Recruits with effect, which I
must withal represent to be the more needful, in regard of the Diminution which
cannot but attend those Marches; and that hardship the Army has been put to in
such a Country and at such a season. I must acknowledge your provisions for
this Army to be very great, and the Comm^tee of the Armies care, in observing
your appointments therein to be answerable. I desire I may faithfully ^mprove
your favors, as becomes an honest man to the glory of God, and your Service:
And rest

Bodman March 7* 1645. Your most humble Servant, T. Fairfax.


To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIr, In my last; which was but yesterday by the Post, I gave you an account of
the Agreement made for the delivery up of Mount-Ed^ecomb, and the ^ing of the
Regiments raised in those parts, and of the (...) of Mr. Coriton and diverse
other Gentlemen of quality, which is every day more apparent then other, by
their hourly sending to the General to be received into the protection of the
Parliament, which is now in some measure made known to the Country, who had
this day a meeting upon Bodman Downs: It was but yesterday they had notice, and
one Hundred of the four had not the notice come to them, yet about eight
hundred or nine hundred appeared; And now for the occasion the meeting was
desired, which was for this purpose, to let them know the Army was come to
protect them, not to ruin them; That the Soldiers horse and foot had charge
to defray their Quarters: That if any Soldier offered violence unto them, upon
Complaint it should be redressed: That the Gentlemen of the Country, naming
such and such persons, were come into the Parliament, which did very much
encourage the co^monalty to be the more forward to harken to what might be for
the service of the public, and defense of their own County: And that which
wrought the impression deepest upon their hearts, was Mr. Peter's his publishing
to them the packets taken in the Irish Vessel, which I mentioned unto you in
the last Letter, which he not only showed unto them, but read the same, and
permitted such of them as desired it to read them, and told them they should
have Copies of Glamorgans Articles, and his other Letters, if they desired
them, which abunly gave them satisfaction; and that which put it out of doubt
was, That the ship and packets were seized on, and taken by the assistance of
the Inhabitants at Padstow within their own County but the day before: And
indeed it was a very seasonable and remarkable accident as could have happened
for the uniting of this County to the Parliament, for the very thoughts of
Irish and French are hateful unto them: Those Letters that were most
considerable miscarried in the water; which was the Earl of Glamorgans to the
Prince, Sir Edward Hide, and to another; which Capt. Allen, an Irish Papist and
Merchant of Waterford confesses he had from the hands of the Earl of Glamorgan
to deliver as aforesaid: Upon his Examination he said further, That the three
hundred Irish desired for the Princes Lifeguard were to be thus disposed, An
hundred to be put into the Mount, an hundred to Pendennis, and the other
hundred to be a guard to the Prince: The General has sent post to Capt:
Moulton Admiral of the Irish Coasts, to give him notice in what forwardness
the Ir^sh were to be transported, That they may keep out ships at sea for
prevention: The Trumpet that went with the Summons to the Lord Hopton is not
yet returned. To morrow early the whole Army horse and foot advances toward
Truro: All passes, By lanes and Fords being for the most part barricadoed or
blockt up; so that if the Enemy should slip by (which we no ways fear) their
marches will be so slow, That their Rear will be engaged before they get half
through the passage. Before this come to your hands, without peradventure the
business will be very near decided by a Treaty or retreat into the sea: There
came seven or eight of the Princes servants this day for passes to go home,
much lamenting the sudden carrying the Prince on shipboard when they dreamed
not of it: At Foy we took thirteen pieces of Ordnance mounted, besides Arms and
powder; the first night the Town stood upon their guard, but the next morning
repented of their folly, and without dispute admitted our forces to come in: Be
pleased to hasten down Moneys to the Army, and match and Powder with all speed
to Lyme: Neither of these will admit of delay: And hasten recruits that they
may meet us when we face about.

Bodnam, March 6. 11. at night. Your most humble and faithful Servant, Joh.
Rushworth.


THe Examination of Allen is sent up by this Bearer, who can inform you more of
the carriage of the man: I hope the Bearer will come safe with the Letters; he
is enjoined to have great care, he comes far with such a Trust.

To the Prince His Highness.
May it please Your Highness,
SInce my coming from his Majesty on the 14 of Octo. last, I have gone in such
untroden paths, as have not afforded me the possibility of making any address
unto your Highness, until this opportunity which has made me live under no
small affliction, least my Actions should have been misrepresented to your
Highness, and lessen me in that good opinion of yours which I value as the
greatest blessing of my life. I shall not presume ^o to trouble your Highness
with so tedious a Narrative, as the reasons of my coming from the King, and the
relation of my Adventures since must needs be; but I have done it at large to
Sir Edward Hide, and I most humbly beseech your Highness to give him leave to
entertain you with them at such leisure times, when he shall find that you can
admit of it with least trouble; which that you may the more easily grant me, I
shall not importune you my self with any thing more at this time, then this
sincere Protestation, That while I have the Honor to live in Your Highness
thoughts; which favor, I shall think my self above all Misfortunes, how
miserable soever otherwise, and I doubt not but your goodness will by
preserving me so happy in your memory, encourage me in that which you cannot
hinder me, from being

Your Highness most humble and most faithful Servant, George Digby.

TO Sir EDWARD HIDE Chancellor of the Exchequer.
My dear Chancellor,
I Seize with much joy this occasion that flatters me with the hopes of
conveying safe unto you, and by you unto the rest of my Friends there an
Account of my Adventures, since you heard from me; these enclosed Papers will
give you a very particular relation of all matters of Fact, I make no question
but my unsuccessfulnesse in that employment will give occasion to my enemies to
accuse me of a great dis-service to the King, in having been the loss of so
many of his horse, not in the conduct of them (for I apprehend not malice it
self in that point) but in putting them upon so desperate a Design. This point
I desire you to clear, by letting all with whom you shall find the Objection,
know, That although I was of opinion, that the King himself ought to have
ventured, when he was at Welbeck, the passage into Scotland, in case there had
been a certainty of my Lord of Montrosses being on this side Forth, yet when
that was once diverted, upon both my Intelligence and Advice, I had afterward
the least share of any man in the Council of adventuring any part of the Kings
horse upon so hopeless a Design as that of Scotland was, while we were
doubtful of my Lord of Montrosses condition; but the Northern horse being
disgusted with Gerrard, refused absolutely to march back Southward to Welbeck,
and so rather then they should disband, it was thought fit to try whether they
would be engaged to adventure to Montrosse, who in all his Letters had seemed
much to resent the neglect of him, in not sending him a supply of horse,
assuring, That with the help but of 1000. he could carry through his work: The
Proposition being made to Sir Marmaduke Langdale, he at first point-blanck
refused it, as an undertaking which had by Gerrard and all the rest been
declared desperate; even with all the Kings Horse; but upon second thoughts,
finding that all his Horse would disband if they were drawn Southward, he and
all the Northern Gentlemen came to the King, and told Him, That if he would lay
His Commands upon me to take the charge and to go along with them, they would
adventure it, otherwise not: whereupon, I having declared my obedience to
whatsoever the King should impose upon me, His Majesty commanded me positively
to that charge, using besides His pleasure, this Argument to me, That if I
succeeded in it I should reap much Honor; if not, I could incur no prejudice
by failing in that which was at first given for desperate: and so at half an
hours warning, having (I protest to God) not dreamt of the matter before, I
marched off from the Rendezvous, with an Addition only to the Northern Horse,
of such as would voluntarily choose to go with me, which proved to be a matter
of Three hundred, with which I made that progress, which you will find
related in the enclosed Papers: But here I am sure you will wonder, how I
holding that place I did near the King, and having the Honor of so great a
part in His Trusts, especially at a time when he had scarce either Counselor
or Penman about Him, should be put upon so extravagant and desperate an
employment: To this I must let you know, and such only as you shall think fit,
That though I had no thought of the present Action, yet the King and I had long
before (that is ever since His Affairs were made so desperate by the loss of
Bristol) concluded it most for his service, That I should absent my self from
him for some time, in case I could find a fair and honorable pretense for it:
I believe the accidents since befaln at Newark with Prince Rupert and Gerrard,
will have given you a light of some reasons of my remove. The truth; Here
follow many lines of Characters --

Over and above these urging Reasons, as to the time, upon the main of the
Kings condition and mine; I found the King likely to suffer much by my stay
near him, the weariness of the War being so universal, and the despair of any
approvement in His condition being so great in all about Him, I found it almost
every man's opinion; Here come in more lines of Characters --

I thought it then high time to watch an opportunity of freeing His Majesty
from an Attendant so pernicious to His Honor and Interest; And this, my
dearest Friend, is as much as I think necessary to say unto you upon this
subject, hoping that by your dextrous conveyance of it to His Highness the
Prince of Wales, it will have the same impression with him, which I cannot
doubt of with you.

Since my coming out of England, I staid a month for a wind at the Isle of
Man, which time I cannot think misspent, having there received great
civilities from my Lord of Derby, and had the means of a particular
acquaintance with his Noble Lady, whom I think one of the wisest and
generousest persons that I have known of her Sex: From thence, I and my company
were very securely conveyed hither in a light Frigot of his Lordships, where I
found all things in a great forwardness, the conclusion of which was expected
within few days, and great Forces (as was pretended) already in a readiness
for England under the command of the Earl of Glamorgan the Confederates great
General and Favorite; but his Lordship being sent for by my Lord Lieutenant
and my self, to confer about the ways of disposing those Ayds most to the
advantage of His Majesty's service, the businesses contained in the enclosed
Papers brake sorth in such manner, as you will find there set down, and
obliged me to that part in the Kings Vindication, which was thought could not
so properly be performed by any as my self; you will find the whole business
so fu^ly stated in the Transactions themselves which I send you, and in my
Letter to my Brother Secretary, that I shall need to say no more upon the
subject, only let me ask you, whether according to the rules of Policy I have
not carried my body swimmingly, who being before so irreconciliably hated by
the Puritan party, have thus seasonably made my self as odious with the
Papists: well, my comfort is, that the very few honest men that are in the
world will love me the better, and whilst I do the part of a man of Integrity
and Honor, I am willing to trust God with the rest. I must not conclude
without telling you, that if I had been brought hither by far greater
misfortunes, I could not have repined at any thing that had given me the
happiness of so particular a knowledge of, and friendship with the Marquis of
Ormond, who (if I can judge at all of men) is not only the wisest young man,
but the most steady, generous, and virtuous person that I have ever known. I
conjure you, as you love virtue, and as you love me, who have so little a share
of it, build carefully by the diligent application upon those grounds which I
have laid for a friendship between you; for indeed, I love him so much, as I
cannot be at rest till we make up the Triangle equal on all sides, to that
perfection wherewith I am

Dublin, Ian. 4. 1645. Yours, George Digby.
Pray fail not to let my Father partake of what I write to you, and General
Goring also, as far forth as you shall judge necessary.



To Secretary Nicholas.
My good Brother,
YOu will receive by this dispatch a particular account from my Lord Lieutenant
of the state of the Treaty here, and of those Conditions upon which he was
hopeful suddenly to have concluded such a Peace as would have afforded His
Majesty powerful and timely ayds from this Kingdom, had not the unfortunate
madness (for I can give it no other name) of my Lord of Glamorgan, and the
necessary proceeding thereupon, cast all things back into a posture, as
uncertain and more dangerous then ever. You will receive from my Lord
Lieutenant and the Council here, a punctual relation of the matter of Fact, and
it is referred to me to convey unto you, and by you to His Majesty, the
Circumstances and Reasons of the whole proceeding against his Lordship.

About ten days since, matters of the Treaty growing near to a conclusion, and
in confidence thereof preparations being made by my Lord of Glamorgan, and the
Irish (as they assured us) for the speedy sending over of three thousand men
for the relief of Chester, which were to be made up ten thousand before the
beginning of March. It was thought necessary that we should confer with the
said Earl of Glamorgan and some of the Irish Commissioners, to the end that
before my Lord Lieutenants final consent to the Articles of the Treaty, the
business of the Kings supply might be reduced from discourse to a certainty,
and directed in the most advantageous way for his service; to which end (we
little suspecting then what was since discovered) the said Earl of Glamorgan
and some of the Irish Commissioners then at Kilkenny were earnestly invited
hither both by my Lord Lieutenant and my self.

Upon Monday last, the day before the said Earl of Glamorgan was expected in
Town, my Lord Lieutenant received out of the North from an honest and well
affected person, the copy which is sent you of my Lord of Glamorgans Articles
and Oath with the Confederate Catholics, assured to have been found in the
titulary Archbishop of Tuams pocket, killed in October last at Sligo. At first
the thing appeared so impossible, as that we were apt to think it a Forgery and
Plot against the King of the Parliamentary Rebels, till considering the
circumstances, formalities and punctualities thereof, we grew to apprehend
somewhat more in the matter, and soon after a second and third copy of the same
coming to other persons, all with Letters to the effect of this enclosed, it
was then thought high time to take the business into most serious
consideration; which being done by my Lord Lieutenant and my self, assisted by
some of the wisest and best affected persons here, we soon concluded, that if
these things were once published, and that they could be believed to be done by
His Majesty's Authority, they could have no less fatal an effect then to make
all men so believing, conclude all the former Scandals cast upon His Majesty of
the inciting this Irish Rebellion true, That he was a Papist, and designed to
introduce Popery even by ways the most unkingly and perfidious; And
consequently, that there would be a general revolt from him of all good
Protestants, with whom this opinion could take place.

Now when we considered the circumstances convincing the truth of this
Transaction on my Lord of Glamorgans part, and how impossible almost it was for
any man to be so mad, as to enter into such an Agreement without powers from
His Majesty, and there being some kind of a formal Authority vouched in the
Articles themselves, we did also conclude, That probably the greatest part of
the world, who had no other knowledge of His Majesty then by outward
appearances, would believe this true, and do according to that belief, unless
His Majesty were suddenly and eminently vindicated by those who might justly
pretend to know him best. Upon this ground it was also concluded by us, That
less then an Arrest of the Earl of Glamorgan upon suspicion of High Treason
could not be a Vindication of His Majesty eminent or loud enough; and that this
part could not properly nor effectually be performed by any other person then
my self, both in regard of my Place and Trusts near His Majesty, That the
business of Ireland had passed for the most part through my hands, That I
attended His Majesty about the time of the date of His Majesty's pretended
Commission, That since that time I had by His Majesty's command written to the
Irish Commissioners a Letter, whereof I send you a copy so Diamitrally opposite
to the said Earls Transactions; And lastly, in regard that my Lord Lieutenant,
to whom otherwise His Majesty's Vindication in this kind might properly have
belonged, was generally thought to be unworthily cousened and abused in the
matter, in case there were any such secret Authority given by His Majesty to
the Earl of Glamorgan.

This being our unanimous judgment of what was fit to be done, and by whom,
the only Question then remaining, was to the point of Time, in which we were
also of opinion, That if it were defer^'d till the business growing public
otherwise, should begin to work its mischief, His Majesty's Vindication would
lose much of its force, and be thought rather applied to the notarieting then
to the impiety of the thing, and rather to the pernicious effects then to the
detestable cause it self: Notwithstanding I must confess unto you, that the
consideration of frustrating the supplies of three thousand men, which were so
confidently affirmed to be in readiness for the relief of Chester, in case the
condition of that place could not bear the delay which this might occasion,
wrought in us a very great suspension of Judgment, Whether the proceeding
against my Lord of Glamorgan should not be forborne till that so necessary
supply were sent away; but the case being more strictly examined, We found,
first, that by the Lord of Glamorgans Oath, the Forces were not to be haz^rded
till His Majesty's performance of the said Earls Conditions: And secondly, that
the said supply was never intended by my Lord of Glamorgan and the Irish, till
the Articles of Peace were consented to, which the Lord Lieutenant durst in no
wise do without a preceding Vindication of the Kings Honor, since this
Transaction of my Lord of Glamorgans was known unto him, and known to be known
unto him by those who wanted neither Art nor Malice to make use of it; so that
the necessary forbearance to conclude the Treaty, frustrating as much the
relief of Chester, as the sudden and vigorous proceeding against my Lord of
Glamorgan could do, our Resolutions did in the end determine upon that course;
when at the instant to remove all Objections, Information was brought us, That
the thing was already public throughout the Town, and began to work such
dangerous ^ff^cts, as in truth I do not believe that my Lord Lieutenant, or any
of the Kings faithful Servants could have been many hours safe in the delay of
this His Majesty's and their Vindication, which h^th now been so seasonably
applied, as that it has wrought here not only a general satisfaction in all
moderate men; but even such a conversion in many less well inclined, That
whereas before a Peace with the Irish, even upon those unavoidable Conditions,
upon which my Lord Lieutenant must needs within few days have concluded, it
would hardly have bin published in this place without very much danger; men's
minds are so secured and settled by this proceeding, as that I believe the
Peace now would be embraced upon those, and perhaps upon harder terms, without
much mutiny or repining. This being so, our chief remaining fear is, lest what
has been done against my Lord of Glamorgan should so far incense the Irish, as
to drive them to sudden extremes; things here on His Majesty's part being in so
ill a condition to enter again upon a War unto this danger, the best
preventives we could think of are applied, This enclosed Letter written to my
Lord of Muskerry by my Lord Lieutenant; Apt persons employed to Kilkenny, to
acquaint them with the reasons and necessities of this proceeding; And lastly,
the Articles of Peace sent unto them with my Lord Lieutenants assent, in the
very terms proposed, and acquiest in by themselves in the last results of this
long Treaty; which in all probability will have one of these two effects,
either to make them conclude a Peace (notwithstanding this in^ervening
accident) whereby Chester may be speedily relieved, and His Majesty further
supplied this Spring, or make it break so foully on their side, as to divide
from them the most considerable of their party. Whatever the event be, my Lord
Lieutenant and I shall comfort our selves with this satisfaction, That we have
done what belonged to men of Honor, faithful to their King, and to their
Religion, and as wisely as ours and our friends best understandings could
direct us, leaving the rest to God Almighty, whom we beseech ( Some such words
should be supplied to make it sense, though they be not in the Original.
to direct) His Majesty to that course herein on His part, which may be
correspondent to our faithful endeavors; and that he will bless them with as
good effects upon the minds of all honest men, toward his Majesty's
Vindication in that Kingdom, as I make no doubt but what we have done will have
in this, when seconded and pursued by those further directions from his
Majesty, which I am sure His own Wisdom and Princely Indignation to find His
Honor, Conscience, and Piety thus infamously traduced, will dictate unto Him
without further advice from

Dublin, Jan. 4. 1645. Your
I Believe you will be as much startled as I was to find the Signet mentioned
in my Lord of Glamorgans Transaction; but it seems that was mistaken; and that
he now pretends to some kind of Authority under the Kings Pocket-Seal, which I
certainly believe to be as false, as I know the other.



Articles of agreement made and concluded between the Right Honorable Edw.
Earl of Glamorgan, in pursuance, and by virtue of his Majesty's This is the
true Copy of the Articles sent by the Lord George Digby, to Secretary Nicholas,
to be by him communicated to his Majesty.
Authority under His Signet and Royal signature, bearing date at Oxon the
twelfth day of March, in the 20th year of his Reign, For, and on the behalf
of his most Excellent Majesty of the one part, and the Right Honorable
Richard, Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Lord President of the supreme Council of
the Confederate Catholics of Ireland, Donog. Lord Viscount Muskery;
Alexander, Mac Donnell, and Nicholas Plunket, Esquires; Sir Robert Talbot,
Baronet; Dormet o Brian, John Dillon, Patrick Darcy, and Jeffrey Brown,
Esquires, for and on the behalf of his Majesty's Roman Catholic subjects,
and the Catholic Clergy of Ireland of the other part.
IMprimis, The said Earl does grant, conclude and agreee on the behalf of his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to and with the said Rich. Lord Viscount
Mountgarret, Donnog. Lord Viscount Muskery, Alex. Mac Donnell, and Nicholas
Plunket, Esquires; Sir Robert Talbot, Baronet; Dormet o Brian, Jo. Dillon,
Patr. Darcy, and Jeffrey Brown, Esquires, that the Roman Catholic Clergy of
the said Kingdom, shall and may from henceforth for ever, hold and enjoy all
and every such Lands, Tenements, Tithes and Hereditaments whatsoever by them
respectively enjoyed within this Kingdom, or by them possessed at any time
since the twenty three of October 1641. and to all other such Lands, Tenements,
Tithes, and Hereditaments belonging to the Clergy within this Kingdom, other
then such as are now actually enjoyed by his Majesty's Protestant Clergy.

Item, It is granted, concluded, and agreed on by the said Richard Lord
Viscount Mountgarrer, Donnog. Lord Viscount Muskery, Alex. Mac Donnell, and
Nicholas Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot, Dormett o Brian, Jo. Dillon, Patr. Darcy,
and Jeffrey Brown, on the behalf of the Confederate Roman Catholics of
Ireland, that two parts in three parts to be divided, of all the said Lands,
Tithes, and Hereditaments whatsoever mentioned in the precedent Article, shall
for three years next ensuing, the Feast of Easter, which shall be in the
year of our Lord God one thousand six hundred forty six, be disposed of and
converted for and to the use of his Majesty's Forces employed, or to be
employed in His service, and the other third part to the use of the said Clergy
respectively; And so the like disposition to be renewed from three years to
three years by the said Clergy during the wars.

Item, It is accorded and agreed by the said Earl of Glamorgan, for and in the
behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, that his Excellency, the
Lord Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or any other or others
authorized, or to be authorized by his Majesty, shall not disturb the
Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion in the present possession, and
continuance of the possession of their Churches, Lands, Tenements, Tithes,
Hereditaments* Jurisdiction, or any other the matters aforesaid in these
Articles agreed and condescended to by the said Earl, until his Majesty's
pleasure be signified for confirming and publishing the Graunts herein
Articled for, and condescended unto by the said Earl.

Item, It is accorded and agreed by the said Earl, for and in the behalf of
his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, that an Act shall be passed in the
next Parliament, to be held in this Kingdom, according to the tenor of such
agreement, or concessions as herein are expressed: and in the mean time, the
said Clergy shall enjoy the full benefit, freedom, and advantage of the said
agreements and concessions, and every of them. And the Earl of Glamorgan does
hereby engage his Majesty's Royal word and public faith unto the said Lord
Viscount Mountgarret, and the rest of the said Commissioners, for the due
observation and performance of all and every the Articles, Agreements, and
Concessions herein mentioned to be performed to the said Roman Catholic
Clergy, and every of them. In witness whereof the parties to these presents
have hereunto interchangeably put their hands and seals the 25. of August,
Anno Dom. 1645.

Glamorgan.
Signed. Sealed, and delivered in the presence of John Summerset, Jeffrey
Brown, and Robert Barry,




Whereas in these Articles touching the Clergies livings, the Right
Honorable, the Earl of Glamorgan is obliged in his Majesty's behalf, to
secure the Concessions in these Articles by Act of Parliament; We holding that
manner of securing these Graunts as to the Clergies livings, to prove more
difficult and prejudicial to his Majesty, then by doing thereof, and securing
these Concessions, otherwise as to the said Livings, the said Earl
undertaking, and promising in the behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, as hereby he does undertake, to settle the said Concessions, and
secure them to the Clergy, and their respective successors, as another secure
way, other then by Parliament at present, till a fit opportunity be offered for
securing the same, do agree and condescend thereunto. And this instrument by
his Lordship signed, was before the perfection thereof intended to that
purpose, as to the said Livings; to which purpose we have mutually Signed this
Endorsment. And it is further intended that the Catholic Clergy shall not
be interrupted by Parliament, or otherwise, as to the said livings, contrary
to the meaning of these Articles.

Glamorgan.
Copia vera collata fideliter cum Origin. Tho. Cashell, F. Patricius, Waterford
and Lismor.




Whereas much time has been spent in Meetings and Debates betwixt his
Excellency Ja. Lord Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant, and General,
Governor of his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, Commissioner to his most
Excellent Majesty, CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland etc. for the Treating and Concluding of a Peace in the said
Kingdom: of his Majesty's humble and loyal Subjects, the Confederate Roman
Catholics of the said Kingdom of Ireland, of the one part, and the Right
Honorable Donnog. Lord Viscount Muskery, and other Commissioners deputed and
Authorized by the said Consederate Roman Catholic subjects of the other part;
And thereupon many difficulties did arise, by occasion whereof, sundry matters
of great weight and consequence necessarily requisite to be condescended unto
by his Majesty's said Commissioner, for the safety of the said Confederate
Roman Catholics were not hitherto agreed upon, which retarded, and does as
yet retard the Conclusion of a firm Peace and settlement in the said Kingdom.
And whereas the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Glamorgan, is entrusted and
Authorized by his most Excellent Majesty to Grant and assure to the said
Confederate Roman Catholic subjects farther graces and favors which the said
Lord Lieutenant did not, as yet, in that latitude as they expected grant unto
them. And the said Earl having seriously considered of all matters, and due
circumstances of the great Affairs now in agitation which is the peace and
quiet of the said Kingdom, and the importance thereof in order to his
Majesty's service, and in relation to a Peace and settlement in his other
Kingdoms, and here upon the place having seen the ardent desire of the said
Catholics to assist his Majesty against all that do, or shall oppose his
Royal Right or Monarchique Government, and having discerned the alacrity and
cheerfulness of the said Roman Catholics to embrace honorable Conditions
of Peace, which may preserve their Religion, and other just Interests; In
pursuance thereof in the twentieth of His Reign, granted unto the said Earl
of Glamorgan, the tenor whereof is as follows, viz. CHARLES R. Charles by
the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defendor of
the Faith, etc. To Our Right Trusty and well-beloved Cousin, Edw. Earl of
Glamorgan Greeting. We reposing great and especial trust and confidence in
your approved wisdom and fidelity, do by these (as firmly as under Our Great
Seal, to all intents and purposes) Authorize and give conclude you power to
Treat and conclude with the Confederate Roman Catholics in our Kingdom of
Ireland, if upon necessity any thing be to be condescended unto, wherein Our
Lord Lieutenant cannot so well be seen in, as not fit for us at this present
publicly to own, and therefore we charge you to proceed according to this our
Warrant, with all possible secrecy; And for whatsoever yo^ shall engage your
self, upon such valuable considerations, as you in your judgment shall deem
fit, We promise in the word of a King, and a Christian, to ratify and
perform the same that shall be granted by you and under your hand and seal*
the said Confederate Catholics, having by their supplies testified their
zeal to Our service: And this shall be in each particular to you a sufficient
warrant. Given at Our Court at Oxon, under Our Signet, and Royal Signature the
twelfth day of March, in the twentieth year of our Reign, 1644. To Our Right
Trusty and well-beloved Cousin Edward Earl of Glamorgan. It is therefore
granted, accorded, and agreed, by and between the said Earl of Glamorgan, for
and on the behalf of his most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors on
the one part, and the Right Honorable, Richard Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Lord
President, of the supreme Council of the said Confederate Catholics, and
the said Donnog, Lord Viscount Muskery, Alex. Mac Donnell, and Nich. Plunket,
Esquires; Sir Robert Talbot, Baronet; Dormet o Brian, Jo. Dillon; P^r. Darcy,
and Jeffrey B^owne. Esquires; Commissioners in that behalf appointed, by the
said Confederate Roman Catholic subjects of Ireland, for and in the behalf
of the said Confederate Roman Catholics of the other part, in manner
following, that is to say,

Imprimis, It is agreed, accorded, and granted by the said Earl, for, and on
the behalf of his most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, That all
and every of the professors of the Roman Catholic Religion in this Kingdom of
Ireland, of what ever estate, degree or quality soever he or they be or shall
be, shall for ever hereafter have and enjoy within the said Kingdom, the free
and public use and exercise of the said Roman Catholic Religion, and of the
respective functions therein.

Item, it is granted, accorded, and agreed by the said Earl, for, and on the
behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, That the said Professors
of Roman Catholic Religion shall hold and enjoy, all and every of the
Churches by them enjoyed within this Kingdom, or by them possessed at any time
since the 23. of October 1641. and all other Churches in the said Kingdom,
other then such as are now actually enjoyed by his Majesty's Protestant
subjects.

Item, it is granted, accorded, and agreed by the said Earl, for, and on the
behalf of his most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, That all and
every of the Catholic subjects of Ireland, of what state and condition,
degree or quality soever, shall be free and exempt from the Jurisdiction of the
Protestant Clergy, and every of them, and that the Catholic Roman Clergy of
this Kingdom, shall not be punished, troubled or molested for the exercise of
their Jurisdiction over their respective Catholic flocks in matters
spiritual and Ecclesiastical.

Item, It is further accorded, granted, and agreed by the said Earl, for, and
on the behalf of his most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, That
an Act shall be passed in the next Parliament to be held in this Kingdom; the
tenor and purport whereof shall be as follows, viz. An Act for the relief of
his Majesty's Catholic subjects of his Highness Kingdom of Ireland. Whereas
by an Act made in Parliament held at Dublin, in the second year of the Reign
of the late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act for restoring to the Crown the
ancient Jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolish
all Foreign power repugnant to the same, And by another Statute made in the
said last mentioned Parliament, entitled, An Act for the uniformity of Common
Prayer and Service in the Church, and the Administration of the Sacraments,
sundry mulcts, penalties, restraints, and incapacities are and have been laid
upon the professors of the Roman Catholic religion in this Kingdom, in and
for, and concerning the use, profession, and exercise of their Religion, and
their functions therein, to the great prejudice, trouble, and disquiet of the
Roman Catholics in their Liberties and estates, to the general disturbance
of the whole Kingdom; For remedy whereof, and for the better settling,
increase, and continuance of the peace, unity, and tranquillity of this
Kingdom of Ireland, his Majesty at the humble suit and request of the Lords
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, is graciously pleased, that
it may be enacted, and be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by authority of the same, that from, of, and after the first day
of this Session of Parliament, it shall and may be lawful to, and for all the
Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion, of what degree, condition or
quality soever, to have and enjoy the free and public exercise and profession
of the said Roman Catholic Religion, and of their several and respective
functions therein, without incurring any mulct and penalty whatsoever, or being
subject to any restraint or incapacity concerning the same, any Article,
Clause, sentence, or provision in the said last mentioned Acts of Parliament,
or in any other Act or Acts of Parliament, Ordinances, Law or usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And be it also further enacted, that
neither the said Statutes, or any other Statute, Act, or Ordinance heretofore
made in your Majesty's Reign, or in any the Reign of any of your Highness
most noble Progenitors or Ancestors and now of force in this Kingdom, nor all,
nor any Branch, Article, Clause, and sentence in them, or any of them contained
and expressed shall be of force and validity in this Realm, to extend to be
construed or adjudged to extend in any wise to enquiet, prejudice, vex or
molest the professors of the said Roman Catholic Religion, in their persons,
lands, hereditaments, or goods, for any thing, matter, or cause whatsoever
touching, and concerning the free and public use, exercise and enjoying of
their said Religion, function, and profession. And be it also further enacted
and declared by the authority aforesaid that your Majesty's Roman Catholic
Subjects in the said Realm of Ireland from the first day of this session of
Parliament shall be and be taken de^ed, and adjudged capable of all offices of
trust, and advancement places, degrees and dignit^es and preferments whatsoever
within your said Realm of Ireland, any Act Statute, Usage or Law, to the
contrary notwithstanding. And that other Acts shall be passed in the said
Parliament, according to the tenor of such agreement or concessions as herein
are expressed, and that in the mean time the said Roman Catholic Subjects,
and every of them shall enjoy the full freedom, benefit and advantage of the
said agreement or concessions and of every of them.

Item It is accorded granted and agreed by the said Earl, For and on the
behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, That his Ex. the Lord
Marquis of Ormond Lord Livetenant of Ireland or any other or others authorized
by his Majesty shall not disturb the Professors of the Roman Catholic
Religion in their present posession, and continuance of the posession of their
said Churches, Jurisdiction or any other the matters aforesaid in these
Articles agreed and consented unto by the said E. until his Majesty's pleasure
be signified for confirming and publishing the grounds and Agreements hereby
articled for, and condiscended unto by the said Earl. And the said Earl of
Glamorgan does hereby engage his Majesty's Royal and public Faith unto all
and singular the professors of the said Roman Catholic Religion within the
said Kingdom of Ireland, for the due observance and performance of all and
every the Articles, Grounds and Clauses, herein contained, and the Conscessions
herein mentioned to be performed to them.

Item It is accorded and agreed that the public Faith of the kingdom shall be
engaged unto the said Earl by the said confederate Catholics for sending
10000. men to serve his Majesty by order and public Declaration of the
general assembly now sitting: and the supreme Council of the said
Confederate Catholics, shall engage themselves to bring the said number of
men armed the one half with musketts, and the other half with Pikes unto any
Port within this realm at the election of the said Earl, and at such time as
he shall appoint to be by him shipped and transported to serve his Majesty in
England, Wales, or Scotland, under the Command of the said Earl of Glamorgan,
as Lord General of the said army: which army is to be kept together in one
entire body, and all other the said Officers and Commanders of the said army
are to be named by the supreme Council of the said Confederate Catholics,
or by such others as the several assembly of the said Confederate Catholics
of this Kingdom shall entrust therewith. In witness whereof the parties of
these presents have hereunto enterchangeably put their hands and seals the 25.
Day of August 1645.

Glamorgan.
Copia vera collata fideliter originali Thomas Cashell. F Partricius Waterford
and Lismore.




I Edward Earl of Glamorgan do protest and swear faithfully to acquaint the
Kings most excellent Majesty with the proceedings of this Kingdom, in order to
his service and to the endeerement of this Nation, and punctual performance of
what I have (as authorized by his Majesty) obliged my self to see performed.
And in default not to permit the army entrusted to my charge to adventure it
self or any considerable part thereof, until conditions from his Majesty, and
by his Majesty be performed.

Sept. 3. 1645. Glamorgan.
Copia vera concordans de verbo and verbis cum originali. Tho: Cashell.




To the Lord Hopton.
My Noble Lord
IF the report of the many difficulties wherewith I have strugled in compassing
my designs for his Majesty's servie, have not before this reached you, a
faithful Relation of the whole will be made to you by the bearer hereof
Captain Allen, whom I desire your Lordship to present unto the Prince His
Highness as an honest man, and one that proposes a course for Intelligence to
pass between this Country and his Majesty's Quarters, whereof there is great
need: Now (God be thanked) the business is brought to that upshot, that the
ten thousand men are designed for his Majesty's service, six thousand whereof
are ready for Transportation: The means for which are wanting, unless your
Lordship will please to solicit his Highness the Prince for transmitting what
shiping those parts are furnished with, that all possible expedition may be
used. We hear (God be thanked) that as yet Chester holds out, to relieve which
the 6000. men are ready for transportation. This bearer has intimated the
Princes desire for having ^00 men hence for his highness Lifguard, which may be
transported to his highness by the return of such shiping as shall be sent
hither for the aforesaid service. By his return I desire to learn from your
Lordship, the Kings present State and being, that we may shape our Designs
accordingly, Thereby I should be most glad to know of the Princes and your
Lordships good success and prosperity, for which none can be more solicitous
then I who am

My Lord Waterford 28 Feb. 1645. Your L. most affectionate humble servant
Glamorgan

Right Honorable,
I Have hitherto been so far from troubling you with many Letters, that I can
scarce abstain for excusing this Address, But as I hope you will do me the
favor, to believe that those Ommissions have proceeded out of a tenderness to
molest you unnecessarily, and not out of any slothfulness in things essential
to my duty, so in my own opinion I were now too much to blame, if after so long
time, and some late hazards, I should not take this occasion to repeat unto you
the assurances of my most humble service, proceeding from the due sense I have
of your goodness to me, which howsoever I have bin deficient in expressing, as
to the outward, I assure your Honor, I preserve the memory in a very sure
Cabinet, as a treasure there laid up wholly for your service, when ever you
shall think me worthy the trial.

For what concerns the affairs of this Kingdom, My Lord gives you so full
and particular an account thereof, that I cannot add to your knowledge of
them. Therefore I shall sufficiently have observed the decorum of the place,
and complied with my duty too, when I shall have made these few reflections
upon the general condition of these parts, and especially of the English
Quarters, which in my judgment is very sad, they being not only reduced
within a very narrow compass of ground, but totally ruinated, the whole
Country waste, and unhabited, Farms and Villages burnt down to the ground, not
a Garrison of his Majesty's. 36. 45. 188. 23. 27. 58. 24. 12. 66. or any wise
5. 69. 11. 13. 38. 57 61. 59. 70. 37. 71. 63. 40. 6. 5. 59. 72. just 66. 84.
45. 36. Provisions of all sorts very scant. The Corporations: 8. 35. 55. 16.
62. and 49. 63. 46. 68. 12. 2. 49. between 36. 4. 25. 15. 63. 6. 67. 29. 87. 4.
19. 34. 58. 42. 13. 11. 6 66. 45. the 8. 16. 35. 67. 62. 51. 67. 70. 11. 29.
40. 20. 2. 15. 70. 16. 5. 31. 36. equal to either, The Army in 66. 3. 55. 40.
29. 23. 12. 2. 34. 71. 38. 10. 62. as 300. 3. 22. 11. 6. 68. 29 5. 58. 56. 37.
20. 39. above 45. 5. 35. 30. 59. 66. thousand 27 58. 46. 2. 66. 48. 19. 40. 49.
16. 69. 12. Foot, and 66. 67. 28. 34. 2. 62. 69 Hundred horse, Garrisons and
all, and those for the most part of 51. 52. 6. 4. 2. 3. 42. 2. 49. 71. 27. 39.
24. 26. 67. 68. 55. 56. 29. This place it self in a manner Blockt up by the
Parliament Ships, riding continually without it, and no less pincht at land
by the Irish Quartered within a very few miles of it, This condition of his
Majesty's Quarters here, compared with that of the Irish, contrary to i^ almost
in every respect, may seem unlikely upon any conditions offered hitherto, to
further such a Peace as must dispossess them of great advantages gotten by the
War, and such a Peace as thwarts the Ambition, and covetous desires of all
those of the Long Robe, whether they be their Clergy or Laiety, and the sway
and Authority of their Nobility, the unlimited Liberty of the People. The Popes
interest, consisting in being Head, not of a Militant, but tryumphant Church,
and (it may be) the secret negotiations, which they have, and do still
entertain with Foreign Princes. It is true, the duty that subjects owe to
their Prince should out-ballance all such considerations; But I doubt, that
duty is taught at Rome, with as many limitations, as at Edenborough, or in
Westminster it self; And as for those Reflections, that should be made upon
the future, they are not for every capacity, but for understanding men only,
and such may (for ought appears to me to the contrary) see as fair and
promising hopes for themselves in our embroylements at home, as we can see for
our advantage in their refusal and obstinacy; To which I may add this
further consideration, how they will be able to suppress Inchiquin, assisted
and supported from England and maintain their own too, against the Scots, if
they shall once have parted with 10000. of their best men, and with so many
Arms, since it is plain that sithence the Cessation, they have made no great
progress against either of the two, with their entire strength: for as for any
assistance they can expect from my Lord Lieutenant it is inconsiderable, and
these Garrisons must not be drained for fear of Insurrections within, where
we find much wavering, and such a hatred even in the Soldiers themselves
against the Confederates, that I can promise my self but little good from
their Conjunction. Thus your Honor may see what probability my Lord
Lieutenant, though never so good a Gamester, has of the Game in hand between
the danger of war, and the difficulty of procuring an useful, and honorable
Peace for his Majesty by this Treaty. The proceedings whereof I leave to his
Lordships relation, resting

Sir, Dublin the 2. day of January 1645. Your Honors most humble,
affectionate, and obliged Servant* John Poingdexter.

To the Lord Culpeper.
My Lord,
HAving orepast many Rubbs and difficulties, the long expected work is at last
compassed, which by what means it wa^ retarded, your Lordship perhaps before
has learned, and will be more faithfully and amply Related by the Bearer,
Captain Bamber, whom I have employed to his Highness the Prince, to give an
account of the state of affairs here, and in what a Mist we are for want of
Intelligence, whereby we might be ascertained of the Kings and Princes
Condition, which one Allen a Merchant of Waterford proposes to undertake a
course for. And (...) his Highness desire, which moved for three hundred men
for the Princes Lifeguard which the Irish party is willing should be sent him
by the return of such shipping as I have humbly desired from his Highness,
might be sent hither to Waterford for to waft over the men, whereof six
thousand are in a readiness for the relief of Chester (which yet we hear
holds out) and the other four thousand by the first of May are to follow. Your
First of May.
Lordship would extremely further the service by your Representing to his
Highness the necessity of a course of Intelligence, That we might not (as we
are now) buried in ignorance of his Majesty's and the Princes being and
Condition, of which I hoped your Lordship will vouchsafe me some light, that
our motion may be according thereunto, by which likewise to be assertained of
your Lordships welfare and happiness would be most welcome news to

Waterford the 27. of Febr. 1645. My Lord, Your Lordships most affectionate and
humble servant, Glamorgan. Lord Culpeper.


THese several Letters and papers coming from Ireland were taken at Milford
Haven by Captain Moulton.

To the right Honorable the Lords and Commons for the Committee of the
Admiralty and Cinque Ports.
Right Honorable,
THese contrary winds have much against my desire detained me still in this
harbor, so that my intended voyage for Ireland has not the free nor speedy
passage I wished, but the first oppertunity of wind that offers it self shall
be laid hold of. Yesterday a barque that stole away from Dublin ^ame in
hither, wherein I found the enclosed Letters committed ^o a passenger, which I
send unto your honors to be disposed of as to your honors shall seem good:
this place being barren both of news and action to produce any, makes me
forbear to give your honors any further present trouble save to assure that I
am ever.

Aboard the Lion in Milford Haven this 23. Jan. 1645. Your honors most
affectionate humble and most obedient servant, Robert Moulton.

To Colonel Pigott.
Worthy Cosen,
I Have here enclosed sent two Letters two the Countess of Glamorgan at
Ragland, her Lord being lately confined here to the Castle of Dublin, and least
her Ladyship may take things too much to heart these Letters are sent to add
some comfort. Both my Lord and I shall acknowledge our thankefullnesse unto you
if you be pleased to use the best and speediest course you may for conveighing
them to my Lady, you were wont to honor noble Ladies especially in distress,
and am assured now more then ever having the happiness of enjoying so noble a
Lady of your own, your Father Mother and friends in Leix are all in good
health, and daily expect to hear good news out of England* thus not doubting
of care herein with my best wishes of happiness to your self and your noble
Lady, not unmindfull of our good Friends all I remain.

Dublin this. 5. of Jan. 1645. Your assured loving Cosen to serve you, Roger
Br^reton.

To the Countess of Glamorgan,
Madam,
I Presume that some rumors of my Lord of Glamorgans being confined to the
Castle of Dublin for some matters laid to his charge by the Lord George Digby
have before this time come to your Ladyships hearing; I thought fit therefore
by these few lines to let you know that my Lord is in perfect health, hearty
and very cheerful, not doubting to give a satisfactory answer to what may be
laid to his charge, I have so much confidence in your Ladyships accustomed
discretion, that I know there needs no disswasive arguments to your Ladyship
from either greeving or taking any reports you may receive to heart to much,
not doubting but his Lordship will ere long see your Ladyship, when you may
partake of all things more fully then may be by writing. My Lord your uncle is
in health at Bunraly and with him there the Earl of P. my Lord John and my
Lady Honora, I wish your honor all health and happiness and am.

Dublin this 5. of Ian. 1645. Your Ladyships still faithful servant and
Kinsman. Roger Brereton.

Lord Herbert (pretended Earl of Glamorgan) his Letter to his Lady.
MY dearest heart, I hope these will prevent any news shall come unto you of
me, since my co^mittment to the Castle of Dublin, To which I assure thee I went
as cheerfully and as willingly as they could wish, whosoever they were by
whose means it was procured; and should as unwillingly go forth, were the
gates both of the Castle and Town open unto me, until I were cleared, as they
are willing to make me unserviceable to the King, and lay me aside, who have
procured for me this restraint; When I consider thee a Woman, as I think, I
know you are, I fear least you should be apprehensive: but when I reflect that
you are of the House of Thomond, and that you were once pleased to say these
words unto me, That I should never, in tenderness of you, desist from doing,
what in honor I was obliged to do, I grow confident, that in this you will
now show your magnanimity, and by it the greatest testimony of affection, that
you can possibly afford me; and am also confident, that you know me so well,
that I need not tell you how clear I am, and void of fear, the only effect of
a good conscience, and that I am guilty of nothing, that may testify one
thought of disloyalty to his Majesty, or of what may stain the honor of the
family I come of, or set a Brand upon my future posterity. Courage (my heart)
were I amongst the Kings Enemies you might fear; but being only a prisoner
amongst his Friends and faithful Subjects, you need doubt nothing, but that
this cloud will be soon dissipated, by the Sunshine of the King my Master,
and did you but know how well and merry I am, you would be as little troubled
as my self, who have nothing that can afflict me, but lest your apprehension
might hurt you, especially since all the while I could get no opportunity of
sending, nor yet by any certain probable means, but by my Cousin Bruertons,
Master Mannerings, our Cousin Constable of the Castle, and my Lord Lievtenants
leave: and I hope you and I shall live to acknowledge our obligation to them,
there being nothing in this world that I desire more, then you should at least
hear from me; And believe it (sweet heart) were I before the Parliament in
London, I could justify, both the King and my self in what I have done, And so
I pray acquaint my Father, who I know so cautious, that he would hardly accept
a Letter from me, but yet I presume most humbly to ask his blessing, and as
heartily as I send mine to pretty Mall, and I hope this day or to morrow will
set a period to my business, to the shame of those who have been occasioners
of it: but I must needs say from my Lord Lieutenant, and the Privy Council
here, I have received as much justice, nobleness and favor, as I could
possibly expect: the Circumstances of these proceedings are too long to write
unto you, but I am confident all will prove to my greater honor; And my Right
Honorable accuser, my Lord George Digby, will be at last rectified and
confirmed in the good which he is pleased to say he ever had of me hitherto, as
the greatest affliction that he ever had, did do what his conscience enforced
him unto, and indeed did wrap up the bitter pill of the Impeachment of
suspicion of high Treason in so good words, as that I swallowed it, with the
greatest ease in the world, and it has hither had no other operation, then
that it has purged Melancholy: for as I was not at the present not any way
dismayed, so have I not since been any way at all disheartened. So I pray let
not any of my friends that is there, believe any thing, until ye have the
perfect relation of it from my self. And this request I chiefly make unto you,
to whom I remain a most faithful, and most passionately devoted Husband and
servant,

Glamorgan.
Remember my service to my Brother, my cousin Brown, and the rest of my good
friends.



My Dear friend,
I Have very much to write to you concerning this place and yet know not what
to write, you have heard I do believe of the Earl of Glamorgans agreement
with the Irish, by which he undertook they should have all the Churches
within their Quarters, and all other Churches in the Kingdom not actually
possessed by the Protestant party, as also all the Lands, Tenements, Tithes,
and Hereditaments belonging to the Clergy, not actually possessed by the
Protestant party, and that they should be free from the Jurisdiction of the
Protestant Clergy, for which wild undertaking my Lord Digbie accused him of
high Treason, for which the Earl does now stand committed in the Castle. What
further effects this will produce, I am not able to judge, but the Irish give
out that they will Treat no further with us if that he be not set at liberty,
it was part of his agreement with them, that they should send into England ten
thousand men to assist his Majesty, and a great part of them was ready to be
shipped where he was committed, which were thereupon stayed; We are in a very
sad Condition here, environed with Enemies of all sides, and in a very weak
posture to defend our selves, but the God of Jacob will I hope be our refuge.
Your Father and the rest of your friends are in good health. I would you had
known my thoughts, or that I were with you for some time to unburthen my
self; God keep you and us in the midst of these straights, and so in have, I
rest,

11. January 1645. Your assured loving friend, MAN. EUSTACE.
This Gentleman has some business to Bristoll, I pray you to be favor him
therein, some estate is there fallen to him, and he is gone thither in pursuit
thereof.

My own, and my Wives service to your noble Lady.

Superscribed for my much honored friend Tho. Pigget Esquire, at Alstowne
near Bristoll these.



FINIS.

