AN ANSWER TO A FOOLISH PAMPHLET ENTITVLED A swarm of Sectaries and
Schismatics.

Put forth by John Tailor the Water-Poet.

Wherein is set down 1. An Epistle to John Tailor. 2. John Tailors Arms,
blazed by Fennor. 3. George Hattons lines sent to John Tailor. 4. The view of
his long silence. 5. The view of his writing this Book. 6. A view of the
Title. 7. A view of John Tailor in the TUB. 8. A view of his Puritans. 9. A
view of his Hypocrisy. 10. An Exhortation to John Tailor to repent.


Printed in the Year, 1641.

An Epistle to John Tailor the Water Poet.
M^ Tailor,
AFter a Supper of slanders, give me leave to return a B^nquet of defense; I am
sorry that my pen is plucked back from other occasions, to answer an oppo^^te
so ignoble: but seeing Religion shot at by such a poisoned Pistol; I thought
it meet to serve out the bullet of thy infamy before it grew rank, or festred
too far in the worlds apprehension. But all that I shall say to thee in this
Epistle more, is only to call thee back, to thy old A. B. C. long since set
thee by an old acquaintance of thine to an Anagramme, that thy self writ of
his name. My Anagramme if thou but rightly fear,
Then thou will find, it is I will fear no man,
How can I then fear thee that art a Tailor,
A shred of fustian, and a ragged Raylor;
A dish that is not worth the seeding on,
When thou art best in Lent thou art but poor John.


The Arms of John Tailor the Water-poet, blazed according to the old Copy.
And first because all sculls thou do excel,
A silver care will for thy Crest do well,
A pair of arms bound in a sable scarf,
In a sad field as large as Wapping-wharfe:
Out of the wa^er shall appear one dead,
A halter, and a cross bar over his head,
And on his shield this Motto shall be found,
Tailor the sculler was both hanged and drowned:
In all this blazing thee no hurt I mean,
But hang thee till the tide has washed thee clean.
To John Tailor the Water-poet.
When a fresh water-man does turn salt Poet;
His Muse must prattle, all the world must know it,
Of whore and thief, he writes two merry books,
He loves them both, J know it by his looks.
G. H.

John Tailors lying still.
Not I alone (but many more) have wondered that John Tailor has of late bin
crowded from the Press by these young Poets; surely he has mourned to see
these times, and fearing Reformation, thought it the best policy to hold his
peace; lest his pen betray his dissembling heart, and so the times chance to
correct his knavery, and he feel the smart of his lascivious life; for such
wanton tricks as he used when he made the Poet almost fear that he -- came
too near his wife, when he said to him. But yet I wonder since thou hate my
life,
Thou should profess such kindness to my wife,
If thy hot love without deceit be fervent,
My Kitchen maid shall take thee for her servant;
For all the love that from my wife proceeds,
Is scorning of thy person and thy deeds.


Such tricks as these may well prevail to keep an idle lascivious, drunken
Poets lines from the Press, such happy times as these.

But stay! John Tailor has taken courage: he has writ a book, and oh how
Papists laugh at it, and commend it, and they are very glad to see him begin to
peep out; well let him take heed, lest he peep through a wooden casement in
Cheape-side, or else fair worse in a cart, with a breakfast with young
Gregory.

The cause why he writ.
John Tailor was, a while since, invited to dine with his old friend the Bishop
of Canterbury in the Tower, and oh how he made his little grace laugh, with
telling of him strange stories; John c^n cut out Brownists, and Puritans into
shreds at his pleasure, though he have his own Religion to choose, indeed he
has said to some, that they had as good to deal with the Devil, as with him,
which we see verified in him, by his base scandalous lines, which were long
since reproved thus. How Rascall-like thou dealest at the first,
Thou show from what a^tiquitie the art nurs't:
But I will spare thee thou intemp'rate Ass,
Until in Bridewell thou shall current pass.


What has the Bishop of Canterbury rubbed up the courage, to put thy railing
lines in print, against thou know not whom nor what? No marvel though his
Arch-Grace told John Tailor, that he wondered he would not visit his wine
ofter; is this book his recompense for thy friendly entertainment?

An Answer to his title.
The title pretends to discover Sects, and Schisms, but the book runs (for
the most part) of another matter, sure he thought he had bin at his old work,
the world runs on wheels; he writes of kissing, and whoring, and such ribble
and rabble of his own brain: ah John, old Rats love cheese. Do thou think
thou losest thy living, when thou have not thy fare of threescore whores in a
day: does this enable Poets to do the Kingdom good service? What, will thou
again lament the loss of those days, wherein thou have attended the whole fry
of famous whores, to air themselves by waters?

Of the picture in the title of his Book.
I did first conceive that fellow in the Tub to be John Tailor the Poet, having
stayed so long with the Bishop of Canterbury, until at last he saw one vessel
of Sack drawn dry, and then brake out the head of the Tub to tumble in, and
falling asleep was almost stifled in the Lees; crying out to Sam the Vintners
boy in the Tower, to help him; crying Sam: How, come and help me out, and all
the people flocking about him, see how he stands like a drowned mouse. But for
all this, when the Bishop comes to his graceship again, he will give John a
good pension, but I hope he shall never see it. Long since did that Satyr
protest thus against him. I to my Country do commend my love and skill,
To root out all such John Tailor and his Adherents,
instruments of ill.


This, says he, was printed luckily, and you see that it may be read unhappily.

The Knaves Puritan.
The Captain and first frontier of the swarm he brings in to be the Knaves
Puritan* or if you will John Tailors opposite, that abhors sin, and detests all
such corrupt company.

Who striving God to fear, and serve the best he can,
The Poet is a knave to abuse this Puritan.
The Knave Puritan.
What is the Poet mad to lay the rod in piss, that must lash his own fat
knavish buttocks; to describe the knave Puritan (as he calls him) to be so
like his own picture? Surely did not the Printer mistake, and put in Puritan
instead of Poet? Well a Croyden Scholar once began to tumble Hell for Tailors
shreds that are thrown out of sight: though something obscurely, when he said
he read his verses to me, and which more is, did move my Muse to write Laudem
Auditories.

If for his Land Discoveries, she should praise him,
Whether would then this liquid knowledge raise him?
Read his two Treatises of thief and whore,
You Will think it time for him to leave his Oar;
Yet thus much of his worth I cannot smother,
It Is well for us, when thieves peach one another.
To he that will.
In the first place John Tailor would have the Readers to understand that his
Muse is no further Musical, then it runs division; and so it is in very deed;
for one while he derides those that deride true Religion as Atheistes, and by
and by, he (like a substantial Papist) derides the Contemners of Popish rights
as Heretics, and while he pretends reverence to truth, and presently again he
applauds foul Errors; this indeed is truly called by himself division,
whereby he unmaskes his own Hypocrisy. Thou talkest much of preaching, but
when do thou either hear the word of God preached to thee, or when do thou
pray? One writ the word long since; That thou that of man's life art no esteemer,
What mercy can thou hope from thy Redeemer?
Say these had wronged thee, thou good names betrayer,
Thou call for vengeance in thy Saviors prayer;
I will not say so, but it does appear,
Thou scarce do say thy prayers once a year.


How lightly does he esteem of pre^ching: when as he compares it to the
hangings in a L^dies bedchamber, and I know not what, surely this he rubbed up
out of his memory, since he played the B^wd, expressing himself, how the
wandering sight brought home, into the very bedchamber of the heart, amorous
actions, effeminate glances, pictures of prostitution, and Veneriall vanities,
he brings a rem^mbr^nce (which was long since commended) before his eyes and
presents it to others, to t^ke warning by Achitophell. But do thou think the
matter is no more,
But hang themselves? Thy Counsel they abhor.
But take thou heed of this enchanted spell,
John Tailor ended like Achitophell.
What foolish Ass, like thee, would take in hand,
To write of that thou can not unde^stand?
But dear T^rlia in her ^iming fit
Sung, thou will dye a fool for want of wit.
But I am sorry that thy credit's tainted,
To make thee and thy Chandler unacquainted,
Will he now score no more for eggs and cheese,
Because he saw thy Hope upon her knees?
For reputation thou can have no more
Than in a bakers debt, or Ale-wives score;
And if thou be denied both bread and d^inke,
Thy writing, and thy lazy sides will shrink.
J see thou art so bare and desperate,
Thou would turn Hangman to a^vance thy state,
And hang up honest men, but they will o're-match you,
And stand to see an hempen halter catch you.


Tailors shreds.
When this Tailor comes to spread his shreds abro^d by piece-meale, he falls
into a furious railing against this man, and that man, and J know not who, and
these he calls holy brethren, and the women holy sisters, the lines are full
of roguish Language, such as Newgate teaches: a friend of his was persuaded
long since, that he was tutored in the stews, because he is so perfect in
their speech, full of base roguish wishings, Curses, and Revilings, tempestuous
Railings, and defiling men's good names, and though he protested not long since
that he would scorn to molest the name of the dead, expressing himself that
he conceived it to be a most inhumane thing, but let him look upon his old
Anagramme. O hate, rail on, or this rail on, O hate:
For spite of railing I must it dedicate
An Answer to thy theme although not so large,
Will sink thy scullers boat, though it were a Barge,
To halter up thy Muse my Muse begins,
To trusse the jade for breaking peoples shins.
Remember when thou let'st the wine run tumbling down,
Thy rotten wine-pipe like a drunken clown,
But yet thy Lion drunk could not defend thee,
Although thy Ape drunk, makes some men commend thee,
And thy tobacco is such stinking stuff,
That thou know who cried out enough, enough.


Farewell, V. R. Heavenly K. R.

FINIS.

