A Word in Season: OR Motives to Peace, Accommodation, and Unity, 'twixt
PRESBYTERIAN AND INDEPENDENT Brethren.
Drawn from necessity of Duty, necessity of Expediency, and from the
Possibility of Atchieving.
CHristian Reader
whoever thou art that do cast an eye on these ensuing Motives, thou art
desired yea and required (how despicable so ever the penman seem unto thee) in
the Name of that Son of peace: and by all thy interest in that spirit of peace,
love, and union, not to slight the Motion, nor yet only in a curfory way, to
pass thy favorable verdit on it as good, and so to lay it by. But seriously
ponder in thine heart the seasonablenesse of the motion, And necessity of
speedy action, toward the within mentioned peace and accommodation; Before
that which is now our notorious sin [ division] be by the hand of Justice,
turned into a most eminent plague unto us. Before the fire which we have
kindled break forth into a vehement flame, not to be quenched but wi^h the
blood of the kindlers: We know how great a matter a little fire kindles. And
as by all the ensuing Motives, so by this also (know thou not that it will
be bitterness in the end:) Thou art entreated to lay by all prejudice against
this duty, so much and so many ways pressed upon us; and industriously act
toward it with all thy might.

And if upon perusal of this paper, thou say, You tell us that we all know
already, and persuade us unto that we are before willing unto: but tell us
something of the way to accomplish.

Its answered the Author is sufficiently persuaded, that the ways are many and
easy enough to find, and that its rather want of will then skill that the
work is not done already, and that the difference is not so much in principles
as in spirits. And that if the ministry of each were but by the people engaged
to confer and consult together, and each for accommodation sake to give way, as
much as with safety and good consciences they may, the work would not be long a
doing.

And further. That way is most like to win upon the people that's found out and
agreed on by the Ministers of either party, of their own designing to the work;
also Ministers are like best to approve and most cordially to engage for it, in
persuading with the people.

Secondly to agree upon the way is the work of both parties together, and not
of one alone; each can best tell what will give them satisfaction.

Thirdly if a way should be propounded and set down in writing it either must
be very largely set down with all its circumstances and objections answered; or
else the propounder must be at the elbow of each Reader to answer objections,
or in stead of helping he might peradventure hinder the work.

Fourthly, The prescribing a way though excellent, could not accomplish without
the former.

Fifthly, nor would it likely avail much though never so perfect, seeing
several persons have several apprehensions, and the same thing seems better
to another in another form: Nor is it for the honor of the public to take
up the conceptions of a private spirit, another being as Good, and if the
result of more public Labors be Better as being more engaging.

For these and the like Reasons he has put thee upon the ingageing the
Ministry to this so desirable so blessed a work.

Motives to Peace, Accommodation, and Unity 'twixt PRESBYTERIAN and INDEPENDENT
Brethren; etc.
FIrst, That we may be like our Father, who is One and undivided, we also must
Be and Appear so.

He seeks Reconciliation with Us, when separated from him, and must not we
seek Reconciliation with Brethren?

He loves the United, and will dwell among, and bless them, Psalm. 133. 1 Cor.
13.11. He hates discord, and the advancers of it, Pro. 6.16.19.

Secondly, That we dishonor not Jesus Christ our Master before the world; and
occasion not them to say, That either Christ is not in us, and we not
Christians, as we profess to be; or else Jesus Christ is not the Son of God;
whom the world knows to be a God of peace and union, and knows there is no
division in him, John 17.21.23. And so,

Thirdly, That we make not frustrate the last and earnest prayer of Jesus
Christ to his Father for us, Joh. 17.21, 23. That we may be one in Spirit, in
word, and in working, as the Father and the Son is one; and hold forth that
union to all the world, that the world may know, that Jesus Christ whom we
profess is of the Father, and that the father has sent him.

Fourthly, That we make not frustrate the glorious design of Jesus Christ, who
dyed, As that he might reconcile Man to God, so also to reconcile man to man;
That he might make in himself of twain One, and so making Peace, Ephesians. 2.15,
16, etc. Isa. 11. chap.

Fifthly, That we make not the Command of Jesus Christ of none effect unto us,
viz. As I have loved you, That ye love one another, Joh. 13. Have peace one
with another, Mark 9.50. Let us follow after the things that make for peace,
and whereby we may Edify one another, Romans 14.19. Seek peace and follow after
it, Psalm. 34. Be of one mind and live in peace, 1 Cor. 13.11.

Sixthly, Nor the earnest request or beseeching of Jesus Christ by his Apostle;
That we all speak one thing, and that there be no divisions among us, 1 Cor.
1.10.

Seventhly, That we dishonor not Religion, and the Gospel of Christ, seeing
it becomes the Gospel that the professors of it stand fast in One Spirit, and
One Mind, striving together for the says of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. and the
contrary thereof, so much occasions scandal to those without, and staggering
to weak brethren, and makes both subject to question, whether Religion be
Divine or Humane.

Eighthly, That we call not our Christianity into question, amongst fellow
Christians, and evidence not to them that we are Carnal walking in envyings,
strife, and divisions, 1 Cor. 3.3. But that we may give Testimony, that we are
their fellow Disciples of Christ, as John 13.35. and beloved of God, as John
17.23. at end.

Ninthly, For that either we grant one another to be brethren, fellow Members,
and to have all drunk into one Spirit: and then how do we dishonor and grieve
that spirit of Peace, Love, and Union, by our contrariety thereunto? or else
one denies the other party to be such; and then how great, how sad, how
sinful, is that Division?

In regard of God, his Son, his holy Spirit, our Selves, our brethren for that
we are Brethren, and the Cananite and the Perosites are in the Land, viz. The
eyes of Papists and carnal Protestants are upon us.

Motives from the expediency: Its expedient and therefore necessary, neither
having ground to believe that the State will so establish the One, as not to
suffer the other, what inconveniency will ensue without Accommodations.

Between both, neither will be able to keep their Members in good Order, but
all discontented spirits will slight and cast off the yoke, and be gone.

Nor will that love and sweetness be maintained 'twixt husbands, wives,
parents, children, brethren, all relations.

Nor will that neglect of the Study of things more excellent and more tending
to piety, Justice and Charity to maintain our pre-ingagements to this or that
Discipline, be prevented.

Nor that making of sides or parties, so prejudicial to States, Churches, and
all Christians, be prevented.

Nor the wicked hopes of our Enemies so thoroughly disappointed.

Nor shall we without accommodation and communion, know so well, those that
notoriously dissent in doctrine and not in Discipline only nor can we prevent
the flowing in of errors without control.

Nor can it be prevented but any party of headstrong persons will make a Church
or confederacy at their pleasure, and slight and set at naught all the Churches.

Nor will (as we may justly fear) envy, clamors, and slanders, by the brethren
of each party be laid aside.

Nor will Royalists and Episcopal Spirits, be so well brought in, but will set
up Assemblies of their own Factions, which by Rules of Accommodation may be
prevented, and they won to love Religion and the Brethren.

Its our duty and therefore necessary, its necessary and therefore our duty:
and the necessity thereof daily more and more appears to every discerning eye,
that sees into the spirits and jealousies of each party, and considers the
mischiefs that may ensue: If ye bite and devour one another take heed, etc.
Gal. 5.15.

Its possible to be achieved: for,

First, our Father has promised to give one heart and one way, Jer. 32.39. He
that made the stick of Judah, and the stick of Ephraim one. Jer. 37.16, 17.
Can, yea will unite all his people, and will turn to them a pure language; and
they shall serve him with one consent, Zeph. 3 9. And his name shall be one,
Zac. 14.9.

Secondly, Our Lord Christ has prayed that it should be so, Joh. 17.21.23. and
made it one of his last and great requests unto his Father, and left it as a
Legacy to Us, John 14.37. and 16.23. and 20.19. It therefore must and will be
so.

Thirdly, Because the Spirit by which we are all sanctified is one and the
same, and therefore will be always acting us toward it, and will at last
effect it, 1 Cor. 12.13. Made to drink into one Spirit and baptized into one
body, and having entrance by one Spirit unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18.

Its possible, for Our Lord Christ is prevalent and cannot fail of obtaining
with the Father, and he is able to deliver to us what he has bequethed, and
God is faithful who has promised; and righteous to give Jesus Christ what he
has purchased.

And that sweet and powerful spirit is able and very willing to carry one that
glorious design of the Father and the Son, wherein himself also is alike
engaged in the hearts of his.

Its possible, for as great things and very much greater are done among us by
the Spirit of the Lord.

How great things even to the height of admiration has been (before our eyes)
done; By that wonderworking Spirit of providence; and how shall we not expect
as great things to be done by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus.

And is not (by exceeding much) the maine part of the work by that Spirit
already done, in the hearts of Gods people of both parties and why should we
doubt the less, are we not come nearer and nearer together, both in principles
and practice, and why should we doubt the issue.

So that all the let is in our selves, our straightness is in our own Bowels:
we must be isntrumental to our God in this, as in all other great things he
has done among us. At the least we must suffer the influence of that all
working Spirit of love, peace, and union, upon our hearts and spirits, and not
resist by a contrary spirit, as we too too much (Oh that it might not be truly
said for the most part) do.

If there be therefore any desire to be like our Father, if any love to his
presence and blessing (and is there the like power and evidence of especial
presence in Ordinances (except by a moderate party) as was wont to be) if any
love to the honor of Christ, and to receive the blessed Return of the prayer
of Christ, or to carry on the glorious design of Christ, or to obey his
commands, or to credit his Gospel, or our selves his members, or to
accommodate his Saints, and disappoint the hopes of his enemies.

If there be any consolation in Christ, if any Comfort in love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies; fulfill ye my joy, That ye
be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. In
lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then themseves.

Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others. Let the same mind be in you, that was also in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.1,
2, 3, 4, 5.

Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus.

That ye may with one mind and on mouth glorify God even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15.5, 6.

Now whereas some will say, all this is good, it ought to be indeed; but what
is it to me or to our partee? our consents and desires are toward it, but the
other partee dissents and stands at a distance, upon such terms that we
cannot, we may not close.

And others will say all this is good and desirable, but the skill and
difficulty is to obtain it.

Answ. To the former its answered, If they desire and endeavor it as good,
what means the bleatings which are heard? viz. The hard speeches one of
another, discoveries of jealousies and opposition of spirit, one toward
another; and deterring of endeavors toward accommodation, peace, and union by
Inclination of the vanity of endeavors thereunto.

At the best where is the discovery of such endeavors as ought to be by either
party, expressing what some particular persons, peradventure of their own
dispositions have done? what considerable thing has been by way of
condescension done toward accommodation by those that brag most of either
partee which ought not in duty to be done though there were no such difference
in Being?

Where is that spirit of accommodation that was in holy James and the Elders
assembled, Act. 21.18.20? Do not many of us on the contrary drive designs, to
go One beyond, and to thwart and circumvent Another?

To both its answered, where is the Manifestation of the desires toward it by
calling for it, crying it up, and endeavor after it, among all the petitions
and petitioners that have appeared? who petitions for this? who (as for other
things) joins together in Troops to request men of wisdom, peace and love to
communicate councels, to find out propositions, to present to the Committee of
Accommodation?

And whereas many motions may best take Rise from the earnest desires of the
people, where is the endeavors of active men to take the stumbling block and
temptation out of the way of Ministers of both parties, who are flesh and blood
and have their frailties as others, and may not peradventure be able to break
through the disesteeme and discountenance of those whose eyes they know will be
upon them for evil, if they shall for accommodations sake yield some thing
from what they have formerly held forth and maintained, or from what men of
great countenance now hold? What great things have been done that (to help in
this case) have seemed to take their Rise from the motions of the people?
Whereas the Ministers cannot but see a necessity of accommodation in other
regards: Oh, that they might see a necessity also, to accomodate the
Importunate desires of the people.

If this therefore be of God, of Christ, and desirable to Christians, cry it
up and with all your might endeavor in it, in a spirit of sincerity, love,
meekness, and humility. And the Lord our God shall be with us.

Now I beseech you brethren by the Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor.
1.10.
FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryl.

London, Printed by J. Macock, for Giles Calvert, dwelling at the black
Spred-Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1646.


