Meditations UPON THE MARKS of the True CHURCH of CHRIST: OR, Motives of
Credibility In behalf of the True Religion: And, the easiest way to find it
out.

By H. W.

Testimonia tua credibilia facta sunt nimis.

Thy testimonies are made too credible. Psalm.92.7.

Lord, if that which we believe be an error, you have deceived us; for this
doctrine is confirmed by those signs, which could not be done but by you:
Ricardus de S. Victore 1.1, de Trinitate c. 2.

Paris, Printed, with License. 1655.

The Preface
IF the Enemy of mankind did not show unto Sectaries the face of Religion in a
false Glass; in which he makes the very Spouse of Christ (she that is so
beautiful, with so lovely features, and of so comely a comportment in her
self) appear to the deluded eyes of so many souls ill-favored, ugly, and in a
manner monstrous; and on the contrary sets out other Sects (though never so
contemptable in themselves) for beauties, most gracious and attractive:
disputes and ^^arrels about Religion would be soon composed: for the natural
comeliness of the one, and the ugliness of the others (covered only with a
painted exterior) would easily discover themselves.

My endeavor therefore shall be to unbeguile these people, and show them both
parties, as they are in their own native colors: for effecting of which, I
have chosen a new medium, or at least a new manner ofproposing the old: many
Elaborate works have been published in Vindication of the true Faith, and in
confutation of falsehood; which undoubtedly were convincing enough: but because
both experience, and the ingenuous acknowledgement of many, teach, that though
the intellect in many thousands rest convinced; yet the will holds back, and
will not execute what the understanding dictates ought to be done: Therefore I
(resolving not to be backward in contributing my endeavors toward the common
good) thought it not a miss to handle this great business of Religion, by way
of Meditation (rather than by that of argumentation;) as being the most
efficacious way to move the will; besides, its being the most clear and easy
way of propounding things to the understanding: especially, since the subject I
take in hand, is both spiritual, and proper for Meditation; to wit, the marks
of the church. For who can doubt but Sanctity of life and Doctrine; the gift of
Miracles and of Prophesying; conversion of Souls, Martyrdom, and the like, are
a very connaturall matter for Meditation.

But as the best masters of spirit advise, that in delivering matter to
Meditate upon, some points, or considerations be suggested to the exercitant,
thereby to facilitate the business for him; and yet that all that may be
considered upon such a subject, be not ambitiously introduced, least the others
understanding be prevented and forestalled: So have I in this little work
endeavored to proceed; setting down upon each matter only some chief
considerations, which may give the Reader occasion to search further himself. I
have also added some affections and Colloquies thereby to further the motions
of the will.

As for the matter of the ensuing Meditations, to wit, the Marks of the Church;
this I may truly say of them, that as they are in themselves a most noble
matter, and most worthy of a Christians Meditation and Study: so are they of
all other, the most facile (...) forcible means, whereby to find out the true
Church: That Catholic who has a desire to make a quick dispatch of his
Adversary, let him encounter him with these Weapons: they are an unknown
treasure, and not unlike to Aristoles Topics, in that they are as it were
common places, or fountains, out of which reasons and arguments, both to impugn
false Sects, and also to defend the Orthodox Religion, are easily at any time
drawn: Art thou demanded the reason, why thou art a Catholic? Answer: Because
that Religion has the marks of Christ's true church upon it; and consequently
is it. Art thou desirous to find out that only soul-saving Faith of Christ?
look where thou can find these marks, and there thou have it; and where
these are wanting; assuredly, there the true Church is not: Have thou a mind
truly to understand how incomparable a benefit God has bestowed upon thee, in
making thee a member of that church, out of which no salvation can be hoped for;
read and meditate this matter, which will inform thee. Roman Catholics indeed
have more and clearer texts out of the prophetical and and apostolic writers,
than any other Sect can introduce in their own behalf; yet the latter have
always evasions, either by appealing from one sentence to another, or else by
insisting upon their own private exposition; reduce them therefore to this
matter of the marks of the Church, and you will soon have them fast.

One thing is worthy, yea necessary to be well understood by all: and this is
that the marks of the Church (which are the motives in point of religion) may
be considered two ways; to wit, either as they are antecedent to faith; or as
they are subsequent, and things themselves believed with divine faith: for all
christians, who receive the the scriptures for divine, must believe with divine
faith, that Christ gave to his church the gift of working miracles, and of
prophesyings and that the church is but one, and antienter than all other Sects
amongst christians; that in it there are holy members; that its doctrine is
holy, and efficacious to convert souls; that it has continued ever since
christ's time, and shall do still until the world have an end; that the
prophesies of the old law are fulfilled by christ, and his church: all these,
or the most of them, must be believed as divine truths by christians; for they
are expressed in the holy scripture; as will appear in the first point of the
succeeding meditations. So that sectaries must believe the true Church to be,
where these marks are.

But the same things may be also considered as they are preceding divine Faith,
and go before it; yea, or wholly independent of it; and in this acception only
they are motives of credibility; yet most powerfully persuasive: For by
demonstrating to Athiests, Pagans, or other non-Christians, out of humane
history, and out of the scriptures (received only for books of humane
authority, yet held by thousands of prudent, and learned men for authentical,
and of great credit) that such and such prodigious things, or miracles (and the
like may be urged in strange predictions of future things contingent fulfilled,
in a strange contempt of worldly things, and in some other such like rareties)
are recounted by so many authors of the greatest humane authority: this cannot
but convince them, that there is a Deity; that this Diety rules the World by a
most wise Providence; that the same Deity (by order of good consequence) is to
be worshipped by some form of Religion; and that that is in all likelihood, yea
in all certainty, the most credible and true, the professors of which are
conspicuous by such things, as out reach the ability of nature or art: for such
persons question less have conference, and hold correspondence with God: and
de facto, Insidels were brought to embrace the Catholic Faith, by these
motives, as the chiefest inducements.

The truth is, That it is not only in all men's opinion morally, but as many
learned Divines teach metaphysically impossible, that that Religion should be
false, which God has confirmed with his own Hand and Seal; I mean, with these
Arguments, Motives, and Marks, which the absolute power of God only could
produce: for otherwise it would follow, that God should induce men into error,
and be the author of falsehood; a thing which implies a contradiction, and is
incompatible with the goodness and veracity of God: and would make the divine
will repugnant to it self, by commanding men to serve him in the true Religion,
and yet leading them to a false one, by the whole complex of such, and so
extraordinary motives as these are.

Thus much for the instruction, and conviction of non-christians, and such as
do not admit the holy scripture to be the word of God. Concerning which people
I add, that when any of them are come so far, as to believe with humane faith
(which may be in every ones power to do) that these motives convince that to be
the true church, which is confirmed by those divine signs; and when they do
accept of that Church for such: God will undoubtedly raise their humane Faith
up to be divine; by infusing into them the auxiliary forces of his supernatural
grace, and light, with the habit of divine faith.

Now for the better understanding how from humane faith, a man may ascend to an
act of divine faith: Note the distinction betwixt these four principles, into
which an act of faith may be resolved. First the extrinsical motives: and these
are not, nor can they be the efficient cause of an act of divine faith: but
they are dispositions: that is they are motives, or cause why that Religion, or
such a point, is accepted on for the truth.

Secondly, The Authority of the Churchs and she does only propound what is to
be believed, and gives order and direction how to proceed in the carriage of
belief.

Thirdly, The Veracity of God revealing to the Church, and by the Church to us,
divine truths: and this is the formal object, or cause, why the understanding
assents to such a thing as a divine truth: for therefore we believe that such
Books are Divine, because God has revealed to the Church, that they are so.

Fourthly, The habit of Divine Faith, together with divine grace: and these are
the efficient cause of an act of Divine Faith.

All these four principles intervene in the analysis of theological Faith; but
with subordination to one another, and not as so many independent first
principles of Faith: for the first, immediate, and indemonstrable cause of man's
assent, is God revealing; though the cause of accepting such a faith must be
the motives of credibility.

I conclude this Preface, with giving the Reader notice, that before I begin
with the Meditations of the particular Marks (of which I have chosen out only
16.) I thought fit to premise 4 Meditations, which are both of most necessary
subjects in themselves, as also preparatives for the more fruitful perusage of
those which follow: And for a clearer demonstration to Sectaries, that such and
such are put for marks of Christ's Church by scripture it self; I have of set
purpose cited the proofs universally out of the Protestants own Bible.

A Table of the several Meditations following:
MEd. 1. Of the end of Man. Page 1 Med. 2. Of divine Faith. Page 11 Med. 3. Of
Christ's true Church. Page 22 Med. 4. Of the Marks in general. Page 33 Med. 5.
Of Miracles. Page 46 Med. 6. Of Sanctity of Life Page 57 Med. 7. Of Holiness
of Doctrine. Page 73 Med. 8. Of the Conversion of nations. Page 91 Med. 9. Of
the Vninterupted, and Apostolical Succession of the Pastors of the Church. Page
106 10. Of the antiquity of the true church Page 123 Med. 11. Of Unity in
matters of Faith and Religion. Page 143 Med. 12. Of the Amplitude, and Extent
of the Dominions of Christ's Church. Page 156 Med. 13. Of the Name of Catholic,
and whose it is by right. Page 167 Med. 14. Of the gift of Prophecy. Page 176
15. Of easy Decission of Controversies. Page 186 16. Of Persecution, and
Martyrdom. Page 198 Med. 17. Of the Prophecies, and Promises, and Figures of
the old Law fulfilled in Christ's Church. Page 208 Med. 18. Of Temporal
blessings Miraculously bestowed on the Defenders and Propagators of the
Catholic Religion. Page 219 Med. 19. Of the Disasters, and Unhappy ends of the
Opposers and Enemies, of the Roman Church. Page 233 M. 20. Of the Confession of
Adversaries. Page 249
Of the end of Man.
The first Meditation, and a ground to those which follow after.

Of the End of Man.

Of the means to attain it, and of the Use, which is to be made of that means.

The first Point.
COnsider first, how the Almighty, drawing man by the act of creation, out of
the darksome abyss of that nonentity, or nothing, in which, he had lain
from all eternity past, without any real being; and bringing him into the
light of life, now a rational and noble creature; placed him in this inferior
world: but for what end? to spend precious time in searching after sensull
pleasures? in hunting after honors? in scraping up riches? No, the end for
which God created thee (man) was more sublime than so; it was a supernatural
end; an end of the highest perfection, and the most to be wished for that can
possibly be: to serve God in this life, and to enjoy eternally the beatisicall
Vision of him in the life to come; this was that which God intended in creating
thee; do thou prefix to thy self the same end, if thou will be happy.

Consider, Secondly (for the better understanding of this mainly fundamental
point) that this end has two parts, Romans 6. 23.
or is twofold. So says St. Paul, Ye have your fruit unto sanctification, but
your end eternal life: And our Savior intimates the same in these Divine
words: Matt. 6. 33. Seek first the kingdom of God, Mat. 6. 33.
and his righteousness; so that here is sanctity and eternal beatitude: the
one is to be practiced in this life; the other shall be purchased in the next:
the one is finis maximus; and the other is the remote end: and as the self same
thing may be both the end, and the means also, respectively: so here holiness
of life, though it be really man's end in this life (for he is created to serve
God in this life;) yet in respect of the final end, which is eternally to
enjoy that insinite goodness, the former is only the means, by which the
latter is attainable.

Gather out of this Fundamental point, a strong resolution, and effectual
desire, from henceforth to make the consideration of this so noble end, thy
serious and frequent Study: Yet first by reading and meditating upon that
subject, a perfect knowledge of it; from which will arise a high conceit and
esteem of the same: and then the will must needs produce its acts: such are a
longing, and languishing desire of seeing and enjoying that infinite Majesty; a
great love and affection toward the service of God; frequent and servent acts
of gratitude; resolute and efficacious purposes, humble and devout petitions
for divine grace, and perseverance: The Will being thus moved, she, as Queen,
will give order to all the executive powers, that they b^stirre themselves
about the performance of all that is conducing to that final end; and in
abandoning whatsoever is prejndiciall to the same.

The Colloquie.
Be ever blessed, O thou great Creator of this little world Man: thine is the
work; thine be the glory: O my ungrateful forgetfulness of this, and thy
other benefits: Grant me (Lord) a large measure of thy grace, for the
reformation of my life: for from bence forward, thou shall be the object of all
my actions; the end of all my creation shall be the rule of all my operations:
thy divine will shall be the copy after which i will write, the White at which
i will shoot, the Compass with which i will sail, and the Pole Star at which I Will
look: grant me still the strong gaile of thy grace; till I arrive at Heavens
Haven, Amen.

The second Point.
Consider first, That as the goodness of God has created man for a supernatural
end; so has he liberally provided him of all the necessary requisites, which
can be wished for that purpose: All these created things (of which some
administer Food, others Clothing; some delight man, others assist him; some
serve for his instruction, and others for his necessary correction) are means
to help him forward on his great journey; if they be used with reference to his
end; and as a Physician uses drugs, of which he prescribes neither more nor
lefse than is needful: but man's end being beyond natures reach alone, God has
also supplied him with plenty of supernatural means; all which are contained in
that general one, the true Church: out of which, as there are no helps, so no
hopes of attaining to that end: no salvation without serving God; no serving
God, but by true worship; Lib.4.c.ult. div.Inst.
no true worship (faith Lactantius very well) but in the true Catholic Church:
Seek it, find it.

Consider Secondly, The particular helps, which are contained in this general
one, The Church: enter in, and to thy comfort, take a view of the many and
marveilous means, which (like precious treasures, or sacred relics) Christ
has laid up in store within it.

1. Faith (without which its impossible to please God) not humane and fallible;
but divine, and undoubtedly true.

2 A Law, which comprehends in it those divine ordinations and precepts, which
all must observe that will enter into life.

3 Evengelicall Counsels; which, though they be only for noble volunteers; yet
by means of them a man may live far more remote from sin, and border nearer
upon perfection.

4 A form of worship most Religious, Decent, Majesticall: and in which the two
essential parts of man, both soul, and body, serve God like a God, by the
exercise of the acts of Religion (the chief of all the moral Virtues) both
interior, and exterior; such are Prayer, Sacrifice, Vows, Adoration,
Devotion and others.

5 The harmonious quier of the infused Virtues, and gifts of the Holy Ghost; by
the exercise of whose acts the soul makes a kind of heavenly music.

6 Most ample promises of a manifold reward in those glorious mansions of
heaven for the true servants of God; and most severe (though wholesome) threats
of never ending punishments for the bad: both which, like sharp Spurs are for
to makeus fly from the occasions of sin, and strive to make haste in the course
of a virtuous life.

7 The holy Sacraments, which are like sacred Conduits, through which the
living waters of divine grace (of which our Savior spoke to the Samaritan
woman) and the merits of our dear Redeemer flow out of his sacred side, into
man's soul.

8 The Holy Scriptures, with these three circumstances, of being truly
canonical, authentically translated, and infallibly expounded.

9 Examples of eminent sanctity, in men made of flesh and blood as we are.

10 True hearts ease, and peace of mind, which made David (Psalm. 118.) run the
way of Gods Commandments; and which Christ promises only to those of his
Church; saying, Jo. 14.27.
My Peace I leave to you: these are the true, solid, and supernatural means;
which our liberal Lord, has left in his Church, to help us to what we were
created for.

The third Point.
Consider now what use is to be made of this so admirable means, and provision
for man's supernatural end: and first those, who are already incorporated
members of the true Church, have reason to render praises to God eternally, for
so facilitating the work of their Salvation by these ample means: Secondly, an
oblation (and that a great one) is upon them, of corresponding with their
endeavors toward a diligent application, and a well ordered use of those
means; for assuredly they shall be responsible to God for the interest of those
so many, and great Talents, with which they are entrusted. Of you (O Catholics)
may that heavenly Husbandman, once more admiring, say: What could I do more for
my Vineyard, and have not done it?

As for those, who are not members of the true Church of Christ: whereof some
content themselves with the bare extrinsecall denomination of a Protestant,
Presbyterian, or Independent; not troubling themselves with the tenants of
these Sects; nay, nor so much as knowing how many, or what they are: Others,
are of a Religion ut sic; a Platonic Idea they have in their heads, and that's
all: of some one they are, but of no one in particular: others (like individua
Vaga) run from Sect to Sect, will be of every Religion; and are carried about
with every whirlwinde of new Doctrine: and others (to omit other varieties of
new fashioned Sects in these our mad times) content themselves with Negations;
showing the little better than non-existency of their Religion, by the only
Negatives of the Roman Catholic affirmative Tenants. All these (I say) and
such as are not members of Christ's true Church, or doubt how the case stands
with them in point of religion; let them ask, and answer themselves, whether or
no, they seriously love, and long for life eternal: if they affirm it: then let
them love, seek for, and find out the true Church; for that alone is the means
to acquire that happy end: if they be careless, indifferent, or ungrounded in
point of religion; evident it is, that their love of heaven is not efficacious,
but a mere velleity for, qui vult sinem, vult and media: he that loves the end,
must love the means.

Hence infer, of what infinite moment is deliberation, and choice of
Religion: to hit right, or miss that mark, is to hazard the winning, or losing
heaven: Heaven is the Wager, Resolution shoots the Arrow, the true Church is
the white, let deliberation take right aim, and earnestly beg the direction of
the Almighty, ( who has also bent his how and prepared it) by saying, Lord,
demonstrate unto me thy ways, and teach me thy paths: send forth thy light and
thy truth, that they may lead me unto thy holy mountain and into the
Tabernacles of thy Church. Amen.

The Second Meditation.
Of Divine Faith.
The first Point.
Consider first, what Faith is, both in respect of the habit and the act:
Habitual Faith, is a supernatural virtue, infused by God into the soul of man,
by which his understanding is illuminated, enabled, and inclined to believe
steadfastly all those things to be true, which God has revealed to his Church:
It differs much from other intellectual habits: as from Science, which relyes
on the evidence of the thing, Faith on Authority, to wit, of God: From opinion,
doubtfulnesse, suspicion; which do not satissie the understanding; Faith
convinces it, from civil, or humane faith, which is subject to error; but
Theological and divine Faith is that, cui non potest subesse falsum: no
falsehood dare insinuate it self into the company of Divine Faith: Actual
Faith, is no other thing but the exercise, or act proceeding from the habit of
Faith: it is a firm assent of the understanding, believing such particulars
revealed by God (to wit, that one and the self same nature and essence of God,
is in three distinct persons; that Christ is both God and man, and yet not two,
but only one thing; that there is heaven, that there is hell, and the like) to
be true: so that the material things believed are the objects of those acts.

Consider secondly, The insallible certainty, which an act of divine faith has
in it: the certainty of it hangs upon these two cardinal attributes of divine
wisdom and goodness: by the former of which, we are warranted that God cannot
by ignorance be deceived; by the second, we are secured that he will not
deceive, by revealing that for a truth, which is false; since both these
perfections are in him infinite: This infinite authority therefore of God
revealing, being the motive, or formal object of an act of faith (for therefore
we believe such a thing to be true, because God has revealed it) makes these
acts most true.

Gather hence what an admirable benefit the gift of divine Faith is; and not
the habit only, but the acts also are such; since to the producing of every
one of them, is required a congruous cogitation, and a pious affection of the
will (besides the application of man's endeavor) both which are favors from
Almighty God. Purpose a frequent exercise of producing acts of Faith, about
those holy mysteries, which God has revealed to his Church, thou that art a
member of it.

The second Point.
Heb. 11, 6.
Mar. 16, 16.
Consider now the necessity of this virtue of Divine Faith; first, from the
Testimonies of holy Scripture: without faith (faith Saint Paul) it is
impossible to please God. He that shall be found at his death devoid of this
virtue, shall not only not please God (a misery great enough) but shall
moreover inevitably incur the greatest of all miseries, eternal damnation: He
that will not believe shall be condemned; fearful words, but spoken by Christ
himself: heavy news for such as die not Catholics; but told by truth it self.
Hence resolve, that as the means to please God, is to begin by true Faith, so
the means to get true Faith, is by becoming a Member of the true Church.

Isa. 7.9.
Consider also, that as the eye is the light of the body, and the understanding
the natural eye and light of the Soul; so Divine Faith, is the supernatural
light of the understanding: Nisi credideritis non intelligetis: what say you (
Socinians) to this Oracle of divine Truth? unless you believe: what? The
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and amongst the rest, the possibility, and
actual gift of infallible Faith; How? With Divine Faith: What will follow? Non
intelliget is; you shall have no understanding of those arcana, or sacred
secrets, into which Faith dives: true it is, that humane faith, and natural
reason (drawn from the consideration of those things, which are marks of the
true Church) are previous conditions, and prerequisite to divine Faith, whose
Ephesians. 2.8.
acts are rational, and it an intellectual habit: but this is not to make
natural reason the formal object, or basis, and ultimate resolution of matters
of faith: Man's intellect has but a small sphere of activity in Order to a
perception of divine things, but so sarre forth as it is elevated by Divine
Faith: As for us, who hope we are true believers, let not us content our selves
with humane. Faith, but petition Gods divine Majesty for that Faith, which is
his heavenly gift, Lord, adauge nobis fidem; increase in us Faith; true faith;
infallible Faith, divine Faith, make us strong in faith, that by it we may know
thee, and whom thou sent Jesus Christ.

Gather out of this point, one reason (amongst others) why many Sectaries are
so bad Paraphrastes, and expounders of Scripture, and why they hold such
Paradoxes, and improbable opinions in these main matters of Faith: To wit,
because they want divine and Theological fith: so true that truth is, unless
ye will believe, ye shall not understand.

The third Point.
Consider now what is to be believed; and how we are to proceed in the exercise
of the virtue of faith: this will be facilitated by understanding the precepts
of Faith, which are two: the one Affirmative, the other Negative.

The Affirmative Precept, obliges every one to believe actually and expressly
some particular points of Faith; and the rest implicitly, or in general; that
is, all whatsoever the holy Catholic Church believes: yet so in general; that
every one is bound to be in a readiness and disposition, to embrace and assent
to the other particulars, when and accordingly, as they shall be sufficiently
propounded by the true Church.

Now for a better information of what particulars are expressly to be believed;
Note, that of these material objects, or points of Faith, some are so
essentially requisite to salvation, that a pure non-knowledgement, or not
believing them expressly, and in particular, Heb. 11. 6.
is destructive of salvation: these are called necessary necessitate medii:
such are these two, which Saint Paul mentions in these words: but without faith
it is impossible to please God; for he that comes to God, must believe that he
is, (to wit, that there is a God) and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. Here it is expressly set down, that there is no coming to
God, no enjoying him, without believing that there is a God, and that he is a
rewarder: and these two are to be believed by all, even Ethnicks and Infidels:
But those to whom the Evangelicall law has been sufficiently propounded, must
believe (besides these two) Christ and the blessed Trinity. Other things are
only necessarily to be known, and expressly to be believed, necessitate
proecepti; that is by reason of a precept obliging thereunto; such are the
Creed, the Ten Commandments, and those of the Church, our Lords Prayer, and
the Sacraments: Now lgnorance or want of actual belief of these, is not
inconsistent with salvation: though negligence in that point is seldom without
sin.

The Negative precept of Faith, is of a sarre different nature from the
affirmative; and obliges all Christians not to deny, or disbelieve any one
point of Faith, sufficiently proposed by the Church, as a truth revealed by
God: This admits no limitation, or latitude; the affirmative precept arises
from the material Points or Objects; from which also (as they are more or less
necessary to be expressly known, and believed) arises that distinction of them
into points Fundamental and not Fundamental: but the negativeprecept is taken
from the formal Object, which is the infallible testimony of God revealing;
which being the same in allpoints, it makes all fundamentalls a like: and here
the forementioned distinction has no place.

Note
Hence may be inferred what a misery it is to deny, or disbelieve any one
point, which the Church proposes as a revealed truth: It belongs undoubtedly
to the goodness of Gods providence over his Church and m^ns souls, to leave us
some infallible means by which we may know clearly, and Mar.16.16
Note.
infallibly, what he has revealed, and what points we are to believe. First,
because otherwise men would be perpetually perplexed, full of frights and
fears, and always doubtful what were revealed, and to be believed, what not:
Secondly, God commands us to belive under pain of damnation; therefore to
disbelieve any one Proposal of the Church is dangerous because a disbeliever
of even any one point is nearer incurring that dreadful sentence, than he who
disbelieves nothing: The Tenants of Roman Catholics are affirmative; those of
Sectaries are almost all negative; and consequently not acts of belief: Hence
also they are in greater danger of that Sentence above mentioned; were not that
also a hard sentence, and repugnant to the sweet mercy of God, unless he
should by some means declare unto usplainly and clearly, what particulars we
were to believe under so dreadful a penalty? The scripture, so obscure in many
places, so subject to various Interpretations, and one of the things which are
to be believed it self, cannot be this easy means; for it has never yet, nor
can possibly end the many main Controverfies about points of Faith so long in
agitation: This is a Demonstration therefore, that the Churches living, and
clear voice, must do the deed; What She says is true, is so?

O what a misery, and madness is it then, to disbelieve, or deny any one point
that she propounds as a divine Revelation: One point alone denied makes an
Heretic, divests that soul, and deprives it of all divine Faith: For the
proposition of the Church being of the same authority in that, as in all the
rest; either She is to be believed in all, or in none: and as he that is guilty
of the breach of one Commandment, is guilty of all; for he violates that
supreme legislative power of God: so he that denies giving credit to one
proposition of the Church, denies her Authority, and is guilty of all the rest:
What he believes then, is upon some humane ground, and with humane Faith;
Domine, ad quemibimus? To whom Lord shall we have recourse in our doubts of
Faith? Dic Eccleiae, Tell the Church; hear her: The least deviation in matter
of Faith is dangerous; but easily avoidable, if you will hear her: She was of
some years growth, when the Scriptures were not in being: and that these were
divine dictates, not forged fables, we had it upon trust from her: Why then is
not her word taken in all other points, as well as in that mainly Fundamental
one? What strange inconsequence is this, to believe her to be an Infallible
Propounder in some particulars, but not so in others?

The Third Meditation, which is,
Of Christ's true Church.
The first Point.
COnsider first, that as there is a God; whose existency, and operations, all
men may read in the pages of the Elements, and in the great Volume of the
Universe; whose creation and conservation, are a Physical demonstration of a
deity; to which may be added moral arguments; as the opinion and consent of all
Nations, and of all the wise ones of the world; prodigious miracles,
apparitions of spirits, prophecies, heathenish oracles, sudden and unheard of
punishments, and the like: which have made all, excepting some Atheists,
co(...)ed believers that there is a God: (...) this is a Patent verity, so also
is (...) which came out of the golden mouth of Saint Chrysostom, to wit, Siest
Deus, est colendus; if there be a God (as it is undoubtedly true there is) then
he is to be Worshipped; nature has made a great connection betwixt these two;
the conspiring consent of all Nations, not only the civillized, but even the
most barbarout, exhibited some kind of Worship to their Gods; the Heathens had
their Temples, the Jews Synagogues, and the Christians have their Churches for
that end.

Consider secondly, that as the want or neglect of divine Worship inclines to
Atheism; so by this may be gathered what in all likelihood will at leng^h
become of these modern sects in our Nation, once so religious: From the
Protestants, their form of Worship is taken away by Act of Parliament; others
will have none, and the rest will not so much as have Churches. O Times! O
Tragedies! what will this come to, but down right Atheism? unless they
repent, and return to that Mother Church, from which they had their first
tincture of Christianity; which Jesus for thy mercies sake effect.

The second Point.
Consider first, how that the Son of God descended from heaven, and invested
himself with humane nature, thereby to work that great work of man's eternal
salvation: but by what means, and after what manner? One drop of his deified
blood was a more than sufficient ransom for the whole World: any one of those
theandrical actions of his was a sufficient sum for the purchase of eternal
felicity for all mankind: for what end then was it, that he spent all the
moments, which were contained in thirty three years so preciously? Why, did he
shed every drop (even till water issued out of his sacred side) of that his
royal blood? The holy Doctors will tell us, that he did this for two ends, in
order to us: First, to make himself a perfect Prototypon (for man to imitate)
of all perfection, by the long exercise of all virtues; of which he left so
many, and so rare examples: The second was, that he might Found a Church, adorn
it with all the requisites, proprieties, and privileges which might beseem
such a Church of such a Founder; and that he might leave in it the infinite
treasures of his merits, to be dispensed out by the Pastors of it; and by means
of the holy Sacraments applied to each member of the same. St Paul says (and
that in most weighty words) That the Church is such a thing as cost Christ the
spending of his precious blood: Acts 20, 28
which argues, that it is a rarer thing than Sectaries make it to be.

Consider secondly, What this Church is: It is a body, a moral, or politic
body; the members whereof are men, as the members of a Common wealth, or a
City, or a College are: Christ's true Church therefore is a Congregation of
People, called out (for so the Greek word (...) imports) from others that are
not of it, and united together in the same belief, and profession of all the
verities revealed by Christ, and in the Communion of the same Sacraments, and
worship, and under the obedience and government of lawful Pastors (which must
descend lineally from Christ and his Apostles, by a legal and continued
succession) whereof one is the Head, governing under Christ, and his Vicar.

Consider thirdly, some inferences which may be drawn from what has been
considered: and first, a knowledge of who are members of Christ's true Church,
and who are not: Three things are requisite in the members thereof: 1. One and
the same Faith and Belief of all revealed truths, and disbelief of no one; to
wit, in those who are come to the use of Reason, and have them sufficiently
propounded: Now for want of this Unity of Belief all Heretics are excluded and
Infidels. 2. Communion together in the same Sacraments, and form of worship;
for want of this Catecumens (such as are only in preparation for Baptism) are
not yet members of it. 3. Obedience and subjection to lawful Pastors; and for
want of this Schismatics are excluded: And here now, you (poor souls) of so
many several Sects; try what you are by these touch-stones.

Gather out of the precedent point three things; first, how dangerous it is in
matters of Faith to follow their own judgment, and private interpretation of
Scripture: 2. What a misery it is to make no use of the holy Sacraments: 3 What
madness it is to take for the directours and guides of their souls, men who can
give no account of their lawful Calling and Mission; but instead of Letters
Patents from some higher spiritual Superior, bring only their own bare word
to prove what are.

The third Point.
Consider now the rare excellency, and nature of the Church of Christ: this may
be evidenced by 3 things most worthy to be remembered and meditated upon: The 1.
whereof is the marks of it, which are rare endowments, privileges, and
proprieties, distinguishing it most clearly from all other sects whatsoever;
these marks are handled in the ensuing meditations: The 2. is the manifold and
admirable means and helps, which it affords those who are members of it, in
order to their easy procuring their eternal salvation, ten of these (most full
of comfort) are briefly handled in the second point of the first Meditation.

The third thing, The Churches Theologium's.
is the brave Elegium's, and great Characters, by which the holy Scriptures
most deservedly extol it. This Church is styled (and that by Truth it self)
the Kingdom of Christ; yea, the Kingdom of heaven: this is the body of
Christ, and the Spouse of that heavenly Bridegroom: Christ calls this his Dove,
his beloved, his perfect one, his only one; this is his Vineyard, and his
Harvest: this is his House: the House of God, the Temple of God, the Tabernacle
of God, and the City of God: This is a high Mount, the Mount of our Lord in the
top of Mountains, mount Sion, and a holy Mountain: This for its Light is that
Candle upon a Candlestick, fair as the Moon, choice as the Sun; that Woman
clothed with the Sun: this (for the means, and marks it has) is a holy way,
and so direct a way, that even fools shall not err therein: This for its ability
to confute and conquer Heresies, is, an Army set in battle ray: This for its
infallibility, is a Pillar and Firmament; it is a House built by the Wise man
upon a Rock; in sine, it is the Church of Christ, against which all the Forces
of Hell shall never prevail: For which, O may thy name be ever glorified, O
King of glory; and since thou art a Lord strong, and powerful, a Lord strong
in battle; diffipate those Nations which will have Wars, wars against thy
Church, thy City founded upon a rock, and situated upon a hill; or rather,
since thy mercies are above all thy works, gather together (thou good
Shepherd) these dispersed, (if not lost) sheep, and reduce them back into the
sheepfold of thy Church, Amen.

Collect out of this point, First, how great the ingratitude of those is
toward Christ, who derogate from the honor of his Church, either by laying
false aspersions upon it of corruption, defection, and teaching false doctrine;
or at least bear not that respect and reverence toward it, which they ought,
both in regard of its excellency, and Christ's charity in founding it. Secondly,
how great reason there is, that every one, that is not a member of it, but of
some other Sect (though they imagine themselves to be truly of the true Church)
do notwithstanding parallel their Sect with that Church, of which the
Scriptures give such noble characters: assuredly if passion, partiality,
prejudicate opinion, and love of worldly things be laid aside, reason will tell
them, they are wrong: and since notwithstanding some one (for there can be but
one) of the different religions now on foot in Europe, must be it; (for Christ
has a true Church upon earth) the result of that deliberation will be, that
the Roman Catholics alone have it.

The fourth Point.
Having considered that there is a Church, what that Church is, and the
qualities of it; the fourth thing remains to be considered, to wit, for what
that Church is.

Consider therefore that the end and intention, which Christ prefixed to
himself, when he founded the Catholic Church, was the glory of God, and the
salvation of Souls: These two are like the two Poles; for all the created
Universe move for them: these are that negotium seculorum, that work of ages;
that primum or first and chiefest thing, which must be sought for; that unum
necessarium, for which all other things must be set aside.

But consider withal, that this Church is founded for the salvation of
Mankind, not so, as a thing indifferent, but as essentially requisite, and out
of which no salvation can be had; thus speak the Fathers, thus the Scriptures,
and thus the Figures, which represent the Church: All that were not within the
Ark of Noah, perished in the Deluge; the member, which is cut off from the
body, cannot live, the branch which is not united to the Vine Tree can bring
forth no fruit, must needs wither; is only fit for the fire: the Sheep which
remain not in this Sheepfold will be devoured by the hellish Wolves. And none
received that mysterious penny (the Symbol of eternal reward) but those that
labored in the VINEYARD. Its of infinite consequence therefore, whether or no
the Sect you are on, be the true Church, pray, read, meditate, conserre,
compare Sect with Sect, till you find out the true Church: for (as truly said
Saint Cyprian, and Saint Austin) He shall not have God for his Father, who will
not have the Church for his Mother; to wit, the true Church; Christ's Church.

Do thou therefore (O my soul) study the matter of the salvation, and
glorifying God well: The Catholic Church is the school, in which the Holy
Ghost presides as chief Professor; in it only all truth is taught; none
elsewhere, nor true divinity out of that school; that long and hard lesson (thy
life led here) thou must give an exact account of, both in the particular
examen, at thy death; and in the general, at the day of doom: learn a pace by
living, that thou may attain to an intuitive knowledge of God, and obtain the
praemium of eternal life. Amen.

The fourth Meditation.
Of the Marks in general of Christ's true Church.
The first Point.
COnsider first, what is meant by the Marks of the Church; a mark in general is
that by which we know a thing, and are able to distinguish it from other
things, by the direction of that mark: so the divine Wisdom set certain marks
upon his Church, by means of which it might be made notorious and easy to be
found out, as also by the same means easily discernable from all other Sects
whatsoever.

Consider secondly, that the marks of the true Church must needs have one
propriety, and that is clarity: They must be things (though they be rare and
extraordinary) yet clear: known, apparent, and free from obscurity and
uncertainty in themselves: and therefore they are called signs and notes; by
reason of their facility of being observed and taken notice of; but if they be
defective in this, they are no marks, but things as much subject to be
questioned and controverted, as that very thing (to wit the Church, or its
infallible authority) whose marks they are pretended to be: but miracles,
prophesies, and strange conversions of Nations; also Unity, Sanctity,
Universality, and Apostolical succession (which four last are mentioned in the
Nicen Creed:) these are plainly convincing arguments and marks, by which
Christ's Church may be found out, and distinguished from all false Sects that
have them not.

Hence infer, that all modern Sects show themselves guilty of maintaining a
bad cause; and that Christ's true Church is not amongst them; because they
assign no such marks as these above mentioned; but other obscure things and
points controverted betwixt them and the Roman Catholics: Such are lawful
administration of the Sacraments, and sincere preaching of the Word of God, and
the like: these are no marks, but we must find out where these are, by the
forementioned marks: they make themselves, by this, guilty also of another
fault, which is called petitio principii, or begging the question; by taking
that for an argument in their own behalf, which very thing is the question to
be argued. For by the marks of the Church, as we must find it out; so must we
find out who are true Pastors also, when this question is urged apart.

The second Point.
Consider now the necessity of these marks: First, from the holy Scriptures,
Exodus 3. God gave Moses order to undertake that great enterprise of bringing
the Israelites out of their Egyptian bondage: To which Moses made reply,
alleging his own insufficiency: Upon which God confirmed this his
extraordinary Ambassadors Commission, with the gifts (as it were with his
great Seal) of working Miracles; which he made use of to the astonishment of
both Nations; all being convinced thereby, that he was a man of God: nor did
God send any other of his Prophets upon any great design, but he authorized
them with the gift of miracles, prophecy, eminent sanctity, or some one of
them; by means of which, credit was given to their words, that they were the
words of God, revealed to them. Christ our Savior made use of the same means,
as necessary to induce the Jews to believe what he was, and that his doctrine
was divine; the same power and confirmation he gave to his Apostles, Disciples
and their successors, as wholly necessary for the propagation of the Gospel:
and certainly, there could be no ground for thinking, that ever the mysteries
of Christian Faith should seem probable to Insidels; unless the preachers of
Christ's doctrine were qualified with these divine Privileges.

Consider secondly, the necessity of these marks, from this: God exacts of man
prudence in his moral actions; much more in the main one; such as are
deliberation, and choice in point of Religion; on the election of which his
eternal interest depends; and certainly that man proceeds not prudently, who
falls rashly upon any Sect or Religion, without well grounded motives; witness
the divine wisdom, which says, He who believes soon, is light of heart: That
is, fickle, inconsiderate, Eccl. 19.4.
imprudent, mark this prudentiall point, you Novellists; examine, what motives
hold you in the way you are in, and what marks of the true Church your sect
has.

Ponder further the necessity (at least convenience) of a true understanding
and comprehension of the marks, and signs of the true Church; from this, if
these two quaeries ( which be the marks of the true Church; and in what Sect or
Religion are they to be found?) were sully answered, as by the divine
assistance they shall be in this Treatise; then it would clearly appear, which
were the true Church, and so all doubts and controversies would vanish, or be
composed easily.

Gather hence, how much conducing and necessary, in order to a settled security
of mind, and a prudent choice of Religion, is a sober, and mature search after
the marks of Christ's Church: especially for those, who are not yet confined to
any determinate Sect; and for those, who professing some one in particular; yet
fear that all is not well with them; for those also who find none of these
Marks upon the Church they are in. Enter into a serious consideration with thy
self, about these two queries (thou that loves thy souls security) seek, and
thou shall find, Psalm. 76.
to wit, the true Church by its marks and signs; Say with David: Now have I
begun; this change is the work of the right hand of him, that is on high: I
have been mindful of the works of the Lord; I will be mindful from the very
beginning of thy wonderful things; and I will meditate upon all thy works.
And after a diligent inquiry made for finding out of the marks and signs of
Christ's Church in your own Sect; you will at length conclude with these words
of the same Prophet, Psalm 73. 10. We have not seen our signs: (there are none
upon this our Church) now there is no Prophet; none amongst us, whose doctrine
we are certain is from God, soul-saving, secure.

The third Point.
Consider now the sufficiency of the signs and marks, by which God gives
testimony, that the doctrine of Christ's Church is truly Orthodox: Of this the
Prophet David (who by an anticipated knowledge, which he had by divine instinct
of the whole frame, and composure of Christ's Church) uttered these most pat and
pithy words, Testimonia tua credibilia facta sunt nimis; Thy testimonies are
made too credible: By Psalm. 92. in Protest. 93
which Hebraisme nimis, he means, that they are very credible; and that that
Church (which is illustrated and confirmed with the testimonies of such marks,
as can be imprinted upon it by God only) deserves to be credited in all things:
Our Savior himself sent no other demonstration to Saint John of his being the
Messiah, but this, Matt. 11.
Go and tell John what ye have heard and seen; the blind see, the lame walk,
the leprous are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise; and he urged the same
argument, when he said that the Jews had not been guilty of sin (to wit of
infidelity Joh. 5.24.
and disbelieving his doctrine) if he had not effected amongst them works,
which no other mortal man was able to do: The blind man (who together with his
corporal eyes, had also those Joh. 9.
of his soul opened by Christ) urged the same argument against them; averring
that it was a thing unheard of since the creation of the world, that a man
could give sight to the blind, unless God were with him: Joh. 3.
And Nicodemus yielded to the like argument, by his ingenious and voluntary
acknowledgement, that our Savior was a teacher sent by God, because no man
could do those miracles, which he did, unless God were with him: so that the
sufficiency of these marks is perfectly established out of Scripture it self.

Ponder secondly, how reason dictates that greater inducements, and powerfuller
perswasives cannot be brought to conciliate authority, and esteem, to a
Religion, than the above mentioned marks are: for they are above the ability
and reach of nature: only God, or such as to whom God delegates this power,
can cause so prodigious effects. Saint Austin and the holy Fathers, urged these
marks, as strong maxims against all Heresies, as they sprung up; yea, they
themselves were kept within the bosom of the Catholic Church by these strong
and sweet chains; as appeared by their Writings. Add to this, the conversions
of Ethnic and idolatrous Nations: what was it else, but the forcible and
powerful charms (if they may be be so termed) of these strange privileges and
prerogatives, with which the preachers of Christian doctrine to them were
endowed, which drew them from infidelity (yea and barbarity) to Christianity.

The fourth Point.
Consider lastly, some inferences, which may be drawn out of the precedent
points: First, those that are already members of the Catholic Church, have
much to thank God for, in being made members of that Church, which is so very
conspicuous with these rare endowments, and proprieties. Secondly, since these
marks (here-briefly touched, but in the ensuing pages, more particularly to be
looked into apart) are on the one side so necessary, and on the other so
sufficient, and satisfactory to reason: it behooves every Protestant,
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, and all these late Euthusiasticks, to
try the truth of their several Sects by these touchstones. Thirdly, That he
who makes a search after the true Religion, by the direction of these marks,
proceeds most prudently, and cannot be obnoxious to error in his enquiry.
Fourthly, that this is both the most convincing, and also the most easy way of
composing all Controversies: for by this you may easily discover the true
Church; which being found out, all are obliged to embrace it, and (...)and to
its verdict in all things: and the Scripture (whose obscure texts abused, and
variously interpreted, have given occasion of these, and of all Heresies) will
by this means need no searching into. Lastly,

For a preparation to the ensuing meditations, infer what dictamen, and
disposition a man is to come with, that will benefit his soul by reading them:
First, he must observe that there is a great difference betwixt Affirmative and
Negative Propositions in this subject: for it is evident, that that Sect or
Religion is not the true Church, which is devoid of these marks: why? because
they are inseparable from the true Church; as will hereafter appear out of the
first points of many of the Meditations. Yet on the contrary, you must not
think, that wheresoever any of these marks is to be found, there is the true
RELIGION: for God can give a man power to work miracles, or prophecy truly,
though he be of a false Sect, but not in confirmation of that false Sect: So
Julian the Apostate, going to sacrifice to the heathenish Gods, and terrified
with the sudden apparition of the devil, he instantly drive him away by making
the sign of the cross, which he had learned when he was a Catholic; thus
writes St. Greg. Naz. and Nicephorus recounts, that the Persians bore the sign
of the Cross graven upon their Foreheads, in memory of their being delivered
from the plague, by arming themselves (as they were taught by the Christians)
with the same sign: Now these examples make nothing against Roman Catholics,
but confirm their tenent.

Secondly, he must come with indifferency; otherwise he cannot be an impartial
and fit judge; without any prejudicate opinion, without passion, and without
obstinate resolution of persisting where he is, be his Sect what it will be;
for this were affected ignorance, which is malice; and such an one is he, Psalm.
36.
of whom God complains, saying, Noluit intelligere ut beue ageret; He would not
understand whereby to do well; this is dangerous, this has too great affinity
with hardness of heart, the greatest of all miseries, and punishments in this
life: but read them with a desire of your own profit and spiritual good, and
then you will find just cause to say with King David to Almighty God; Ps. 92.
Testimonia tua credibilia facta sunt nimis; thy testimonies (to wit the
testimonies and marks of thy Church) are made too credible; that is very
credible; meaning thereby, that the Church (in behalf of which God gives these
signs and testimonies) deserves to be credited in whatsoever she propounds.
Yet it is worth taking notice of, that the protestant translatours of the
Bible, interpret the forementioned words of the Psalm (93 with them) thus: Thy
testimonies are very sure; using here their wonted manner of explicating places
that savor Catholic Tenants equivocally, obscurely, or two largely, and
without the restrictions, which the places require: For these words do not
express the motives of credibility, as the former do.

The Fifth Meditation.
Of Miracles.
The first Point.
COnsider first, that Miracles are a mark of Christ's true Church: Mar. 16.
These signs (says our Savior of his Church) shall follow them that believe
in me: in my name shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new
tongues, they shall take up Serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it
shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover:
Here Is the promise of that power, and behold the performance of it: Matt.
16.20. They went forth and preached every where, the Lord working with them,
and confirming their word with signs following: And that this power of working
Miracles was to remain perpetually in the Church, it is acknowledged by the
Protestants (in their Bible, Printed Anno 1576.) in their Comment in the
Margent upon these words of S. John, Jo. 14. 10.
He that believes in me, the works that I do, he shall do, and greater: These
words are clear; their gloss says thus of that place and promise: This is
referred to the whole Body of the Church in which this virtue does shine for
ever: So that this perpetuity of the Churches being privileged with this power
(an admirable gift of Gods providence) is by this clearly proved.

Ponder Secondly, the necessity of miracles: as also the sufficiency of them in
order to convince, that that doctrine is from God, which is confirmed with
them; both which two things are proved by scripture and reason, in the second
and third point of the precedent Meditation.

The second Point.
Consider now how apparently this mark of Miracles is to be found amongst the
Roman Catholics: for the better understanding of which, these four things
following are most worthy to be well pondered.

First, The Authors who relate them, or wrote in defense of them, or urge them
as an argument against Heathens and Heretics: Such are St. Ireneus, Lib. 2. c.
57. 1. de Spiritu Sancto c. 26
in his Books against Heretics; S. Basil, who writes of the miracles of S.
Gregory Thaumaturgus; Saint Gregory Nyssen, in the life of the same Saint; S.
Athanasius, in the life of S. Anthony; S. Hierom, who wrote the lives of many
Saints; Eusebius Russinus, Nicephorus, Strm: 91.
and Socrates; S. Ambrose, who relates the miracles, which happened at the
finding of the bodies of the Saints' Gervasius and Protasius martyrs; St.
Gregory the great, in his Books of Diologues; Venerable Bede in his five Books
of the Church of England; S. Bernard, who writ the life of S. Malachy; S.
Bonaventure, who writ the life of S. Francis, and our own Country men, who
lived since the Conquest; Malmesbury, Hoveden, Huntington, Paris, Westminster,
Doctor Harpsfield, and Doctor Stapleton. Now reflect upon this, that these
authors are such, as that many of them are acknowledged for Saints and
Doctors the Church, even by all Sects whatsoever: out of which it follows,
that they cannot be suspected of ignorance, lying or faining these miracles,
which they recount: Yea, they themselves teach, that imposture, and forgery in
point of Miracles, is a grievous sin.

Consider secondly, the persons that wrought Miracles; such were S. Gregory
Thaumaturgus, S. Anthony, S. Hillarion, S. Pacovius, S. Nicolas, S. Martin, S.
Boniface, S. Remigius, S. Augustine the Apostle of England, S. Cuthbert, S.
Oswald, S. Guthlack, S. Omer, S. Bertin, S. Malachy, S. Bernard, S. Francis,
and Saint Dominick, and many hundreds more; of which the very Adversaries of
the Roman Catholics acknowledge many of them for Saints, and workers of
Miracles: Hackluit Navig vol 2. part. 2. p. 88. Heart. w^^.
concerning which the Magdeburgian Centurists, in the 13. chap. of every
Century give a clear testimony: And in this last Age, Hackluit (a Protestant,
and a great admirer of S. Francis Xaverius the Jesuit) writes of this blessed
man, that he wrought Miracles, and so does Hartwell (in his Epistle to his book
of the kingdom of Congo in Africa, speaking of the conversion of it) wrote of
the same man and other Roman Priests: Now concerning the miraculous prodigies,
which these men did, Histories (writ by the forementioned Doctors) are so
clear, that they cannot be denied, without disavouching all humane faith,
history and authority; and to say, or suspect, that these blessed men had any
recourse to the Devil, or commerce, and assistance from him, were intolerable
impiety: What can light have to do with darkness? Sanctity with inveterate and
confirmed malice? Saints with Devils? they are irreconcilable enemies;
continual Antagonists: Now that these Saints were all Roman Catholics, it is
undoubtedly true: First, because the Writers of their Lives,and their Acts
testisfie it. Secondly, because their Adversaries, the Centurists and others,
ingeniously confess it of most of them. Thirdly, Because Sectaries would
challenge them, and their Miracles to themselves (thereby to strengthen their
own faction) if any probability appeared, which might persuade, that they were
no Roman Catholics.

Consider thirdly, The nature and excellency of these their miraculous
operations: No Sympathy or Antipathy; no Judiciary Astrology, or Art Magic; no
Sorcery or ability of the wicked Spirits, can produce so prodigious effects:
True it is, the Devils are not by force of their Damnation divested of their
natural abilities, but can do strange things: yet as St. Austin in his Books of
the Trinity, Lib. 3. c. 8.1. p.q. 118.
and the Angelical Doctor St. Thomas of Aquin, and others well versed in
Philosophy and Theology affirm; they cannot give sight to those that are born
blind, nor streighten distorted limbs, nor cure paralyticks, nor give life to
the dead; nay, nor cure diseases, but by application of natural medicines; nor
will Devils put their associates out of their possession of men's bodies; but
rather indent with one another, and plot both to keep their holds they have,
and to make new entries into others: Catholic Priests only are they that can,
and have outed these impious usurpers in all ages: Nor will these wicked
spirits concur to the preserving the dead bodies of Saints uncorrupted; at
which so many devout Prayers, long Watches, large Alms, were offered up to God
in honor of his Saints; and by occasion of which Monasteries, Colleges,
Churches, Chapels, and Hospitals were founded. O the wonders (and by occasion
of them the good Works) that were wrought at the Shrines of S. Thomas of
Canterbury, S. Hugh, S. Edward, S. John of Beverley, and S. Cuthbert: this one
Saints body remained incorrupt, and entire every limb and joint, Haipsfield,
and the records at Duiham.
with the hair on the head, and Episcopal weed on, for the long Tract of eight
hundred and forty years; till the sad days of King Henry the eight caused the
demolishing of that rare and rich Shrine, and the conveyance of that body into
an obscure Cave: only that Ring, so long wedded to that Saints finger, of all
the riches of that Shrine, came into good hands, and is now with the right
Reverend Lord (Richard Smith) Bishop of Calcedon, as I hear: The translation
of this one Saints body to Durham, what arguments for the Roman Religion there
dos it not afford: For out of the brambles and bushes of a woody hill rise a
City, and Episcopal See, in which sat 37 Bishops, all obedient to the Sea of
Rome, and Roman Catholics every one of them.

Consider fourthly, the number and multitude of these forementioned Saints
Miracles; how numerous (and in a manner numberless) the Miracles were, may be
best gathered from the number of the Saints; Six Tomes filled with Saints
lives, has one man alone; hence how many Miracles; since almost each Saint
wrought so many: Surius
Ponder this! Admire this! Gloria haec est omnibus Sanctis ejus; Psalm. 149.
this glory of working miracles is proper only to the Saints of Gods Church;
and therefore those, who have been privileged with power to work these, are
the Saints of his Church.

The third Point.
Consider now, what confirmation any of these modern Sects has from Miracles,
none at all: Luther and Calvin knew full well, that Miracles were great marks,
and signs of true doctrine, and therefore to authorize themselves, they
attempted these; Luther began to dispossess a certain Wench a spiritual
daughter of his; but instead of delivering her from the injury, himself fell
into his hands; for the Devil setting upon him, almost killed him, as Staphysus,
eye witnesses report: His second attempt, was to raise from death a man drowned
in the river Elbe (Nesenus by name:) Coclaeus in actis Luth. ann. 1523. Bolseus
in vita Call. and others.
he comes to the place with a retinue of his new Prosellytes and others, he
views the body, mutters some obscure words, seconded with various changes of
his countenance, but the man stirred not; at which Luther went away, not a
little confounded. Calvin agreed underhand with a poor man, called Bruley
(upon promise of some temporal succor) that he should fain himself sick, and
seemingly grow worse and worse, and at length die; all this begun to be acted
as was agreed upon; Calvin is called to the poor man's house; he comes with a
great deal of gravity and resentment, people flock apace, and a greater blind
is made, just as the man dies Calvin takes hold of his hand, and conjures him
in the name of God to rise; but by the just judgment of God the man proves to
be really dead: the poor man's wife (conscious of their combining together)
charges Calvin with the death of her husband, and discovers to Calvin's shame,
the whole design; and thus stands the case with Sectaries in point of
Miracles: no, no; God will not with his seal confirm lies, heresies,
blasphemies.

The fourth Point.
Consider now some sequels derived out of the former points; first, one of the
main reasons why Sectaries calumniate, and inveigh so much against some
Miracles (for many they cannot deny) done by the Roman Catholics, is because
they have none themselves: and by good consequence they have not the true
Church amongst them; since they have not this mark, which the Scripture
attributes to Christ's Church: Secondly, that the above mentioned holy fathers
were all Roman Catholics, even for this very reason(if there were Note.
no other) to wit, because they recount the Miracles of other Saints, praise
them and urge them as an impregnable argument against Heretics; this thing is
most worthy of consideration: Thirdly, that the Church of Christ, is only
amongst the Roman Catholics; since only true miracles (many and most strange
ones) were done by them, and are done by them even in these our days.

And now thou The Collquie.
(O Lord) who art wonderful in thy Saints, work thy wonted wonders, and
restore sight to those souls, who have the eyes of their under standings so in
a manner put out by ignorance, passion, or malice, that they cannot see this
mark of mighty Miracles upon thy Church: Open with that thy Ephphata, those
Ears that will not hear thy Church, which thou commands (upon pain of being
reputed no better than Heathenish) should be heard: Say to the lame, Rise and
Walk; direct the footsteps of those that stray, even out of that in which fools
cannot go amiss; that so all may return to thy Church, their best House and
Home, Amen.

The sixth Meditation.
Of Sanctity of life.
The first Point.
COnsider first, that sanctity and perfection (which consists in a perfect
accomplishment of the divine Will, and a conformity of humane will to it) is a
mark of Christ's true Church: The holy Scriptures are most copious in the proof
of this: Psalm. 93.
Sanctity becomes thy House (O Lord) unto the length of days; to wit, for
ever: thus King David expresses this mark; immediately after that of miracles,
and the other marks, in these words; Testimonia tua credibilia facta sunt
nimis, to those that are members of Christ's Church, 1 Cor. 3.17.
says Saint Paul, The Temple of God is holy, which (Temple) you are: and Lev.
15.16.
God himself says, Beye holy, because I am holy; our Savior inculcated this
truth often: Joh. 15.16.
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you that you go and
bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: and again he says in
plain terms, that by their fruits you Matt. 7.
shall know them: Man is the Tree (says S. Austin) and his actions are the
fruit; in fine our Lord says to all the members of his Church; Matt. 5.48.
Be ye perfect, even as your heavenly father is perfect: Hence appears
evidently, that sanctity and perfection, is a mark of Christ's true Church: And

Hence must be inferred, that where this is wanting, there the true Church of
Christ has no being; where this is truly found, there is the true Church
discovered: Be thou therefore an impartial judge in this point of Sanctity;
without which (in some degree) there is no salvation to be hoped for 1 beg the
assistance of divine grace, that no self ends, or worldly interests; no
prejudice or passion may disturb thee, or hinder thee in this search after
true Sanctity, and the Communion of Saints, which are only to be found in the
holy Catholic Church.

The second Point.
To understand how truly true Sanctity and perfection has been taken to heart
always amongst Roman Catholics, Consider these three things following; First,
the means their Religion affords them, for the acquiring of true Sanctity;
Secondly, The use they make of such means: Thirdly, The number and multitude of
their Saints. Consider therefore, 1. That all the helps and requisites, which
the study of perfection can stand in need of, are to be had amongst them; to
acquire the benefits of divine grace and justification, as also to increase the
same, and to recover them again being lost, As 1. The holy Sacraments are the
main means; now, who makes any doubt, but that the Roman Catholics make most
frequent and Religious use of these; but especially the holy SACRAMENT of the
ALTAR, and that of Confession (which is always accompanied with the exercise
of many Acts of other virtues, as humility, sorrow, good purposes, victory over
ones self, Faith, Hope and Charity) they find by daily experience to be great
helps to virtue.

2. Their form of worship, and that divine Sacrifice of holy Mass (which all
antiquity ever honored) is both a motive to all acts of virtue, a means to
obtain virtue, and a work upon which all virtues attend: it is both impretatory
and propitiatory in the highest degree.

3. Another great furtherer, and most efficacious means to virtue, is Prayer,
both mental and vocal; to the good and frequent performance of which, as the
Roman Catholics are most conformable to the Counsel of our Savior, by being
most addicted to it of all other sorts of people; so have they most excellent
instructions given them by holy and learned men.

4. Fasting, (so much commended, and extolled by holy scripture in the lovers
of it) how can it but be very conducing to virtue; since it weakens virtues
adversaries (the rebellion of the Flesh, inordinate passions, and the malignant
humors both of body and soul) so much, as experience teaches, the Roman
Catholics surpass all others in this.

5. Another great advantage they have above all others, and that is the
direction of their spiritual Pastors, and Ghostly Fathers; upon, whom as there
is a most strict charge laid, that they have care of their spiritual children,
so they discharge that duty most exactly.

6. The Doctrine they teach (especially that of good Works, Works of
Supererogation, Penance, and Satisfaction) is a great spur and mover to
perfection.

7. To omit other instrumental causes of virtue and devotion, that admirable
and plainly divine invention, and institution of Religious Orders (differing
one from another in their manner of living, but most unanimous in beliving) is
plainly an admirable means to get virtue by; yea, that state of life is
properly the school of perfection it self; and by these you see how abundantly
the Roman Catholics are supplied with means for attaining to sanctity: to
these also may be added other particular helps, mentioned in the second point
of the first Meditation.

Consider secondly, how Catholics correspond with these great helps they have
for the expulsion of Vice, and purchase of Virtue: The Church commands each one
that's come to the years of discretion, to approach once a year to the holy
Communion, but commends a more frequent access: What do they do? hundreds in
every great Town, yea, thousands in some, repair not once a year, but once
every week to that divine banquet: they are commanded to confess their sins to
the Priests (whose power to forgive sins was most assuredly given by Christ, in
these express and clear words, Jo. 20.23. Mat 18, 18,
Whose soever sins ye remit, are remitted unto them.) Once a year: yet
thousands of them go to that Sacrament once every week: They are commanded to
be present at holy Mass every Sunday and Holyday; yet besides these days,
thousands of them in every great Town perform that act of Religion every day;
is not this a true compliance with the forementioned means? Are not these works
of Supererogation a fair way to perfection? These instances alone, argue how
much these people are addicted to prayer, what good they get by their
spiritual directors, and how they fulfill that doctrine of good Works; As for
Fasting (that sovereign antidote against the sins of the Flesh) Roman
Catholics are admired by all Sectaries for this; as for upright dealing in
civil contracts; they have the repute of being generally the left injurious or
unjust: nor does any sort of peoples word go further than theirs, even in
treating with those who are averse from their opinions: And truly to see so
many of them (families of great worth) in this our Nation, live so contentedly
amongst the ruins of their great Fortunes, which they might have kept entire
in great part by once going with those of a different Religion to Church, or
swallowing over that one Oath, yet would not; this must needs argue a great
fidelity to their religious Principles, and a great esteem of virtue and piety
in them; as for these holy inhabitants of religious Monasteries, they live as
if they would win heaven (which suffers force) even by very violence; such is
their study of persection, so intense their prayers, so protracted their
fastings, so long their watchings, and so continual their study of self denial,
carrying their crosses, and following their Savior (the things so much
recommended by him to all) by an exact imitation of heroical virtues. Who now
can deny but the Roman Catholics take to heart the study of perfection, and
that science of the Saints, which is sanctity. Compare these and Sectaries
together, and see what sequels follow.

Consider thirdly, the number of their Saints: behold a short Catalogue of some
few of them in every Age, besides the Apostles, Disciples, and others, these
following lived in the first Age, Saint Dennis, Linus, Cletus, Clement,
Martialis, Thecla and others.

2. Ignatius, Policarp, Justine, Vincent, Irenaeus, Eleutherius, Lucius,
Felicitas.

3. Tiburtius, Valerianus, Cecily, Barbara, Agnes, Agatha, Laurence, Xirtus,
George, S. Gregory Thaum.

4. Nicholas, Antony, Hilarion, Hellen, Athanasius, Hilary, Basil, Gregory Naz.
Hierom, Ambrose, Epiphanius.

5. Chrysostom, Augustine, Paulinus, Alexius, Vrsula, Lutrick, Leo, Germanus,
Simeon Stelites.

6. Columbe, Columbane, Genovesa, Siverius, Leonard, Leander, Hermingildus,
Gregory the great.

7. Isidore, Aidan, Edwin, Oswald, Cuthbert, Theodore, Benedict, Ebb,
Cesarius, Lambert, Eugenius.

8. Bid, S. John Damascen, Germanus, Cuthlack, Grimwald, Hubert.

9. Sabinus, Geroldus, Ludgerus, Rumoldus, Nicetas, Rembertus, Swithin.

10. Wenceslaus, Dunstan, Bruno, Odocluniacensis, Romaldus, Elphegus, Guibert.

11. Henry the Emperor, Edward Conf. Lanfrank, Anselme, Stanislaus, Ivo, Bruno
Carthusianus, Robert.

12. Malachy, Bernard, William, Norbert, S. Thomas of Canterbury, S. Hugh
Bishop of Lincoln.

13. Dominick, Francis, Mary Ognes, Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, Gertrude.

14. Roche, Christina Sumlensis, Gertrude ab Oesten, Catharine of Sienna.

15. Bernardinus senensis, Viucentius, Laurence, Justinian, Antoninus, Colecta.

Francis of Paula, Ignatius, Loyola, Francis Xaverius, Philip Nereus, Teresa,
Carolus Borom.

To these, many thousands more might be added; yea, the English Martyrologe
alone affords us Saints of our own Country, for every day in the year.

Now that these were Saints, and also Roman Catholics, it is evident: First,
because all the whole Roman Church (not any one expressing in the least the
contrary) acknowledges them for such; and upon that score honors them.
Secondly, because their written lives, and Ecclesiastical History do evidently
evince the same. Thirdly, the practice of their lives and their opinions,
demonstrate that they were Roman Catholics; for they all honored and obeyed
the Pope, as supreme head of the Church next after Christ; they practiced
Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the faithful departed, saying, or hearing
holy Mass, Priestly power to remit sins, and other tenants now held by Roman
Catholics; yea, their very enemies, the Magdeburgian Centurists, acknowledge
many of them for Saints, even of the latest of them (as S. Bernard, S. Malachy,
S. Dominick, S. Francis and others) and grant that they held these foresaid
opinions.

The third Point.
Consider now the state and condition of other Sectaries in point of sanctity:
First, they have no means to acquire it, whilst they remain as they are: They
deny that Priests have power to forgive sins, and consequently make no use of
that Sacrament; their Communion they grant is but bare bread, and consequently
it cannot sanctify them; for public worship, there is none now in any sect in
England: a Psalm is all that is now extant of public service amongst them, and
that rejected by most; and for private prayer, certainly they spend little time
in it, at least they do nothing that's comparable to what the RomanCatholicks
generally perform; much less will they pretend to come near these in Fasting:
In brief, their doctrine is exclusive of works of supererogation, Merit,
Mortification, and Satisfaction; how then can it be but destructive of true
Sanctity; yea, Note.
and salvation: in fine, all the means they pretend to get sanctity by, is
faith alone: this medium of faith, the Roman Catholics have; and besides it,
all the other comfortable helps mentioned before: Who can now but be afraid of
the ones condition, and admire the other.

Consider secondly, what Saints they have; they will not now surely own that
Calender of John for any more; since Father Parsons examination proves it a
ridiculous false thing; the chief of their forefathers were Luther, Calvin,
Beza and such like; what lives led they? Scandalous, and exorbitantly bad.
Luther himself, ingeniously confesses, that when he was a Papist, he said
Maffe, and that devoutly for many years; that he lived in his Monastery (for he
was once an Augustine Friar) punishing his body with Watching, Fasting, and
Prayer; by which he followed the counsel and example of our Savior; that he
kept Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience; and that he honored the Pope out of
mere Conscience: Well, at length, he begun a new Sect; did this make him
continue his former piety? Did he increase it? Did he become a Saint? Behold
what he did; he casheer'd Fasting, Prayer, Watching, his Vows, his Monastery
and the Pope; and instead of these took a Nun (called Catherine Bore) for his
Concubine; and gave himself wholly to Lust, Gluttony, drinking of Wine, and
sensuality: What he writ, was conformable to the temper, which these Vices put
him in to; and so he persisted to his dying day. Calvin was not only given to
lust, but to lust against nature, to wit, Sodomy; for which his Shoulder was
burnt with a mark of a Lilly at Noyon in France. Beza kept not only a
Concubine, but a Boy also to satisfy his lust; with both which he was so
transported, that he could not forbear to express the same in wanton and
scandalous Verses, which are extant amongst his other Works: As for these men's
followers and adherents; Luther himself fayes (upon the Gospel for the first
Sunday in Advent) of his; that they were become worser livers, than they were
whilst they remained Papists. Erasmus, in his Epistle to Vultu rius Neocomus,
gives the same character of them; and Jacobus Andraeus, a famous Lutheran, in
his 4. Sermon upon the 21. of S. Luke, says, To the end that all the world may
know that they are no Papists, nor attribute any thing to good works, they do
no good works at all; and indeed experience teaches, that those, who turn from
being Papists, do not become Saints, but Sensualists.

The fourth Point.
Consider now what may be gathered out of the precedent points: First, either
these modern Sectaries acknowledge Luther, Calvin, Beza, or others of their
times, for their first Founders, or not; if they do, then they admit men of
scandalous lives for their Founders, and so the Religion or fruit sprung from
these b^d trees cannot be good: If they disavouch them, then they be like the
Acephalists, members without a head, and without Ancestors: for they cannot lay
claim to the Saints mentioned in the second point; since they so little
resemble them either in belief or life: Secondly the reason why due respect to
the Saints in heaven is neither taught, nor practiced by them; to wit, because
they have had none of their own; and because the true Saints indeed were Roman
Catholics: thirdly, seeing that the opposition of contraries, and their
repugnancy, appears more clearly when they are paralelled together; compare the
Roman religion and the best of these later sects together in point of virtue,
and sanctity, which is the cream and quintessence of man's felicity in this
life: then make a prudent choice, and side with that party where there is most
Sanctity, and by good consequence most hopes of salvation; then with the
Cherubins, and Seraphins cry out; Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, Son of
God, since you bid us be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect: Heavenly
Father since you bid us be holy, because you are holy; grant us what you
command, and command what your good pleasure is: My heart is ready, O God, my
heart is ready: Help me Lord to remove the obstacles, and apply the means
aright; that being freed from the enemies of my conversion, I may serve thee in
sanctity and justice all the days of my life, Amen.

The Seventh Meditation.
Of holiness of Doctrine.
The first Point.
Consider I. that Christ's true Church has (as it must needs have) amongst
other marks, that of holy doctrine, and such as becomes Christ's Church: it must
teach nothing against Piety, Verity, Reason, Equity, or good manners: but on
the contrary, all things in it must be conformable to Piety and Virtue, as
truly they are: The holy Ghost speaking by the mouth of the Prophet David,
confirms this truth, gives the Churches doctrine many great Elogium's in that
long, but most sweet Psalm 119. The law of the Lord is immaculate; that is
without spot, or blemish of falsehood, or impiety: The precept of the Lord is
Lucid: that is bright, shining, and like a light to show us the true way to
serve God, and save our souls: The testimony of the Lord is faithful: and
Saint Paul calls it a sound doctrine; by which Metaphor he intimates, that as
that body cannot be judged sound and healthful, which is seized upon by any
disease; so that Doctrine, Faith, or Church, cannot be wholesome, and
soul-saving, which has adhearing to it any maxim, or assertion false or
favoring vice; but there needs no proof of this; for it is called the word of
God: And the doctrine of Christ's Church must needs proceed originally from
Christ; who will not permit his Church to teach impious or false doctrine.

Consider secondly of how great concernment it is for men of understanding, to
have sometimes for the subject of their most serious and retired thoughts, the
consideration of what doctrine is taught by the different Sects now on foot in
England; and to mark which, and how far they are pec cant against piety: And
thou who tenders the good of thy soul, weigh their tenants, and those of the
Roman Catholics, with an equal balance (but let not the love, or sear of thy
temporal interests meddle with the scales) and after exact notice taken of them
all, cast thy self without more ado into the arms of that religion, which
seems to teach that doctrine which is conducing to piety, andthy souls eternal
felicity.

The second Point.
To understand how agreeable to Piety, and Verity, the doctrine of the Roman
Catholics is, take these three considerations for matter of the frequent
meditation: The first, is, That tenants of the Roman Catholics (about those
matters, which are controverted betwixt them and other Sectaries) are more
beseeming Almighty God and his Church; much more advantageous to the honor of
both; and greater expressions of divine perfections, than the adversary
opinions are: Is it not better to have more means for obtaining divine grace
(and consequently more Sacraments, the isntrumental causes of it) than fewer?
to receive the real body and blood of Christ, is not that a more noble memorial
of Christ's a thing more beneficial to man, and more honorable to God, than a
bit of Bread only, and a sup of Wine? Is it not far more beneficial for
frail and sinful men, that Christ give Priests power to remit, and forgive
them their sins, than otherwise? that the Church of Christ be conspicuous and
visible in all Ages; that it be liable to no defectibility, or fallibility;
that it have easy and accessible means for the decision of Controversies; that
some stately and majesticall form of worship be exhibited to the divine
Majesty; as also that a sacrifice of some rare thing (such as is the precious
body and blood of Christ) be offered daily to that infinite deity; that there
be an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, ascending by different degrees up, till it come
to one supreme head, to whom all are to yield obedience: do not these make more
for the Churches perfection, Gods honor and glory, than the contrary? Frame to
thy self a lively Idea of the congruity of these particulars with Gods and his
Churches greater honor; look upon these instances with a judicious eye; and
conclude, that in case it were doubtful, Note.
whether the affirmative or negative opinion were truer in these points; yet
since one of the two must be embraced, choose that which is most conducing to
the honor of God and his Church.

The second consideration is, that the opinions of the Roman Catholics (these
in particular now urged, and others which will be mentioned hereafter) are more
suitable and consonant to the holy scriptures, than their contradictories are:
For the better intelligence of which, observe these two rules, whereof the
first is, clear places of scripture must be preferred in point of proof before
hard and obscure ones: the other is, many texts of Scripture must be a greater
argument than fewer, caeteris paribus: these two rules can be rejected by none,
but such as (conscious of their own unjust plea) will come to no try all at
all: Now conformably to these rules, it is apparently evident, that Roman
Catholics bring more and clearer places out of the scriptures, to establish
the truth of the forementioned opinions, and others which they hold, than their
adversaries can possibly bring to the contrary: Read any Catholic book of
Controversy, and you will see the truth of what is here affirmed; and by the
way note also how this consideration strengthens and fortifies the truth of the
former.

The third consideration is, that the tenants of Roman Catholics are more
conducing to the security of men's salvation, than the Negative opinions are: in
this corruption of humane nature (vitiated by that Original sin of our
protoparent Adam) the flesh wages war continually against the spirit, and the
inferior against the superior portion of the soul; and the issue of the war
would be the undoing of the nobler part, unless it had continual recruits and
supplies, both of auxiliary forces from heaven, and made use also of Fasting,
Watching, and self-denial, and other asperities, and mortifications: for these
are the ordinary arms, with which the rebellious passions and vicious
inclinations must be curbed; these are the things so much recomended in the
scriptures both Prophetical and Apostolical; these are the things recommended
unto us all by Christ himself, when he bid us deny our selves, take up our
crosses and follow him; Mat. 16. 24
as also when he bid us go in the narrow way, and enter in at the strait gate:
Now this is the very doctrine of Roman Catholics, and only of them: They both
in their Pulpits, and with their pens inculcate these virtues continually;
witness the many rare Treatises written by their Priests upon that subject; as
also of the angelical virtue Chastity; and of the Sacrament of Confession,
which is accompanied with the exercise of most virtuous acts of Contrition,
Penance purposes of emendation, of satisfying for injuries done, and removing
the occasions of relapses; all which virtues, as they are contrary to
self-ease, and the wild liberty of flesh and blood, so they keep off sin, and
secure salvation so much the more: and thus you see how their doctrine teaches
to decline from evil by the aforesaid means; and as for doing good, which is
the second part of the works of Christian duty; it is most certain that their
doctrine favors this, and leads to this most effectually; for they teach that
the commandments of God may be kept, and that the difficulty of observing them
is not insuperable; They teach, that man has a free liberty of will, not only
to do evil, but good also: They teach that man's works (done in virtue of
Christ's merits, and united with them) may be good and meritory of an increase
of grace and glory: These opinions cannot but animate a man toward the keeping
of divine precepts, and doing all the good he can; and consequently bring a
greater security of salvation: Which if thou take to heart truly, thou must
like, love and embrace this doctrine.

The third Point.
Consider now, whether or no, the doctrine of other Sectaries (now swarming in
England) be holy and wholesome; and how helpful it is to the saving of souls:
this will appear by a short survey made of those particulars, which are
commonly held by them all: first, behold what a pitiful, poor, and naked thing
they make the Church of Christ: (by which Church is here meant, not this or that
Church, which either Roman Catholics, or other Sects call Christ's Church and
theirs; but prescinding from controversy about whose, or where it is; we mean
the Church of Christ secundum se; and which all Sects must grant Christ has
upon earth:) this they divest of all the ornaments, which become it, and the
founder of it. They deny it to be of infallible authority; and say, it can, and
has erred; they will not admit it to be the judge of Controversies, nay, nor
to have been in all ages visible: they deny that Priests have power to remit
sins, Joh. 20.23.
which is contrary to the express words of Christ, and contrary to the Book of
Common Prayer; and they aver that Christ has not left his real and true body
and blood to be received by Christians; nor that there is in the Church any
true proper or propitiatory sacrifice; and since sacrifice is so great an act
of Religion as it is, by depriving the Church of Christ of this, they
undervalue the Church, and monarchical government (which even Aristotle a
heathen could define to be the best for keeping of order) they deny Christ's
Church: a man would think that God (who does all things in number, weight, and
measure) should have made the Church a masterpiece of his wisdom, power, and
goodness: the Roman Catholics indeed say it is so; but other Sectaries
deprive it not of comely ornaments only, but even requisites; and have lest in
it nothing but one Sacrament, to wit, baptism (for their other things is but
bare Bread and Wine) and that now omitted and abused by many; no form of
Worship, but some one of their ill translated Psalms, and that not used by all;
and Preaching, common to all sorts (and even Sexes) of People.

Secondly, they teach things which are plainly paradoxical, and asystata;
things not only repugnant to most clear texts of Scripture, but quite
destructive of good Works, and by consequence of the means for salvation: for
by their private spirit, and each man's own interpretation of scripture, they
measure and square out the whole business of Faith and Religion: in this if they
err (and how can they be free from errors?) they not only run hazard of but
plainly incur damnation; for he that will not believe shall be condemned. Amay
with this pernicious and presumptuous tenent, let the Church be your guide;
hear Her, She Is exposed to no illusions of self-conceipt, or of the wicked
spirits, whose transfiguring themselves into angels of light she can discover,
you cannot.

They deny also that man can merit by his good Works; a tenent evidently
contrary to all places of scripture in which the word reward is extant: for
merit and reward are correlatives; they infer one another: to say that
Christ, amongst the other things he merited, merited also this, that man's good
works (done in relation to hi^ passion, and in virtue of it) should be
meritorious, does not this more extol Christ's merits, and magnify them more,
than the negative opinion does? many stupendous benefits, favors, and means
for man's salvation Christ our Savior merited, and amongst the rest this.

They deny Free will (at least to do good) in man: O imposture! What Is this but
a cloak for malice; an occasion (if not invitation, and allurement) to sin; and
a stumbling block laid in the way, for all to break their necks over: this was
a trick of Luthers and Calvin's devising: who after they had shamefully fallen
into some enormous sins of the fltsh (as they did) began to broach this
doctrine, conformable to the lives they had begun, and intended to lead;
thereby to save themselves from the indeleable stain of sacrilege, Apostasy
and infamy; and because companions contribute to lessen the miseries of
disgrace and dishonor, by how many the more there be that participate of them;
therefore they endeavored by this hellish herefie to inveagle others to adhere
to them.

Many of them hold that the Commandments of God cannot possibly be kept, O
blasphemy! What Is this, but to impeach the divine Majesty of tyranny: Can that
goodness, that infinite, wise, legislator impose laws under pain of damnations
which are impossible to be kept? stand astonisbed you heavens at this.

And to omlt other their assertions dishonorable to Christian Religion, they
hold that an act of Faith alone, works that great work of man's justification:
that great change (which the Prophet David calls the work of the right hand of
him that is on high) of a soul transferred from the state of being found guilty
of mortal fin, Ps. 76. 10.
and by it of eternal punishment, to the state of grace, divine adoption, and
right to the eternal inheritance of the kingdom of heaven; to attribute this
stupendous effect to one act of faith alone, as the cause either efficient, or
formal of it, is an incredible paradox; yea, an impossibility; besides the bad
sequels which thence result: that by which a man is formally justified is
justice, intrinsecally inherent in the soul; to wit sanctifying grace; and this
is bestowed upon him for Christ's justice, to wit his merits; nor can Faith
alone be the efficient cause of man's justification, or sanctification; it is
indeed a disposition, but so is fear, penance, hopes and an act of the love of
God; by which act the soul is much more unired to God, than by an act of Faith:
of man's justification therefore, the efficient cause is God, the formal cause
divine grace, and the meritory cause is Christ; to wit, by his merits and
passion. The bad sequels are many which that opinion of faith alone justifying
brings: first, it hinders the exercise of many other virtues, much recommended
unto us in the holy Scripture; as filial fear offending God, sorrow for having
offended him, and good purposes of amendment: secondly, it is a great let and
impediment to good Works, and the study of virtue: for if I can be satisfied
and consequently saved, by producing one act of Faith only; what need is there
of spending my time, and taking pains to pray, fast, watch, do penance, give
alms? What need you take pains about self-denial, Mat. 16. 24.
carrying my Cross, and following my Savior by imitating his virtues, the
three things he recommends unto us; the practice of which, since that opinion
hinders it, who does not see how pernicious it is: thirdly, it lays open a wide
gate for all licenciousnesse, sin, and wickedness; for if with an act of faith
only, you can repair and redress all the misery which sin brings to my soul;
why should I not feed all my senses with their delightful objects, follow the
instinct of my flesh, give the bridle to my passions, and sacrifice my time, my
body, my thoughts and my endeavors wholly to sensuality.

Ah deer Redeemer! Now I see the reason colloquy.
of that your pitiful complaint: Supra dorsum meum fabricaverunt peccatores;
upon my back sinners have built: I see who they are that instead of carrying
their crosses after you, and in imitation of you, build upon your back, and lay
not only all their obligations to Christian duties upon your sacred shoulders,
by omitting them; but heap sin upon sin (by offending more freely) and lay
these upon you also: For what do they else, who under pretense of magnifying
your merits, deny all merits of man's best works, by denying Freewill to do
good, do no good; and by extolling the ability of Faith alone, give occasion of
remissness in virtue, of falling into vice, and of making shipwreck of all true
faith.

The fourth point.
Consider now in order to a rectifying of thy judgment in matter of belief,
and for the better managing of thy life, what may be inferred out of the
precedent points, and amongst other things, first some peculiar differences,
betwixt the Doctrine of Roman Catholics, and that of Sectaries; the one is
most conformable to the holy Scriptures, and our Saviors doctrine and example;
the other is contrary to these: the ones Doctrine favors and honors the
church of Christ, by teaching that which is most beseeming almighty God, and
it: the other by attributing all to an act Note.
of faith, makes the Church an imperfect, yea, a needless thing; for all the
other privileges and proprieties of it, as also the means it has conducing to
salvation, are superfluous, if an act only of faith will do all. The one
teaches to fulfill both parts of Christian duty, ( decline from evil and do
good) and prescribes the means: the other gives occasion to sin freely, and
puts a bar against virtue: the one has a pleasant taste at first, and
seemingly rellisheth well, but in the operation proves rank poison to the soul:
the other seems harsh, and has somewhat of the bitter in it, but in effect it
proves a true cordial; the teachers of the one are those (of whom our Savior
bids us beware) that come in the sheeps clothing of soft indulgent and
condescending Doctrine, but the effects of it proves them to be interiourly
ravenous wolves; the others are like good shepherds; who restrain, yet feed
their sheep, and govern them well. In fine, the one doctrine leads to the
narrow way, and strait gate which leads to life; the other points out the broad
way, and wide gate, which leads to perdition.

Infer secondly, that since these tenants of Sectaries, make many become
Sensualists; and Syren-like have a sweet sound pleasing to the ear; yet destroy
and kill: those therefore that desire to escape all danger, must imitate
Ulisses, whose companions being inveigled by the charms of Circe, were
metamorphosed into Hogs, (an excellent Hieroglyphick of some Sects, and the
effects they produce:) but Ulisses himself by stopping his ears, missed the
hearing of her bewitching voice, and by that means got safe away. If you shun
not the occasions of hearing bad language, and dangerous Doctrine; Saint James
his words ( He that loves danger shall perish therein) will be verified in you.
Where your eternal interest is concerned, seek the greatest security and adhere
to that Doctrine which most favors fanctity; which the more you shall love,
the more shall you resemble the holy of holies, Christ himself.

The eighth Meditation.
Of the Conversion of Nations by the efficacy of Doctrine.
The first Point.
COnsider first, how that the great Commander of the world in chief Christ
Jesus, resolving to reduce into that one Kingdom of his Church, all those
Nations, which the rebellious Princes of darkness had kept enthralled in the
slavery of infidelity; for the effecting of this great design; first made
choice of twelve men (which he called his Apostles) who were to be seconded by
new supplies from time to time, till that great conquest were finished: the
arms (because the war was a spiritual one, in which souls were more looked
after, and esteemed a greater booty, Ephesians. 6.
than bodies) were to be such as that noble Champion Saint Paul gives us a list
of: to wit, Verity for the sword belt or scarf; the breast plate justice; the
shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the sword was to be the word of
God: this he calls the Armor of God. This word was the sword which was to do
the deed. Of this the same Saint Paul said, that the word of God was
Efficacious, and more penetrating than any two edged sword: and of it our
Savior meant, when he said; I will give you a mouth, and Wisdom, Luke 21.
against which all your adversaries shall not be able to resist. And he
expressed their Commission in these words: Go, Mat. 28.
teach all Nations baptizing them.

Consider secondly, what may be hence inferred as undeniable. First, that
efficacy of Doctrine, and the conversion of souls thereby, is a sign, and mark
of Christ's true Church: for at this aimed king David, when he said, that the
Law of the Lord was not only immaculate, but converting souls. Secondly, that
that Church was and is the true Church of Christ, Psalm. 119.
which has in all ages, and does still prosecute the same work of converting
souls.

The second Point.
Consider now the efficacy of the Roman Catholic doctrine. And first a priori,
as from the cause. Man's intellective faculty aims at truth, and seeks to
perfect it self in the knowledge thereof, as being it is natural object; and
for the rational appetite, the will, good is that which it hunts after. Now
certain it is that the Church of Rome teaches the most noble, and sublime
things, that can be studied or conceived. Such are the nature of the Divine
effence, and its perfections; the eternal beatitude of man, and the most
comfortable, and efficacious means to obtain it, and how to remove the letts
and impediments to the purchase of it. Add to these the excellency of Christ's
Church, and its holy Sacraments and Sacrifice, together with the doctrine
contained in the Second point of the former meditation. And as for the verity
of this Catholic doctrine, it is grounded upon the greatest authority that can
be exacted, yea, or wished for; to wit, the veracity of God, and the testimony
of that Church, which undoubtedly deserves more credit, than any single
person, or particular Sect in the world; that is, the Church of the Roman
Catholics, dispersed over all the world; Now, these things so great, and so
beneficial to man's soul, established also by so unquestionable authority, how
can they but move the will, that is, the rational appetite of man: the
sensitive indeed (a thing not more excellent in man, than in bruits) finds the
effects of Luther and Calvin's doctrine more agreeable to it: but speaking of
the soul as rational, in loves that which is truly good; Quid enim fortius
desiderat anima quam veritatem? As truly said Saint Austin, Tract, 26. in Joan.

Consider secondly, the efficacy of this doctrine, a posteriori, or from its
effects: the forcible attractivenesse of this converted all that have been
converted: after the successful labors of the Apostles, and Disciples of
Christ, other Apostolical men put for ward the work; and amongst the first,
was holy Pantenus, who converted many Indians: soon after which, the Scythians,
Dacians, Nemians, and Morines (of which Paulinus writes) were brought into the
Church; as also the Armenians and Hurmes, as Saint Hierom recounteth: In the
fifth Age, the Scots were converted by Saint Palladius, a man born in Rome, and
sent from Rome by Pope Celestine into Scotland, to preach An. 411.
the Faith of Christ to that Nation: This is recorded by Prosper, Bid, and
Baronius; soon after, Saint Remigius and Saint Vaus, authorized both by the
same power of the Bishop of Rome, brought the French Nation to embrace the
Catholic Faith; at which time Clodoveus their King, received the first
tincture of Christianity by being baprized by Saint Remigius.

As for our own Nation England, (whose the conversions patently convince these
late Sects of Novelty and falsehood) the first time of its being enlightened by
Christ's Gospel, About the year 180.
was in the Apostles time; the second illustration of it was; when Pope
Eleutherius sent the men of God Fugatius and Damianas thither; who baptized
King Lucius, and converted his Subjects: And thirdly, it was totally converted,
by whom? By St. Austin, and his companions Justus, Mellitus, Laurence and
others: Whence they? From Rome: By whose order? Saint Gregory's the Pope: And
here is matter for amazement, About the year 600.
when a man reflects how ungratfully our English offspring (like an unnatural
brood) defiles the Nest from which it had its Christian Birth. O England!
remember the relation which is, or ought to be, between Rome and thee: Whence
arises this aversion, and bitterness of many of thy children, apainst those
supreme Prelates, whose predecessor was once to thee a second Savior? Remember
the days of old; and return to thy self, and say; Convert my soul, O Lord, for
I have sinned against thee; nor do I deserve thee for my father, since I have
been so disobedient to thy Church, my Mother. From Rome, and by order of that
incomparable lover of our English Nation St. Gregory, came these men, who made
England Catholic; and so Catholic, that it from that time became able to make
other Nations Catholic also: For the two Ewaldi brothers, (commonly called
Albus and Niger) converted Westphaly; Saint Willibrord converted Frizeland; and
Saint Boniface almost all Germany: These bleffed men were Monks, (as S. Austin
and his companions were) by profession, English by Nation, and their Doctrine
in all points, according to what the Roman Catholics now teach. Now to pass
further, multitudes of Spaniards, were converted by Andonius: the Flemmings by
Saint Eligius; those of Franconia by S. Kilian; the Danes and Sweads by
Ausgravius, the Bulgarians by Joanieius; the Moravians by Withgumgus; after
these follows those of Russia, who were converted by means of the Emperor
Basilius; and the Polonians by Aegidius Tusculanus, sent thither for that end,
by Pope John the 13. after these followed the Hungarians, brought in by holy
Adelbert; and the Sclavonians by an other Adelbert: to these succeeded the
Pomeranians and those of Norway; both which Nations were made Catholic by
Nicholas the English Monk, a man of great virtue, who was afterward chosen for
Pope, and called Adrian the fourth; to these may be added the Livonians and
Li^uanians, the former of which were converted by Medardes, the later by the
Knights of Saint Mary. All these Nations, in order as they are here specified,
were converted by these men (who were all Roman Catholics) to that very same
faith, which the Roman Church now professes: Nor were these all that were
Converts of the Roman Catholics; the Tartarians with their Emperor Cassanes,
were made members of that Church; yea, and the great Turk Azatines embraced the
same faith; and of Jews and Sardzens, that blessed Saint Vincentius, a
Dominican Friar converted 25 thousand to the same Catholic faith, not many
years before Luthers time: and thus it is manifest, that the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome is efficacious; since by it Nations in all Ages have been
converted from Infidelity to Christianity.

The third Point.
Consider first, what Nations ( Ethnicks or other non-Christians) have been
converted by Heretics to Christianity, not any one; in all these many Ages,
from Christ's time unto Luthers, not any one Sect converted so much as any one
Kingdom, Country, or Province of Infidels to the faith of Christ; yea, or to
their own Sect: Take a view of the whole body of Ecclesiastical history, and
you shall not find one: and this consideration alone, me thinks, might be a
sufficient conviction of the fals-hood of all sects whatsoever; and a
confirmation of the truth of the Roman faith. Sectaries have labored much to
bring some one instance in opposition to this so general a Thesis; and cite
one Freculphus, who seems to say, that the Goths became of Pagans immediately
Arians: Miserable Sectaries! that can find but one example to impugn the
Papists withal, and in that one favor the condenmed Arians, thereby to oppose
Catholichy: Yea, and this one instance is false also, as Master Southwel proves
in his Analysis, out of S. Austin, Theodoret, Sozomenus, Orosius, Nicephorus,
Baronius, and others.

Consider secondly, what insidels have been converted to Christianity by Luther
or Calvin, or any other Sectaries which succeeded them: name any one Pagan
Nation, Province, or Town of their converting from paganism to Christianisme,
or even to any of their own Sects, he that can: And yet in the very days of
Luther and Calvin, Roman Catholics (and those such as Sectaries hate, even for
this every reason of their great zeal, to wit, Jesuits) have converted many;
how many? An. 1542.
That one blessed Saint Francis Xaverius sent by the Pope of Rome, Paul the
third, into the East Indies, to convert souls; labored there incessantly for
the space of ten years, and converted three hundred thousand souls to the
Christian Faith; thus writes Bosius the Oratorian; Tom. 1. 1. 6. de signis.
the same in effect writ many more: Nay, his signs of Apostleship struck
astonishment, even into the enemies of Catholic Religion; amongst Vol.2.part.
2. page 31.
whom Hackluit (well versed in the Indian affairs) calls him a godly Professor,
the painful Doctor of the Indian Nation, and one endued with all spiritual
blessings: so true it is, that virtue and verity force their own praises even
from enemies: Now if one man in ten years time converted 300000. how many
hundred thousand may be converted in above a hundred years, not by one, but by
many hundred of them, who are now there (sent by the like authority, enabled
with the like talents of virtue, and learning, and carried on with the same
motives) seeking most earnestly in Africa, America, India, and China, for those
truly precious pearls (immortal souls) for the adorning of the heavenly
Jerusalem, with what success, you may learn of their great enemy and
Protestant, Simon Lythus, who says, In resp. altora contra Fac. Gretser.p. 333.
that the Jesuits have filled Asia, Africa, and America, with their Idols: How
great a Panegyrist he proves by thus disparaging them, and their Religion, let
prudence judge.

Thus Luther and Calvin should have employed the heat of their zeal in
converting Ethnicks, as these others did; who begun their work about the same
time that they begun theirs; and whom God raised up, (as the greatest Prelate
of the world upon occasion affirmed) to oppose them: Had Luther and Calvin set
forth for the Indies to propagatt Christianity, perhaps posferity would have
preferred them before these ancient Heroes, which went to setch the golden
Fleece: but (as well said Tertullian of the old Heretics, Lib.de prascrip.
their sorefathers) These men's work was not to convert Aliens to Jesus Christ,
but to pervert his domestics; mark these words, Protestants: they drew indeed
thousands from the practice of their ancient (yea the only in Europe then
extant) Religion, and from the love of Chastity, Fasting, Consession, Penance
and Satisfaction for their sins, and from the love of good works and hatred of
sin, Note.
to all licenciousnes and wicked liberty; but this was to pervert, not to
convert; to this no efficacy of doctrine or divine grace was requisite; any
proposal or the least pretense was a sufficient alarm for frail people, to run
after the maxims of liberty and sensuality; to which self inclination carried
them: Its easy going with the stream, or down bank; but to clime up the mount
of Christian persection, Hic labor, hoe opus est.

The fourth Point.
Consider lastly, what resultancies arise, and may be gathered out of these
foregoing Points: Amongsts others, one is, that the Church of Rome has been
apparently visible in all ages: An other, that since Christ must have a true
Church upon earth, and since one of the marks of it is (appears by the
scriptures) conversion of Nations, by the doctrine: and since no other Sect
has this mark, the Church of Rome (which has always had it) must be, and is
Christ's true Church: a third, Note.
that when any are converted to the Roman church from insidelity or heresy,
they amend their lives, and live more virtuously than before: But those that
were Roman Catholics, when they fall, and betake themselves to any other Sect,
they grow worse and worse; as we see it sals out by experience in almost every
one that revolts from the Catholics to any other Sect; and the reason of this
is clear, because liberty and temporal ends are their motive, not any quarrel
they have against the probability and truth of the Catholic Tenants: If I stay
with the Catholics, I must not only confess my sins and be truly sorry for
them; but I must also seriously purpose amendment of my life, and repair what
soever damages my neighbors same or fortune have suffered by my malignant
tongue, or fraudulent dealing: Wave these obligations, and go once to Church,
and by this I may evade the misery of sequestration, and live free from sears;
siding with the Sect most countenanced, and cried up, will secure me and mine:
With such thoughts the wicked spirits inveagle those frail ones, which (like
unto Fishes) at first sight, lay hold on the bait, but mind not the hook; no
efficacy of doctrine moves such men: But thou, Rationalist, be thou led with
motives grounded upon eternity; and let that doctrine, The Colloquie.
which all Nations have experienced to be efficacious, find no resistance in
thee, and thou heavenly Physician (who said that the healthful had no need of
such artists but the sick only) look upon the distempers of this distracted
Nation in point of Religion: England, that when time was, lent Evangelical
light to so many others, sits now in darkness, and in the shadow of death; but
thou, who art the way, make her walk in thee: thou that art the truth, make her
believe in thee; that since thou art life, she may live in thee, till all
Nations meet in the Unity of Faith, AMEN.

Of the uninterrupted and Apostolical succession of the Pastors of the Church.
The first Point.
COnsider first, that as Christ our Savior founded the Catholic Church, so as
that it should last to the end of the world; so also he ordained, that in it
there should be lawful Pastors, succeeding one another, so long as the Church
was to continue; this the scripture teaches in express terms: Ephesians. 4. v.
11, 12.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and
other some Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints, unto the
work of the ministry, unto the edifying of the body of Christ, until we meet
al in the unity of faith.

Consider secondly, that this continued succession was to be propagated by a
legal descent from Christ's Apostles, both scripture and reason proves this
truth: for if all true members of the Church, must (like living stones) be
built upon the foundation of the Apostles, (to the end that all the building
fitly framed together, Hphes. 2. 20, and 21.
may grow unto a holy Temple in the Lord) much more necessarily must the
Pastors be built upon them; and as that family ceases, and is extinguished,
when once the line of descendents from the first of that family, is by death
interrupted; so the lineal (but moral or politic) descent of Pastors from the
Apostles ceases and is extinct, when such an interruption is made, as that
Pastors cease to have their spiritual birth to their Functions by that
legitimate consecration and jurisdiction, which is derived from the Apostles;
the want of which also in the first of a new Episcopal See, illegitimate him
and all his descendents; now that this descent from the Apostles be legal, it
requires a calling from God or Vocation; No man takes to himself this honor,
but he that is called of God, Heb. 5. 4.
as Aaron was; this vocation is the door, in at which every shepherd (that is a
true one) must enter in to the sheepfold of Christ's Church: for he that enters
not by the door into the sheepfold, Jo. 10.
but climbeth up some other may, the same is a thief and a robber, says the
good shepherd Christ: v. i.
a severe cesure for such as are not true Priests, and get into the Office of
Pastors only by self-intrusion, or by the deputation only of some secular
power, devoid of all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

Consider thirdly, the manner of this legal Calling, which Saint Paul says
must be from God, as Aaron was; divine calling, or vocation, is twofold,
extraordinary, and ordinary: the former is, when God by himself immediately
calls one, as he did the Prophets, Moses and the rest: and this extraordinary
manner of calling was absolutely necessary in the first plantation of the
Church: For the first Pastors, (to wit the Apostles) could not be called
otherwise; because they were the very first themselves. The Ordinary calling is
also from God; but not done by him immediately, but by the concurrance of
others: The first, of the line of those which were ordinarily called, was
called after the extraordinary manner, by God immediately; so was Aaron called;
but Aarons successors were ordained by others: so the Apostles (who were called
extraordinarily) ordained other Bishops and Priests; and these Bishops
afterward made others, according to the order prescribed by Christ, to be held
in his Church; and thus both vocations were truly from God.

Now to understand the better what the lawful calling of a true Bishop or
Priest is; and by this means, to be able the better to distinguish who are
lawful Pastors, and who not: Consider, these things; first, the Election, or
designation of the Person, and this belongs properly to Church men; though the
People, or secular Princes, have been sometimes permitted to depute, and
propose to the Church such persons as they desired and thought sit; but this
makes not a man either Bishop or Priest: the next thing after Election or
Approbation, is Consecration, or Ordination; and this act is to be performed
only by Bishops: this act is it which makes a true Bishop or Priest; and
without this consecration, all the Princes of the world, by any their
deputation of persons to Episcopal, or Priestly Function, can never make them
true Bishops or Priests. The third thing is Jurisdiction, which is given by a
Superior Prelate to the Consecrated person, and this is called Mission; for he
is sent with faculties to govern souls, and feed them with the holy Sacraments,
and the word of God. These faculties (for so they are called) are the Priests
Commission; and the giving of them with lesser, or greater limits, as also the
assigning him these subjects in particular, and not others, is only in the
hands of Spiritual Prelates, and in no temporal Princes power whatsoever.

Gather out of the premises; First, that that Church cannot possibly be
Christ's Church which wants Bishops: Secondly that these are only true Bishops,
and Priests; who are lawfully descended from the Apostles: Thirdly that those
only are legally descended from the Apostles, who have these two things,
Succession, and Consecration; both Apostolic. A true Pastor must succeed to
some one of the Apostles, either immediately, as Saint Liuus succeeded Saint
Peter, and as Saint Policarpe succeeded Saint John: or else mediatly, as S.
Ignatius succeeded S. Evodius, who was ordained Bishop by S. Peter: his
Consecration also must be Aposto lick; that is, this Priest must be consecrated
by a Bishop, which Bishop must be consecrated by other Bishops, and these by
others, till at length an assent by degrees be made up to the Apostles.
Fourthly, that Spiritual dignity is of a far higher nature than temporal, both
by reason of its lineal descent (and that never interrupted) from Christ; as
also by reason of its Function, which is about things Speritual and Divine.

The second Point.
To under stand how lawfully the pastors of the Church of Rome are called;
Consider first that the Protestants do not stand in denial of this, but
plainly grant it: yea they pretend for the lawfulnes of their own calling no
greater argument then that they have their succession from the Church of Rome;
conscious, to wit, that there can be no true power, either of order, or
Jurisdiction, nor any true legislative power Ecclesiastical at all, but it
must descend by succession from Christ, and his Apostles; and this they
acknowledge the Church of Rome to have; pretending with all that themselves are
united to the same line of Communication in that Apostolic succession.

Consider secondly, this their lawful calling confirmed by this Negative
Argument: Christ must have, and has a Visible Church upon earth somewhere;
this Church must have a Visible succession of Pastors; for this is the main
thing in which chiefly the visibility of the Church appears; since where the
succession of Pastors cease, there the flock is lest ungoverned, unfed,
exposed to dispersion and perishing; and thus the Church would come to fail,
not only in visibility, but even in its existency: Now this Visible succession
must be derived from the Apostles, and that without ever being interrupted;
otherwise the Church would not be Apostolic, (contrary to the scripture, and
the Nicene Creed) nor remain the same unto the end of the world; contrary to
our Saviors promise, and St. Paul's forementioned words: And since there is not
any sect which either does or can with any show of probability pretend to have
a See Apostolic, or a never interrupted visible succession from the Apostles,
but only in the Church of Rome; there it must be, and consequently their
calling(yea only theirs) lawful: True it is, the Greek Church had Apostolic
Sees; to wit, at Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria; each of which had an
Apostle or Evangelist, for its first Bishop: but for the space of these last
nine hundred years (since the beginning of which time, the Persians, Sarazens
and Turks have kept possession of those Countries) the succession in these has
been obscure, interrupted, as good as none: And this by the just judgment of
God, for the Schism and persidiousnes of the Greek Church; as also to make the
Roman See Apostolic, more clearly to appear to be the Mother and Mistress of
all Churches.

Consider thirdly, that the lawful Calling of Pastors amongst the Roman
Catholics is, further positively demonstrable from the succession of their
Popes. For the better understanding of which, note first, That the ancient
Fathers were most exact in registering the names of the Popes, as they
succeeded one another; so did Saint Ireneus, Tertullian, Eusebius, S. Austin,
S. Hierom and others; the like diligence has been used by other Roman
Catholics in all succeeding ages, even to this present Popes days, who is
called Innocent the 10. and is the two hundred thirty and nine from S. Peter.
Note secondly, that the forementioned holy Fathers, used to produce the
succession of Popes, as an impregnable argument to prove that to be the only
true Religion, which had these chief Pastors on its side: Now if the succession
of twenty or thirty of them, were of such force(in the judgment of these
learned Doctors) to convince Heretics; how forcible an argument against these
modern Sects, must a long Catalogue of 239 make. Note thirdly, that none were
ever acknowledged by the Roman church for true and lawful Bishops or Priests,
but such as were ordained either immediately by the Apostles, or by their
successors; now conformablely to these truths, here noted; this follows, and is
most certain, that from every true Pri^st now living (by passing from the
Bishops which consecrated them, to those that ordained these, and so on upward)
a line of spiritual pedigree uninterruptedly ascends to the very Apostles. This
orderly series or scale of succession proves evidently the Pastors of the Roman
Religion to be lawfully called and sent. Here Is solidity, here is security; those
that will get out of their labyrinths of errors, doubts, or fears, must do it
by the conduct of this line: begin, go on; this is your way to the Apostles and
Christ.

The third Point.
Consider now, how the case stands with other Sects, in point of lawful
calling; and first for Luther, the ringleader of all modern sects; that his
calling was not extraordinary, it is certain; for he could never show his
extraordinary Commission, to wit, Miracles, the gist of Prophecy, or these
other supernatuall endowments, which God always gave to his Prophets and
Apostles, whom he sent extraordinarily; and that this exacting of Miracles in
this case is most just and reasonable; it is hence proved, if some new upstart
should pretend he were immediately sent by God to preach against such or such a
Sect; the only means that Sect could use for silencing and confuting such an
one, were to demand Miracles of him: and if some new impostor should pretend he
were Christ; or urge his being sent extraordinarily to Preach against Christ,
or any other mystery of Faith, which were believed by all Christians (as the
mystery of the Incarnation, or Passion, the reality of supernatural Faith, and
divine grace, or the like) against such a fictitious pretender, not only Roman
Catholics, but all other Sects amongst Christians, also ought to bid him show
his Commission sealed with Miracles.

As for Luthers ordinary calling; true it is, he was lawfully ordained Priest
by the Church of Rome; but a Priest cannot ordain other Priests, much less
Bishops: so that no succession could be propagated by him: It is true also,
that he had jurisdiction (which must flow from the spring head of all true
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, Christ and his Vicar; and was lawfully sent
(after his being consecrated) to govern and seed souls: but his faculties, or
commission were given him with these limits and conditions, which not only the
Ecclesiastical Prelat, but even sense and reason requires; to wit, that he
should use that power for the edification, and not to the destruction of that
Church which gave him it; that he should Preach and Teach her doctrine, that he
should administer her Sacraments; but he went beyond his Commission, yea, quite
contrary to it; he preached doctrine contradictory to that of the Church; he
taught her doctrine was false in many of the mainest points, and that her
Sacraments were not so many, and so efficacious causes of grace, as they were;
he could have no commission for this: yea, his revolt and rebellion against the
Church quite annulled his former Commission; and divested him of all the
faculties which had been delegated formerly to him: as for Episcopacy, though
some of his clients styled him Bishop of Wittenberg, (as Oecolampadius, whose
Grave stone expresses him the first Bishop of Basil, and Zuinglius of Tigur,
and Calvin of Geneva) yet neither he, nor these other ever gave out, or
pretended they had Episeopall Consecration, or jurisdiction from the Roman
Church or from any precedent Bishops: so that what they acted in this kind was
by a usurped power and invalid.

Consider secondly, the calling of the English Ministry; the Protestant titular
Bishops urged always against their Catholic Antagonists, that they were true
Bishops: their proof was because they were consecrated by the old Catholic
Bishops: Mark here (for your comfort) Catholics; that your Bishops, and by
consequence your Priests, are acknowledged for true and lawful, even by their
adversaries: But you (Protestants) mark in order to your amendment, that this
very means (and the only argument, by which they must prove, themselves lawful
Bishops) which they make use of to establish your cause, destroys it; and with
all confirms that the Roman Catholics, are the only true Church: For since
that main thing which Christ gave his Church, (to wit, power to ordain Bishops
and Priests, and to send them to seed souls with the word of God, and the
Sacraments) is granted to be in the Church of Rome; it follows evidently, that
it is the true Church of Christ; and that its doctrine and Sacraments are only
true: for Christ could not give that Church commission to Preach doctrine
contrary to his; nor could the Church (which confessedly has this power)
ordain others, and give them commission to Preach against it self: Hence also
it follows (if these supposed Protestant Bishops were ordained by the old
Catholic ones) by going against their commission, and preaching and acting
against that Church, which gave them their power; first, that their former true
commission ceased, and was annulled: Secondly, that Protestants and their
Bishops were, and still are guilty of Schism, by not holding communion with
the Church of Rome, and thirdly, that they are guilty of heresy (these Bishops
and ministers, to wit) in believing and teaching Doctrine contrary to the Roman
Church, which they say, gave them their power. Fourthly, that they incurred the
Ecclesiastical censures, for the forementioned reasons, and consequently,
could not give orders lawfully; so that their Successors were not lawfully
ordained. Fifthly, that since the Protestant Bishops, neither used the true
form, nor matter, in the consecration of their later Bishops and Ministers,
with which the first of them was supposed to have been consecrated with, by the
old Catholic Bishops, even upon this score, the later were no true Bishops nor
Priests. Sixthly, that since none can lawfully succeed in a Bishopric, unless
the former Bishop be either dead, or canonically deposed; even upon this ground
all the first of the Protestant Prelates were unlawful; because the old
Bishops were living and not deposed, when the later usurped their Sees, or were
intruded by others.

But the truth is, these first Protestants took to themselves that
Ecclesiastical honor, Heb. 5.4.
without being called by God, as Aaron was; and took upon them the Office of
preaching, without being sent; Romans 10.15
contrary to the words of Saint Paul. It must not be presumed, but positively
proved by them, that they were consecrated by the old true Bishops, and that
they succeeded them legally: they must be able to prove, when, where, and by
what Catholic Bishops they were consecrated, and what faculties and commission
they had: All other Catholic Priests can demonstrate in behalf of their
Apostolical calling, all these particular circumstances, but the Protestants
could never yet prove their lawful calling thus; and yet are obliged to do it,
otherwise they are to be looked upon, as having got into the sheepfold, not by
entering in at the door, John 10.1
but by elimbing up another way. And indeed, the Catholics urge (which they
are not liged to do) very positive, and probable arguments to convince the
Protestants unlawful calling, and that they had not any consecration or
jurisdiction from them. For first, the Catholic Bishops, all of them
absolutely refused to consecrate any of the Protestants, who seeing this, and
not hoping to obtain it of them by proceeding in a fair way, aimed at the
getting of it by underhand dealing; Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlisle.)
but that good old and infirm Bishop (of whom they thought to have taken
orders, without discovering that they were Protestants) having got some hints
of their design, rejected them: their next plot was the producing of a
Register, in which were set down the names of diverse Protestants, ordained
Bishops by such, and such Catholic Prelates: but the forging and fraud of this
Register, was soon laid open by the Catholic party; and so that attempt
ceased. The next Machine they moved, was by an Order from the Court, that so
many Divines and Lawyers, should enter into consultation, and resolve whether
some new form of making Clergymen, might not be found out, without dependence
of the Church of Rome; but the ridiculousnesse of this adynaton, soon made that
conventicle desist from proceeding further in that way: at length therefore,
they resolved to ordain each other, without more ado; which seven or eight of
them ventured upon, all on one day, not after the ancient, Catholic manner,
publicly and solemnly in the Church at high mass, and in the eyes of many
hundreds of people, but privately in Naggeshead in Cheapside. An. I. and. 8.
Eliz.
an Inn, and without any witnesses. And lastly, Queen Elisabeth and the
Parliament, ordained that all who had the Queens Letters Patents for to be
Bishops, should by the people be acknowledged for true Bishops, notwithstanding
what soever defect might have happened in the consecration of them. Now these
instances (and particularly the last) plainly intimate, that all was not well
with these Protestant Bishops in point of lawful calling.

The fourth Point.
Out of the precedent points many fruitful consequences may be gathered: and
first, that that Sect which wants Pastors lawfully called, cannot possibly be
the true Church of Christ.

2. That none can be lawfully called, unless they be consecrated by Bishops,
lineally descended from the Apostles.

3. That since there must be a See Apostolic somewhere (for otherwise, Note.
Apostolical succession cannot be derived down from age to age, till the world
end, as the Scripture says it must) and since there is no other but the Sea of
Rome, which can with the least show of probability, pretend to have a
succession of Bishops, uninterruptedly continued from the Apostles time to
these our days, the Roman See must be the Apostolic: this being so, as most
assuredly it is, change that simister opinion (you misled men) which you have
had of the Church of Rome, so long; away with that contumelious language, with
which you vilify and slander it, lay aside passion and prejudice, then let the
Roman Religion be paralelled with any one, or all other Sects, and after your
second thoughts upon this subject, you will assuredly frame a better conceit
of that so long continued, and so well grounded faith: Gather fourthly, that
the Church of Rome, has been always visible, which is proved by its
continual succession of chief Pastors. Fifthly, that since Christ must have a
Visible Church upon earth, and since no other but the Roman has been visiblely
conspicuous in all ages; it must be Christ's Church; love it therefore, honor
it, adhere to it. Sixthly, since there is no true religion without true
Priesthood; no true Priesthood without true consecration, and that by Bishops
Apostolically descended; and since there are none of those among these later
sects; what hopes, what comfort, what security (yea, or probability) of
salvation amongst these?

O Chief Priest Christ, O thou, whom God has anointed with the olye of
gladness before thy fellows; Colloquie.
be thou ever blessed for sending them, as thy Father sent thee: be ever
praised for giving that eternal Priest hood, according to the order of
Melchisedech to them, which thy Father gave thee: Silence (we beseech thee) all
false and lying prophets, that say; the Lord says, and the Lord has not sent
them, Send laborers into thy Vinyard; and make the fruits of their labors
many and great, to thy glory, Amen.

The Tenth Meditation.
Of Antiquity.
The first Point.
Consider first, that antiquity is a mark of Christ's Church: this is most clear
out of scripture, all those places in which the indefectibility and
infallibility of the Church is foretold, promised or intimated; prove also the
Antiquity of it: And I will make this my covenant, says the Lord my spirit,
that is upon thee, Isa 59.21.
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from
hence forth for ever. A most ample promise of the Churches antiquity and never
failing: Upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, Isa. 62.6.
have I set watchmen all the day and all the night for ever, they shall not be
silent: These so significant words, cannot be verified upon the City of
Jerusalem (since it has been destroyed) but of Christ's Church: Behold, Mat.
28.
I am with you all the days, even until the consummation of the world; most
express words of our Savior, who also said, That after the sower had sown
good seed, then came the enemy and sowed cockle upon it: Mat. 13.
the good seed of Catholic doctrine was first sown by Christ, and afterward
the devil sowed the cockle of false doctrine and heresy upon it.

Confider secondly, the antiquity of Christ's Church, gathered from other
reason: And first its very names import thus much, it is called the Church of
Christ; because he founded it when in mortal flesh he conversed with men; and
therefore it would imply a contradiction to grant it to be Christ's Church, and
yet deny it antiquity: it is also called Catholic, not only because it
imbraceth all places, but all times also; and it is called Apostolic, because
it begun in the Apostles, retains their doctrine, and keeps their succession.
2. Reason, dictates to all, that truth is precedent in time to falsehood, which
is nothing else but a denial of truth; and consequently posteriour in time to
it; for the Father of lies brought falsehood into the world, when he tempted our
first Parents, after their creation in the state of Grace and Knowledge of
Truth, 3. The holy Fathers always urged this mark of the antiquity of the
Catholic Church, Lib. cont. cp. fund. cap. 4.
against the Novellismes of the Heretics, and their coming after that the
Church of Christ was begun: so did Saint Austin urge this mark against the
Manicheans; and Saint Hierom in his Epistle to Pammachius.

Hence infer, first, that that Sect cannot possible be, yea or conceived to be
Christ's true Church, which begun in such or such a year after that Christ's Church
was instituted: Why? because this posteriority of times argues diversity, which
excludes identity. Secondly, that that sect cannot possibly be the true Church
of Christ, which (though it began in Christ's, or his Apostles time) yet has
not continued, but is now annihilated, and why? because its antiquity (which
must not only be derived from Christ's time, but the same must also be, without
interruption continued, till the worlds end) is come to an end, Christ's Church
having still its being.

The second point.
Consider now the Antiquity of the Church of Rome, by which Church is
understood, not only that Congregation of the faithful, which in the City of
Rome, and the adjacent places, adhere to that Supreme Bishop; but all others
also, dispersed, over all the earth, that are united to the Church of Rome, by
the same belief, by communion in the same Sacraments, and by obedience to the
same Supreme head under Christ: the Antiquity therefore of this Church, is
first demonstrated out of the Scripture it self. Saint Paul writ that famous
Epistle of his, to the Church of Rome, in which he gives the members thereof
many great Elogiums: Romans 1.7. v. 8.
To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called Saints; and again, your faith
is spoken of throughout the whole world. Acts 28.
When Saint Paul was come near to Rome, the faithful (for even then, v. 13, 14,
15, 16.
there were Christians at Rome, at Puteoli and thereabouts, before Saint Paul's
coming thither) went out of Rome to meet him and his fellow prisoners, v. 23.
as far as Appii forum: He began presently upon his arrival to preach; v. 30,
31.
; in sine, he preached the faith of Christ in Rome, without any disturbance,
for two whole years together. Of the Church of Rome, Saint Peter also makes
mention, in these words, The Church which is in Babylon, Pet. 5.13.
salutes you: so that both the Antiquity (and truth also) of the Roman faith,
is demonstrated out of Scripture.

Consider secondly, the Antiquity of the Roman Church, continued, and
conserved uninterrupted in all ages since its being founded in the Apostles
time. First, at all times, in every age, there has been apparent a visible
body of Professors of the Roman faith, this is evinced clearly by that brief
Catalogue of Saints, put down in the sixth Meditation; as also by the never
interrupted, Apostolic Succession of chief Pastors, treated in the preceding
Meditation. 2. The faith and Doctrine, held now by the Church of Rome, accords
most perfectly with the faith, and Doctrine of the Holy Fathers in all points:
this truth has been of purpose moved at large, by many learned writers, nor
can Sectaries instance any one particular thing, which the Roman Catholics now
hold as a point of faith, which was not held by the Holy Fathers; yea, every
particular point is granted, even by Protestants themselves, to have been the
Doctrine or practice of the holy Fathers. Brerely and the progeny.
. 3. Going out, or separation is specified in the Scripture, and by the holy
Fathers, as a note of novelty, and heresy: now certain it is, that Sectaries
could never assign any known time in which the Church of Rome, Note.
went out and separated it self from any Society of Christians, antienter than
it self, and this they grant, which is a sign, it is the antiontest of all
Churches still, and the only true. 4. Of all sects, of Heretic, the beginning
of them, withal the notable circumstances, Note.
is known and set down by writers: No known beginning since the Apostles time,
of this Roman Religion, which now is extant, was ever mentioned by any author
whatsoever, nor can be; and this the very Adverfaries grant, which is a sign,
that it is the most ancient of all Religions, and the very same, which was
established in Rome, by the Apostles. 5. since all Sectaries grant, that the
Roman Religion, remained truly Catholic and Orthodox, for many hundred years
after the Apostles time; it is, and must be granted by all, to be still the
same, Note.
unless evidence (and that convincing) can be brought in against it, out of
good and warrantable authors, when Rome lost its true Religion, in what point
it did err against its former true faith, who taught that false says first,
and what number adheard to it at first, who stood in opposition against it, who
condemned it, and what body of people stuck still to the true Religion (for
Christ's true Church, was still visible somewhere) and to what country, or town
did any of them repair, (for Rome stood still for the Pope, and he in it) to
exercise the true Religion in; certain it is, that most of all these
circumstances would have been most exactly recorded, if any such thing had
happened: that the Vicar of Christ should promulge an Heresy to be believed by
the whole Church, and that the true Church, should lose its true faith (which
had been the greatest change, and strangest point of news that ever the world
had heard of since Christ's time) and no one Author at least recount the
circumst-nces of that great wonder, is plainly incredible: especially since the
particular points and passages of all other heresies, yea of all considerable
points of news done in any Nation, are always commended to posterity by some
Writers, at least by some one: the deep silence of all kind of Authors in this
business, till Luthers time, condemns this wretched Apostata, (and all that
band against the Church of Rome, upon that ungrounded and impious supposition)
of deadly sin, of schism, of Hesie; and obliges all (whom invincible
ignorance excuses not) under pain of the same sins, to return to the communion
of the Church of Rome again.

Ponder further the antiquity (and consequently the verity of the Roman Church,
upon this ground: She was once in possession (yea for many ages) of the
honorable title of being the most ancient and true Church: Now this is her
most just plea; she has still possession (and melior est conditio possidentis)
of what her adversaries (once her children) grant was long hers by right: Now
by what law (surely neither by the civil nor natural) can she be thrust out of
possession; since her adversaries (who are the Plaintiffs in this unjust
action) can prove nothing against her? Denial serves the Defendant; the other
must positively prove that which they can never prove.

Ponder lastly, the Antiquity of the Roman Catholic Religion, from the common
sense, or consent of all people; from which arose that phrase of the Vulgar
sort, calling it the old Religion.

All these considerations questionless convince, that the Roman Catholics are
the most ancient, (and consequently the true) Religion; for here the one infers
the other: Luc. 19.39.
Si hi tacuerint lapides clamabunt; if these arguments proclaim not with a
voice loud enough the antiquity of the Roman Religion, the very stones will
speak in its behalf; all ancient monuments, even Gravestones and Church
Windows; all Abbeys, Collegies, Churches, and Chapels (of which many lie
buried in their own ruins for this Religions sake) and crosses (now grovelling
upon the ground for their too much favoring the ancient Religion) are strong
witnesses of this truth.

Thou therefore that art wavering, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, Jer. 6.16.
harken to what the ancient of days says to the of this ancient Religion:
Stand in the ways, and see, and inquire of the old paths, which is the good
way, and walk therein.

The third Point.
To understand the better, that none but Roman Catholics can justly pretend
Apostolic antiquity; consider, first that rule which S. Hierom gives, as a
touch stone to try heresies by: Epist. ad Cliteph.
to reduce an heresy to its first beginning, is to confute it: this is it, and
it is well grounded in reason, lib. 3. c. 4.
and Saint Irenaeus before him used the same rule, and by it confuted the
Valentineans and Marcionists.

Consider secondly, this other proof of heresies novelty and salshood; to wit,
going out, and separation; the scriptures make going out, a distinctive mark of
Heretics: Saint John speaking of Heretics, says, They went out from us, 1
Jo. 2. 19. Saint Jude, says, These are they which segregate themselves. Jud.
19. Saint Paul says, Out of our own selves shall arise men speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after themselves, Act. 20. 30. And the Apostles
together in Council, said, We have heard that certain going forth from us have
troubled you, with words subverting your souls: Act. 15. 24. And our Savior
gave us all his express admonition against being seduced by Heretics in these
words; Go ye not out: Mat. 24. 26. So that going out is a badge or character of
an Heretic and Novelist.

Hence inser, that since Berengarius, Waldo, Wyckliffe, Hus, Luther,
Carolstadius, Peter Maryr, Bucer, Oecolampadius, Ochinus, Zuinglius, Calvin and
Beza (who had all been originally Rom^n Catholics) went out from that Church,
they are convicted to be Novelists, Heretics, and Schismatics: and since both
their going out of the Church of Rome is confessed by all, and easily made
manifest; even by this alone their heresies, are easily reduced to their first
beginnings, and consequently according to Saint Hieromes rule confuted.

As for Luther, who led the Van of all these troops of modern Sectaries, he in
the year 1517. went out of the Church of Rome, and began a new sect: and in the
year 1529. Note.
he and his adherent^ gave to themselves and their own posterity the name of
Protestants; a name never heard of before: the occasion of the imposition of
that new name was taken by their protesting against that decree, which was made
against them at the Diet in Germany. Luther was presently writ against, and
confuted, by many learned men in all Catholic Countries; his Doctrine and he
were condemned first by Pope Leo the tenth, and afterward by the Council of
Trent: so that Luthers going out, and the beginning of his new Sect, are most
certainly known, and recounted by many. Yea the falsehood and novelty of Luthers
doctrine, as also his going out of the Roman Church, and that the said Church
of Rome is Christ's true Church, is plainly demonstrated further by this thing,
which is most worthy to be taken notice of: At that time when Luther began his
new sect, there were not in the world any Religions but these; Note.
the Roman, Paganism, Judaisme, Mahometisme, the relics of Nestorianisme in
Greece, and some Hussites in Germany: some one of these was Christ's true
Church; for he had a visible Church upon earth; Therefore the Roman must be it;
for even the Lutherans deny that any of the other could be it.

Hence infer, first, that Luther could not but know that he went out and
separated himself from Christ's Church, by forsaking all Churches, one of which
he knew must be it: Secondly, that he could not but know that the Roman Church
was it: thirdly, that supposing the Church of Rome were it (which must be
supposed, or else the denyers must say, Christ had no true Church upon earth,)
it could not be guilty of any Heresy or Idolatry, nor give any just cause to
Luther of going out of it; and consequently by his revolt from the communion of
it, he incurred the sin of schism; by teaching doctrine contrary to it, he
fell into the sin of heresy: Fourthly, that all that entered into that
schismatic league with him, and embraced his opinions, were guilty of the
same sins; so far forth as ignorance did not make their acts involuntary:
Fifthly, that that Note.
schism unlawfully begun by Luther, cannot be lawfully continued by others:
and therefore all that are not Roman Catholics expose themselves to evident
danger of their souls, unless they return to the communion of the Roman Church.

The fourth Point.
Consider now, what may be drawn out of all the precedent points: first, that
antiquity is not only a mark of the true Church; but it is one by which even
the most ignorant souls may easily find out, which is the true Church; and
which are late sects, and consequently false; for a small enquiry will bring
them to the knowledge of which Religion is of the longest standing, and a far
less will discover unto them which are of the latest; for of Luther, above
mention is made: Calvin begun at Geneva, anno 1538. and Protestant Religion in
England begun under Queen Elizabeth (though some symptoms of falling into it,
were difcovered in her predecessor Edward the sixth his days,) as is evident,
out of John Stows Chronicle, Eliz. an. I. and 8.
and other Protestant Writers; as also out of the Stature book: 2. That since
according to Saint Austins rule, (which is, that if there be any thing
practiced in the Church universally, Epist.118.
and no time of its being introduced can be assigned; that thing is to be
supposed to have its first origin from the Apostles times) no known beginning
of the Roman Catholic Religion since the days of the Apostles can be
specified, it must be the true Religion: On the contrary, since both the going
out from the Roman Church, and also the first beginnings of all later Sects are
easily demonstrable; none of these can be true or a soul saving Religion. 3.
That all who are not Roman. Catholics (for these know it) have great reason,
yea are obliged, to inform themselves about the requisitenesse of antiquity in
point of Religion: For by a neglect of this, they expose themselves to the
danger of making an imprudent choice; to the great prejudice of their souls,
whereas a compliance with this obligation of searching after the antiquity of
Religion, will bring them easily to a perfect insight into the defectivenesse
and falsehood of all, save only that Religion of the Roman Catholics. Inquire
therefore of the old paths, you who are out of that way, which your Ancestors
held for above eight hundred years together in England, before Luther was born:
you who have left the true worship of God, and sacrifice to the Idols of your
own fancies, learn that lesson well which Moses reads to you: Do ye thus
requite the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.
O foolish people and unwise? remember the days of old; consider the years of
many generations: ask thy Father, and he will show thee; thy Elders, and they
will tell thee: What? The ancient being, and truth of the Catholic Religion,
and the nonentity of these late ones of our miserable times.

The Eleventh Meditation.
Of Unity.
The first Point.
Consider first, that the true Church of Christ is but one: The Scriptures,
Councels, Fathers, History, and Reason, prove this truth; imprint in thy mind
the many divine Oracles, with which the true God of Wisdom has confirmed
this: One is my Dove, my perfect one; Cant. 6. One God, one Faith, one
Baptism, one body, one spirit; says Saint Paul, Ephesians. 4. who also recommends
to all Christians most earnestly, that they will stand fast in one spirit, with
one mind: Phil. 1.27. and that they will be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, and one mind: Phil. 2.2. in all which places, and many
more, he exhorts to unity in Faith, Judgment, and opinion: Our Savior every
where speaks of his Church in the singular number; ( tell the Church, upon this
rock will I build my Church!) intimating thereby, it is but one: the General
Council of Nice and Constantinople (received by Protestants) define, and
profess in their Creed, that the Catholic Church is but one; the holy Fathers
all unanimously fight for the unity of Christ's Church against Heretics and
schismatics; and History delivers unto posterity, the continued succession of
Popes Bishops, Priests, Doctors, Confessors, Virgins and Martyrs, for fifteen
centuries of years together and more; all whose lives, deaths, books and blood,
have published, signed and sealed their attestations, that there is but one
Church, the Roman Church, which is the Catholic Church.

Consider secondly, and that seriously, what forces natural reason brings to
establish this Unity; verity it self is but one, and that indivisible; and
propositions contradictory cannot possibly be both true: how then can Sects, or
Religions contradicting one another in one and the self same points, be more
than one of them true? Different Nations, people of different callings and
qualities, may meet in conjunction together, and make one and the same body in
Faith, and Religion; as it happened in the Primitive Church: But different
Sects, and People of a contrary belief about the self same material objects,
or points of Faith (for example about the real presence of Christ's body in the
Eucharist about Justification, about Purgatory, about the infallible Authority
of the Church and such like) cannot possible be both true, whilst they remain
both contradictory: for that would destroy that Principle which natural Reason
dictates to all men, which is, that the same thing cannot be and not be at the
same time: the same point cannot be true and false; nor the Negative and
Affirmative opinion about the same point both true and false together.

Hence infer, First, that of all Sects and Opinions contradicting one another,
there can be but one True. Make a search for this, find it out, embrace it.
Secondly, that this Unity of Faith and Religion requires; that all the members
belive all, and every one (at least implicitly) of the particular Points
proposed by the true Church; and disbelieve no one of them. Note.
Thirdly, that no other different sect is of the same church with Roman
Catholics. Fourthly, that those who call themselves Protestants,
Presbiterians, Independants or the like, are not members of these Sects,
unless they believe the same body of Articles: which since few of them do;
nay nor so much as know what, or how many tenants are to be believed by them;
yea since there is no certain number, or sum of points to be believed, in
the same sense and meaning, amongst any of them; let the world judge in what a
lamantable condition thousands of these poor souls are.

The second Point.
Consider now the Unity in all things belonging to Faith and Religion, which is
amongst the Roman Catholics: First the sum, or body of Articles amongst them
is one, and the same, through the whole world; these in these source classes or
branches (the Apostles creed, the Athanasian creed, the Nicen creed, and the
profession of Faith decreed by the Counsel of Trent, and published by order of
Pius the fourth Pope) all what the Roman Catholics believe is contained.
Secondly, there is a most perfect Unity amongst them in believing what is
contained in the forementioned sum: Note.
the knowledge and explicit belief of which (conformably to what was treated
Med. 2.
of this subject in the meditation of Faith) is to be measured according to the
capassity of the persons, Note.
and the things more or less sufficiently propounded to be believed: By reason
of which two things, it falls out here (as it cannot possible be otherwise in
Christ's Church whether this or some other be it) that some know and believe
more than others explicitly and distinctly (which is not against true Unity, in
believing all points of Faith) yet the most ignorant and simple amongst the
vulgar, are taught, and do believe the most important Points explicitly, and in
particular; and all the rest they believe in general, assenting to al
whatsoever the Church believes; but they disbelieve no one thing: Now by
believing in this manner, and disbelieve nothing, the simple ones embrace the
whole sum of that faith; as truly as the most learned do: Now by this means
every one of that Church believes all, every one believes the same; every one
knows what is to be believed, and what the other members of that Church
believe: no one amongst them disbelieves what the rest believe; no one believes
what the rest deny, no one denies what the rest profess: Now what greater
Unity, either in the things to be believed, or in the Persons believing can be
desired than this?

Consider secondly, the admirable Unity and concord which is amongst the Roman
Cotholicks, in all the other things which concern their Religion. As for the
Scriptures, they have all the world over the same Canon; that is the same
catalogue or number of divine books, with every chapter, line or verse, they
have the same adition, to wit the vulgar, the which only they have bin
accustomed almost since Saint Hieroms time, which is above twelve hundred
years: they have all the same rule or way, and means for expounding it, to wit,
the Church by the Pope, the general Counsels, and the holy Doctors; and they
have all the same sense and interpretation of it, in those hard places, which
chiefty contain the Mysteries, and points of Faith: here is Unity indeed. As for
the function of Preaching the word of God to the People, their Unity is
wonderful; all that are admited to that office (for none takes it upon him on
his own accord) have their Commission, and are sent either immediately, or
mediatly from one; to wit the supreme Bishop in the world, the Pope: and in the
exercise of Preaching, no one of them teaches different points of Faith, or
teaches otherwise of matters of Faith than the rest do. As for Sacraments,
they are in that point so united, that all of them unanimously hold there are
seven, and that they were all of a divine Institution, and confer grace; as for
the manner of administrating the Sacraments, their rule and order, in that is
the same in each several Nation: as for their form of worship, and Lyturgie
(which is Mass, most religious and majesticall every where) their practice is
most uniform: As for their Ceremonies (great incitements to devotion) they keep
a great decorum in the use of them; and that variety is not without great
uniformity: and as for Prayer, as the Priests have every one a set portion of
their breviary, to be recited every day; so for the lay peoples comfort, and
devotion, most excellent prayers (and those many) have been composed by that
Church; and the self same are used by all the members of that Church, where
ever they reside in any part of the world: Nor are these Enthusiastes of our
times for their prayer, extempore, to be compared with the Roman Catholics,
who perform that kind of Prayer, both more discreetly, more frequently and
more religiously: in fine, their Unity, and uniformity appears in the whole
composure and carriage of their religious affairs: they have unity in their
Fasts, and unity in their solemn Feasts; which as they are proscribed for all,
so are they observed by all: One chief Pastor has a general care over them
all; one living judge of Controversies (to wit, the Pope, and the general
Councels) gives a disinitive sentence, which is obeyed by all; every one prays
for all; and a mutual participation of merits (for each one of them may say
with David: I am partaker with all that fear thee) Psalm. 116.63. and the
benefit of the communion of Saints, is both proper to each one, and common to
them all.

O most sweet harmony! made by such Unity, in so great a variety: here is
nothing out of tune, no discords, nothing harsh, all parts conspire, all
accord; this is true Church music indeed: but what wonder? since this consort
is made upon the ground or foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.

The third Point.
Consider now what Unity can be found amongst other Sects; pick out the most
probable, and plausible of them, from amongst the rest: will you find it one,
and uniform in all the particulars mentioned in the former Point? no not in any
one.

None of these sects has one and the same body of articles: some things (as
the Sacraments, Note.
Scripture, and that the twelve Articles were made by the Apostles) they must
believe, which are not expressed, either in Scripture or in the Creed: what,
and how many these things were, they never yet resolved: nor do they agree in
the meaning of the twelve Articles: they admit what latitude and liberty in
believing they please: they neither agree about the Canon of Scripture; for
some admit parts of it, which others reject: nor have they one authentical
Edition, but a multiplicity: nor one and the true sense; but every one follows
his own private interpretation: hence is it, that their Ministers cannot be
unanimous, and preach all the same doctrine: they cannot agree about the
number, or nature of the Sacraments: for some admit fewer, others more; and
these are isntrumental causes of grace, withsome bare elements with others: in
form of worship, they come nearer a nullity than unity: for nothing now but a
Psalm (and that not liked of by many) is used in most of the Churches: they
have not one head of their Church, but are become Acephalist^; or if otherwise,
every man (at least Minister) when he pleases, makes himself head of a faith
particular to himself, or his household: nor have they one (yea, any) judge of
Controversies; but in that every man is his own Master; whence it comes, that
how many men, so many minds are there: even about going, or not to Church (in
which exterior action alone, many place their whole Religion, without any
regard, who preaches, or what is his doctrine) they are various; so like it,
others are aversed from it; some go and others forbear: in fine, no uniformity,
nor unity, but a kind of multiformity appears even in the most famous Sects
amongsts them; which be it what it will, is more like that Proteus
(Hieroglyphick of each modern Sect) metamorphising himself now into one shape,
now into another, then any way resembles the perfectly one mystical body of
Christ's true Church.

The fourth Point.
Out of these former points, gather, first, a perfect knowledge, and a lively
apprehension of the far different condition of Roman Catholics, from that of
Sectaries in point of Religion; the one has an admirable Systema of Faith and
Religion; the other a confused Chaos of disagreeing fancies, and judgments
only: the one has unity mixed with a most grateful variety; the other
neither unity nor variety: the one has a sum of things to be believed, which
is one and the same for all persons and places; the other has nothing fixed or
settled in point of belief. 2. Since the Roman Catholics have in a most
perfect manner this mark of Unity, so much mentioned in the holy Scriptures;
and no other sect has any thing that is considerable of it: the former ought
to be embraced by all, as the true Church of Christ, and the rest forsaken, as
false and Heretical sects: 3. Since the substance of the two former points,
paralleled together, cannot but work strongly upon an impartial and disingaged
judgment and will; prosecute (draw Christian soul) this comparison with a
desire of the truth, and thy souls good; and at length thou will find that
only the Roman Catholics are that populus unius labii; a people of one lip;
saying, and believing every one the same thing in matters of Religion and
Faith: you will find that Saint Paul's exhortation to the Corinthians Cor.1.10.
(I beseech you that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no schisms
among you; but that ye be perfectly knit together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment) is truly fulfilled by them.

The Colloquy.
We acknowledge (sweet Savior) that your amorous prayer to your heavenly for
your Churches Unity (Neither pray I for these (Apostles of mine) alone, but for
10.17.20. 21.
them also which shall believe in me through their word; that they all may be
one) we acknowledge that it was beard, and also is fulfilled by the members of
the Roman Church, and by them only; and that in such manner, as forces us to
admire, and cry out with the Prophet O quam bonum ac jucundum eft habitare
fratres in unum, O how good and pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell
together in unity: Psalm.133.1.

The Twelfth Meditation.
Of the Amplitude and extent of the Dominions of Christ Church.

The first Point.
COnsider first, the Predictions of the Prophets concerning the great extent
and Amplitude of the kingdom of Christ's Church: Of it said David, It shall
rule from sea to sea; Psalm.71. To it spoke God, by the same Prophet, I will
give unto thee Nations for thy Inheritance, and for thy possession the bounds
of the earth: Psalm.2. Of it spoke Esaias, The Nation and kingdom which will not
serve thee shall perish: Isa.6. And to it spoke the same, Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers, Isa. 49.23. Upon which place
the English Bible makes this glossa: Printed an, 1576.
Kings shall be converted to the Gospel, and bestow their power and authority,
for the preservation of the Church: Daniel, also has most strange Predictions,
and representations of the greatness of the Kingdom of Christ's Church, in the
interpretation of the meaning of that Dan. 2.
statua; and the same thing is prefigured in the four beasts, Dan. 7.
representing the same four Monarchies; after which the monarchy of Christ's
Church was to succeed and surpass them all.

Consider 2d. that since this kingdom of Christ (whose great dominions are here
promised and foretold) must be now some where extant and visible upon earth:
that Church (whether it prove the Roman Catholic, or some other sect) which
has not this Amplitude, salendour and greatness of limits and bounds, cannot
be it; but on the contrary, that to which most Nations, Kings and Princes have
yielded to, have honored and acknowledged for the kingdom of Christ, that must
be and no other, Christ's true Church.

The second Point.
Consider first, the amplitude of the Church of Rome, from that time (to wit of
Saint Gregory the great) about which Sectaries say, it ceased to be any longer
the true Church of Christ: for their imputations and aspersions, with which
they endeavor to brand the Church of Rome, must be granted to be most unjust
slanders, and it to be still the true Church, if this mark and the others
attributed to Christ's Church by the scriptures, be still apparent upon it.

In the time of Saint Gregory, therefore almost all parts of the world obeyed
the Church of Rome, and communicated with it; this appears evidently by the
Epistles of that holy Doctor to the Bishops both of the Oriental and Western
Churches; Constantinople with the other Patriarchal Seas obeyed then the Church
of Rome: the Bishops of Greece yielded to it; to it the Churches of Asia, to it
the Churches of Africa submitted; all these stood true to the Church of Rome;
and when they revolted from it, they fell not only into schism, but into
heresy also (to wit, the denial of divinity to the holy Ghost) which is the
ordinary sequel and punishment of schism (witness England) from the Church of
Rome: Note
and so by denying due Allegiance to that See, they became, by the judgments of
God, to be made subject to the Turk. To the Sea of Rome therefore all these
Nations in point of Religion were then subject: Add to these Italy, Spain,
Sicily, France, Scotland, and England; which were all under the same obedience:
After the death of that holy Pope, new Nations came in with their voluntary
subjection to the Roman See apace: Flaunders, with the other Low Countries and
adjacent places, and Germany with its adherent Provinces; and after these
Denmark and Sweathland, Russia, Norway, Poland, Hungary and Transylvania: All
these Kingdoms and Countries, with their Kings and Princes, became voluntary
subjects to the Sea of Rome; and so persisted many hundred years; till Luthers
licentious doctrine began to seduce Germany, and to give occasion of new
heresies, and many revolts both from their tenporal Princes, their Spiritual
Prelates, and their true and Ancient Religion: Such is the nature of heresy.

Consider secondly, how far the limits and bounds of the Roman Religion extend
themselves in these our days; all Italy, Venice, Sicily, Spain, and Portugal,
with many other adjacent Hands, are entirely Roman Catholic; France (excepting
some places) has every Town and Province of the same Religion; of the
seventeen Provinces, the far greater part, is entirely Catholic; and of
Germany, more than three parts are Faithful professors of the same Roman
Faith: as also of Poland, and Hungary; add to these the many hundred thousands
of Roman Catholics mixed promiscuously amongst other Sectaries in England,
Holland, Sweathland, Denmark, the revolted Towns in Germany, and Switzerland,
and other the like places: And then Consider, whether this be not that mark of
Magnitude, and far extended bounds promised by the Prophets to Christ's Church.

Let us pass further, And first into Africa; all which Simon Lathus the
Protestant says, the Jesuits have filled with their Idols; he means that they
have planted the Roman Religion every where in it: From thence let us pass
over the main Ocean every way (and further then ever any earthly Empire went)
to the East Indies, to the west America, to the north in Japan, and to the
south in Brasil; and from thence into the furthest and vastest Kingdom in the
world, China: into all these have the Roman Priests advanced the royal Standard
of Christ's Cross: Fables (which had the liberty to attribute to their Heroes,
and Baccus, and Hercules, what feats and travails they pleased) never fained so
much as these men have really affected, in their extending the dominions of the
Roman Faith: Caesar and Alexander, never went near where these are now
Preaching Christianity; nor had the old Roman Empire near so great Dimensions
of longitude and latitude, as the Spiritual Empire of the Church of Rome now
has; and it daily gets ground, and continually dilates it self; for these
more then Herculean laborers, there find still plus ultra: O that our natives
of England, were but spectators awhile of the infatigable and succesful
labors, of these Roman Priests; they would see in them most clearly these
signa Apostolatus those signs of Apostle-ship, signs of truly Apostolical
men; Cor. 12.12.
which would make them have an other manner of opinion of them, and the
Religion they all preach. Note.
But one thing more is most worthy of a mature consideration, and that is, that
the Roman Catholics in these foreign Nations, are not confined to a private
exercise of their Religion, as Catholics in England are; but there are whole
Towns, yea Countries (and those many) entirely Catholic, and without any
mixture of Infidels; and in these there are Churches, many, and richly adorned;
and Collegies (as at Goa, Mexico, and in many places besides) in which the
studies of Humanity, Philosophy, and Divinity are taught: And in this posture
are Catholic affairs, in these many and vast Nations, converted to
Christianity by Roman Priests.

Hence we infer, that it was thee (Rome) and thy Faith, to which these large
promises of Nations, for thy inheritance were made; for in thee only they have
bin performed: And since the bounds of the earth are given to thee, who can
deny but they were promissed to thee?

The third Point.
Consider now, and make a survey of the greatest and most populous Sect, now
extant in Europe: But if the distinction of Sects, be taken from the different
body of Articles, or different number of points of Faith, as really it must;
there will be no proportion or degree of comparison, betwixt the Roman
Catholics and any one Sect left: For he that will hold that the number of
Roman Catholics in Holland or England, is as Copious, as any one sect (taken
according to this true distinction, of sect from sect) in either Nation, holds
a very probable opinion: But take all Sects now on foot amongst Christian
Countries, and Conglobate them all into one by aggregation; yet their dominions
would not out reach, yea equalize the above mentioned bounds of the Roman
Church; Look upon the compendium of the earth, either the Map or Globe, and
your eye will satisfy your understanding in this point.

As for great Personages amongst Sectaries; What, and how many Magnificent
Benefactors has any of these Sects or all together had? As for the Religion of
the, Roman Catholics, Kings indeed has been its nursing Fathers and Queens
its nursing Mothers; such were Constantine and Hellen, such were Lucius,
Ethelbert, Inas, Ethelred, Oswald, Alfred, Edward and many others in England
such were Lewis in France, Richardus in Spain, Casimer in Poland, Stephen in
Hungary, Wenceslaus in Bohemia, Canutus in Denmark, Henry and many of the house
of Austria, in the Empire: In fine, such were Cimegundis, Blanch, the
Elizabeth's of Hungary, and Portingal, with many more of that sex. O royal
souls, be ever Crowned with Glory, for managing your earthly Crowns so well,
toward the maintaining of the Church of Christ: Well did you know, that to
serve Christ was to reign; and that so to reign, was the means to reign
eternally: The great ones which ruled where Sectaries swarmed (such were the
Duke of Saxony, the King of Denmark, Queen Elizabeth, the Palsgrave, the
Landgrave of Hesse, the Prince of Orange, the King of Sweathland:) what
Universities, what Bishoprics, what Abbeyes, what Churches, Chapels and
Altars, have they founded? yea, rather what have they not destroyed? Now confer
dominions, parallel Princes, and compare Religions together; and then chose
according to equity and prudence.

The fourth Point.
Out of what has been here handled, make these reflections, in order to thy
Spiritual profit: First, that since large extent of limits, has been promissed
to Christ's Church; and since it is patently apparent that only the Roman Church
has this Amplitude; none but it can be Christ's true Church. Secondly, that
since the Scriptures in the first point cited, (with other places in Isay and
Daniel) as also the great promises made by God to Abraham and David's
posterity, must be understood of Christ's Church, as the Apostles and holy
Doctors aver: What an argument of inveterate hatered is it against the Roman
Church (in which only these promises are fulfiled) to say (as some body to
their own shame, and their Auditory's injury have both said and preached) that
this Magnificency and greatness of the Romon Church, argues it to be the
Kingdom of Antichrist: No, no: the Roman Church is thy Kingdom, The Colloquie.
(Christ) This collection of converted Nations, is that which was blessed in
the seed of Abraham: This is that Kingdom, whose largeness, and eternal
duration Daniel foresaw: this is that holy mount Sion, which David fore told
Christ should be King of: Reign therefore (O King of Kings) in this thy
Kingdom for ever, Amen.

The thirteenth Meditation.
Of the name of Catholic.
The first Point.
Consider first, that this noble Surname Catholic, is one of the many Marks,
which distinguish the true Church from every particular Sect of heretics. The
Apostles themselves, gave Christ's Church this significant name; for it is
specified in that Article of our belief: I believe in the holy Catholic
Church. The Counsel of Nice also in that Creed, puts this as a Mark of the true
Church, together with the other three: Vnam, Sanctam, Catholicam and
Apostolicam Ecclesiam. And the Athanasion Creed gives the true Faith the same
honorable Appellation.

Consider secondly, that the holy Fathers made use of this nam^ Catholic
(amongst other marks) thereby to prove against heretics; 1. that the Roman
Church was the true Church, because it kept still that name. 2. That Heretics
were not members of the true Church; because they were called not by this, but
by some other name. 3. That they themselves were members of the true Church;
because they were members of that Church which had always borne that name:
L.contra Ep. fund. c. 4.
For Saint Austin after that he had summed up many excellent marks and motives,
which like forcible chains held him in the Roman Church, and made him believe
it was the true Church; he thus concludes: Lastly the very name of Catholic
holds me in this Church: thus argued he against the Manicheans. Ep: ad
Sympronianum.
And Pacianus one of the Nicen Fathers says; Christian is my name, and
Catholic my surname. And Heretics in all ages (whom the modern sectaries
imitate in this as in other things) aimed at this name (which they see was a
mark of the true Church) with hopes thereby to conciliate to their doctrine an
opinion of its being true, if they could get it christened by the name of
Catholic.

The second Point.
Consider now, that this honorable name is theirs by right, and only theirs,
who have and do adhear to the Church of Rome; the reasons are: First, because
ever since the Primative Church, they have held it as their birthright, and
part of that inheritance, which their Ancestors, the Apostles (to whom they
only succeeded as lawful heirs) left them: And though many attempts have bin
made, by heretical pretenders, to put them out of the possession of this; yet
they were never able to effect it: so that now the Roman Catholics hold it,
both by title of inheritance, and also by title of prescription; not of years
only, but ages.

Secondly, it is the Roman Catholics only; because in them only is verified
that which the name Catholic imports: The word Catholic is a Greek word, and
it signifies Universal; now this Universallity may be taken either with
reference to time, or place, or doctrine, or communion, all and every one of
these several acceptions pleads, yea and proves that title to be theirs who
hold with the Roman Church; for that Religion only stretches it self out to
all times, by its Antiquity; embraces all Places by its Amplitude or extension
of bounds; its Faith and Doctrine is universally one, and the same for all
persons; and its communication betwixt the members and the head, is also
universally one, and the same.

Thirdly the generality of all sorts and Sects of people, have in all ages been
of this mind; and upon occasion expressed the same in words, that by
Catholics are meant those who are in communion with the Church of Rome.
Fourthly, even Note.
the by-name Papist, proves them Catholics: for by calling one Papist, they
mean (as really the word argues) one who joines in communion with the Pope, and
is under obedience to him: Now the Pope is one of that never interrupted line
of Saint Peter's successors; and consequently chief pastor under Christ of the
Catholic Church. Fifthly, the name of Roman Catholic (which every one
willingly gives them) proves the same that the former reason proves; and the
intention also which Sectaries have, in calling these Roman Catholics, argues
the same: for they do it, First to prevent Roman Catholics from ingrosing the
name Catholic wholly to themselves: Secondly, out of hopes that these will rest
content, with the title of Roman Catholics, and not impugn others when at any
time they term themselves Catholic, with some such restrictive adjective as
Protestant, added to the word Catholic.

The third Point.
Consider and ponder, the reason why Sectaries have no right to that honorable
and Ancient appellation of Catholics: The first is, because there is no
congruity betwixt the signification of the word Catholic and any one of these
sects, for they are not Universal in any of the four ways mentioned in the
former point; much less in them all.

Secondly, they can pretend no more why they should be called Catholics, than
the Donatists, Arians, or other Sects could formerly: which not withstanding
were opposed and confuted in this very point, by Saint Austin, S. Hierom, Saint
Chrysostom; as also by Pacianus, S. Athanasius, S. Cyrill, and Justin.

Thirdly, The practice of all sorts of people (yea of those who are of the
particular Sects themselves) is to give Sectaries their names, either from the
authors name, who first broached that Sect; as the Arians, Pelagians,
Donatists, Montanists, Manicheans, Lutherans, Calvenists and others: or, else
from some principal Tenent which they maintain; Hence the Monothelites,
Protestants, Puritans, Independents, and Presbyterians have their names; or
from some exploit, or genious of the persons; as the Iconaclasts, Geuses,
Quakers: none ever gave these the name of Catholic.

Fourthly, Sectaries do not, nor dare they own the name of Catholic at such
times, as fidelity to their Religion most requires; as first, when they are
brought before any Justice, Judge, or Tribunal, either upon score of Religion,
or to give evidence in Court upon any other action: true it is, in time of
disputation about the name Catholic, who should have the best title to it;
then being constrained by their Adversaries to a forced put, and positive
answer to the question; they will let fall these, or the like propositions; we
are Catholics as well as you; we are all Catholics; all Christians are
Catholics: ungroundedly spoken, and sooner said than proved; unless taking
the question for the argument be good proof.

In like manner, when any Protestant, Presbyterian, Independent, or the like
(being about to die) is desired to declare himself in point of Religion; he
will not say thus; I die a Catholic, for the Note.
spectatours and auditors would immediately conclude that he dyed a Papist;
but he would declare himself thus: I die a Protestant, Presbyterian, or the
like; or I die a member of the Church of England; which is in effect to say, he
dies a Protestant: and thus the titular Archbishop of Canterbury Mr. Laud and
some other great Personages that died the same death, before and after him,
declared themselves, at that instant, which was both most unseasonable for
dissembling, and at which period a man should be serious, if ever; and yet
these great Persons, to hold an argument, whilst they were in discourse upon
who had the best claim to the honorable title of Catholic, would undoubtedly
have stood for it themselves.

The fourth Point.
Out of these former points make these ensuing reflections: first, that the
name Catholic is, and has been always esteemed by venerable antiquity, a
mark of the true Church; yea even Sectaries always esteemed it so, and upon
that account would sometimes challenge it, thereby to Patronize and vent their
new fashioned Religions the sooner.

2. That those who desire to be accounted Catholics by all Sects and sorts of
people; yea, and (which is better) by God himself; must join with those whom
they call Roman Catholics, in the same Belief, Communion and obedience, to the
spiritual Prelates.

3. That the denominations of Catholic, Papist, or Roman Catholic, are in
substance all one thing, and as it were termini convertibiles, or synonima. Now
to the and a man may be saved, since it is not sufficient to bear only the
extrinsecall appellation of a Catholic, but he must lead a life conformable to
that name and Religion: therefore,

Grant (good Lord) a large contribution of thy grace, both to all aliens from
thy Church, The colloquie.
that they may become members of it; and to those also who are adopted into
that honorable family already, that they may speak by a good life what they
profess in their belief. Amen.

The fourteenth Meditation.
Of the Gift of Prophecy.
The first Point.
FOr a perfect information, and understanding of this truth, that the
privilege of prophesying is a mark of Christ's Church; Consider first the
infallible testimony of Gods word; Your sons and your daughters shall prophecy,
and your young men shall see visions, Joel 2. Behold Gods promise by his
Prophet: and that this was made to the Church of Christ, witness the Prince of
the Apostles Saint Peter; who cites these very words of Joel, Acts 2. to prove
what is here intended: Nor is Saint Paul inferior to Saint Peter in the proof of
this point: for in his induction of the graces given to the Church Gratis, 1
Cor. 12
he ranks the gift of Prophecy amongst the rest: so that no doubt can be made
of this truth.

Consider secondly, the excellency of this endowment, and how sufficiently able
it is to notify unto us which is the true Church: Prophets are called
videntes, by reason of that kind of intuitive knowledge which they have of
future things, not as at a distance only, but as actually present; they need
no such window in man's breasts, as that momus wished for, thereby to see into
men's hearts: they anticipate what the succession of time brings to others; and
the celestial secrets which others have from the second or third hand, they
have them immediately from the divine Wisdom; and certainly the knowledge of
future things contingent is not attainable either by the nature or art of man;
it can only be had from God: and who have it, may deservedly be held for great
correspondents with him: and this truth is expressed to the full in these words
following: Declare the things that are to come, and we shall know that ye are
Gods: Isa. 41. Now if these by this gift of Prophecy become as it were Gods,
or men of God: certainly that must be the Church of God, which is highly
endowed with the same gift.

The second point.
Consider now how eminent the Roman Church has been at all times in this
point; and to say nothing of the predictions of Saint Gregory Thaumaturgus,
mentioned by Saint Basil, in his book of the Holy Ghost cap. 29. Of Saint
Anthony, recounted by Saint Athanasius, the Writer of his Life: of the Abbot
John, of whom Saint Austin in in his Book of the City of God, makes honorable
mention, cap. 26. And to pass with silence the Saints of the Primitive Church
famous in this kind; we will come to those times, and persons, which
Protestants themselves acknowledge for papistical; the argument will be the
stronger by this supposition.

Saint Benedict, the spiritual Father of many thousand Monks, amongst his other
strange Prophesies, foretold Totilas King of the Goths, that he should enter
the City of Rome, then cross the Seas homeward, and that he should depart this
life, after the period of nine years should be expired: all these things Saint
Gregory says, he knew to have been effected, Lib. 2. dial. c. 25.

Saint Cuthbert foretold the total rout of Egfrid King of the Northumbers his
Army, by the Picts, and the Kings death amongst the rest in the field; and this
the year before it hapened; and the next year, upon the approach of the time,
and a disaster prenunciated, he went on purpose to Carlisle to comfort the
Queen, Egfrids wife, and to be with her against that fatal day: there in
spirit he saw the whole tragedy, as it was acted a far off in the Country of
the Picts, and related the same to the Queen: the same Saint foretold his own
Election to be Bishop, with the time when, and other circumstances: he foretold
his own departure out of this life, to the holy Ermit Herebert; who earnestly
requesting the Saint, that he would negotiate with the divine Majesty for his
passage together with his; presently the Saint replied, that his petition was
granted; and indeed one and the same day carried them both out of this mortal
life together: He foretold (but with the qualifying particle perhaps, out of
his humility) that after his death men should have recourse to his body, as to
an asylum; it proved so, and that for the space of eight hundred and forty
years: These predictions with many more, Venerable Bede recounts in a
particular Book (extant in his Tomes) of S. Cuthberts life.

In vita S. Ed.
King Edward the Confessor (whilst he was hearing Mass upon Whitsunday) saw
the King of Denmark fall into the Sea (as he was going out of a Longboat into
the Admiral) and drown; by which accident that his intended invasion of England
with that Navy was spoiled.

Mafferis in vita.
Saint Hugh Bishop of Lincoln (whilst he was yet Prior of the Charterhouse
Monks at Witham) next under God delivered King Henry the second, out of a
dangerous Tempest at Sea: for that King in that great danger had most earnestly
wished for the assistance of Saint Hugh his prayers; immediately upon which the
fearful storm ceased, to the great astonishment of the King, and increase of
his reverent respect to the man of God.

Surius in vita.
Saint Bernard being requested by a Noble man's son, that he would pray for the
conversion of his Father, returned him this answer: be not perplexed; be not
perlexed, I shall bury him in this Monastery of Clarevall a perfect Monk; and
so it fell out: he foretold also the conversions of four more.

S. Bonav, in vita.
Saint Francis foretold the Captains of the Christian Army, that if they gave
the Sarazens battle upon their intended day, they should loose the field: they
took little notice of the holy man's Caveat, engaged with the enemy, and were
defeated.

Saint Dominick, su ius.
falling sick at Bolonia, called for the Religious Friars of the Convent there;
and exhorting them to the study of perfection, told them he should die of that
sickness; and yet it was far from mortal then.

Ribad^u ix vita S.Ig.
Saint Ignatius, founder of the order of the ^ociety of Jesus, foretold that
Francis Borgia, then Duke of Gandia, should forsake the world, become
religious, and General of the forementioned order: so he died; and is now
beautisied.

Hence infer that the Roman Church is highly privileged with this Prerogative,
and gift of prophecy; for these blessed men are known by all to have lived and
dyed Roman Catholics: As for the Writers of their lives, or Prophesies, Saint
Athanasius, S. Austin, S. Gregory, Venerable Bede, S. Bonaventure and other
Authors of known fidelity; with what face can they be suspected either of
feigning or recountting these things without an assured knowledge of the truth
of them.

The third Point.
Consider first, (for prevention of objections against the gift of prophesies
being an argument, that the Roman Church is the true Church) that though God
may, or have revealed things to come by persons not known to be of the true
Church, or in his favors; as he did by Balaam Number 24. v. 17. foretell the
Star which appeared at our Saviors birth; and by the Sybils, whose acrostick
Poem is full of most clear predictions about our Savior: Yet he will never
permit a thing contingent to be foretold, and fulfilled, in confirmation of a
falls religion: Besides, this makes nothing against the intent of this
Meditation; which is to show, first, that the gift of prophecy is a mark of
Christ's true Church; and this is proved by scripture: 2. That this gift is
found to be eminent in the Roman Church; and so it appears evidently proved in
this point going before: 3. That that Sect cannot possibly be the true Church,
which is destitute of this gift; because it wants this mark, which is
inseparable from the true Church: for the Negative here (as in all other marks)
admits no latitude; but excludes all sects devoid of these marks, from
possibility of being the true Church: and to understand how truly Sectaries are
destitute of the gift of Prophecy.

Consider secondly, that in real truth they could never instance any
particular Prophesies, delivered by members of their Sects in confirmation of
their doctrine; nor indeed have they any person endowed with the gift of any
true prophecy at all: True it is, that Luther prophesied once, that if he
cochleus in aun. 1525.
lived but to preach his doctrine two years longer, the Pope, Cardinals,
Bishops, Monks, Nuns, Towers, Bells, and Masses, would all vanish away: he
preached afterward, according to his manner, not only two years, but almost
twenty two; yet these things are al extant; none of them vanished: hence infer
that Luther proved himself a false prophet by this, and his doctrine false:
according to what is Writ in Deuteronomy, cap. 18. of false prophets: and that
of Jeremy: Thy Prophets (England) have seen false and foolish things, Lam. 2.

Calvin, indeed prognosticated more truly, (but to the destruction of his own
Sect) in these words: Concerning posterity I am so anxious, that I dare not
think of it; for unless God send mavelous succor from heaven, I seem to see
extreme barbarousnesse hang over the world: and I pray God our children may not
erelong feel, that this is rather a prophecy than a conjecture: Thou had had
(Calvin) no need of such fear, if thy sect had been that Church, which Christ
built upon that rock; for the gates of Hell would not have been able to prevail
against it: But conformably to what Gamaliel said; Acts 5.
since thine is the work of man; thy prophecy will be accomplished; it will
come to nothing: And he that will apply to the Protestant (what Hooker
appropriated to the Puritan) King David's words of Psalm. 89. juxta vulg.
the life of man, and withal summon up the years betwixt the establishing of
Protestant Religion by Queen Elizabeth's Parliament, An. I, and8.
and the abolishing of the same, by this late parliament: will sinde a kind of
prophecy of the ruin of it, in these the royal prophets words: The days of
our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of of strength they be
fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow; for it is soon cut
off: Psalm. 90. Thus speaks the Protestant Bible, and thus out of this point it
appears, that Sectaries have not that gift of prophecy, which is promised by
scripture to Christ's Church, as a mark of it.

The fifteenth Meditation.
Of Easy decision of Controversies.
The first Point.
COnsider first, what means the divine wisdom provided the Jewish religion
with, in order to deciding of Controversies amongst them. In Deuteronomy 17.
God declared in express terms many particulars concerning this matter: and
first he appoints for judge of the hardest controversies, not the scripture, v.
8, 9.
as Sectaries do; but the Priests, (a living judge) and particularly the chief
Priest. Secondly, he commands all to stand to the definitive sentence of that
judge, even upon pain of death, v. 12. And thirdly, he promises that that
judges definition, verdict and decree, shall be infallibly true, v. 9, 10, 11.
but particularly in these words: He shall show thee the truth of judgment,
judicii veritatem; which words in the Protestant Bible are falsely translated;
the sentence of judgment.

Consider secondly, the necessity of a living judge: No form of Government (be
it Monareby, Aristocracy, or Democracy) can subsist in an orderly being without
it: No suit either in Civil, or Canon Law, no action of debt, or damage can
come to a trial, no sentence can be passed upon any person, or cause, without
the voice of a living judge; two Counselors cannot without a Judge, as Umpire,
put a final period to any one cause (for example in the Court of Chancery) so,
as that both parties shall understand, and acknowledge it to be decided: much
less will the Plaintiff and Defendant Note.
end their quarrel by themselves alone, without a Judge; for each one would
still plead for himself: the dead letters of the written law can never
sufficiently expound either the legislatours mind, or it is own meaning: nor
shall men at any time understand by it alone who is cast, who has got the
better: in fine, all injustices and outrages, would be committed; and no
malefactors punished, without a living judge; and that such an one, as from
whose sentence, there is no appeal: Now if these instances prove (as they do
most effectually) the requisitnesse of a living judge, for the upholding of all
true civil judicature and government: much more is a living judge necessary in
ecclesiastical; in which matters of Faith and Religion, and consequently of
eternal moment, are to be tried.

The second Point.
To understand how easy and efficacious means the true Church of Christ has
for the composing of Controversies: Consider first, that it belongs to the
divine providence (which extends it self to a care over every the least
individuum of the most contemptible species amongst natural things) not to let
his Church want any thing of those which are required ad melius esse, much more
to supply it with what is absolutely necessary; as means clear and easy for the
judging of Controversies is.

Secondly, what perfection the Jewish Synagogue had in this kind, that a
fortiori, is to be supposed in Christ's Church; for it was but the handmaid,
this the Spouse; if the shadow, this the Sun; if the type, this the real
thing prefigured; if it had a living judge, an infallible judge (who was to
show the truth of judgment) and a judge to whose final sentence that people was
to stand, upon pain of death: shall the Church of Christ (in which the most
weighty controversies of divine Faith and eternal salvation, are raised every
foot by Heretics) want such means? Assuredly no.

Consider thirdly, the many Texts of Scripture (yea and as clear in the
confirmation of this, as of any point whatsoever) by which the Church of Christ
is empowered with an infallible authority for deciding Controversies, even of
the highest nature: All power is given to me in heaven and in earth; go ye
therefore and teach all Nations, Mat. 28. in which words, the emphasis of that
particle theresore intimates, that a powerful Commission was given them, and
consequently of teaching without danger of erring; and that it was not given to
them only, but also to their successors, the ensuing words ( Behold I am with
you always, even unto the end of the world, Luke 10.) Convince, He that
bears you, bears me; and be that despises you, despises me: If he will
not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen and Publican: Matt. 18.17.
Our Savior says of his Church, that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it: Mat. 16. And he says in most significant words that the holy Ghost
shall teach the Church all truth, Jo. 16. O divine spirit, since you cannot but
perform (what our Savior promised) this teaching of the Church all truth; what
do they deserve that accuse it of truth? And indeed either the verity of
Christ's promise, or the fidelity of the holy Ghosts performance, is questioned
when the true Churches Infallible Authority is doubted of, or its erring
avouched.

The third Point.
Consider now, that since the true Church of Christ (where ever it be now) has
his infallible power of resolving all doubts in matters of Faith; as the
forementioned places of scripture (besides many more) confirm: and since some
one of the various religions now extant in the world must be Christ's true
Church, and have this power; for still there is a Church, and it the Ground and
Pillar of Truth, Tim. 1.3. let us see what Church sympathizeth best, or rather
is (as some one must be) identified with Christ's true Church in this point, and
by good consequence in all others.

First, therefore this infallible judge, and composer of all controversies in
Christ's Church formerly, could be no other, than either the head of it, or some
representative body of the Church, or both jointly together; no other means of
having a living judge can more probably, yea or possibly be affigned; for all
the mombers of the church, men, women and children cannot be collected together
into one consult; we see also that a Parliament, in which some one is president
above the is the representative body of a Kingdom, or Common wealth: and what
it (being a law full one) acts, is the act of the whole Nation: we know more
over, that in the primitive Church this judge was no other, but such an one as
is here intended, to wit, the chief pastor and head of the Church, or a General
Council, or both; and by such a judge was Arius condemned, to wit, by the
Council of Nice, in which Hosius (Bishop of Corduba in Spain) was Presidentin
the place of Pope Silvester, who sent him and confirmed the acts of that
Council: So was Macedonius condemned in the first Council of Constantinople: So
Nestorius in the Ephesine Council: so Eutiches in the Council of Calcedon: so
in all suceeding ages, Controversies (as they rise) were decided, and Heretics
condemned after the foresaid manner: therefore that living judge, so necessary,
must be such an one.

Consider secondly, that the same praxis has always been held in the Roman
Church, and is held still; eighteen general Councels have been called and
confirmed by the supreme Bishops or Popes of Rome; the first whereof was the
Nicene Council, and the last the Council of Trent, in which sat six
Cardinals, four Legates, three Patriarks, thirty two Archbishops, and Bishops
two hundred and twenty eight, besides Abbots, Generals of Religious orders, and
a great number of divines, sent by such Bishops, as for infirmity, or other
just reasons, could not be present: And that this Council was not of as great
Authority as any of the first four were, can never be proved; all that can be
urged against this Council, must be grounded upon that false, and ungrounded
(but dreadful, fince all Sectaries venture their salvation upon, on the same)
supposition, that the Roman Church has fallen from the true and Primitive
Faith. Prove this your supposition (you miserable men) which you could never
yet prove, or be converted; or loose your souls; of which you run a most
desperate hazard, by forsaking that Church (which is acknowledged by your
selves to have been once the true Church) merely upon Luthers hare word that it
has lost the true faith.

Consider thirdly, that since there is no other Church now in the world; but
the Roman Church, which holds the same way and manner of deciding controversies
which the Primitivs church held; nay, nor has any means to procure such a
judge (for want of a head, to call and confirm a General Council, and Bishops
to consult, enact, and see that the inferior Pastors put in execution what
was enacted) Hence it follows, that the Roman Church is the only true Church
of Christ.

The fourth Point.
Consider lastly, that since Sectaries reject the authority of the Popes, nor
can have General Councels, and consequently no living judge; they must fly
either to scripture alone, or to the private spirit.

As for the scripture; first, it cannot perform the Office of a Judge; which is
clearly to pronounce sentence, so that both parties which contest about the
thing controverted may understand and acknowledge who is cast, who has got the
better. 2. There is a difference betwixt the written laws, and the judge in
civil matters; the one is the rule acording to which the judge must give
sentence; but the other (to wit the judge) must give the sentence; he is the
mouth of the law, and must interpret its, land the legislatours mind: now the
same Analogy and comparison holds betwixt the holy scripture (and the written
law of God) and the ecclesiastical judge. 3. About the scriture it self, arise
many controversies, which have been long agitated to and fro; as what Books are
Canonical, which Apocriphal; the Roman Catholics say the books of Judith,
Toby, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the first and second of the Macchabees, are
canonical scripture; the Protestants deny them to be so: Now, how shall this
great controversy be decided: the scripture cannot give sentence, for it has
not a living voice; in like manner, about the sense and meaning of many places
of the canonical scriptures, many long quarrels have been amongst different
Sectaries themselves, and betwixt them and Roman Catholics; the scripture it
self can never compose these controversies, for want of a living voice.

4 The old Heretics had never been convinced, nor condemned, i^ the scripture
had been appointed for judge: for still they would have had evasions; the
scripture neither did, nor could give sentence against them; but the Church, by
the Pope and General Councels.

As for the private spirit, this must either be supposed to be an infallible
judge, or not, if not; Sectaries can never have their controversies truly
decided; for this judge may err, give a false resolution, and so expose poor
souls to an evident danger of frequently Note.
believing that to be a point of divine Faith, which is not so; or the contrary:
If infallible, what shameful presumption will it be, to challenge to your own
particular person such Note.
an assistance of the Holy Ghost, as by it you shall infallibly judge a right,
in whatsoever point of Controversy; and yet deny this to the whole body of the
Roman Church. 2. The question is, whether that private spirit be the holy
Ghost, or a wicked spirit, or your own spirit, to wit, your own judgment, or
fancy: How shall this question be determined? O miserably misled souls, of such
Sectaries; do you not see in what labyrinths of errors, and miseries you
wilfully involve your selves? Is not this to walk in a circle, like the wicked?
But since you will be so hear the word of the Lord, Woe be to the foolish
Prophets, who follow their own spirit: Ezcek 13. Mark these words well, and
amend; least your folly in following your own spirit The Colloquie.
bring you to eternal woe. But O thou infinite goodness, God, send forth thy
(pirit; that these deluded souls may become new creatures: make them members of
that Church, to which only the spirit of truth teaches all truth, Amen.

The sixteenth Meditation.
Of Persecution and Martyrdom.
The first Point.
COnsider the many and clear Texts of the holy scripture, in which our Savior
does denunciate to his Apostles and Disciples, and in them to the succeeding
members of his church, that for their professing, and propagating of his faith,
they shall undergo persecutions of all forts; yea, death it self. Beware of
men, for they will deliver you up to the Councels; and ye shall be brought
before Governors, and Kings, for my sake; Mat. 10.17, 18. And ye shall be
bated of all men for my name sake, v. 22. But when they persecute you in this
City, fly into another: v. 23. The time comes, that whosoever kills you,
will think be does God service: Matt. 16.2. They shall lay hands on you, and
persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and into prisons, Luke 21.
v. 12. And some of you they shall cause to be put to death. v. 16.

Gather hence, first, that God permits (for he could hinder it, if it pleased
him) his Church to be persecuted; to wit by the Devil and his Emissaries,
wicked men. Secondly, that persecution is a mark of Christ's Church, and much
more martyrdom: Thirdly, that to fly in time of persecution is lawful; till
God dispose the circumstances for their sufferings.

The second Point.
Consider first, that what our Savior foretold, begun soon to be verificd; of
men that persecuted Christ's church, the Jews, Pagan Princes and heretics are
the chief. The Jews not only persecuted Christ (whom they hanged on a cross)
and his Apostles and Disciples, before his Passion; but after his sacred death,
they were most bitter and violent against the young flock of his church; as may
be read in the Acts of the Aposeles; yea their sacrilegious and savage
handling, and abusing the blessed sacrament and other holy things, when they
laid hands on them by stelth, as also their very crucifying of even Christian
chrildren; argues an implacable and incredible hatred of them against christian
religion.

2. As for the Pagan Princes, Nero, Demitian, Trajan, Aurelian, Maximean,
Dioclesian, and Galerian, with many others; how cruelly and barbarously did
they torture Christians: In Rome alone, three hundred thousand Christians were
martyred; amongst which were twenty seven Popes; and the sacred bodies of
180000 of them were buried in that famous Churchyard of Saint Calistus Pope and
Martyr. Now if in the City of Rome alone, so many were martyred; to what an
immense number, would all that suffered for the same cause, in all other parts
of the world, if they were added to these, amount.

3. And for the Heretics, it is their main maxim, and a principle in which
generally all the sects of them are united, to oppose and band against the
Roman Church; their heads and judgments look all several ways, but in this
point they are tied together: out of this opposition, sprung hatred, and this
egged them on to persecute Catholics, which they did most bitterly: The Arian
Emperors, the Kings of the Huns, Goths, and Wandels, and Martyrdom sent many
thousands of Catholics martyrs to heaven: nor were they a few hundreds that
were put to death for the same religion, under Henry the eighth King of
England, and Queen Elizabeth: And could thou be so cruel (England) as to see
thy own bowels, so often unbowelled at Tyburn, and not yet repent? Not yet give
over seeing thine shed thy own blood? and this for thee? For the old religion,
the true religion, thy religion?

The third Point.
Consider the admirable effects which the Divine Providence has drawn out of
these sufferings of Martyrs: the first effect (and that a happy one) was an
increase thereby of Catholic religion, that very medium which the enemies of
the Church took for the destroying of it, the same the Divine Wisdom made use
of as an instrumental cause, for the greater propagation of it: The Church is
not lestned by persecutions, but augmented; says St. Leo: Ser. I. de Petro and
Pau. What lopping produces in the Vines, that persecution effects in the
Church, says Saint Persecution Justin, The blood of Martyrs is the seed of the
Church, in Triphon: says Tertullian in his Apologetick cap.ult. and Saint
Cyprian both said it and sealed the truth of it with his blood. King James also
is said to have often repeated these Saint Cyprians words; sanguis martyrum
semen ecclesia; and upon reflection of the truth of them, to have often
expressed his mislike of shedding Priests blood.

The blood of Tiburtius and Valerianus, of Faustinus and Jovita, of Saint
Clement, Saint Thecla, and Saint Katherine; shed for the Faith of Christ, drew
a far greater number, than they were, to believe in him: did not the death of
Saint Lucia the Roman widow double (in Geminianus and others converted) what
the Church was robbed of by her death? Was not the number of Faithful B
lievers, as much augmented in the conversion of Adauctus, as it was diminished
by the death of happy Felix? And did not the Curch gain (by loosing Saint
Januarius) almost five thousand? For so many were converted at his martyrdom.
Read the Martyrs sufferings, those who love to read rare things, and they will
be convinced (of what even the Apostata Julian was convinced) that the sequel
of persecuting Christians is the multiplication of Christians.

Consider a second effect of suffering for such a cause; and that is the great
glory, which does acrew both to God, and to the sufferers thereby. God cannot
regale man more in this mortal life, than to make him a Martyr: and man cannot
perform a greater point of service for God, than by suffering as becomes a
Martyr: for no man bath greater charity than such an one: In Martyrdom God
compleateth man with the greatest of his favors; and in the same man complieth
with God in the superlative degree of his endeavors. O strange and most
perfect circle of perfect love, Persecution betwixt God and man in martyrdom!
out of the Ocean of infinite love flows this felicity into man, by a strange
participation; and from it runs back into the same abyss by a pure intention.
O strange reciprocation, and unheard of communication betwixt God and man in
martyrdom: O martyrdom! a felicity which none conceives, but he who receives
it; a secret which no man knows, but from God, who tells it; a word which none
understands, but from him who gives it; and a favor which none can deserve;
but let S. Igna. Ep. ad Romans
all desire it. Pardon me, said one, I know what is good for me; fire, cross,
beasts, breaking of my bones, disjoynting of my limbs, brusing of my body, and
all the torments that the Devil can inflict, come upon me, so be that I may
enjoy Christ. O myrrour of martyrdom, blessed Bishop Ignatius: if to us thy
words seem so sweet; how sweet were thy thoughts, when thou uttered these
words; when thou suffered what thou longed for; when thou enjoyed the reward of
what thou suffered? Answer thou, O my soul; at least guess what a case that
enamoured beart was in then: think, ruminate, meditate with desire, humility,
sorrow: and purpose to be often that in affection, which thou cannot (till God
please) be in effect.

The third Point.
Ponder first, that all who are out of the true Church, are incapable (whilst
they remain so) of this great purchase of martyrdom: for without Catholic and
true faith, it is impossible to please God; and without pleasing God, as little
possible to be a martyr: Now those who are not members of Christ's true Church,
cannot have true faith, whilst they remain so.

Hence infer, that though Sectaries suffer upon score of Religion, as some of
several Sects have; yet none of them are martvrs: for as amongst several
Sects of believers, there can be but one true Church; so amongst several sorts
of sufferers, there is one only Con. in Ps. 24.
of them can be true martyrs: the reason of this is contained in these words of
Saint Austin; Non poena, sed causa facit martyrem: not the punishment which a
man suffers, but the cause for which be suffers, makes a Martyr: Let him
suffer torments and death, never so willingly, and that upon account of
Religion; yet he can be no martyr, unless his Religion be the true one: Occidi
potest, coronari non potest; says that holy Father.

Infer secondly, that he who will deny the Primitive Martyrs to have been of
the same Religion with the Roman Catholics which now are, must positively
prove in what, and when the Roman Church (which was once the true Church even
by the Confession of all Sectaries) did fall from being the true Church: This
fall, this change, this transition is inconceptible; and yet Sectaries are
obliged to prove it, or else return to that Church again.

Ponder secondly, that in case it were supposed that Sectaries might be capable
of being truly Martyrs: yet no one sect, no nor all sects together, (out of all
which Fox makes his Martyrs) could make up a Martyrologe comparable to what is
in the Church of Rome.

Gather out of the precedent points, first, that the mark of Martyrdom is only
to be found in the Roman church and consequently that it is the true church.
Secondly, that the martyrs of the Primitive Church, and those Roman Catholics,
that suffered under King Henry the eighth, Queen Elizabeth, and her successors,
were all of one Church, all Roman Catholics, all true Martyrs: for Sectaries
could never yet prove any innovation in matters of faith, or false doctrine
introduced, by the Church of Rome: add to the former those martyrs (all
Catholic Priests, and in number 21) who have suffered in England since the
year 1640 till this present year 1654 inclusive.

Hail King of Martyrs, The Colloquie.
Christ; the meritory, and exemplar cause of all true martyrdom; we magnify
thee in these thy martyrs; noble Champions, and pious Prodigals of their blood
for thee: Please (if it be thy blessed pleasure) that in this thy cause my
unworthy self, with many more, may have some share of these sweet sufferings;
and if not dye for thee, at least dye for not dying for thee.

The seventeenth Meditation.

Of Prophesies and promises, and the figures of the old law fulfilled in the
true Church.

The first Point.
COnsider first, that not only the the Prophets of the old law, but Christ
himself also foretold many things of great concernment, which were to be
verisied, and fulfilled in his Church, or by it: in these prophesies also many
large promises of ample privilegies and prerogatives made in reference to the
same Church, were included; which were afterward accomplished: And Saint Paul
often in Cor. 1.10, 11
his Epistles intimates that the Jewish Synagogue with its sacrificies and
ceremonies was a Symbol or Figure of Christ's church, and its proprieties. So
that no sect amongst Christians can or indeed does deny these truths, in
affirming of which the scriptures are so clear and copious.

Consider secondly, that the fulfilling of these prophesies is to be brought
against Turks, Jews, Pagans, and particularly Atheists (too to many of which
are now abroad under the notion of Sectaries; and indeed this confusion of
modern Sects produces Atheists) as efficacious arguments to convince them of
the unreasonablenes and stolidity of their infidelity, and to bring them to
Christianity: for though they deny our scriptures to contain oracles of Divine
Truth: yet they admit them (or at least may be brought by discourse to admit
them) as worthy to be ranked amongst the best monuments of humane History: Now
this their humane authority is sufficient to convince and move them; if it be
effectually showed (for example to an Atheist) that such and such things were
foretold by Isay or Daniel, (Authors to whom all the best wits amongst
Christians give credit; and that the said predictions are recorded to have been
fulfilled by Authors of the greatest repute.

Prophesies fulfilled.
The second Point.

Consider first, some of the chief Prophesies fulfilled, and by whom: the four
Monarchies (to wit, the Chaldean, that of the Persians and Medes, the Grecian,
and the Roman) like rivers running one into another, at length lost themselves
in their Ocean; the Monarchy of Christ's Kingdom, to wit, his Church: the great
extent of which its never being overcome, its superiority and predominance over
all other Kingdoms, and its perpetual durance, are foretold by Daniel, cap. 2.
but particularly in the 44. verse, this is apparently fulfilled in the Church
of Rome yet, and in no other Sect.

The Preaching of Christ's Gospel to the Gentiles, and the Conversion of them,
is foretold in many places of scripture: but mark the words of Isa. cap. 66. v.
19. I will send of those which shall be saved, of them to the Gentiles into
Africa, and Lydia, into Italy and Greece, unto the Islands a far off, that have
not heard of my same, neither have seen my glory, and they shall declare my
glory to the Gentiles: These names are left in the Protestant Bible
untranslated out of the Hebrew; which is strange, and argues that the
Translatours had no mind that a place so particularly expressing the
conversion of the Gentiles by the Church of Rome, should be intelligible.

Call to mind (you enemies of the Church of Rome) the religious submission,
humble g^nuflexions, inclinations of the body, and exterior reverence and
comportment (even of the greatest personages) exhibited to Priests, Prelates
and Popes: Then read these words of Isa.c.49.v.23. Kings shall be thy nursing
Fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers; they shall bow down to thee, with
their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet: and in the 60.
cap. verse 14. The sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending
unto thee; and all they that despised thee, shall how themselves down at the
soles of thy feet. Now consider, whether these places do not foretell, and in a
manner describe the forementioned exterior reverences.

Malachy Prophesies of Christ's Church thus; In every place a pure offering is
sacrificed, and offered to my name; The sacrifice of holy Mass (so
acknowledged and reverenced, by all the holy Fathers) is daily offered to God,
by every Priest almost extant in any part of the world; and by it, is fulfilled
that prophecy.

Add to these the gist of working Miracles, the gist of prophecy, the unity,
antiquity, amplitude, sanctity, and some other Marks (of the Roman Church
only) mentioned in the first points of the particular meditations: all these
you will find to be prophesied and fulfilled only in the Roman Church.

The blessed Virgin Mary, in her Canticle Magnificat, prophesied of her sacred
self in these words: For behold, from benceforth all generations shall call me
blessed: Now as it is evident, that all generation of Roman Catholics have
complied with this prophecy: so Sectaries may be ashamed to exhibit no kind
of honor to her; nay not so much as this, or any other honorable appellation;
but rather speak undervaluingly, and disrespectfully of her; whom not
withstanding the whole torrent and generality of the holy Fathers extols, with
such Elogium's, and that deservedly; both in respect of her being the mother of
God, Queen Mother to the King of Kings; as also in regard that her life was the
perfectest copy, that ever was taken out of the Prototypon of all perfection,
Christ her son and our Lord: The Roman Catholics (consonant to the ancient
Fathers, and consequently both of the same Religion, by reason of their Union
in this, and other opinions) honor this great Theotocos, as such a personage;
whereas most of these modern Sectaries (Nestorian-like) make no more of her,
than if she were one of the vulgar: yet all England, for almost 900 years
together, as all Catholic countries do still) honored her with due respect
and reverence.

Consider secondly, that the Types and figures of the old law (which were
representations of what was afterward to be in the Church of Christ) are
fulfilled in the Church of the Roman Catholics; and in that only: For the
Synagogue, as it was a figure of Christ's Church, so the Alters, Pri^sthood,
Sacrifices, (which being correlatives, infer one another; as the want of any of
them, argues the want of true Worship and Religion) were types, not only of the
pri^st hood and sacrifice, which Christ himself exercised, and offered, when he
was amongst men in mortal flesh; but also of the daily sacrifices and eternal
priesthood which he left, and ordered to be exercised, and offered in his
Church: now since there must be some analogy and similitude betwixt the thing
prefigured and the figure; such as is clearly to be seen in the priesthood and
sacrifice of Mass daily offered in the church of Rome; (of which other Sects
have nothing, that can any way answer to those former types:) It follow
evidently, that the Church of the Roman Catholics is that which was
prefigured by these, and consequently is Christ's true Church.

As for particulars: the Manna of the Israelites, with its proprietits, was a
type of the Sacrament of the real body of Chrift, and its effects; this is
truly fulfilled in the Roman Religion. Sectaries in this point still Judaize;
and of Christ's real body have still only a figure; for they acknowledge their
Bread and Communion to be no more: Nor is it so good a figure of Christ's real
body, as the Jews Manna was; of which also, as some of it was always kept in
the Tabernacle, so is the holy Eucharist kept in the Tabernacle in Catholic
Churches.

Melchisedecks Bread and Wine, was a figure of Christ's real body and blood:
Secturies have still nothing but his bare Bread and Wine; they are still in the
figure: but Roman Catholics have the real thing; they have real priests and
offer up to God the real body and blood of Christ, though in a mystical manner.

The Jews Pascall Lamb, was both a Sacrament and Sacrifice; so is the holy
Eucharist: and as the Pascal Lamb was offered in memory, and in thanksgiving
for the benefit of their deliverance out of the Egyptian thraldom; so the
real Body and Blood of Christ is offered up (when the priest, by the power
which Christ has given him, consecrateth it in Mass) in remembrance and
thanksgiving for the benefit of man's being redeemed by Christ, from the more
than Egyptian bondage of sin; and therefore it is called Eucharist, which
signifies thanksgiving, and it the sacrifice of Thanksgiving: Is not this a
better and more honorable remembrance of Christ's passion Note.
, than a bit of mere Bread, and a sup of Wine?

The devout Ceremony of making the sign of the Cross (used, and commended by
the holy Fathers, and all ancient Christians) was plainly represented and
commended to us all, by that Thau in Ezekiel cap 9. and by the Angels signing
the Servants of God, in the Revelations, cap. 7. v. 3. This as the rest is
fulfilled perfectly only by the Church of Rome.

Gather hence; that since the prophesies and types, also the great promises
contained in these prophesies, are fulfilled in the Roman Church, and in it
only; it follows evidently, that it is Christ's true Church.

The third Point.
Consider now, the sad condition of Sectaries; argued out of their having no
share at all in this full table of sweet and comfortable promises, foretold by
the prophets: for this evidently shows that they are not the Church of Christ,
nor members of it: On the contrary, they have just reason to fear, that the
heavy denounciations and threats of the prophets (for in this kind only they
are like to fulfill prophesies;) will fall upon them: for as their novell
opinions (fond and profane images of their own fancies, made by their private
spirit) have some semblance of those Idols, to which the Jews (sometimes
falling from the worship of the true God) Sacrificed: So let these modern
imitatours of them take heed, they be not delivered over to a reprobate sense,
and the like spiritual punishment with them.

And can you still persist in that perverseness? away with these fancies; yield
to truth; and say with the repenting Jews (and in this they may by you be well
imitated) Signa nostra non videmus, jam non est propheta: Psalm. 73. v. 10. We
acknowledge we have no signs, nor miracles in behalf of our sects: We grant
there are no prophetical men amongst us: We see not the marks of Christ's
Church upon our Sects: We confess the prophesies are not fulfilled by us: And
therefore from hence forth we will resolve, and choose rather to be abject in
the house of God, his Church Ps. 84.
, than to dwell in the Tabernacks of sinners, of Sectaries any longer.

The eighteenth Meditation.
Of temporal blessings and felicities, miraculously bestowed on the Defenders
and Propagators of the Catholic Religion
The first Point.
To understand how temporal felicity may be one mark, amongst the rest, which
discovers the Church of Christ from all other Sects: Consider first, the
difference betwixt the ordinary and extraordinary providence of God: The first
is that, whose effects we see and feel, in the production, conservation, and
operation of creatures: It appears also in the effects of man's morality,
industry, or art; and in the natural effects of all secondary causes: The
second appears to us chiefly in effects which are surpassing the forces of
natural causes: the one confers riches, honors, victories, kingdoms, and the
like, after that manner which we have daily experience, see, or hear of: By me
Kings do reign; Prover. 8. verse. 15. says God; and he calls them Ministers of
his Kingdom, Wisdom 6. verse. 5. and Saint Paul says, There is no power but
from God, Romans 13. By the other he give principalities, and victories
miraculously, when, and to whom he pleases; and without the cocourse of
secondary causes any way proportionable to those prodigious effects: Thus he
gave the Jews Victories most miraculously; as to Josu, Gedeon, Judas, Machabeus
and others: which, as they were extraordinary signs both of the Divine
Protection over the Synagogue, as also that it was then the true Religion: so
the same Argument holds in behalf of the Church of Christ; that that people is
it, on which God bestows the like victories and benefits after a miraculous
manner.

Consider secondly, (for the avoiding of error in the weaker understandings)
that these temporal felicities are not to be supposed a mark of Christ's Church
in themselves; but only so far forth as they are conferred after a miraculous
manner: for certain it is, that poverty is as conducing a means to eternal
salvation, as riches: yea, heaven is far casilier attainable by poverty (if it
be embraced not only patiently, but willingly) than by riches: yet they are in
themselves both gifts originally arifing from the hand of God: The Lord has
given, the Lord has taken away; says Job chap. 1. The Lord makes poor and
enricheth; he brings low and lifts up, 1 King. 2. v. 7. Poverty and honesty
are from God: Eccles. 11.24. He humbles this man, and he exalts that man,
Psalm. chap. 74. So that there is no doubt of this: But we speak here of the
manner of Gods dispensing out these temporals; which, when it is miraculous, it
argues which Religion is most favored by Almighty God, and consequently is his.

Hence infer, that this mark is not any way repugnant to that other of
persecution: for different circumstances of time, place, and persons, remove
this difficulty; the Jews, though they were often miraculously protected by
God; yet at other times he permited them to be sore persecuted; as by Antiochus
and others.

The second Point.
Consider now (by induction of examples) how highly the Roman Church and its
members, have been favored by Almighty God in a miraculous way. Constantine
the Emperor (and honor of England Anno 312. Euschius Metaphor. Baronius.
, his native country) was a Roman Catholic well known by his great reverence
to the Pope, to the Saints, and their Relics, and to the sign of the Cross;
and his example methinks might move all England to reverence the same: God gave
him the Empire after a miraculous manner; for as he were upon his march (going
out of England toward Italy) with small forces, against Maxentius the Tyrant,
who had in his Army a hundred and seventy foot, with eighteen thousand horse;
espied in the air about midday a fair Cross, with this inscription upon it:
In hoc vince; overcome by means of this: the next night, our Savior appeared
to him, and showed him the same Cross, and gave him order to bear that sign
in his Banner, and so he should be victorious: He did so, overcame the Tyrant,
and then became Christian: After which, he was victorious in all his other
Battails also, by means of our Saviors promise made to him, if he carried that
figne of the Cross: which he did always carry in his Standard, (called the
Labarum) causing it to be transferred always to that quarter of the Army,
which was most weakened by the Enemy; and the fight of it added new courage to
the one, by which the other were soon defeated.

Theodosius the elder, a pious and Catholic Emperor, gave a strange defeat to
the Tyrant Eugenius Anno 394.
, and Potius orando, quam pugnando, says Saint Austin: for before the battle
began, he had implored the Divine assistance by long prayer; and the effect
was, that in the beginning of the conflict, on a sudden comes so prodious a
storm of wind, that it drive the enemies Dartsback upon themselves, with the
slaughter of many of them, and even forced their weapons out of their hands:
Thus writes Saint Austin de civit. l.5. cap. 26. And even Claudian the pagan
Poet sings the same in a poem to Honorius: l.5. c. 24. And Theodoret writes
that Saint John, and Saint Philip Apostles appeared mounted upon White horses,
and fighting for Theodosius in his army against his enemies.

An immense army of Sarazens came to force Theodosius the younger, to raise his
siege of Nisibis in Asia: but Anno 420.
God struct into them so strong an imagination of the Christian Army's
Nicephor. Socrates.
setting upon them on all sides; that a hundred thousand of them threw
themselves headlong into the great river Euphrates, and so were drowned.

Heraclius the Emperor, often worsted by the Persian forces Romans brev. Baron.
and brought in a manner to despair of ever recruiting; betook himself to
implore the divine aid, by much fasting, prayer, and pennace: at length he was
admonished from God to fall upon the Persians with the small forces he had; and
with these, he defeated three huge Armies of them, one after another, and
recovered the holy Cross of Chirst.

England had no few of such examples. Venerable Bede recounts a famous victory,
lib. 3. c. 2. which King Oswald got against the Pagan King Cadwallus, in the
battle, he had for his Ensign, the sign of the Cross; and the victory was so
much attributed to a heavenly assistance; as that the place was called Heavens
field; now corruptly Haden field.

Alfred King of the west Saxons, got so miraculous a victory over the Danes,
Anno 880. by means of Saint Cuthbert (who bid him encounter with the enemy,
notwithstanding his forces were small; and told him when, Malmesh, Inguls.
Polidore
how and in what place he should sight them) that many of the nobler sort of
the Danish Army were Biptized and Converted upon it: yea, the same Saint
Cuthbert told Alfred, that his posterity should rule over all England: which in
Athelstane, and King Edward was fulfilled.

When Godfrey of Bullen with the an. 1098. Paul. Aenil. Guil. Tyr. Baron.
Christian army was besieged in Antioch by a huge Army of Truks, Sarazens and
Persians, and brought to extreme famine; S. Andrew appearing to a devout Priest
in the army, bid him tell the Captains of the army, that digging in such a
place in S. Peter's Church, they should find the Spear which pierced our
Saviors side; and that Sallying out with that borne before them, they should
get the Victory: All was performed as S. Andrew revealed it; and an absolute
Victory was got. And the an. 1099.
next year that Christian army besieged Jerusalem: but having for a month
together made many assaults, and still repulsed; some Soldiers began to shrink
a way, and passing toward mount Olivet, they saw a man in glittering armor on
the top of it, who with his hand giving them a sign to go back; this made
them return, and with the news give so comfortable an allarum to the army,
that presently a new attact was given, and the town taken. Godfry Bullen and
Eustathius his brother being the first two that entered the City.

Alphonso the first King of Portingall, an. 1139.
animated by our Savior (who appearing to him crucified, promised him the
victory) with 4000.set upon 400000. Audreas Resendius.
Sarazens, led by five kings, and totally defeated them: the grateful king, in
memory of the 5 wounds with which our Savior crucified appeared to him, added
to his arms (which were before only a whitefield) five Escuchons in form of a
plain cross Azure.

Alphonsus the 8. King of Castile in Spain, fought a set battle with Memelius
King of the Sarazens; an. 1212
and encouraged with a Cross, which appeared in the air, and the Sarazents
dismayed at the first sight of the picture of the blefsed Virgin Mary
(patroness of Toledo) which was painted on the Spanish Ensign; slew two
hundred thousand of the Sarazens, twenty five men only in the Catholic army
being slain. Thus Writes Rodorick Archbishop of Toledo, an eye witness of it,
as being then present to animate the Army.

The ever honored House of Austria, has been privileged with many miraculous
favors from Almighty God; the first of that House, who was Emperor, was
Rodulphus the Duke of Haspurge: he, seeing a Priest carrying the blessed
Sacrament toward a Village, in which a sick person lay, piously importuned the
Priest to ride rather upon his Horse, than to go in the foul way; then he ran
by the Horse side like a foot boy: at their departure the Priest with his
benediction gave him a good omen, that God would reward him and his, for that
fact: On he goes his intended journey, which was to visit a prophetical woman:
She at the first sight of him (having by revelation known what had past) told
him, that his humble devotion to the blessed Sacrament, An. 1273. aliis. An
1271. Daurolt.
was so pleasing to God, that he and all his posterity should be rewarded for
it: She bid him therefore take notice of the number nine, and its being
expired: In fine, at the end of nine years, the princes of Germany met about
chosing a new Emperor, and all unanimously choosed him: in whose family it
still remains.

Of the same family was Charles the fifth, An. 1547. Bellar.
who amongst his many famous victories, got one miraculously with a few men
against a great Army of his rebellious Subjects, who by Luthers instigation
were gathered together, and had put themselves into a fighting posture against
their prince, and in defense of Luthers Reformation.

And his son, John of Austria, was General, Anno 1571. when that miraculous
victory against the Turks at Lepanto, was got; which was both revealed to Pius
Quintus pope, many days beforehand, and also at the very time of the battle:
At the beginning of it, the wind savoured the Turks, but instantly calmed; then
suddenly a strong and favorable wind rise, which so pestered the Turks;
bringing also all the smoke from the Catholic Guns and Muskets upon them; that
by the end of four hours, not full 200 Galleys (against 300 of the Turks) so
fought, that the Turkish Hali Bassa with 3000 were slain, 3000 prisoners, 130.
Galleys taken, 15000. Christians (who had been slaves) redeemed, and 80 Galleys
sunk; with no loss at all, in a manner of the Catholic side.

Famian Strada.
To conclude, a strange miracle it was, that preservation of many thousands of
the Spanish foot, in the Isle of Bomel, from being starved, drowned, or taken
every man; if a prodigious wind had not in a short space frozen the Sea there:
so, that the Holland ships could not move, but the Spaniards marched away upon
the Ice: the thing made the Holland General Holach, say, that God had been too
much that day a Spanyard.

Gather hence, first, that since the forementioned Princes, and their Armies
(on which God bestowed these victories) were Roman Catholics; as all history
evidently shows: and since the victories bestowed on them were above the forces
of nature, or humane endeavors, and policy; and none such were ever obtained
by any other sect: it evidently follows, that the religion of these Roman
Catholics is the true religion: 2 that these examples (related by authors of
good credit, and those many) evidently prove against atheists, and such as in
cline that Note
way, that there is a God; and that god by his providence rules the world; and
that there is no such thing in the world as Fortune, or Fate: those things which
seem casual, are only so in regard of secondary causes; nothing is casual in
respect of the prime cause, God: this man's adverse fortune, and the others
successeful endeavors; this man's want; and the others plenty; this man's health,
and others infirmities; are all from the hand of God, his gists; and the one as
well as the other matter for virtue and means to salvation, if they be used
well, and with a rectified intention*

The third Point.
Consider first, that Sectaries (even all put together) cannot make it appear,
that they have received any miraculous favors, like to the above mentioned,
either in confirmation of any of their sects, or any other way: Gods providence
has permitted the Sarazens and Turks to prevail much against Christians, and
to possess themselves of many Countries, in which catholic Religion had
formerly flourished; yet this does not argue that God loves them better than
the Christians; or thereby approves of their Alcaron. In like manner, in the
Wars betwixt Catholics and Sectaries; the latter as they have often received
the worse, so have they often been prevalent against the other; (yet never but
upon some great advantage) and are now in possession of many Towns and
Countries, which were sormerly Catholic: but this is no more a divine
approbation of their Tenants and Doctrine, than the Turkish Temporal success,
pleads the truth of their Religion; in both cases (of the prospirity of Turks
and Sectaries, as also of what damages they have inferred to Catholics) these
are only ordinary (and experienced in all ages) effects of the divine
providence; which humbles this man and exalts that man; Quia calix in manu
domini virimeri plenus mixto, and inclinavit ex hoc in hoc. Psalm. 74. But these
miraculous effects are plainly a divine confirmation of Religion: And thus must
all Sectaries argue against Insidels inbehalf of Christianity, and their own
Sects; Note.
by denying that their worldly prosperity proves them to be in favor with God,
and of the true Religion; and yet convincing them that these prodigious effects
are arguments of true Religion, and of Gods great protection: for they are so
indeed.

And therefore thou may truly say (O holy Church) with the holy Prophet: I will
not fear thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round about.
psalm.3.6. Though an host should encampe against me, my heart shall not fear;
though war should rise against me; in this will I be confident. ps.27.3.

The nineteenth Meditation.
Of the Disasters and unhappy ends of the opposers and enemies of the Roman
Church.
The first Point.
AS victories, and other temporal blessings, miraculously bestowed upon the
defenders, and propagators of the Roman religion; so extraordinary, and
prodigious punishments inflicted upon the persecutors of the same, are signs
and arguments that that is the true Catholic Church of Christ; consider
therefore, first that though God permit the wicked livers, and those and those
that seek the ruin of his Church, to go long unpunished; yet to convince the
world that this is meerly'a permission of his (thereby to give the just matter
for merit, and the bad time to reclaim themselves, and repent) and that he can
lay his heavy hand hard on where he pleases; he lets men have frequent
experiment that he has a reserve of miraculous punishments, which he lets fly
(like his thunderbolts out of the Clouds) at them, and especially at the
enemies of his Church, Scismaticks, Heretic, and Persecuters.

Ascalonita.
Joseph. l. 17 antiquit. c. 9
lib. 2. c. 7. and ult.
Jos. l.18. c. 14
Consider secondly, that those punishments are twofold; some are such, as
cannot be conceived to be otherwise then by miracle: as when God punished the
Madianites by the mutual slaughter of one another: others, tho not
transcending the forces of natural causes; yet are such, and accompanied with
such circumstances; as that it appears evidently, that God thereby punishes
extraordinarily. Such were the punishments of Herod (he that in killing the
holy innocents, aimed at the killing of our Savior;) who was consumed by
Vermin, and so dyed; having first killed his own wife and children, and
attempted to kill himself: And of Pilate, who killed himself, as Eusebius
recounts: As also of the other Herod, the Tetrarch, who beheaded S. John
Biptist, and treated our Savior as a fool: he was thrust out of his king dom,
sent into banishment, and in it lived and died with a great deal of misery.

Number. 4. Mathab.
Consider thirdly, that amongst other signs, by which the world might easily
know that the only true religion before Christ's time was that of the Jews, one
was (and that a principal one) the exemplar, and extraordinary punishments,
which God exacted upon those who were irreligiously in jurious to the same:
Such were those nine plagues, which were laid upon the Egyptians for
oppressing that faithful people; the Philistians for handling the Ark of the
Testament unworthily, suffered many calamities; the Bethsamits, for their
irreverent looking only at that Ark, contrary to Gods command, were punished
with the death of 70. men of prime quality, and 80000. of the vulgar sort:
Antiochus for the out cries, and Sacrileges which he committed in his
persecution of the Jews, was struck with most abominable diseases, and
devoured by vermin: Baltbasar, for his Sacrileges committed in Jerusalem, and
profane abuse of the sacred Vessels, in the very heat of his banquet, read the
dismal sentence of his loss of life and Kingdom, (which Macha^
was put in execution that very night) written miraculously by singers which
appeared upon the wall; and Heliodorus (to omit many more) besides other
scourges, was cruelly whipped by two young men (sent by God) for his
sacrilegeous attempt of robbing the temple of Jerusalem.

Hence inser, that if such like punishments can be showed to have been laid
upon the enemies, and persecutors of the Roman religion; it must by the same
consequence be judged to be the true Church of Christ.

The second Point.
Consider therefore first the tragical end of those Pagan Emperors that
persecuted the Catholic Church, of the first 24 of them, which sat at the
stern of the Roman Empire, betwixt the time of Augustus Caesar and Constantine
the great; as there was scarce 4. of them which did not persecute (and that
most cruelly most of them) the Catholic Church; so hardly four of them escaped
the revenging hand of God, and most miserable ends; some of them were self
murderers; others were massacred by those very men (or their affociats) whom
they had raised up to the highest step of honor in the Court, or Militia: and
others were destroyed by horrible diseases, judged even in the opinion of their
own Pagan physicians, more then natural.

An. 406. ut ^r^sins.
After their times, and when Rome was free, and entirely Catholic, two
reniarkable Examples of punishment (inslicted upon two armies, which attempted
to make Rome, and Constantinople, the subject of their barbarous cruelry)
happened. Radagaisus King of the Goths, marched with an Army of two hundred
thousand men (armed no less with malicious intentions against Religion, then
with other weapons) toward Rome, and faced the City with those formidable
forces, the Romans to prevent this sudden storming their City, armed themselves
with what speed they could (but considing chiefly in that, which S. Paul cal's
the Armor of God) and with their small number went out to fight that mighty
Army, behold what happened: on a sudden that vast army was struck by the divine
power with such an amazment and stupidity, and so disabled from fighting; that
the Romans falling upon it, totally routed, and destroyed it, together with
that King, who with his sons was slain amongst the rest: and of the Romans not
so much as any one man kiled, or wounded: this is related (and counted for a
miraculous punishment) by S. Austine himself, who was living at the same time:
l.5. c. 23 de civit.
and not twenty years after: Roylas (with a puissant army of Scythians Anno
425.) coming with the same intention to Constantinople; as he made his approach
toward the City then filled with fears and frights, as may well be imagined;
Theodoret l.5. c. 36 Socrates 1.7 c. 42.
behold fire and thunderbolts at Gods command fell upon that huge Army and
totally destroyed it; lo, two famous Examples of Gods heavy hand upon the
enemies of the Caltolick religion.

Consider secondly what punishments befell some of those Emperors and Princes,
who after that they had been or were Christians, became injurious to the same
Religion: Anno 363.
Julian for his apostasy from the true Church, and his malicious persecuting
the same, at length fighting against the Persians, received a moral wound with
a lance, from what hand it came, no man about him could tell; S. Herom.
Theadoret. Socrates.
but himself acknowledged that it were a stroke from heaven, by his casting
handfuls of his own blood furiously into the air: and saying to our Savior;
Vicisti Galilee: thou have overcome, O Galilean: after which the earth opening
swallowed up his body; as S. Gregory Nazianzen writes in an oration of Saint
Athanasius.

Valens the Arian Emperor, Ruffinus.
persecuting the same Religion, was many ways punished by Almighty God, and at
last he was burnt alive by the Goths.

The Emperor Anastasius, Cedren. Zoano^s
, who both opposed the Church of Rome, and favored the Eutychian heresy, was
slain with a Thunder bolt.

Leo Iconomachus the Emperor caused Math. Palm.
the people of Constantinople to take all the pictures and images out of the
Churches, and burn them in the marketplace: Presently after which fact, the
plague invaded that City, and destroyed in a short time three hundred thousand
persons: This happened about the year 719. in the time of Pope Gregory the
second.

The Emperor Zeno, an Eutichian heretic, Zon. and enemy of the Church of
cedren.
Rome, was by Anastasius (who succeeded him) buried alive.

Justinean the Emperor, after so many laudable facts of his, Ev(...)
at length be gun the heresy of the Aphthartodocites, affirming (out of an in
discreet Zeal of our Saviors honor) that his flesh was incorruptible before
his passion: But whilst he was about making an Act for the receiving of this
opinion, all the Empire over; he was carried out of the world by sudden death.

Heraclius the Emperor, Zona^
after the great favor he had received of God, in that miraculous Victory
against the Persians; at length fell into the heresy of the Monotholites; and
dyed most miserably.

Belizarius that great warrier, (them which the world had no greater then) was
degraded, Baronius
and divested of all his honorable offices which he had had under his Emperor
Justinian, both his eyes were pulled out of his head, and he sunk down into so
low a condition, as to sit a blind beggar, with these words still in his mouth:
Give a bodwel to Bellizarius. Whence this great change? from Justinians
jealousy, that he affected his Empire as some say: But Belizarius himself,
with many more, attributed that punnishment to the injury he had done the Vicar
of Christ, Pope Silverius; whom he unjustly sent into banishment by the
Empress Theodora's instigation.

Theodorick the Arian King, a among the other mischiefs he had done the Church
of Rome, killed Pope John the first, with a cruel imprisonment: at length a
holy Saint in a vision saw that King led betwixt that Pope and Simmachus (a
noble Patrician whom the same Theodorick had unjustly killed) toward the fiery
pits of mount Etna, and thrown headlong into one of them: This is related by
Saint Gregory; who says, that upon examination it was found, L. 4. Dia^, c. 30.
that the King dyed at that very time which the holy man's vision specified; and
by consequence argued the verity of it.

Hunnericus, an other Arian King, and a great persecuter of the Roman Church;
Victor l. ^^
was eaten up alive by vermin.

After these astonishing examples of Pagan and Christian Princes, punnished for
opposing the Church of Rome, and persecuting the same: Consider thirdly, what
became of some of the Arch heretics; Arius, going to ease himself, voided out
his bowels together with his excrements, and so dyed. Manicheus, was fleed
alive by the King of Persia. Montanus, Theodotus, and their Women (which
pretended to have the gift of prophecy) all hanged themselves. And Nestorius,
his impious tongue (which had denied that the blessed Virgin Mary was Mother of
God) was eaten away by Vermin, after he himself had been condemned by the
Ephesine Counsel, and the blessed Virgin declared Theotocos, to wit, the mother
of God. And this example me thinks, and the authority of that general Counsel,
might move these later sectaries to bear more respect, than they do, to that
blessed Virgin Mary.

The third Point
Though the looking upon these examples, with a juditious and considerate eye,
would sufficiently convince any man; that the heavy hand of God hangs always
over the heads of the opposers, and enemies of the Roman Church; which I
suppose may without presumption be now called (as it only is) the Catholic
Church, as only having the true marks of Christ's Church: yet the nearer we
deduce this argument down to wards these our days, the greater influence it
will have upon many.

Consider therefore First what befell the protoparents of all these later sects.
Luther (the Ringleader of all the succeeding sectaries) after aplentiful and
merry-supper, Coclcus in ^jus vita.
in which he had exhilarated all his company with his discourse (the drift of
which was ordinarily to make the Pope, and papists ridiculous, and odious) he
went safe and sound to bed; but was ceazed upon by sudden death before the
morning came.

Oecolampadius, going well in health to bed with his woman, was found next
morning lying stone dead by her; an untimely end (as is to be feared) for one
who had been not only a Priest, but was tied also to the religious order of
St. Briget with the triple cord of his three Vows: some Suppose he was killed
by the Devil; others write that he killed himself. Nor was the end of
Carolstadius less terrible: for of him the Ministers of Basil write: (in their
Funeral Epistle of him (that he was killed by the Devil he had been
Archdeacon of Wittenberg, and a Priest; but presently upon Luthers revolt sided
with him, and took a Concubine. Zuinglius, (who had been a Canon of Constance)
the incendiary of a bloody civil war in his own Country, was at last
massacred in one of the battles himself: his pretense was to extirpate Popery,
and to plant the Reformed religion, as they called it: But Erasmus (in his
Epistle to Goclenius) says plainly, That the aim of Zuinglius (as also of
Oecolampadius) was tyranny; and that they affected some temporal dominion:
Osiander, before his miserable end, was suddenly struck dumb, like a beast; as
may be read in Prateolus: And Calvin's end was by being eaten up by Vermin;
the horror of which punishment, and the frightfull terrors injected into his
conscience, made him spend his last minutes (as Hierom Bolsecus writes) in
execrations and blasphemous ejaculations, with invocation of the Devils.

O dreadful punishments! tragical and dismal deaths! untimely ends! so truly
spoke St. Paul, when he said, It is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of
God: Heb. 10.31. so truly said David, that God is, Terrible in his counsels
upon the sons of men: Psalm. 66.5. and can you still adhear to those your sects,
which had such founders? Still persecute the Church of Rome, and read such
punishments? Harken rather, to what the Prophet says, and fulfill his words;
yea, the words of God: Love ye peace and verity, says the Lord Omnipotent.
Zach.8.

Consider lastly, the unsuccessefull affairs, and final ends of three secular
Princes; who in their several countries did most harm to Roman Catholics: King
Henry the eighth in England, William Nassaw in the Low countries, and Gustavus
Adolphus in Germany; they had been all three once Roman Catholics; and how sad
enemies they proved afterward to the persons, places, and practice of that
Religion (and yet not so much out of hatred of that religion, as to compass
their other designs) few are ignorant: but they themselves were overwhelmed in
the ruins they made; and of the tragedies by them begun the Catastrophe, King
Heary she 8.
fell chiefly upon them: The one was delivered over to his own sensuality, and
made a slave to it; even his very body was metamorphized out of that of a man
almost into that of a monster: he sunk still deeper into sin, till his souls
danger grew almost desperate; and all his latter years were full of punishments
of his Schism and Sacrilege. Prince of Orange
The second, when death rushed in at the windows of those wounds, which the
bullets made in his breast, and carried him presently to render up the accounts
of his Stewardship to God and his King; was not the heavy hand of God upon him?
The third, King of Sweathland
, after an ocean of Innocent bloodshed in his unjust invasion of the Empire;
after such a ruin of Catholic Houses, Villages, Towns, Cities, Monasteries
and Churches; after such a ransack of Religion, and threats against Rome, and
the Vicar of Christ himself; to be killed, without a moments respite to repair
what was amiss; was not this a fearful scourge of God? undoubtedly it was.

Hence infer, that the whole complex of these examples proves evidently that
the Roman Catholics are the true Church of Christ; and for this reason amongst
others; because God has laid so remarkable punishments upon their enemies, and
persecuters: Secondly, Note
gather that these examples efficaciously prove against Atheists, that, there
is a God, who punishes wickedness. Thirdly, infer what misery and punishment
Luther made himself liable to, for his giving the first Allarum to all the
Heresies of these later times.

O Luther, what got thou by imitating Lucifer? thy pride, and disobedience to
the true Church, was like his to God: thy fall from that state, which is a
kind of heaven upon earth, was like to his: and I fear thy doom is not unlike
to his.

The twentieth Meditation.
Confession of the Adversaries.
The first Point.
FOr the Conclusion of this Work, let the subject of this last Meditation be,
that which these late Sectaries grant in behalf of the Roman Church, and
against themselves.

Consider therefore, that the Sectaries since Luthers time, and particularly
Protestants, do grant and acknowledge many things in behalf of the Roman
Catholics: First, they confess that the Fathers and Doctors of the Primitive
Church, believed and taught the same things which the Roman Catholics now
hold, and in which they and other sectaries differ: First, That Saint Peter was
ordained, by Christ the head of the Apostles, and of the whole Church. 2. That
the Bishop of Rome succeeded S. Peter in the Primacy of the whole Church. 3.
That the Books of Toby, Judith, Esther, Wisdom, Ecclestasticus, and two first
of the Machabees, were truly Canonical scripture. 4. Traditions. 5. The real
presence and Transubstantiation. 6. That Mass was a sacrifice truly
propitiatory for the living and the dead. 7. That Christ gave Priests power to
forgive sins, and the necssity of auricular Confession. 8. Pardon or
Indulgences. 9. Purgatory and Prayer for the dead. 10. Praying to Angels and
Saints. 11. Placing Christ's image, and his Saints in Churches, and reverencing
them. 12. Reverence to the relics of Martyrs and other Saints. 13. That such
as were made Clergymen could never afterward marry. 14. That not only Faith,
but also good works do truly justify; and that these are meritorious of grace
and glory: These, and diverse other Tenants of the Roman Catholics, are
acknowledged by chief Protestant Writers to have been taught, believed, and
practiced by the ancient Fathers: That the protestant. Writers confess these
points (which indeed is a strange thing, and utterly ruins their cause) those
learned and laborious works, to wit, the Protestants Apology; the Progeny of
Catholics and Protestants; as also many other Authors do most amply declare;
and cite the very words of all the chiefest Protestant Writers most faithfully
about the the forementioned points.

Secondly, they confess that Roman Catholics dying Roman Catholics may be
saved; this, the most of all Sectaries grant, both in their Writings and in
their ordinary discourse: truly as this acknowledgment ought to bring no small
comfort to Catholics, when they reflect that they are of a religion, which
even in the opinion of their Adversaries is soul-saving: so me thinks it should
make a great impression upon others which are not Roman Catholics, and move
them to embrace that religion in which all parties think and say men may saved:
and this acknowledgment did produce this effect in that honorable Lady, the
Countess of Buckingham; which was present at that public disputation betwixt
Mr. Fisher a Jesuit, and Master White a Minister, held by the Kings order: For
Mr. Fisher demanding of Mr. White, whether or no, he thought that one dying a
Roman Catholic might be saved? and he answering, that upon his soul, he
thought such an one might be saved: presently upon this, she resolved to become
a Roman Catholic; and what she then purposed, she soon put in execution, as
many thousands could witness.

Thirdly, They confess that Roman Catholics do not err in any fundamental
point of Faith; and that they want none of the things essentially requisite to
salvation: and therefore the most learned Adversaries grant that Roman
Catholics are a true Church, or members of the true Church, though not the
true Church to wit alone: The consideration of this also (as of the former)
cannot but comfort ROMAN CATHOLICS, whilst they remain so: Now what a
madness is it to fall from that Religion, in which all parties agree, that
salvation may be had: Certainly a prudent man will not venture his temporal
estate upon a probable security, if he can have a certainty (provided also that
it be lawful) much less his eternal: No man can in conscience expose his soul
to hazard; if he may make sure work: Note
For though in things which are necessary necessitate pracepti only, a probable
opinion of Doctors will save a soul harmless; yet in things which are
absolutely necesfary, and means without which salvation cannot be had (as the
being a member of the true Church is) the surest way is to be chosen.

Fourthly, that very thing, which has been by me prefixed to my self as the
end of my endeavors, in these twenty Meditation (which was to See the
Protestants Apology.
show that the marks of Christ's Church were to be found only amongst the Roman
Catholics, and consequently that Christ's true Church, was only with them) is
by many of the chief protestants Writers granted, by granting those things
which really are the marks of Christ's true Church: They grant that S. Malachy,
S. Bernard, S. Francis, S. Dominick and others, were Roman Catholics, that
they were Saints, and that they wrought Miracles; they grant the mark of
Antiquity; and that no known beginning of the Roman Church since the Apostles
time (which is a convincing argument, that it begun in the Apostles time) can
be assigned: They grant that the Roman Church never went out of any Society of
Christians, ancienter than it self: They grant that no particular time can be
assigned, in which any innovation of Faith was introduced, or change made in
the Church of Rome: which three things notwithstanding they ought not only to
deny; but are obliged positively to prove the contrary; or else grant that their
forsaking the Church of Rome, and caluminating it, is most unjust; as most
certainly it is: Besides this, in granting (as they do) that the holy Fathers
of the Primitive Church held the same forementioned opinions, which the now
existent Roman Catholics hold; consequently they must grant these two to be
both one; as also the Roman Catholics to have those, who were eminent in
Sanctity, Miracles, Prophecy and the like, (for the holy Fathers of the
Primitive Church, were persons privileged with all these great endowments) and
by good consequence to have the marks of Christ's true Church: In brief, it has
been most amply proved by Catholic Authors (as by the Protestants Apology, and
other learned Books) that the ablest protestant Writers grant those things to
be amongst Roman Catholics; which are truly the marks of Christ's Church: Read
also the eleventh and thirteenth chapter in every Century of the Magdeburgians,
and you will see how effectually the Protestants (like good advocates) plead
the cause of the Roman Catholics: who may truly say with Moses, Our enemies
are judges, of the equity of our cause.

The second Point.
Consider now what things the Protestants acknowledge against themselves: And
here a man may truly say; Out of thy own mouth I judge thee, Luke 1^, 22.
naughty servant.

First they disclaim from the ancient Fathers, and will not own them. That
Luther, and Calvin, and the Centurists, do so, it is well known to all that
read their works. And that many of the English Protestant writers do the
same, their works do witness. True it is, many of them do pretend to appeal
to the Fathers; but since as many, or more of them, do not, but the contrary;
it appears by this that the Protestants are divided amongst themselves in this
main point. Therefore, Mittam Egyptios, contra Egyptios, I will put the
Egyptions, against the Egyptions, belongs to them. And since (of the
forementioned Protestant Authors,) many do plainly censure, and condemn the
Fathers for holding popish tenants; hence also it follows, that they must
grant them to be all one with the now Roman Catholics.

Secondly, they grant that the ancient Fathers condemned in the ancient
heretics many opinions, which are held by the protestants themselves now a
days: This is instanced at large by the author of the Progeny; and others: that
the assertions of the old heretics were condemned; and that notwithstanding
the Protestants now hold the same, is evident; and therefore they are forced to
grant it; in particular about the Sacraments, the Scriptures, Freewill, Faith,
Goodworks, Marriage of Priests, Monachism and diverse other points.

Thirdly, they grant that the four first general Councels lawfully condemned
Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches, and Macedonius, and that these were truly
heretics: and yet some of them erred but in one point. Therefore, since to
deny any one point sufficiently propounded as a truth revealed by God, makes an
heretic; and this by the protestants own consession: let any prudent man judge
whether the protestants do not expose their sules to evident danger; First by
denying so many points now held by the Roman catholics, and the same held by
the ancient Fathers also. Secondly by not having amongst themselves one, and
the same body, or number of things to be believed: but on the contrary taking
to themselves all liberty in believing; and being actually so various, and
disagreeing in matters of faith, as every where they are amongst them selves:
and so by granting these former to have been truly heretics, for their denial
of some one point (as they must grant it, seeing the four first general
counsels are received in England) hence it follows that they condemn, and
undo themselves, and their own cause.

Founthly they grant that when Luther began, there was neither true preaching,
nor true pastors, nor true doctrine in the world. Which thing though it be most
false: yet by granting this, they grant that they themselves had no Church till
Luther began, and what Church began then only, could not be the true Church of
Christ, for want of Antiquity, apostolical succession, Visibility and
Indefectibility; which proprieties Christ's Church must have. True it is, that
Prideaux (as also some others) troubled at this sequel, Lect. 9 de visibil.
denies the former proposition, and pretends that the protestant Church was
visible in every age. But, first neither he, nor any other could ever yet prove
any such visibility. Secondly, this argues that the protestants are here also,
as in other points, at variance amongst themselves.

Lastly they confess (and in confessing this alone, they grant enough to undo
themselves and establish the truth of the Roman Church) that they went out from
the Roman Catholics. The thing indeed in it self is most true; and it has
been often proved by Catholics, that Waldo, Wicliffe, Hus, Luther, Calvin and
the chief of these new Reformado's were sirst Catholics and members of the
Roman Church, before their change: But the thing now to be considered is their
own consession of this truth. As for Luther, he acknowledges in many places of
his Works, that he had been a Papist, and went out from them. Epist. 141. And
Instit. lib. 4. c. 6.
And Caloin says in plain terms, that he, and his departed from the Church of
Rome, yea and from the whole world. Discessionem a tot mundo facere
coactisumus. The Progeny 1.3.c.7.
. Mr. Jewel, Fox, Rainolds, Mason and many more of them acknowledge their
Church to have gone out of the Roman Church: so that nothing remains now but to
take notice of what sequels result out of this, and their other ingenuous
confessions.

The third Point.
Consider lastly, Some inferences which may be drawn out of the two former
points: first by their granting that they went out of the Roman Church
(acknowledging also that those who die in the same Church may besaved) they
evidently make themselves guilty of schism. 2. granting in this manner
Salvation to Roman Catholics, whom they confess also not to err in
fundamentals (the latter of which is also inferred out of the former) nor to
want any of those things which are essntial requisites to salvation; it
follows that these other are not only guilty of Schism; but of heresy also,
if they hold any thing (as they hold many) contradictory to these confessedly
foul saving tenants of Roman Catholics. 3. This grant of their going out from
the Roman Catholics (which thing is evidently proved also in the third point
of the meditation of antiquity) this alone makes the protestant Religion guilty
of novelty, and by consequence of falsehood: for the true church of christ began
in the time of the apostles: theirs coming after that time, could not be it,
by reason of its posteriority; but some other false sect. 4. The whole sum of
what they have granted in behalf of the Roman catholics, and against
themselves, proves evidently, that the Roman catholics are the only true
church of christ.

Since therefore in this great suite betwixt Sectaries (especially Protestants)
and Roman catholics about the true church of christ, and whose it is by right,
we have not only proved that the marks of it and of that of the Roman
catholics, are all one; and consequently that these two are not in reallity
two but one and the same church: but our adversaries have moreover given us a
judgment, by confessing in substance, that our claims are good, and their own
ill grounded: what remains but execution: not that which the ministers of
divine justice do upon the wicked; which God avert: but that rather (for such
are my cordial wishes) which the equity of this cause exacts to be done by
convicted persons upon themselves; by putting in execution that (true
conversion to the catholic faith) to which the evidence of these most
credible testimonies (the marks of the true church must needs incline an
impartial reader. Confident I am that the substance of these meditations cannot
but convince, that the marks of christ's true church are to be found amongst
the Roman Catholics, and only amongst them. If passion, prejudicate opinions,
and obstinacy be laid aside; if self ends, and temporal interests be not
prevalent, and disturb reason; undoubtedly the testimonies of these marks will
make it give sentence for the catholic party. Away with these fears of
sequestration, or temporal encumbrances; heaven is a happy purchase, though it
cost you these; yea life it self. Such premises as the praxis of your belief
and life prepare, such conclusions will death draw out in the end: Nor can
either belief or life be good in a Religion which is bad. Choose therefore the
best, whatsoever it cost; since thy salvation depends upon thy Election in
point of Religion: Mean while, Let this be the last (though not the least) of
the sequels which may be drawn out of the precedent Meditations; to wit, a
cessasion of persecution. Can reason, yea can nature choose but cry out, in
seeing Catholics persecuted, where all Sects are tolerated; and in beholding
those men's blood shed, or sought for, even by those, for the good of whose
souls these others are so piously prodigal of their own blood.

England, England, which kill's the Prophets, and with the averse affections of
thy hard heart ston's those that are sent to thee. How often and how willingly
would they have gathered thy children together (as the Hen her Chickins) under
that shelter, which he wished for, who said; Under the shade of thy wings
protect me: but thou would not. Behold thy house is left like a desert;
without Altar, without Priest, without Sacrifice; stone upon stone, and scarce
that some where. Alas! The days will come, in which thou must repent thy not
taking notice of the visites, which thy Savior gave thee by his Servants.
England, remember from whence thou have fallen: do penance; and do thy first
works: Return to thy self, and consider how many thousands in the house of thy
Father abound with bread, the bread of Angels, their daily bread; whilst thou
perishes with famine: Rise, go, and say: Father I have finned against heaven,
and in thy sight; now I am no more worthy to be called thy daughter, since I
have forsaken thy Spouse my mother. And thou, O God of hosts, look down from
heaven, and behold, and visit this vinyard; and the Vineyard which thy right
hand once planted; let it by the same be again repaired; to thy eternal glory.
Amen.

Soli Dei honor and gloria.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 25 read proximus, and marg. Romans 6.22. p. 3. l. 12 get, p. 4. l.
11 dele all., p. 8. l. 9 an oblation, p. 14. marg. dele Isa. 7.9, p. 16. l. 27
dele meant, p. 27. l. 13, what they are, p. 28 marg. Elogium's, p. 40. l. 19
ingenuous, mar. del. Jo. 5.24, p. 41. l. 10 machins p. 46. l. 20. Mar. 16.20,
p. 54. l. 10 the enemy, l. 13 eye witness reports, p. 55. l. 7 a great blunder
is, l. 14 cambinding, p. 47. marg. 14.12. p. 57. l. 1 Ephpheta, l 7 that way
in, p. 58. marg. dele Lev. 15.16, p. 61. l. 26 believing, p. 63. l. 18 least,
p. 65. l. 13 r. Patrick, l. 15 Silverius, p. 68. l. 21. John Fox, p. 85. marg.
76.11, p.86. l. 20 besanctified, l. 25 need I, p. 87. l. 6 I can, p. 95. l. 3
Nervians, p. 103. l. 18 is (as ap. p. 107. l. 16 itlegitimates, p. 121 l. 26
not by, p. 131. l. 11. proved at, p. 135. marg. 19. 40. p. 145. l. 12. possibly
be. p. 146. l. 1. believe, l. 28 dele these, p. 148. l. 5. disbelieving, p.
149. l. 1. to the which, p. 153. l. 21 some like it, p. 155. l. 6. dear
Christian, l. 21. father for, p. 161. l. 4. Lithus, p. 164. l. 28. Cunegundis,
p. 179. l. 9. dele a, p. 182. l. 2. beatified, p. 190. l. 21.1. untruth, p.
191. l. 2 this, p. 193. l. 18 dele on, p. 195. l. 10 dele and, p. 202 l. 1.
Justin in Triphon, p. 204. l. 4. from him it, p. 212. l. 24. generations, p.
214. l. 8 Altars, p. 217 l. 18. denunciations, p. 222. l. 25 be was, p. 223 l.
1. seventy thousand, p. 224. l. 19 struck, p. 229 l. 25 Catholics, p. 230. l.
6. on, p. 234. l. 15. dele and those, p. 236. l. 7 God inflicted, l. 19 the
outragies, p. 240. l. 12 it was.


