Elisij Campi, A Paradise of Delights: or an Elixier of Comforts. Offered to
BELIEVERS, In two short Discourses OF

I. The Confirmation of the Covenant from Heb. 6.17.18. II. The Donation of
Christ from Romans. 8.32.
By R. W. Minister of the Gospel and sometime Preacher at Tamerton-Foliot, in
the County of Devon.

Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to
thee and to thy seed after thee. 2. Cor 5 2^. He has made him to be sin for us
who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. Colos.
3.11. Christ is all. London Printed by S. G. and B. G. and sold by John
Williams Bookeseller in Plymouth. 1672.

To the Virtuous and Pious, my beloved, honored friend Mrs. ELIZABETH CALMADY,
Wife to the Worship. Worthy, and much honored Josias Calmady, of Langdon, in
the Parish of Wenburie, and County of Devon, Esquire.
Grace, Peace and comfort and all Covenant blessings be multiplied with, and
through Christ Jesus.
Much Honored, and beloved in the Lord,
SVch as I have, I give, had I any thing of more worth, to present you with,
you should have it, the best is due: and I desire to be honest.

Poor Ministers have nothing elce, wherewith to requite their obliging
friends, but prayers and Books.

But why say I nothing elce: This, as it is an honest requital, so, may be a
meet compensation, Prayers ascend, and mercies descend upon him that prays
and upon those that are prayed for, the prayer of Faith can do much with God,
fetching blessings from Heaven, Prayer (says one) is the Christians hand,
Oration justi clavis caeli, ascendit precatio, and descendit Dei miseratio.
that reaches to Heaven, and takes every good thing out of God's Treasury:
The effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous man avails much. Jam. 5.16


Now any Grace-gift from God, or blessing of his love, any Spiritual gift
obtained by prayer is incomparably better then any thing that man has to give,
so that a poor Christian who has an interest in God, and acquaintance with him
may be so far beneficial to his greatest benefactours, as to oblige t^em.

Books there are in this Scribbling age, many (more then a good many,) some
filthy, some frothie, and frivolous; some Heterodox and pernicious, others,
(how^v^r Orthodox, yet) rather w^r^ie then worthy: thoug^ there are (blessed
he God) not a few, of great worth, and excellent useful of precious matter well
clothed with words, set forth in a handsome dress, fitted for Edification, and
for laudable, holy insinuation, to get within the Reader, for the conveying
light into the understanding, and Spiritual life, and Heavenly heat into the
heart and affections, prepared, and published, by men of much learning and
piety.

Now a good Book may (if good use be made of it) prove a good gift indeed, and
of greater advantage than a great bag of gold.

The prayers of many (I doubt not) as well as mine, an sent up to heaven for
you; (The good God receive them, and answer them with a gracious and plentiful
return of blessings upon your heart and head.)

This little Book is (I hope I may say) sent from heaven to you, by the hand of
an unworthy servant of Jesus Christ, in the work of the Gospel.

Books (no doubt) you have many, and those good, yet this little one, added to
the rest, may not make your store to be more than enough; and (for ought I
know) it may be as suitable, as useful; and through divine grace as beneficial
to you, as any other.

The Wind blows where i^lisieth, the Spirit of God compared to the Wind has
his influence according to his own choice of means, choosing sometimes to blow
in an oaten Pipe refusing a silver Trumpet, tha^ the efficacy of the blast may
b^ ascribed to him, and not attributed to the instrument tha^ he makes use of.

The Lord accompany this Ink-work of mine, with the powerful working of his own
spirit, to a great increase o^ spiritual light, and life, an^ strength, and
warmth i^ your soul, and to your establishment in Christ, and to the
furtherance of your joy o^ faith.

Receive this gift from God hank fully, accept (I pray you) this labor of
love, and ^rvice of debt, favorably from

Your oblidged, devoted friend and servant, ROBERT WINE.
Eastlake in Devon. Aug. 24 1670.
God's Covenant [OURS.]
HEB. 6. v. 17, 18. Wherein God willing more ahundantly to show to the Heirs of
Promise the immutability of his Counsel, Text.
confirmed it by an Oath:

That by two immutable things, wherein it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold on the
hope set before us.


THe Author of this Epistle, Connection.
(the Apostle Paul) having in the latter end of the former Chapter sharply
reproved the Hebrew; for their childish ignorance, does in the beginning of
this Chapter exhort them to an increase of knowledge, and to stedfastness in
the Faith, and to fruitfulness in their Profession, and to a striving up to a
full assurance of hope in a due exercise of Faith and Patience; propounding to
them for their imitation, the example of their Forefathers, and asserting for
their encouragement, the infallibility of God's Promise; so that there is not
only a possibility, or probability, but a certainty of obtaining, if they be
not slothful, but followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises.

Then he urges a special example of Abraham, showing

1 What God did for, and t^ Abraham; (he made him a Promise, and confirmed it
with a^ Oath.)

2 What Abraham did with respect to God's confirmed Promise and what he found
thereupon (he pati^ntly endured, and the^ he inherited the Promise.)

Now in urging this great example of Abraham to enforce his Exhortation, he
intimates, that if they do as Abraham did, they shall find what Abraham found,
and tells them, that they have the same assurance that Abraham had, (...).
viz. God's Word, and his Oath; These are the two immutable things wherein it
is impossible for God to lie.

And now in my Text this is evidently carried, that the confirmation of the
Covenant to Abraham, was intended not for him only, but for all Believers, as
Heirs with him of the same Promise; and that God gave the Promise to them, and
swear to them in promising, and swearing to Abraham, that so by giving them his
Word and Oath

1 He might show the immutability of his counsel or purpose.

2 We might have strong consolation: [We, who have sted for refuge, to lay hold
on the hope set before us] i. e. on Christ, or on Life Eternal, the object of
our hope, (this is a metaphorical description, or a paraphrase of Believers) so
that this point lies clear in the Text.

God's Covenant confirmed to Abraham, Abraham's Seed throughout their
Generations.

This Doctrine is clearly offered from the Text, for if the promise made to
Abraham were not intended for, and belonging to Believers in after Generations,
then the confirmation of it to Abraham had not tended to the consolation of
New Testament Believers, as here this is expressed to be the end of God's Oath
to Abraham, that we might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge,
etc. (this is (as I said) a description or paraphrase of Believers.)

Now with respect to the Doctrine in prosecution of it: First, I shall hint
something explicatorily: Secondly, I shall prove the point: Thirdly, I shall
make some improvement of it by application.

By way of explication, Explication.
I shall show 1 What the Covenant is. 2 How it is confirmed. 3 Who are
Believers to whom it is confirmed, who are Abraham's Seed, to whose consolation
the confirmation of the Covenant tends.


1 What this Covenant is. Its kind. The Covenant; what.
Its substance.


1 As to the kind of it, Its kind.
it is (...), a Testament, or Testamental Covenant; wherein Legacies of Grace
are bequeathed, wherein good things are freely given by God in and through
Jesus Christ unto his people: It is called in Scripture, the Covenant of
Promise, Gods Covenant of Peace, the Covenant of Gods love, a Covenant of
Grace; it is a Covenant or Promise founded in Christ the Mediator, and a
Testament that is put in force by the death of Christ the Testator; and this
Testament or Covenant is an unchangeable dispensation, an everlasting Covenant.

Its substance.
2. As to the substance of the Covenant, it is diversely expressed in Scripture,
in the sundry branches or particular promises; but we have a very full account
of it in few words, Genes. 17. where we find, that God's Promise or Covenant
established with Abraham, and his Seed after him in their Generations, is this,
That he will be a God to him, and to his Seed after him for ever. The
expression is short, but very full and comprehensive, there could not be any
thing more put into the Covenant, for nothing is excluded where God is
included: Here is a promise of blessings Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal. This
short expression carries in it all the Covenant of Promise, which God gave from
the first man to the manifestation of Christ; it is (as one says) the Epitome
or sum of the whole Gospel; it is God's promise of pardon and peace, of
righteousness and life, of Justification, and Sanctification, and Salvation, of
all grace and blessing here and hereafter. This is the substance of the
Covenant, and it is substantial indeed, has substance enough in it.

How is this Covenant confirmed?

Covenant confirmed, how?
It is confirmed by Gods Word, and Oath, and Seals, and by the Death of Christ.

1 We have God's Word, his written Word, to show for it; he has given it us
under his hand in many places of Scripture.

2 There is God's Oath for the confirmation of the Covenant; his Oath to
Christ, The Lord swear, Heb. 7.21.
and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedeek. The sense or meaning of that Scripture is this, God swear to
Christ that his Priesthood should be for ever available and effectual for the
salvation of sinners; that he would justify, and bless, and save sinners
through him (according to the Covenant of Promise) accepting his Sacrifice for
them; and there is God's Oath to Believers, Heb. 6.13, 14, 17.
in this Chapter as in the Text, so in the thirteenth and fourteenth verses.

3 This Covenant is confirmed by God's Seals, both external and internal;
external the Sacraments; Circumcision is called ((...)) the Seal of the
righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11.
which is the great promise of the Covenant of Grace, and is Synecdochically
put for the whole Covenant. The internal Seal is the Spirit, persuading and
assuring our hearts of the truth of the promise, and of our interest in it.

4 The Covenant is confirmed by the Death of Christ: He was appointed to be the
Mediator of the Covenant, to mediate as a Surety, and he has mediated by
Blood, has fulfilled the Law of a Redeemer, and fully answered his engagement
of Suretiship; so that God cannot now in Justice withhold any thing that he
has promised to give, nor refuse to do any thing which he has promised to do
upon Christ his dying.

Christ having died according to that agreement betwixt his Father and him, is
to be satisfied for his dying, as well as by his death he has satisfied his
Father; now nothing will satisfy Christ but to have the end of his death,
which is, that they for whom he died be justified and saved; Isai. 53.11.
He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied: So that Christ
his death makes the Covenant sure, without all question, to be performed.

3 To whom is the Covenant confirmed? Our Doctrine says, Covenant confirmed to
whom?
to all Believers, the Seed of Abraham.

Now, who are Believers interessed in the Covenant? to whose consolation the
confirmation of the Covenant tends? Why? they are all such as have a true
justifying Faith, To believers.
who are called the seed of Abraham, (are his spiritual seed) ye are all the
Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; Gal. 3.26.^9.
and if ye be Christ's, then a^^ ye Abraham's seed, and Heirs according to the
Promise: Romans 4.16.
Theref^r it is of Faith, (or through the righteousness of Faith, as v. 13.)
that it might be by Grace, to the end that the Promise might be sure to all the
seed, not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the
Faith of Abraham, i. e. not only to the believing circumcised Jews, but also to
the believing uncircumcised Gentiles.

Now I shall show you what Faith is, and how it is evidenced, that you may
understand who are Believers, Abraham his seed interessed in the Promise (not
to mention the diverse acceptions of the word Faith, nor the several sorts of
Faith) it is a justifying Faith that we are speaking of, Faith, what.
the Faith of Gods Elect, which is subjected in the understanding, and in the
will.

1 Faith in the understanding is a right apprehension and certain knowledge of
its object, which is either general or special; general the whole Word of God;
more special the promise of Grace, or the Gospel-promise of Remission, and
Reconciliation, and Justification, and Salvation by Christ Jesus, or Christ put
to death in the flesh, and quickened by the Spirit, with all the benefits of his
Death and Resurrection. (...).


2 Faith in the heart and will, is a firm assent unto, and confidence and
acquiessence in the promises of the Gospel, called a confident persuasion and
assurance.

What has been hitherto spoke of Faith, amounts to this short definition; [It
is a fiducial knowledge of the promise of Grace through Christ Jesus.]

I shall now show you more distinctly in two or three particulars, what is
carried in the notion of believing in Christ.

1 It implies a knowledge and acknowledgment of Christ, (...)
appointed by God to be the Mediator between God and Man, and a clear assent to
all Gospel Revelations concerning him the Savior of sinners, touching his
Person, and Natures, and Offices, and touching his Mediatory transactions, and
touching the necessary and saying effects of his Mediation.

This knowledge and acknow^edgment are necessary and essenti^l unto Faith,
there must be Faith doctrinal and assertive, as a foundation of that which is
fiducial and applicative.

2 To believe in Jesus Christ, implies an utter denial of any other Savior or
Saviors, Mediator or Mediators, of any other way by which we may come unto God.

3 It is not only a knowledge and acknowledgment of, and assent unto the
Revelations of God concerning Christ the only Savior, but it carries in it a
fiducial receiving of Christ offered to us in the Gospel promise; this is
formalis ratio fidei, the formality of true justifying Faith lies in this;
there are these two things formally constitutive of such a Faith.

1 An acceptance of Christ in the promise.

2 The Souls innitency or recumbency on Christ received.

This is truly and properly to believe on Jesus Christ; and they who have such
a says are true believers, the seed of Abraham, and heirs of the Promise.

There is a carnal and a spiritual seed of Abraham.

Carnal Professors that have not faith, or true grace, are the carnal seed; and
such as do not only profess faith and repentance, but are also real believers,
and truly gracious, are the spiritual seed.

Now therefore that you may not be deceived in this great matter, (as we are
alas too apt to deceive our selves, and in danger to be deluded by Satan) that
you may know whether you be believers, and may take comfort in the Doctrine
which we are now handling, I shall ho^d forth to you a few of the properties
and effects of faith, Faith, low evidenced.
which are evidential of the truth of it.

True faith is a purifier of the heart, and of the conversation; Purifying
their hearts by faith: Acts 15.9.
Faith purifieth as from the guilt (...) sin, by receiving Christ his
right^ousness, so from the filth an^ power of sin, by conflicting against
corruption, and by degrees in^stering it, and working it out; (...) very one
that has this hope (which is a concomitant of faith, 1 John 3.3.
and the daughter of faith) purifieth himself, and the heart being purifie^ the
conversation will he suitable^ Faith in the heart purifies it, an^ reforms the
life; he that trul^ believes in Jesus Christ, washe^^ his heart from
wickedness, and (...) careful to keep himself from the defilements of sin.

2 True faith is a living livel^ active faith that discovers it se^^ by
action, setting the soul o^ working, according to all the discoveries of the
mind of Christ^ and this it does, because it is a loving faith. True believers
tha^ by faith have taken in the love o^ Christ, are carried out in love t^ such
a loving Redeemer, who has purchased them with his own precious blood, and are
constraine^ in themselves to give themselves up unto him, who gave himself for
them; love sets the soul on work to keep his Commandments.

3 Faith in Jesus Christ, acted on him, fetches virtue from him, to make the
soul to grow in every grace, and increase in all holiness: Where Christ is made
righteousness to the soul, by imputation of God's part, and by Faith's
application on the souls part, there he is also sanctification by the influence
of his Spirit, or an emanation of grace which Faith draws from Christ, to whom
the soul is united.

4 True faith acted on Jesus Christ, carries on believers to confess Christ,
and to own his Institutions, and to stick to him in doing their duty, against
all discouragement by trouble and persecution in the world, Satan has desired
to have you, that he may sift you, Luc. 22.32.
as wheat is sified; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, says
Christ to Peter; Peter's faith did not utterly fail, though it failed very much
in the High-Priest^ Hall, and fell (as I may say) into (...) swoon; but
certainly no fears o^ dangers could have made Peter to deny Christ, had Faith
been active and done its part: It was Faith that made Moses to choose reproaches
and persecutions for Christ, rather than the glory of Egypt. Faith is our
Victory, whereby we overcome the World, it being that which raises the soul
above all the hopes and fears of the World: See faith's working in Paul, and
what power it had to carry him on through sufferings for Christ: For the which
cause also I suffer those things; 2 T^m. 1.12
nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and am
persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against
that day.

5 True faith is a joy-creating grace: The Apostle prays for the Romans, Romans
15.12.
that they may be fill^d with all joy in believing: Joy is the Daughter of
faith; when faith lays hold on remission of sins through the blood of Christ,
the soul must needs rejoice in the Lord its Savior, who has delivered it from
the guilt of sin, and the curse of the Law: Peace and Joy, in some degree, is
an immediate fruit and effect of true faith acted on Christ.

Thus I have finished the explication of the point, showing what the Covenant
is, and how it is confirmed, and to whom it is confirmed.

I come now to prove our Doctrine [That God's Covenant of Grace is confirmed to
all Believers. Proof.
]

You have seen the Position clearly grounded in the Text: See further proof;
Gal. 3.29.
If ye be Christ's (the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, as ver. 26.
if ye be believers) then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the
promise: To Abraham and his seed were the promises made, Gal 3.16.
he says not, and to seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed, that
is Christ, viz. Christ complexive^^ taken, and in aggregation; Christ in his
Mystical Body, as you ha^^ it expounded by the same Apost^^ 1 Cor. 12.12. So
also is Christ; (...) you read the whole verse you wi^^ easily see, that here
we must understand Christ mystical, the Bod^ of Christ his Church.

The promises are made, the Covenant is confirmed to all tru^ Believers the
Members of Christ.

Now for application of the point; Applicat.
First, I shall draw up two or three inferences for information; next, I shall
give out some words of exhortation or counsel: Thirdly, I shall close up all
with a use of consolation.

1 If the Covenant of Grace belong to Abraham's seed, Information. Infer. 1.
and to them only, then there is no Universal Redemption; for Christ is the
Mediator of the Covenant only for those who are within the Covenant: Surely he
did not undertake to mediate by blood, to die, that the Covenant might be made
good to any but those whom God had included in the Covenant of promise: The
Covenant of God's mercy is not by virtue of Christ his mediation fulfilled to
any without God's donation, Commensurartur opera Trinitatis, Patris, in
eligendo, filii in redimendo and Sp. S in convertendo.
and beside his intention, but God has given the Covenant of his love only to
a certain seed; therefore Redemption by Christ (which is clearly the great
fruit and effect of Christ his mediation) belongs not to all, but only to a
certain seed, God has indeed given all things unto Christ, but not so as he
has given his chosen to him; Joh. 17.2.
Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to
all them whom thou have given him. There is a world of men to be considered in
contradistinction to those whom God has given unto Christ to be saved by him;
I pray not for the World, says Christ, Joh. 17.9.
but for them which thou have given me. (Surely Christ did not die for those
for whom he would not pray.

And whereas the benefits of Christ his death, are either more common,
Permortem Christi, ad omnes aliqua bona, ad aliquos (electos scarosque solos)
omnia bona per veniunt.
or else more special a^^ saving; it is not to be denied, b^^ there are some
benefits of Christ death, in which any man may ha^^ a share, but we grant not
to eve^ man a saving advantage by i^ Christ died not for the redemption of all;
we may, and do gran^ that Christ died for all sufficientl^ but not for all
efficaciously: The^^ was merit enough in the Death (...) Christ, his blood was
a sufficien^ price for the redemption of all (...) but as to the counsel and
purpose^ of God, intending and appointing Christ a Redeemer, and the death of
Christ for redemption, and in regard of the real effect and fruit of Christ his
death; so we deny the universal claim to it, the saving benefit of it is not
extended to all.

But it may not be amiss (by the way) to answer an objection or two against
this great truth inferred from our Doctrine.

Object. It is said expressly, 1 Timothy 2.6.
That Christ gave himself a ransom for all.

Ans. 1. Sol. ^adem e^ectionis personalis, and redemptionis efficacis
peripheria.
Either it is to be under^^ood of the universality of God's ^^lect; for all
God's chosen and ^^venanted ones he gave himself; ^^r)

2 By [all] we are to under^^and not every individual person, ^^t every sort or
rank of men, as (...) is to be understood in ver. 1. and (...) where it is
said, that pray^s and supplications must be made ^^r all men; and that God will
^ave all to be saved. This is the ^postle's meaning, that God will ^^ve some of
all kinds and all ranks ^^f men, and therefore his will is, that prayers be put
up for all sorts; and thus v 6. he says, That Christ ^ave himself a r^ns me
for all. (or)

3 Christ gave himself a ransom ^^r all, i.e. he paid a price suffici^nt for
the redemption of all; ^or)

4 It may be said, that Christ is ^n some sense a ransom for all, ^ut not in
that sp^^ial sense, as he ^s a ransom for hi^ people, (as a very able godly
Divine makes out ^he difference) H^ has brought others under the conditional
Gos^^^ Covenant, that they shall be sav^^^ by his death if they will believe
(...) but he has brought the children promise under the absolute Gos^^^
Covenant, purchasing for them (...) condition of their receiving this bl^^sing,
viz. the grace of Faith, (...) the power to believe, as well as (...) blessing
promised, which is sal^^tion.

Christ is said to be the Savior (...) all men, 1 Timothy 4.10.
especially of them that b^lieve.

This Text I conceive is fitly i^terpreted to be understood of G^^ his
providence in preserving a^^ and providing for all, Sol.
yet with i^timation of a special peculiar r^spect that God has to believe^^
even in temporal salvations, an^ common preservations, and esp^cially that God
save them likewi^^ with an eternal salvation. The context gives this sense; for
(...) had said before, that godliness ha^^ the promises of the life which no^^
is, and of that which is to come (...) God's providence reaches to a^^ men in
outward preservation, but ^he promise of Eternal Salvation ^s to believers.

And as for all such Texts as speak of Christ his suffering for all, and his
dying for all, doubtless they are to be understood (according to the School
distinction) of the sufficiency of Christ's death, and not of the efficiency or
efficacy of it.

Well, here is the business, the Doctrine that we are prosecuting, overthrows
that Assertion of Universal Redemption; for it cannot be thought, that by
virtue of Christ's Death any should have the benefit of the Covenant of Grace
unto whom God did not intend it, or that he intended it to any besides those
whom the Scriptures speaks to be the subjects of the Covenant, or within the
compass of it; so that the Covenant not being made of God to all, but only to a
certain seed, it follows, that Redemption by Christ, which (being taken largely
and according to the extent of it) is all spiritual grace and blessin^ both in
this world, and in the world to come; (and so is the whole matter of the
Covenant (...) it follows I say, that this belonge^^ not to all, but only to a
certai^ seed.

This first great truth inferre^ from our Doctrine, is a point o^ such
consequence, that I though^ fit to insist a while on the vindication of it; and
now I conclud^ this with Augustine his plain determination and confident
Assertion; Omnis qui Christi sanguin^ redemptus est, homo est; non autem omnis
qui homo est, Christi-sanguin^ redemptus est.

I come to a second inference.

2 If the Covenant confirmed to us be the same which was made to Abraham,
Infer. 2.
and by oath confirmed to him, then there is but one Covenant in substance,
which runs through the Book of God, since the fall of Adam: Peter says to the
Jews, Acts 3.25.
Ye are the children of the Covenant which God made with Abraham. There is but
one grand Covenant of promise given by God from the first man, to the
manifestation of Christ, which is held forth to us under the Gospel, and shall
continue without alteration.

This is held forth to us in Psalm 105. Psa. 105 v. 8, 9, 10, 11.
He remembered his Covenant for ever, his Word which he commanded to a thousand
Generations; which Covenant he made with Abraham, and his Oath unto Isaac,
saying, Unto thee will I ^ive the Land of Canaan for an everlasting inheritance.

This promise concerning the Land of Canaan (which may, as I think, with more
color than any other clause of the Covenant, be questioned whether it belong
to the New Testament) is said to be a Covenant for ever, a word commanded for a
thousand Generations, and for all everlasting inheritance or possession.

This must needs extend to the times of the Gospel, and by Canaan promised for
an everlasting possession to Abraham's seed, we must understand all that of
which Canaan and the good things thereof were a Type, viz. all the blessings of
the New Testament Church, and of heaven it self.

There is an oneness or sameness of God's Covenant given to Abraham and
Believers in the Old Testament, and to Abraham's seed, believers in the New
Testament; and though we read of a First Testament, Heb. 9.18.
as implying a second; and of a New Covenant, as standing in opposition to an
old one; Heb. 13.24
yet this truth inferred from our Doctrine is not hereby shaken, for there is a
various acception of the term Covenant, sometimes it is taken for the Covenant
it self, and sometimes for the dispensation of the Covenant: Now we have not in
the forequoted Texts, Testament opposed to Testament, but one dispensation is
set against another, in respect of the different dispensation or administration
the same Covenant is called Old and New.

3 If the Covenant confirmed Infer. 3.
to Abraham be confirmed to Abraham's seed, to all his seed, and only to his
seed, then the Seals of the Covenant appertain to this seed, and are limited to
this seed, and belong in an extension to all this seed: The Seal is nothing
without the Covenant, but together with the Covenant it is of great importance
and necessary use, to confirm and ensure the Covenant where it is given: You
know the use of a Seal in Covenants among men; when a Bargain, Grant or
Covenant is made without fraud, and truly drawn up in writing, and signed and
scaled, we account it sure; and the Seal for assurance goes along with that
which is to be assured, and is nothing worth separated from the written
contract or Covenant, and will do no good to him that has nothing else to show.

Now by the Seals of the Covenant of Grace, I understand the New Testament
Sacraments, which are God's Seals confirming his Covenant to his covenanted
ones.

Divines do generally affirm the Sacraments to be seals of the Covenant of
Promise; this is in the very definition, and it is the received Opinion, and
concurrent judgment of the Orthodox, agreeable to the Word of God, that
Sacraments are instituted to signify and seal up to us Gospel Grace, serving
to strongthen our Faith in the promises, being seals of the Covenant of Promise.

Now where God gives his Covenant, he gives his seal for confirmation; so that
all in Covenant have a right to the seals or seal of the Covenant, and none but
they; so that to give the seal to those that have no Covenant given them, is
indeed to set a seal to a blank, (that which Anabaptists do frivolously urge
against the baptizing of Infants) and to deny the Seal where the Covenant is
given is very injurious, and a great sin against God, and his covenanted ones.

I do not now make it my business particularly and fully to declare how far the
right to the seals extends, nor within what compass it is to be limited as
to particular subjects, I do only now draw up a general inference from the
Doctrine, inferring thence the extent of such a right to all Abraham's seed,
and the limitation of it to this seed only, as having an interest in the
Covenant; and my drift herein is, to show how our Doctrine and inference from
it lays a clear ground for Infant Baptism, for the baptizing of Insants in the
Church of Christ: Baptism, the seal of the Covenant, belongs to Abraham's
seed, who are included in the Covenant made with Abraham, and Heirs of the same
Promise.

But all Elect Infants in the Church are Abraham's seed, included in the
Covenant of Promise: The Promise is to you, and to your children. Acts 2.39.


Ergo Infants in the Church are to be baptized (Baptism being come in the room
of Circumcision) as well as Infants in Abraham's time, and afterward in the
Church of the Jews were to be circumcised upon account of Covenant Interest.

And I pray mark this (which will serve to make good our Major Proposition) in
Acts 2.39. The Promise is made the ground of Baptism, and the command to
baptize reaches as far as the Promise; Be baptized every one of you, for the
Promise is to you, and to your children; (...) to those that are brought forth
by you; the word notes children of each Sex, and every Age: Look to Genes.
17.9 and you shall find, that children are Abraham's seed, included in the
Covenant, to whom the Token and Seal of the Covenant is to be given, Genesis 17.9.
Thou shall keep my Covenant, thou, and thy seed after thee in their
Generations. This command concerns the same seed that is spoken of ver. 8. to
which the promise is made; and that he there means a spiritual seed, is
apparent from the matter of the Promise, which is, Canaan to be an everlasting
Inheritance to his seed; which everlasting Inheritance must be understood to be
Heaven, which was figured by the earthly Canaan; and this is not promised to
all Abraham's seed after the flesh, but to all his spiritual seed; so that the
command of keeping the covenant lies upon all Abraham's seed throughout all
Generations: And look I pray into ver. 10. This is my Covenant, etc. every
Man-child among y^u shall be circumcised. Thou shall keep my Covenant, i.e.
shall observe the Token of my Covenant (Every Man-child shall be circumcised)
and you know that every child of eight days old was appointed to circumcision.
Are not children here accounted Abraham's seed, included in the Covenant, to
whom the token of the Covenant is to be applied by an express and strict
command from God? And are not children of believers in Covenant now as well as
then (the Covenant being given for an everlasting Covenant to Abraham and his
seed) and is not the command of keeping the took of the Covenant still obliging
to Abraham's seed; so that what is now the token of the Covenant, must be
observed instead of Circumcision? as the token then was circumcising of the
child, so the token now is baptizing of the child.

Well, here is the business, all Elect Infants in the Church are included in
the Covenant or Promise; and so have right to the token and seal of the
Covenant Baptism, and therefore are to be baptized upon account of Covenant
Interest, and we are to baptize all the Infants of baptized Church members and
visible Professors, because we are bound in the judgment of charity to judge of
every particular Infant, that it belongs to the Election of Grace, and so is an
Heir of the Promise, (though we cannot judge so of any with the judgment of
certain^y.)

2 I come now to a Use of Exhortation, 2 Use. Exhortation
to give out some words of counsel,

I Believe that which the Scripture clearly holds forth concerning this
Covenant which we have spoken of. Couns. 1.


I Believe that God has made a second Covenant with man, Believe the Covenant.
a Covenant of Grace; since by his fall, by transgression, he cut himself off
from God and happiness, and made himself incapable of life by the first
Covenant, which was a covenant of works; if this were not held forth in the
word, then there were no consolation of the Scriptures, nor no ground of hope
given to sinners in them: For the word speaks most clearly, that we cannot be
justified and saved by a covenant of works, by the deeds of the Law; By the
deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified: Romans ^.2^. Gal. (...).
The Scripture has concluded all under sin; and under sin and death we must
all lie for ever, were it not for the Covenant of Grace, wherein God freely
offers life and salvation by Jesus Christ unto sinners, upon condition of
Faith and Repentance, which he has promised likewise to give; woe, woe to all
the Posterity of Adam, were there not such a Covenant of God's love and mercy,
in which he has promised righteousness and life eternal through his Son, to
all those that receive him. This Covenant we must believe, or else we can have
nothing whereupon rationally to build hope of salvation.

2 Believe that all Abraham his spiritual seed, and none but they, are
comprehended in this Covenant, favingly interessed in it.

3 Believe the confirmation of the Covenant to all this interessed parties, by
the written Word of God, and by his Oath, and by his Seals, and by the death of
his Son, whose blood is called the Blood of the Covenant. Heb. 10 29.


4 Believe that Jesus Christ is the Mediator of the Covenant, by whose
mediation all the promised good is procured for us, and shall be performed to
us; so that we must take up the Covenant, and the comfort of it, in and through
him.

This is the first counsel to persuade souls to believe the Covenant of Grace,
and to yield a full assent to all that which the Scripture holds forth
concerning it. Because otherwise they will never regard it, or look after it,
nor can ever have any benefit by it: Suffer your selves to be convinced of the
misery of being out of this Covenant, Couns. 2. See the m^sery of being out of
Covenant.
and of the necessity of being under it, and interessed in it, that you may
have life and blessedness.

Poor creatures that are out of this Covenant, are without God, and without
Christ, and so without that which can relieve their misery by sin, and make
them happy: What ever their enjoyments are in the world, how far is the soul
from happiness, while it is far from God the Fountain of Blessedness? All good
is comprehended in God, and all true happiness is comprised in our fruition of
God; sin has set us at the greatest distance from God, and so at the greatest
distance from happiness: The Blood of Christ brings us near to God, and an
interest in the Covenant of Grace, gives God to be our God, and so renders us
happy.

Truly, conviction in this case is most necessary, for a man will never seek
that which he does not know he has lost, or which he thinks he may well enough
be without; but a knowledge of our loss by sin, and a conviction of the
necessity of r^finding what we have lost, will cause answerable affections:
When a soul is convinced that it has lost God, and lost happiness, will it not
cry out, that it i^ undone, and have a strong desire to recover this loss, and
so seek an enjoyment of God in Christ above any thing in the world?

3 Study the Covenant of Grace, Couns. 3. Study the Cov^nant.
labor for a clear understanding of it, that you may know its nature, its
matter, its Author, its rise, its subjects, its privileges, its goodness and
excellency, its necessariness, its perpetuity, its ends, and the condition of
enjoying it.

It is very sad, that whereas it concerns us as much as our souls are worth, to
have a knowledge of and interest in the Covenant, yet people generally are
ignorant of it, so that they understand not what it is, nor whence it is, nor
why it is, nor what need they have of it, nor what benefit comes by it, nor to
whom it belongs, nor upon what terms it is to be enjoyed, etc. Is this
ignorance for want of means of knowledge? or is it an inconsiderable point, the
knowledge whereof does not at all, or very little concern us?

Ah beloved! the matter is very weighty, and the knowledge of it very
necessary, and the Revelations of God concerning it very clear; but here is the
cause of men's ignorance, they will not be convinced of the necessity of this
most necessary knowledge and interest, and so regard not to know the things
that concern their everlasting peace.

Oh how greatly does it concern all souls, that in themselves are liable to
death and damnation, to study God's gracious Covenant of Life and Salvation? If
this were well studied by us, we should see more in it then we do, and should
have more affection to it then we have, and should be more diligent and
studious to apply it then we are; we should see it to be worth the laying hold
on, and should not be so loath as we are to renounce lusts, profits, and
pleasures, and vanities, (which our hearts are naturally in league with) that
we may receive this Covenant of God's mercy concerning pardon, and peace, and
all manner of blessings here, and eternal salvation hereafter.

Couns. 4. Apply the Covenant.
Having studied this Covenant sofar, as to see the goodness, and the
desirableness, and excellency of it, let desire be carried to it, and labor
diligently to apply it.

What is it to me that there is such a Covenant of God for the healing, and
recovering, and saving of wounded lost destroyed sinners, if it belongs not to
me? What comfort can the knowledge of that which is excellent and precious
afford me, if I have no part in it? Therefore let me labor truly and thoroughly
to apply this precious Covenant.

This counsel has two branches.

1 Apply the Covenant truly. 2 Apply it thoroughly and surely.
Apply it truly.
1 Apply the Covenant truly; take heed of a misapplication, see that there be
not any material error in applying the Covenant.

Now I shall lay down some rules, Directions.
give you some directions for a right application of the Covenant.

1 You must have eyes to see what you take, must not be ignorant of the
Covenant which is to be applied; we say a blind man may catch a Hare (it is
possible, though not probable) but a blind ignorant soul cannot apply the
Covenant of Promise; as it is fabulously reported of Ixion, that he embraced a
dusky dark Cloud instead of bright beautiful June: So do ignorant souls embrace
the delusions of Satan, and the phantasmes of their own deluded spirits,
instead of the true real Covenant of Promise; therefore before I exhorted you
to application, I advised you to study the Covenant of Grace.

2 You must apply the Covenant, as God's Covenant of Grace offered to sinners.

There are three specialties in this to be taken notice of.

1 It is God's Covenant. 2 A Covenant of Grace. 3 A Covenant offered to
sinners.
1 It is God's Covenant, not man's; and seeing it is God's Covenant

It is worth the laying hold on, for God does not covenant to give to the Heirs
of Promise small petty things, but great matters indeed: 2 Pet. 1.4.
The Apostle says, that God has given us exceeding great and precious
promises; such are the things promised to be given, exceeding great and
precious. God gives like himself, gifts worthy the giver; Gods Covenant of
Promise is the riches and treasure of the heirs of promise.

This is one consideration to draw us in to the Covenant, to make us desirous
of it; it is worth the having.

2 Seeing it is God's Covenant, we may be sure it shall be performed. A man's
covenant with God or man may be broken, because either he may be unable to make
it good, or he may prove false and deceitful: (and oh what falsehood is there
found with men, and how common a sin is covenant breaking?) but now we cannot
question God's performance:

1 Because there can be no want of power for the fulfilling of his Covenant; To
thee, O Lord, Ps. 62.11.
belougeth Power. We are taught in the Lord's prayer to ascribe this unto God,
Thine is the Kingdom, and the Power. God is Almighty, so that there cannot be
any check given to his Power by the greatest difficulty that can be imagined;
there is nothing too hard for God to do, nothing at all difficult to him:
Hereby Abraham his Faith in the Promises was born up, because he was persuaded
that what God had promised, Romans 4.21.
he was able to perform.

2 There can be no failing of God's truth and faithfulness; he is not as man,
that he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should repent; Dent. 32.4.
The Lord is a God of truth.

These considerations will make the soul desirous to apply the Covenant, when
it considers, that it is Gods Covenant, and a covenant concerning very great
matters, and a covenant that shall surely be performed by the Almighty,
faithful, unchangeable God. And as this consideration may serve to draw the
soul to the Covenant, so it may give direction, and be helpful, respecting the
right manner of applying it.

1 If it be the Covenant of God, it is to be applied humbly, and with
self-denial, and self-abasement; O Lord, I would have it, I desire to close
with it, but truly I am most unworthy of it: Blessed and glorious God, what am
I that thou should tender to me the covenant of thy love?

2 If it be God's Covenant concerning great and precious things that he will
give, then it is to be applied earnestly: We are too earnest and greedy to
catch at the things of the world (which we look upon as great matters, though
they are not so indeed) Oh if we did understand the things which concern the
wealth, and peace, and happiness of our souls, then we should be as earnest to
lay hold on the riches of God's Covenant, the good things therein promised,
which are great matters indeed.

3 If it be the covenant of God Almighty, and unchangeable, who abides
faithful for ever, then apply it fiducially, without staggering at the promise,
as being confident of the performance.

Thus much of the first particular, (it is God's covenant.)

The second specialty to be taken notice of in the second general rule of
direction is this.

2 It is God's covenant (of Grace) this is to be considered.

Now this consideration will be of special use in the application of the
Covenant. Nothing moved God at first to make this Covenant, but his own
goodness, herein he expressed his love, and discovered his free grace, which
was the ground of the Covenant; and truly that is it which carries it on to
full accomplishment, by every step, and in every parcel of it: The whole
business of saving from first to last, is merely of grace. Now see what a
direction and help this will be in the application of the Covenant.

1 If it be a Covenant of Grace, then we must go out of our selves to take it,
and must take it wholly as a Covenant of Grace: I say, we must go out of our
selves, i.e. we must be taken off from our own bottom, so as to have no
confidence in our selves, nor any conceit of our own worthiness; we must come
off from our graces and duties, from our own righteousness, must have no
Opinion of that, though the work of grace in us, clear to us, may be our
warrant to apply the Covenant to our selves, when we find this effect of the
Covenant in our own souls, this condition of enjoying the promises, yet our
graces and duties must not be looked upon, as giving us any right to it, or
rendering us any way worthy of it; no, it must be a self-denying application,
taking it by Faith, as purely from grace.

2 This consideration (that it is a Covenant of Grace) will help to carry on
the self-judging, self-condemning soul, to an application of it.

A precious sweet Covenant (says a poor heart that has a sight of its own
sinfulness and vileness) oh it is a blessedness to have an interest in it, but
I vile wretch am unworthy; what have I to do with the Covenant of the great and
holy God? it belongs to holy ones, to those that have better hearts then I
have, and are more in duty then I am, and perform duties in a better manner
then I do, and that have greater abilities to serve and glorify God.

Now let such a soul consider the freeness of the grace of God in the Covenant:
Do thou judge thy self before the Lord, and mourn over the corruption, and
carnality, and laziness, and barrenness, and deadness of thy heart? Do thou
bewail thy unworthiness and unprofitableness, and thy backwardness to holy
duties, and thy miscarriages in them? Are thy sins thy souls burden, and thy
weaknesses the matter of thy grief and complaint? Why? to thee the Covenant
does belong, which is a Covenant concerning Sanctification, as Justification,
and a Covenant of Grace, holding forth the mercy and goodness of God to those
that have need of it, and not to those that deserve it: The good God gives his
Covenant as a [gift of grace] to all those whom he takes into Covenant;
therefore let humble souls, brokenhearted sinners arise, and go to God, who
calls them, and holds forth grace to them in his Covenant.

There is yet a third specialty in our second general rule of direction, which
he that would rightly apply the Covenant must take notice of.

3 This Covenant is a Covenant offered to sinners, to those to whom the poison
of Adam's corrupted nature is propagated, and by whom much sin has been acted,
to such as are full of sin, and laden with guilt, even to Publicans and
Harlots, to a Manasseh, to a Mary Magdalen; God's Covenant is held out to such,
if they come in by repentance, and bring Faith to lay hold on it: Isai. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his thoughts, and let
him return to the Lord, for he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. Paul tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.9.
that some of them were Fornicators, and Idolaters, and Adulterers, and
Covetous, and Drunkards, etc. but they are washed, and justified, and
sanctified. Now this was Covenant grace, this was the performance of the
Covenant to them. This is to be considered by those that have been great
sinners, to keep them from presumption on the one hand, and from despair on the
other hand.

1 The Covenant is held out to sinners, not to proud self-admiring Pharisces,
or presumptuo^^ offenders, but to humble self-judging Penitents, to repenting
sinners; If we do not see our selve^ sinners, if we have not a d^^ humbling
sight and sense of sin we cannot apply the Covenant (...) Grace.

2 The Covenant is held out to sinners, even to the greatest sinners that
repent; therefore let no^ any self-judging soul despair o^ receiving the mercy
and grace o^ the Covenant: 1 Jo. 1.9.
If we confess o^ sins, God is just and faithful to fu^give our iniquities, and
to cleanse us from all our unrighteousness. Come to me all ye that labor, Mat.
11.2^
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Thus you see what use is to be made of this consideration, with respect to the
application of the Covenant: it is a Covenant offered to sinners; therefore we
must see our selves to be sinners, and judge our selves for our iniquities,
that we may take it; and having a sight of our own unworthiness, and being
wounded with the sense of sin, we must not out our selves off from the
Covenant, whose the Word of God does not ^ut us off; as I willsay to the
impenitent, secure, presumptuous sinner, Why medlest thou with the Covenant?
Hands off, it belongs not to thee; so I would say to any humble, mourning,
penitent, self-judging sinner, Poor soul, why stand thou so far off? Behold,
the Lord calls thee, and offers his grace to thee, therefore draw thou near,
and lay hold on the Covenant of his mercy and love.

You have seen a second rule that is to be observed by those who desire duly to
apply the Covenant.

Remember that it is God's Covenant of Grace offered to sinners.

3 That you may not misapply the Covenant, or catch at that which belongs not
to you, keep this in mind, That [God's Covenant is made only to Abraham, and
his seed.] Now Abraham's seed, children of Promise, included in the same
Covenant with Abraham, are (in general) all the Elect; but God's Election is a
secret which cannot be known, a priori, but only by God himself, who alone
knows who are his, yet we may have a knowledge of it a posteriori, when we find
that we are called with a holy and effectual calling. Now I say you must apply
the Covenant, as being Abraham's ^eed, finding a true work of grace in your
hearts, the saving effects of the Covenant upon your souls, whence you may
conclude your Covenant relation to God, and interest in his precious promises,
or else you do not apply the Covenant truly and honestly, but unjustly, laying
a false claim to it.

4 As we must make God in his Covenant our end, so we must make Christ, as
Mediator, our way; and therefore in applying the Covenant must look to him, and
act Faith primarily on him, by whom the grace of the Covenant is purchased for
us, and in and through whom it is conveyed to us; we must accept of Christ for
our Lord and Jesus, that we may receive the Covenant of Grace, and Peace, and
salvation through him.

5 We must know, that the Covenant is propounded and offered conditionally,
Faith and Repentance, and New Obedience, are the condition of Pardon and
Salvation.

It is certain none are saved but by Covenant, by a Covenant of Grace, but it
is by the Covenant kept; therefore I must not think without any more ado, to
take this Covenant to my self, not having any regard to the fulfilling of the
condition of the Covenant in my self; where there is not Faith and Repentance,
a true work of grace and holiness, there can be no right application of the
Covenant.

So much now as to the first branch of the fourth General Counsel, Apply the
Covenant truly.

2 Apply the Covenant thoroughly; Apply surely and thoroughly.
see that you make sure work of it, make sure to your selves your Covenant
interest.

Seeing there is such a Covenant of Grace so precious, and so necessary for us,
which belongs to the feed of Abraham, and to them only, why should we be
content to live without assurance of our interest in it? They who are in
Covenant, are for Heaven, and they that are out of Covenant, are for Hell. Oh
how desirous should we then be, to be resolved and assured whether we be in
Covenant or no? How can we think or speak of God with comfort, or without fear
and trouble in our spirits, while we are uncertain whether he be our God or no,
whether he be our friend or our enemy: Let us labor therefore to be at a
certainty in this point; an infallible certainty of our interest in God's
Covenant may be had: Oh let us strive to it.

Now to quicken you in this case, to excite you to diligence in making up to a
through application of God's Covenant, even to the full assurance of Faith, I
shall hint to you something of the benefit, and comfort of assurance, the
unspeakable advantage that hence accrues to the soul. Fruits of assurance.


1 This assurance of Faith will sweeten to us all Providence, and every
condition of life, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.
while a Christian lives by Faith in a clear apprehension of the love of God,
who has made an everlasting Covenant with him, no outward changes can work any
great change in his spirit, or make much impression pression upon him;
assurance of God's love will make a Christian to sit down under changes,
quietly and comfortably, with the Prophet Habakkuk rejoicing in the Lord, and
joying in the God of his salvation.

2 Assurance of God's love will sweeten to us our enjoyments in the world, be
it more or less that we have of these things, if it be but a little Oil in the
Cruse, and a hand-full of meal in the Barrel, assurance of a Covenant interest
in God will make it enough to us, and render it good; for want of this poor
hearts are full of fears, and cares, and discontents, even in the midst of
abundance of outward things which they possess; but this (I say) will sweeten
our enjoyments to us; for being assured of God, we know that what we have comes
from love, and is a pledge of greater love, and is that which our God sees to
be good for us, and is blessed to us.

3 This assurance will give the foul boldness to come unto God, and make it
familiar with him, and much sweeten and heighten Communion: This will fill us
with comfort in our approaches to the Throne of Grace, when we can confidently
call God, Father; Am I in great straights, or do I lie under some sore
afflictions? is this, or that wanting to me? what a comfort is it now, that I
have a God to go to, a God in Covenant with me that can succor and deliver me,
that can supply my wants, and is able to do for me exceeding abundantly, above
all that I can ask or think.

4 Assurance of a Covenant interest in God, will take off the fear of Death; a
true believer that applies the covenant with assurance of Faith, does not put
the day of Death far from him, as being loath to see it, and even afraid to
think of it; no, but he desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; he
knows that Death is Vltimus morborum medicus, that which cures all diseases,
cures the Pride, and Covetousness, and Hardness, and Frowardness, and Unbelief,
and sluggishness of the heart, cures the body of the Dropsy, Scurvie, Gout,
Stone, etc. frees it from all diseases, pains, and griefs; he knows that Death
will let him into a clear, full, and everlasting enjoyment of God, and
therefore he is glad when his glass is run; whereas the awakned Soul, that has
no upprehension of an interest in God, cannot but be troubled at the thoughts
of Death, and even affrighted at the grimm countenance of that King of
Terrors; As one of the Kings of England once in his straights cried out, A
Kingdom for a Horse, a Kingdom for a Horse; So will an awakned Soul cry out,
when Death presents it self; Oh a Kingdom, a World, ten thousand Worlds, (if I
had them) for assurance of an interest in the Covenant of Grace: but Oh, how
comfortable and delightfully may an assured Soul think of Death, which is a
passage to his everlasting rest and happiness, in the nearest, sweetest,
fullest enjoyment of his God and Savior for evermore.

5. The thoughts of the Judgment to come will be sweet to those that have a
known interest in the Covenant of Gods his love, for the Judge is their friend,
their brother, their head, their husband, and the day of Judgment, Acts 3.19.
Ephesians. 4.30.
shall be to them the time of refreshing; the day of their Redemption of their
full Deliverance from all misery and corruption, the day of their public
absolution, and perfect justification, and the time of the manifestation of
Gods love to them in the fullest measure.

6. He that is certain of his interest in Gods Covenant, is certain of his
interest in Salvation, and so the thoughts of Heaven must needs be delightful
to him while he is certain that it is the blessed rest prepared for him, the
place of his everlasting abode in happiness yea, this assurance gives the Soul
a present possession of Heaven, brings Heaven down (as I may say) into the
bosom of a believer while he is upon Earth; Faith is the s^bstance, Heb. 11.1.
(...)
(the subsistence) of things hoped for; it gives a real existance or being to
that which is held forth in the promise; an assured Soul has Heaven within it.

Thus you see the benefit of assurance: some special advantages and comforts
that thence accrue to the Soul, which should be a great inducement to put us
upon care and pains to get it, does it not bring a sufficient reward with it?
Does not the profit and comfort that comes by it, far exceed the greatest
profit in the World, and the greatest comfort that Earth affords?

Therefore, though the Covenant may be savingly applied by Faith, where
assurance is not, yet let us strive to assurance, that we may live and die
comfortably, in assurance of God, his everlasting love toward us in Christ
Jesus.

Now I shall show you, how assurance may be attained, and how it may be
discerned from presumption.

Way to assurance.
1. Concerning the way and means to attain assurance.

We must be much in exercising and acting all Grace, must be diligent in
trading with our stock of Grace, that we may attain to the riches of assurance,
Col. 2.2.
as the Apostle calls it; The diligent hand makes rich.

That we may have comfort and assurance, we must beware of negligence, and
sluggishness, and laziness in duty, and of remisseness in the exercise and
actings of Grace. True is that which a reverend Doctor (now with God) has told
us in a Treatise of his. That it is the lazy Christian commonly that wants
assurance: and, that the way of painful duty is the way of fullest comfort.

Sloth and idleness stops the fountain of comfort, causes Christ to withold
his comforts; Parents are not wont to smile, but frown upon their Children,
when they are negligent and careless of their duty, and neglective of their
observance toward them.

All the honor that God has from us, is from the exercise and actings of
Grace; and the more we strive to honor God, the more will he comfort us with
the manifestations of himself, and the revelations of his love in our hearts;
Active Christians shall have most of Gods love, and of the manifestation of his
Grace to them; He that has my Commandments, Joh. 14.21.
and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he that loves me shall be
beloved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self t^ him.

Again, sloth and negligence causes want of peace and comfort for this
reason, because Grace is not sensible, apparent, and evident to the Soul, but
in the exercise and actings of it; as the fire that is in the flint is not
discernable, till you smite and force it out: In acting Faith upon Jesus
Christ, and the promises of God, and in acting love toward God and Christ, you
will know that you have the grace of Faith and Love; will know that ye believe,
and that ye love God, and so will know that God loves you; for we love God
because he loved us first, and our believing is a fruit of the promise of Grace.

2. We must be much in the application of the Covenant with a faith of
adherence and innitency, cleaving to the promises, and casting our selves by
Faith through Christ, upon the mercy and grace of a Covenanting God, till the
love and grace of God be revealed from faith to faith.

3. We must take heed that we do not greive, but please the spirit of God, the
Comforter, that reports the love of the Father unto Souls, and seals them
up to the day of Redemption; The way to assurance of Gods love, is to comply
with, and give content to the witnessing sealing Spirit.

4. If we desire, that God should bestow upon us the riches of full assurance;
then, let us be thankful for the least glimps of Light, that he makes to shine
into us; let us not look at any of the consolations of God, as small, but let
us be thankful for any pledge of his favor.

The Lord in making out his love to the Soul, deals (says one) as Boaz dealt
with Ruth: he first gave her liberty to glean in his fields, then to glean even
among the sheaves, then invited her to eat bread with him, and to dip her
morsels in the vinegar, and at last; he took her to be his Wife, to lie in his
bosom: so does God discover his love to believers, first, more sparingly, and
as at greater distance, then draws nearer, and reveals himself more clearly,
showing himself more friendly to them, and familiar with them; and then at
length he gives his Spirit into their bosom, to assure them of his love, and of
their interest in all his grace.

Now the ready way to attain all this, to have such manifestations of Gods love
to us, is to be truly thankful for the least appearance of Grace; Then will God
say to such a Soul, art thou so thankful for a beam of Light, I will fill thee
with the fountain of Light; art thou thus thankful for crumbs that fall under
the board? I will feast thee with marrow and fatness at my Table.

5. One other great means conducing to a certainty of our interest in Gods
Covenant, is a serious trial of our hearts, and of the state of our Souls, by
and according to the Word of God: the Scripture tells us, who are the people of
God, his Covenanted ones, what are their qualifications and properties;
therefore let us see what the Scripture holds forth in this point, and then let
us diligently prove our selves, whether we be such persons, so qualified, that
by this means we may come to a certainty of our estate.

Now for direction herein (to make short work of it) know this, that where
holiness is, there is the Covenant of God his love: -- Holy, Beloved; Col. 3.12.
all holy Souls are beloved of God; prove your selves then whether there be a
true work of Grace wrought in you by the spirit of God, whether you are of the
number of Gods holy ones.

Qu. How may this be known? who are holy ones?

An. Where corruption is by Grace so far subdued, that sin reigns not, there is
holiness; when a Soul is delivered (not wholly from sin, that will not be in
this life? but) from the law of sins, so that sin has not dominion over him;
The Apostle says, Romans 6.12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the lust
thereof: he does not say, ne sit, let not sin be in you (though we must not
allow it in our selves, or suffer it to be quiet) but ne regnat, let not sin
reign in you.

Sin reigns when it has the wil's consent, and the hearts delight, and
commands the whole man: when a man is a willing servant of sin, and (as the
Apostle says) yields his members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, is in a
readiness to obey sins commands, and to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Sin cannot be said to reign, when a man does unwilling service to sin,
bewailes and hates the evil that is in him, and the evil that is done by him,
and wars against sin, and prays against Sin, and desires and endeavors to
shake off the yoke of sin; I say, here sin cannot properly be said to reign;
though it exercises a Tyrannical power, forcing a poor soul many times to do
its commands; and where this reign of sin is not, there is holiness, but where
sin reigns there is no Saintship.

2. He that is universal and serious in his desires to be good, and do good,
having respect to all Gods commands; that truly desires to be filled with the
knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, and to walk
worthy of the Lord unto all well pleasing, and to be fruitful in every good
work; that desires and endeavors to order his conversation aright, in the fear
of God, and to keep his Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men,
to be conformed to the mind of God in internal, as well as external holiness,
and righteousness, he is a holy man, though he may have many infirmities
falling short of his duty, and doing often times that which is displeasing to God.

3. If a man be sincerely diligent in using the means of Grace, setting his
heart to seek God in them, aiming at the profiting and perfecting of himself by
them, and bewailing his unprofitableness and barrenness under them, such a
person is to be numbered among holy ones; true desires of Grace, and cadeavours
to get Grace, are a sign of the truth of Grace; but where the means of Grace
are slighted and neglected, and God is not songht unto for Grace, there is no
Grace, no work of Holiness yet wrought in the Soul; for Grace is such a good
thing, such a precious thing, and Holiness is so desirable, so comfortable and
delightful, that he who has any thing of it, desires more, and thinks that he
can never have enough. Well, thus prove your real, spiritual estate, that
hereby you may come to a knowledge of your relative estate: This is the way to
assurance of an interest in the Covenant of Gods love: Thus much briefly,
touching the way to assurance the means by which it may be attained.

Marks of assurance.
Now, for some marks or evidences of the assurance of Faith; to show you how it
may be discerned from Presumption.

1. The presuming heart is a proud heart that is lifted up in it self, and
makes no humble acknowledgment of the grace of God; but the assured soul is
humble in it self, and admires the love of God toward it in Christ Jesus, Ah
Lord! who am I, that thou should thus manifest thy self to me? Oh, what a
mercy is this, and what manner of love is this, that thou should thus embrace
me in thine arms, and take me into thy bosom, and kiss me with the kisses of
thy mouth? O my God, what rich grace is this, that thou should give me
assurance of my interest in thee, of my Union and Communion with thee, of thine
everlasting love toward me?

2. The presuming soul rests satisfied with that of God, which he presumes
he has; but a true Believer earnestly longs after a fuller enjoyment of God
and Christ, after clearer and fuller Manifestations of his: Psa. 63.1.
O God, thou art my God says David, here is Faith apprehending an interest in
God, and applying the Covenant of his love, well, has David enough of God? No;
see what follows; Early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee.

3. The presuming Soul is still quiet, it is all peace with such a one the
Devil does not at all trouble him, but lets him alone, and laughs at him to see
how he disceives himself, and how he is Devil deluded, and befooled; but where
true faith is taking up the Covenant, the Devil assaults the Soul, and seeks to
disturb and destroy its peace, as he buffeted Paul after that he was wrapped up
into the third Heavens, and had seen such visions of Glory; The Devil rages
against the Soul that has any measure of assurance; because this is that which
does excellently fit the soul to do God service. They who have no experience of
Satan's onsets, have reason to question the truth of their assurance, if they
pretend to any such matter.

4. Presumption will not bear up the spirit under afflictions, troubles and
crosses, against dangers and deaths; but assurance will: David was assured of
Gods mercy and love toward him; he says therefore, Psalm. 23.
That though he walk through the valley of the shadow of Death, he will fear no
evil. The Apostle writing to Believers, says, Ye took joyfully the spoiling of
your goods, (known in your selves) that you have a better and more enduring
substance.

5. The presuming Sou^ ^s bold with sin, and goes on in sin, but a well
grounded assurance of Gods love breeds a distance betwixt the Soul and sin, and
arms and strengthens the Soul against sin, it makes a man to loath sin; Sin is
hateful to the assured Soul: How shall I do this thing, and sin against my God
who loves me, and has shed abroad his love in my heart? shall I dishonor him
and grieve him, and despise his Commands? and be found a rebel against him?

The assured Soul fears the Lord, and his goodness, fears to offend him, Psa.
85.8.
because he is a good God his good God; God will speak peace to his people, but
let them return no more to folly; when peace is Preached in any ones heart:
this is the use which naturally flows from that Doctrine; now return no more to
folly.

6. If we say that we have assurance of Sonship, and of an interest in Christ,
and in the Covenant of Gods love, let us examine whence we have it, by what
Testimony we are assured: As Christ said to some of his Disciples upon a
certain occasion, [ye know not what Spirit ye are of] so we may say to many
that are ready to boast of their assurance, that they know not from what Spirit
it comes, or whence they had it.

There is a dangerous ill grounded peace, and false persuasion that many have,
which comes from an evil Spirit, from the Devil that old deceiver, the
beguiling Serpent, and from a vain, carnal, loose spirit of their own.

Qu. What then is the true witness, from whose Testimony true assurance is had?

An. The Apostle tells us, Romans 8.16. (...) una testatur cum spiritu nostro;
hac ratione duo erunt testes, nempe Spiritus Dei, and Spiritus noster, certior
ab eo factus.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of
God; that same spirit which he called the Spirit of God, ver. 14. and the
Spirit ^f Adoption, ver 15. that same Spirit bears witness with our Spirit,
so that there is the Testimony of the Spirit of God, and the Testimony of our
Spirit, and they both agree in one.

First, the Spirit of God witnesses bringing this assurance to the Soul: We
have received the Spirit, which is of God, that we might know the things that
are freely given us of God; Cor. 2.12.

Now the Spirit of God witnesses, and gives, such assurance, by working, and
by speaking.

The Spirit of God witnesses Sonship, by his Works, which h^ effects, which
he creates in the Soul upon which the promise comes.

This way of witnessing is first in order of nature: The Spirit brings in the
nature of Gods Child, working so great a change that it is called the renewing
of the holy Ghost, and the subject of this change, the soul thus changed, is
called a new Creature.

2. There is the Word of the Spirit, testifing to the spirit of a Christian,
that he is the child of God by promise, I say, there is the Spirits Word, viz.
a full, sensible, clear conviction, which the Spirit of God brings to the heart
of a believer, persuading him, that the promise belongs to him.

This Word of the Spirit comes upon the work of the spirit, so that where the
Spirits work it not, (which is a work of renewing the heart, and delivering it
up to a conformity in some good measure to the mind of God) there the Spirits
word comes not to witness Gods love to the Soul, therefore let people take heed
of mistakes herein.

The Spirit of God never told you, that you are in Gods favor, unless he has
put into your hearts Gods fear, he never gave you the name of Sons or
Daughters, or suggested to you your interest in the inheritance of Sons, unless
he has brought in the nature of Sons, and stamped the image of God upon you.

Now, because mistakes about this are too ordinary and very dangerous, I shall
give you more distinctly, some clear difference between the true assuring
report and testimony of the spirit of God, and the false deluding testimony of
another spirit.

1. The Testimony of the Spirit of God witnessing to Souls the love of God is
not given by extraordinary immediate Revelation or an audible voice from
Heaven, as the Devil makes people to believe, and as some pretend to have
assurance they way, while they slight, and despise the word and promises, those
sacred Oracles of God, to which believers should have recourse for their
comfort, and villifie and mock at that persuasion which believers have in Gods
way of persuading Souls, that is, from the operation of the Spirit, working
true Grace and Holiness in them, and thereupon speaking comfortably to them,
persuading them of God's love toward them, and of their interest in his
Covenant.

These poor Souls are deluded by Satan transforming himself into an Angel of
Light, and imitating God in those extraordinary ways wherein he has been wo^^
heretofore to manifest himself to his people. The witnessing word of the Spirit
of God is a word coming upon, and through his working in us, and it is an
inward voice, a secret whispering, that makes report within us of the love of
God to us, powerfully persuading us, and sensibly convincing us of our Covenant
interest in God.

2. The Testimony of the Spirit of God comforting Souls, by reporting Gods love
to them, and assuring them of their interest in God, is not given to any, but
those that fear the Lord, and walk holily. So Cornelius a devout man, Acts
10.2, 3
one that feared God, which gave much alms to the People, and prayed always;
to him, while he was praying, an Angel of God appeared, telling him, that his
Pray^rs and his Alms were come up in rem^mbrance before God.

While Daniel was praying, confessing his sins, and the sins of the People,
Dan. 9^
and presenting his supplications before the Lord for the holy Mountain of his
God; in the time of prayer, even at the beginning of his supplication, an Angel
comes, and tells him, Isa. 64.5.
That he is great^y bel^ved. Thou meetest him that Rejoices and works
Righteousness those that remember thee in thy w^ys. To him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the Salvati^^ of God; he shall s^e my
Salvation with the eye of Faith, and my Spirit shall wit^^ss to him my
acceptance of him, and give him assured hope (...) eternal happin^ss.

The holy Spirit never witnesse^^ the love of God to any Soul out (...) thy way
of holin^ss; therefore, i^ peace be spoken, and the love (...) God reported to
ungodly person who walk loosly and car^l^sly, th^^ is from the D^vil, this is
the hi^^^^^ of the old Serpent, and not the whisp^ring of the good Spirit.

3. The good Spirit of God always witnesses according to the word of God;
there is always a^ agreement betwixt those two wi^nesses which are both of God,
vi^ his word the outward witness, a^ his spirit the inward; If the test many of
the Spirit should cross the Testimony of the word, then the Spirit should
contradict himself, s^ the Scriptures were indicted by t^^ holy Spirit, so that
the word it s^ is the Spirits testimony; he do^ not immediately testify any
thing contrary to that testimony which he has given in the world? where the
word binds, the Spirit does not lose, where the word condemns, the spirit
does not acquit, where the Word proclaims war, and threatens Destruction,
the spirit does not there whisper peace, and promise Salvation; the Spirit does
not bless any whom the Word curses.

Now the Word says, Romans 8.14.
That they are the Children of God, who are led by the Spirit of God. that they
are the children of promise, who are changed by the spirit of promise, and made
new Creatures, and that walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham, and to none
but these does the spirit witness their adoption and their interest in the
Covenant of Gods love: That Testimony which crosses the Testimony of the word,
speaking peace to a carnal, unbelieveing, impenitent, graceless heart; I say,
that testimony comes from the lying spirit of Hell.

4. The Spirit of God is a holy Witness, as formally and originally, so
efficiently holy, he makes a gracious and holy Soul; The holy Spirit sealing
peace and the love of God to the Soul does strongly engage the Soul unto
holiness, and makes it to increase in holiness: (...)
the love of Christ constrains us, says the Apostle, Christ his love
manifested to us, has power over our Souls, and rules us over to the mind of
Christ. The Testimony of the holy Spirit makes a Christian fearful to offend
God, and careful to please him, and circumspect in walking before him.

That Testimony and speaking of peace to the Soul, which makes a man bold with
sin, and lose in his walkin^, that breeds a neglect of holy duties, and a
despising or slighting of God his ordinances; surely, that testimony is from
the Devil: It is clear that the Spirit of God guides those that are the Sons
of God, to whom he gives this testimony that they are Sons; now this Spirit
leads from Sin, and leads unto holiness and righteousness.

Thus you have seen, which is the first witness, from whose testimony true
assurance is taken up; and I have given you some rules for discerning between
the true and false Witness, whereby people may judge, whether they have taken
up true assurance, or be possessed with a false persuasion and confidence. (
Secondly, The spirit of a Christian is another Witness, that assures him of his
interest in the Covenant of Gods love.

The spirit of a man, of a Christian witnesses, with the spirit of God, by
reception, and expression, by taking in the effects of the Covenant of promise,
(as knowledge, faith, and Love, and all graces) and thence witnessing to him
his interest in the Covenant.

Object. But is there any trusting to the Testimony of our own Spirit? can that
be a true witness in which we may confide? Q^id cord humano fallacius? Is not
man's heart deceitful above all things.

Answ. It not is our own carnal Spirit, our own natural spirit, that is the
assuring witness, Spiritus noster est cornostrum regeneratum. Par.
but our own Regenerate Spirit, the new Spirit, which God gives: now of this
Spirit the Apostle John speaks, saying, If our hearts condemn us not, then
have we confidence toward God; Dictamen cordis regeneratiest infallibile, says
Pareus.

Now it is Good for us to understand and note the difference between the
testimonies that proceed from those two different witnesses, different spirits:
that in this great matter, we may not be deceived by our own hearts: I shall
therefore briefly show you the difference between the testimony of a ca^nal
heart, and the testimony of a renewed pirit.

1. The carnal heart takes up its evidence confused^y and groundlessly, not
heeding whether there be any gracious, saving work of the Spirit of God upon
the heart, which in order of nature necessarily preceds the Testimony of that
good spirit whisperings, to witness the love of God to the Soul. But the
Regenerate new spirit takes up its evidence, and gives forth its testimony
within the Soul to the Conscience, orderly, and upon good ground, observing
herein the order of the spirit of God, and grounding its testimony upon the
work of the holy Spirit in the Soul. Ye have not (says the Apostle) received
the Spirit of bond^ge again to fear; Romans 8.15.
but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, F^ther. The
Spirit that brings in peace, has caused a man to see himself lost in himself,
so that he has seen his bondage, and miserable condition by sin, before he
came to apprehend his liberty by Christ; and his happiness in the enjoyment of
God his favor.

2. The testimony of a carnal heart will be without the Word, and contrary to
the word, justifiing where the W^rd condemns, speaking peace to a formal
Hypocrite, or loose-liver, or a carnal, earthly minded worldling; such a one
may have a spirit that spea^eth good, speaks peace to him; but it is a carnal
lying spirit that speaks falsely: but the Regenerate Spirit, which is the true
witness within a man, gives evidence concerning a man's condition, and speaks
comfort by and according to the word; a Regenerate Spirit will not flatter,
will not falsify, will not make thy condition better than the Word makes it to
be.

3. If it be the testimony of a carnal heart speaking peace to a man, it will
make him careless of duty, and give him much liberty, but if it be a true
spiritual Witness, it will make him more careful, more studious to honor God,
more diligent in the service of God. Serve thy God, honor thy God, strive to
please thy God, who has given the Covenant of his love to thee, says the new
Regenerate Spirit, taking up the evidence of Gods love, and telling the
Christian that he has an interest in the Covenant of Grace.

Thus you have the (...) the proofs and evidences of the truth of assurance,
whereby we may be able to discern between it and presumption, well, now to
resume, and a little further to press this particular exhortation, Exhortation
resume.
the fourth counsel which I suggested to you from the Doctrine.

Labor truiy and thoroughly to apply the Covenant, strive to a certain knowledge
of your spiritual estate real and relative, to know whether you belong to God
or no, and whether the Covenant of his love does belong to you.

Take two or three swasives or incentives hereunto, Incentives.
besides those which you have had already.

1. Mistakes herein are most dangerous; for such a mistake of ones condition
judging it to be good, when it is naught, is a very great strengthner of sin,
making a man regardless of bettering his condition, and causing him to misapply
Scripture to apply promises and comforts, when threatenings and terrors belong
to him.

2. The commonest cause of souls undoing is this, that they would not be
persuaded to try their estate, but gratify Satan, joining with him to deceive
themselves being persuaded by him to pass a way their years in security and a
careless oscitancy, not once questioning their condition, or spending any time
at all, to prove what their estate is Godward; if any man think himself to be
something when he is nothing, be deceives himself, and this self deceiving is
self-undoing.

3. A certain knowledge of a Covenant interest in God, will set the soul on
working sweetly toward God, with its affections and graces.

1. Such a soul will sorrow after a godly sort, bewailing his finning against
God, whom he now knows to be his God, who dearly and tenderly loved him, even
while he was sinning against him, and dishonouring him.

2. Psa. 18.1, 2.
Such a soul will love the Lord, when he knows his near relation to God, and
God's affection toward him.

3. Desire will be drawn out after God, when the soul apprehends its interest
in him; O Lord, Psa. 63.1.
thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for thee.

4. A known interest in God will be a ground of continual rejoicing; I will
rejoice in the Lord, Hab. 3.17.
I will joy in the God of my Salvation.

5. This is that which will strengthen the souls confidence in God, even in the
greatest straights.

Such are the fruits and effects of assurance of an interest in God, Psa 46.1,
2 3.
and the examination of our selves, the trial of our estate is the way to this
assurance.

Thus you have had a 4th. branch of the use of exhortation, a fourth counsel
from the point; apply the Covenant of Gods love [truly] and [thorowly].

You have seen how and why you should labor to make such an application.

I proceed now to a Fifth Counsel, Couns. 5. Meditate on the Covenant.
having laid hold on the Covenant, Meditate on it, and on your interest in it,
that frequently and seriously viewing your relative estate, your relation to
God, and interest in his Covenant, you may be deeply affected with it, and
enjoy the sweetness of it.

This is that which I would persuade you to; not only to think of this
Covenant, and of an interest in it, of the preciousness of the Covenant, and of
the souls happiness in such an interest; (it is not a bare work of the
understanding and memory that is here called for) but to get these things from
the head to the heart, from the understanding to the affections, that there may
be heart as well as life in the soul; that by acting our understanding and
affections upon the Covenant, and upon God in Covenant with us we may have a
sweet enjoyment of him.

To Meditate, is diligently and intently to think upon, and consider a thing.

Meditation brings God near, sets him full in the eye of the soul, and presents
him with his Covenant of Grace in the most afflicting way; serious and deep
meditation will draw up arguments to affect us, from every Attribute of God,
and from the consideration of our former estate, when we were without God in
the World, and without Christ, and without Hope, and from the happiness of our
present estate, in having and apprehending the Lord to be our God, and from the
preciousness of the promises in which we are interessed, and from the
confirmation of the Covenant, and from the present fruits of it, and its future
privileges and advantages.

Thus Meditation is a means to affect the soul with the goodness, and sweetness
of the Covenant, that we may take much comfort in it.

And further, a due diligent, serious meditation of the power and wisdom, and
mercifulness, and faithfulness, and satisfactoriness of God, in whom we have
interest through Christ, of his everlasting love toward us, and of the freeness
of his grace, in making a Covenant with us, becoming our God and taking us to
be his people, and of the riches of his grace held forth to us in the Covenant
of Promise; and the consideration of the tender love of Jesus Christ, who
undertook to be the Mediator of this Covenant for us, reconciling us to God by
his Death, making peace for us by his Blood, bearing the Curse which should
have come upon us, and restoring us to the blessing which we had lost,
purchasing for us eternal Salvation, pleading his Blood with his Father, and
making continual intercession for us, that we may be kept in favor with God,
notvvithstanding our many sins and provocations, who is become our head, and
the immortal husband of our souls, who kisseth us with the kisses of his
mouth, and embraces us now in the arms of his love, and will take us to a
perpetual abode and Communion with himself hereafter: I say, a due Meditation
hereof would be a means to stir up in us holy affection toward God.

1. This would be a means to inflame us with holy love to God and Christ, who
have loved us with such a free, preventing, tender, abounding, fruitful, and
everlasting love.

2. This would be a means to excite desire, and to set the Soul on longing for
a nearer uninterrupted communion with, and a fuller enjoyment of this God, and
this Jesus Christ that my Soul may be no longer at a distance from my God, but
that I may dwell with him for ever.

3. This will be an excellent means to quicken and strengthen hope; I say, hope
of all needful blessings here, and of eternal Salvation hereafter; Is the Lord
my God, and shall I not hope? Have I God's Promise, and Oath, and shall I not
hope? Is not the Promise of God so sure, that hope therein makes not ashamed?
Therefore in wants, and straights, and difficulties, and in my greatest
sufferings, I will say with the Church, Lam. 3.24.
The Lord is my portion, therefore I will hope in him; It is Jehovah who has
promised to bless me and save me: the almighty God can do it, and the faithful
God will do it; he will perform his promise, his Covenant, therefore I have
hope in wants, in trouble, in sickness, in death; I will hope in my God to the
end.

4. A diligent, serious meditation of God's Covenant and our interest in it,
will raise our joy; God has made with me a Covenant of Peace, a ^ovenant of
Life, the Lord is my God, and will be my God forever: The Covenant which he
has made with me, is his deed of gift, whereby he has made over himself to
me, and has bestowed upon me the everlasting inheritance, it is my Fathers
good pleasure to give me a Kingdom, he has promised me a Crown of Glory, and
this promise of his, is surely a ground of joy, Rejoice therefore, O my Soul,
in hope of the Glory of God.

Thus you have had a Fifth Counsel.

Having applied the Covenant to thy self and gotten some assurance, that it is
thine, now meditate on it, and set it to thy heart, for the exciting of love,
and desire, and hope, and joy in thy soul.

6ly. Let us admire and adore the mercy, love, Couns. 6. Admire the grace of
God in the Covenant.
and grace of God in this Covenant of his; his mercy toward the miserable, his
love to Enemies, his grace to sinners, in setting himself down to us, and
taking us into Covenant with himself, who had otherwise been utterly lost and
miserable for ever; Let us cry out with admiration, O the hight, and depth, and
length, and breadth, of the love of God; O Free Grace, O rich-Grace, O
glorious-Grace. Why did God pass by those Angels that fell, leaving them in a
remediless condition, and take the Seed of Abraham into Covenant with himself,
to pardon them and save them, who is a God like unto our God, that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his People,
performing his truth to Jacob, and his mercy to Abraham.

7thly. Has God made such a Covenant, Couns. 7. Bless God for it.
and do we apprehend our interest in it, then let us bless God for it, and
abound in all thankfulness to him, who is the Fountain from whence such streams
of Grace do flow; how should they who have tasted the goodness of Gods
Covenant, have their hearts and mouths, and lives filled with his praises?

God's Covenant is a Covenant of pardoning sin, and healing diseases, of
redeeming our life from Destruction, and of Crowning us with his loving
kindness, and tender mercies, and for these mercies whereof believers are made
partakers by virtue of the Covenant, David stirrs up himself to bless God; Psa.
103.
Bless the Lord O my soul, who forgiveth all thine iniquties, etc. Oh, let our
souls bless God, and let all that is within us praise his holy Name, for the
Covenant of his mercy and love which he has given us; and that he has so
clearly revealed this Covenant to us, and has given us to apprehend our
interest in it.

Now there are these reasons (among others) why believ is should ^tirr
themselves up to bless God for his Covenant. Incentives.


1. The end of Gods goodness to his Creatures is his own glory; Surely this is
the end of his making and confirming his Covenant to Abraham with his seed,
that Abraham and his seed mi^ht glorify him; this is the great end of all his
works of grace in Christ J^s^s, he h^th done all to the praise of the gl ry of
his grace; Ephesians. 1.6, 12.
that we should be to the praise of his gl^ry.

2. The Covenant it self is so precious, such a rare gift, that it well
deserves our praises; God is worthy to be blessed by us for such a ble^^^ng as
this, for,

First, Consider of what worth those things are, which the Covenant does give
believers a Title to, and int^rest in; (O precious things) an inheritance
immortal and undefiled, a ^^own of life, an exceeding great, and eternal weight
of glory.

2 Consider what matchless consolations, the Covenant affords to believers,
even when all outward comforts fail; Thy word is my comfort in my afflictions,
Ps. 119.50.
f^r it has quickened me.

Gospel-comforts, those which flow from the Covenant of mercy, and peace, to
such as are interrested in it, are the purest and surest and fullest comforts.

Now (by the way) from the preciousness of the Covenant, in respect of the
worth of the things promised in it, and the excellency of the comforts that
flow from it; I infer this, That the worst of a believer, is better than the
best of an unbeliever; or,

That the lowest estate of one interrested in the Covenant of promise, is
better than the most raised condition of any one that is uninterrested in it,
and a stranger to it.

A believer may be a stranger in the world, and afflicted with want of food and
clothing convenient, and may meet with a great deal of hard usuage; yet, he is
a Citizen of the Heavenly Jerusalem; he is the Lords Freeman, he has God for
his Father, Jesus Christ is his Brother; and though he has little or nothing
at present to the eye of the World, yet he is rich in hope; though he has
nothing in possession visible, he has a rich Inheritance, a Kingdom, an
immortal Crown in revertion.

Who is the better man? the poor Christian whom God has chosen to be rich in
Faith, heir to a Kingdom, to the Kingdom of Heaven? or the rich and honored
Worldling, that wears a Gold-ring, and has the highest room given him in the
Assmblies? surely there is no happiness like to the happiness of a believer,
that has an interest in the Covenant of Grace, the Lord is his God, this is
the Crown of all enjoyments, the compendium of all happiness.

Whence it follows, that God is to be praised by us, for nothing in this world
so much, as for giving us an interest in his Covenant.

3. This Covenant which is so precious and so comfortable, (a^ int^rest wherein
makes us happy, is freely given us of God, nothing moved him to it, but his own
goodness; it was free grace that made God to be a Promiser, a Cov^nanter; now
that which is exc^^^^ng pr^cious, an^ freely given to us, is to be received
with much th^nkfullness.

4. We can make no other return but love and thanks, for a^ith^ love of God;
^^^r^^ore, let us lov^ God, and give him praise, makin^ it not only the labor
of our lips but the work of our hearts, pow^ing out our very souls unto him who
has manifested the gracious p^rpose of his heart toward us, it the Covenant
of Life and Salvation, which ^e has given us.

5. Praising of God for the Covenant of his mercy and love, shall be the
constant, et^rnal work of Saints in Heaven, when they sh^^^ b^ fully made
partakers of (...) blessings of the Covenant, being taken up to the fullest
fruition of their God, and made full of joy with the light of his countenance:
and is not Heaven work to be begu^ by us here? do we not pray, that Gods will
may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven? now this will argue a heavenly Spirit,
to be taken up with heavenly employment and action, and this will be a means to
make the heart more heavenly; Oh, let us now enure our selves to our
everlasting work, and labor to be as like as may be here to what we shall be
hereafter.

6. The more we let our hearts out to God in thankfulness, for the grace of the
Covenant, praising him for the free donation of himself to us, as prising him
above all, the more will he let himself out to us, and communicate his
goodness, clearing up to us our interest in him shedding abroad his love in our
hearts, Psa. 50.23.
so making us glad with the Light of his Countenance.

Qu. How shall we show our selves thankful to God, for the Covenant of promise,
the Covenant of his love?

Ans. In cleansing our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and
perfecting holiness in the fear of God: This is the return which God expects
from us, for his love toward us, that we declare our selves on his side against
sin which is his great enemy, that we freely give up our selves to him, who
has engaged himself to us, that as he is become our God, so we should be his
people, a people of his holiness, and that we strive to walk worthy of the Lord
unto all well pleasing.

2. Let us declare to others the preciousness of the Covenant, and the comfort
and sweetness of a Covenat interest in God, tell them, that this is infinitely
more worth, than all other interests and enjoyments, seeking thus to draw souls
unto God; this is thankfulness for exhibiting grace, cordially and
affectionately to commend both the gift and the giver.

3. (...) us thankfully, and with enlarged hearts bless God for the Lord Jesus
Christ the root of the Covenant (as I may say) and the Mediator of the
Covenant. By his Blood the Covenant was purchased for us, and by his mediation
it is performed to us; therefore let us set the name of Christ to all this
grace; God the Father delights to have his son honored, and he that honors
not the Son, honors not the Father: therefore, let Christ be great with us
upon this account, that he has procured the love of his Father to us.

4. Our prizing of the Covenant, and our thankfulness for it, will be shown in
our longing for a nearer communion with God, and a fuller fruition of him, in
the accomplishment of all the promises of the C^venant.

We are not thankful to God for the Covenant, whereby he is become our God,
unless we make him our ^rd, our portion, our treasure, and have our hearts set
upon him and desire carried to him.

O Lord, thou art my God; why have I no more enjoyment of thee? why is my soul
at such a distance from thee? it contents me not to see thy back parts, O show
me thy face: O let the time hasten when I shall see, as I am seen; Thou art my
God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for thee, O blessed day, when I
shall come to appear before my God in Sion.

Thus you have had a seventh Counsel, and some directions about it.

8thly. Let us constantly act faith upon the Covenant which God has given us,
Couns. 8. Act faith upon the Covenant.
and upon God in Christ covenanting with us. This is the way to fetch sweetness
from the Covenant, to suck out the honey that is in it.

I shall hold forth some exciting considerations, Incitements
some arguments to persuade to the acting of Faith upon God, and upon his
Covenant of Promise.

1. Consider, that as God re^aires this, so he is greatly delighted with the
actings of precious faith upon such a precious object as himself, who is the
believers and and happiness.

This is very pleasing to God, because it gives him the glory of his goodness,
and of his all sufficiency, and of the truth and certainty of his Covenant; by
acting says upon God's Covenant of promise, and so fetching our comfort from
thence, we set to our Seal that God is good, and that he is sufficient for us,
and that he is tru^, ^^e real in Covenanting, and faithful in performing his
Covenant to his people; now, I say; it must needs he that God is delighted with
these actings of Faith while the soul rowl's it self upon him, and fetches its
comforts from him, and satisfies its self with him, because thus the sold
gives him the glory of his precious Attributes which are so dear to him.

2. This is a most sweet, pleasant and delightful life to the believer himself,
to lie sucking by faith at the fu^l breasts of consolation, to drink in the
pure waters of the Fountain of Life, to feed upon the marrow and fatness, the
honey and sweetness of the sweet Covenant of grace; to be satisfied with God,
to have all in him.

There is a vast difference between Faiths repasts, and the worlds refreshings,
between Covenant comforts which are received by faith, and creature comforts
which are apprehended and taken in by senses: Oh, how do they differ in respect
of pureness, and fullness, and durableness, and universality, or extensiveness.

1. In respect of pureness; there is a mixture of wax in the most clarified
honey of earthly delights; there is some bitterness in the sweetest morsels of
sublunary contentments; they are (...) bitter-sweets; there is a mixture of
dreggs in the purest liquors of the worlds comforts; but the comfort of a
Covenant interest in God, is (...), sincere; this is honey without wax; it is
(...), sweet indeed, without any bitterness in it, it is (...) pure indeed,
liquor without any dregs.

2. Great is the difference betwixt the comfort which the faith of a believer
fetches from Gods Covenant, and that which a worldling fetches from the
Creature, in respect of fullness.

Alas, the b^st comforts which the world yields do rather provoke than fill
the appetite, do rather enerense than quench thirst; no inferious good, no
sublunary enjoyment is adequate or proportionable to the capacity or desire of
the Soul; When Hannah wept before the Lord, because she was Childless, said,
E^kanah to her, Why weepest thou? am not I better to thee then ten sins? (as if
she should be satisfied in him) but suppose she had had ten such comforts as
she longed for, ten Sons; and imagine her Elkanah to be an enjoyment ten times
more comfortable then he was, yet all this could not be satisfactory; Ahabs
Kingdom was as nothing to him, till he had Naboths Vineyard, and was he (think
you) satisfied when he had that? Could not a World satisfy Al xander? no more
would the whole World content us. These things, when we seek to fill our selves
with them, seem to say to us, as Jacob to Rachael; What? are we to y^u instead
of God?

The good that is satisfactory to the Soul, must be aptimum and maximum, the
best good, that it may sistere appetitum, fix the appetite, (there being
nothing so desirable as it,) and the greatest good, that it may impl^re
appetitum, fill the appetite, (there being nothing needful beside it.

Now when faith is acted upon the Covenant; the soul takes up such a comfort,
such a good, viz. Deum optimum maximum, God the best good; there being nothing
so desirable as he is, and God the greatest good even the all comprehending
good, that brings all with him, and so is satisfactory to the Soul; (...) I
have fed, said the Epicure, (...) I have found; said the Philosopher; there was
a kind of a sudden ravishment with the enjoyment of their sensual and
intellectual pleasure, (an empty delight) but when the believer acting faith
upon the Covenant as his, feeds upon the goodness of God in it, he may well cry
out (...) I have fed upon that which fills me with a gratful satiety, My s^ul
is satisfied as with marrow and fatness: (...), I have found that which
contents me, which fills me with delight; let David come in and attest this:
when acting faith upon the Covenant, he had tasted afresh the consolation of
his interest in God, he cries out, Ps. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on Earth that I desire
beside thee; God is mine I have enough.

3. Covenant comforts, those which faith fetch^th from the Covenant, have this
excellency in them beyond all Creature comforts that they are durable, abiding
comforts; Creature comforts have in them a vanity of Corruption (as well as a
vanity of emptiness,) they last but for a time, even a short time, (like
Jonah's gourd) they are transient and momentary; we can have no assurance of
any worldly comfort; no, not for a day, f^r who knows what a day may bring
forth?

But, now the comforts which faith does fetch from the Covenant, are streams
issuing from a living Fountain, that is always yiedling out, they are day
comforts, and night-comforts, summer-comforts, and winter comforts, to support
and refresh the Soul in the night of trouble, and the winter of adversity; as
well as in the day of outward peace, and summer of prosperity: Gods Covenant is
an everlasting Covenant which yields everlasting comfort to those that are
interested in it: and if a Soul that has an interest in it, do at any time, or
in any case want comfort from it, it is for want of a lively acting of faith
upon it.

4. The best of Creature Comforts are applicable only to some particular
condition, they are not a salve for every s^r^, but the comforts of the
Covenant are suitable to every condition of a believer: It is not the God of
all comforts, who has given us this Covenant, in which he has given himself
to us, so that there is no case, wherein the sold acting faith upon the
Covenant shall not find comfort in its God.

5. To urge one argument more, that may persuade to the acting of faith upon
the Covenant.

This will be a notable means of making a sweet and happy improvement of our
interest in the Covenant: I shall show this in particulars.

1. By familiarizing God to the Soul, through the frequent constant actings of
faith upon God in Covenant with us, the thoughts of God will be sweet and
comfortable to us: The greatness and power, and jealousy, and justice of God,
when s^^o^sly thought upon must needs be troublesome, and terrible to those that
are lirangers to him, and have no apprehension of an interest in him; but this
will be matter of comfort to the believer that is interested in the Covenant of
Gods love, and frequently acts faith upon it: Why, this is may God; his
greatness and his power, and his justice shall be for my advantage, put forth
for my good; and Oh! what a comfort will it then be to the soul to consider; my
God is merciful and gracious, abounding in goodness and truth, forgiving
miquities, healing diseas^s, redeeming the life of his people from destruction,
and crowning them with his loving kindness, and tender mercies.

2. By thus acting faith upon the Covenant, which God has given us, we shall
be sweetly emboldned in our requests to God, O Lord I come to thee now in a
weighty case, and in my great necessity, to implore thy goodness toward me, and
why should not I with an humble boldness approach to the Throne of thy Grace,
being confident of acceptance through Christ, seeing thou art verily my God,
and have given me a promise to hear me, and help me, and to grant my requests
for thy Sons sake?

3. This will wonderfully sweeten all mercies: When my heart is kept up in a
believing frame, and my acquaintance with God is increased, and assurance of
his love toward me strengthened by renewed acts of faith; what comfort may I
now take in my enjoyments, what sweetness may I find in inseriour good things,
and in those that comparatively are small matters? why, this is from my God,
and that is from my Father; this is a gift of God's good will, it comes from a
Father's love: this is part of the blessing of the Coverant, and all these
gifts are the beginnings, and earnest of everlasting mercies.

4. By acting Faith upon the Covenant, and by a frequent believing recognition
of our interest in God, we shall be enabled to bear afflictions patiently, and
to undergo them with chearfullness. The sting of afflictions, and the burden of
the Cross is the apprehension of Gods anger in it, but while this persuasion is
kept up in the Soul, that God is my God, that the Covenant of his love is with
me; here is a surpassing, comforting consideration in the greatest affliction.
Surely my God means me no harm, he intends no evil to me in this, he has
promised that all things shall work together for my good, while he afflicts me,
he is my God still, he threatens me, and loves me still, it is all for my
profit; I know that in faithfullness he afflicts me, all Gods ways are mercy
and truth to his Covenanted ones; O my Soul, lie quietly under the red, cheer
up under his affliction, it is a fathers rod, it is the dispensation of my God.

5. The frequent actings of faith upon the Covenant, bringing it home to our
selves by renewed application will be an execllent means to frame our hearts to
contentedness with our condition, we have a notable instance of this in David,
Although my house be not so with God, 2 Samuel 23.5.
yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, well ordered in all things
and sure. It is not indeed with my house al^ogether as I hoped not fully
answerable to the letter of the Promise, which God has made to righteous
Rulers; That they shall be as the Light of the morning when the Sun rises,
etc. yet this is my comfort, I am in Covenant with God, he has made an
everlasting Covenant with me; this helps all, and this is all my desire, though
he makes not my house to grow; I am contented with that which I have in the
Covenant.

Q^est. Whence is it, that the Soul acting faith upon the Covenant, fetches
such contentment from it?

Ans. 1. Because when Creature Comforts that are the Conduitpipes conveighing
Gods goodness to us, are cut off, faith goes to the Fountain, and drinks there,
The believing soul makes God its portion, and finding all in him, is satisfied
with him; this is the excellent skill and singular art of faith, thus to supply
wants, and so to bring contentment by taking up all in God.

2. Faith in Gods Covenant presents the believer with the principal full
blessing of the Covenant, and gives it into the bosom of the soul, faith gives
the soul a light of Heaven, and sets the Crown, the everlasting inheritance
before the believer. Heb. 12.1.
Faith is (...), the subsistence of things hoped for; that which makes Heaven
and future glory present to the soul. Thus Faith fetches contentment from the
Covenant, by appropriating the Covenant, and looking into the grace and riches
of the Covenant, and ascertaining the soul hereof.

The carnal man has his contentment (such as it is) or at least, he seeks
contentment, in that which he sees before him, and that which he has about him
here in the World, but the believer fetches contentment from what he has in
hope, upon account of his interest in the everlasting sure Covenant of God.

6. The constant acting of Faith upon Gods Covenant, Ours, will help us to
improve our Covenant interest in God, to a Saint-like, Son like dependence on
him, for protection and provision, for all needful mercies and comforts; Thus
David excellently improves his interest in God unto such dependence on him, and
confidence, Psa. ^3.
in him, The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. Though, I walk through
the valley of the ^hadow of Death, I will fear non^ evil, for thou art with me.
Surely; mercy and goodness shall follow me all the days of my life, for the
Lord is my God: and so in another Psalm, Psalm. 71.
In thee O Lord do I put my trust, deli^^^ me (O my God) thou art my hope.

An active faith makes a sweet, improvement of the Souls interest in God, unto
such confidence in him, to make him our all sufficiency in all estates.

And there is very good reason, why believers in the exercise of faith should
rely on God in Covenant with them.

2. Because they know, that God is all-sufficient for them in every estate.

1. There is in him a sufficiency of wisdom, to find out ways for the bettering
of the conditions of his people, and to understand what is good for them.

2. There is in him a sufficiency of Power, to act by the means which he finds
out, and to render them effectual for our good; yea, and he can do us good
without means; his Power is unlimited, he can do what he will, and how he will.

3. There is in God likewise a sufficiency of Goodness, and Mercy, to put forth
his wisdom and power for his peoples good. Truly, God is good to Israel: the
Prophet Isa. tells us, Isa. 63.7.
of the loving kindness of the Lord, and his great goodness, and his mercys, and
the multitude of his loving kindnesses toward his People.

This Mercy and Goodness, and love of God will surely put forth his wisdom and
power for the good of his People; and this is that which faith lays hold on, to
cause the true believer to cast himself upon his God.

2. The Soul that acts faith upon Gods Covenant given him, is sensible of
God, his relation to him, and of his relation to God, and has herein a ground
of confidence; for, if we be God his Covenanted ones.

1. He is our Shepherd, and we are his sheep: now every good Shepherd is
careful of his flock to defend it, and provide for it; upon this account, David
promises to himself all needful supplys from God, and his gracious Protection,
because the Lord is his Shepherd: See how the Prophet Isaiah holds forth Gods
provident care for, and indulgence and tenderness toward his People, Isa. 40.11.
who are his Sheep: He shall feed his Flock like (...) Shepherd, he shall
gather the Lambs with his arms, and carry them in his besome, and shall gently
lead those that are with young.

2. If we be Gods C^venanted ones, Mal. 1.6.
then; he is our Master, and we are his Servants: a good Master has a care of
his servants, a counts himself to stand charged by virtue of his relation, to
look after them, and provide for them; now surely God is the best Master, he is
most loving toward, most careful of, and makes the best provision for his
servants.

3. God is a Father to his Covenanted ones, and they are his children; and like
a Father, he loves them, and pities them, and is ready to minister to all their
necessities, surely Gods bowels are more tender than man's, and his love is
infinitely beyond the love of earthly Parents; Tam pater nemo, tam pius nemo.
there is no Father like him, none so indulgent as he is. If ye being evil know
how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your heavenly
Father give? When God promises to heal Isreal's condition, he gives this re^s^n
of it; Jer. 31.9.
For I am a Father to Israel. This relation of a Father works much upon the
heart of God, so that he remembers his children, when they are unmindful of him.

4. God is a Husband to those that are in Covenant with him, Isa. 54.5.
and they are his spouse, his dearly beloved; now in this near relation,
^^^iction is d^awn out between Creatures, to do what they can to ^elp, and
comfort, and procure the good of one another; and though there may be a failing
between a Man and his Wife, for want of ^ower, or ability, and sometimes or
want of a good disposition, and due conjugal affection, yet God cannot fail to
answer this relation (...) the full.

Now the Soul, I say, acting faith upon the Covenant is confident in God, upon
account of such relation of God to the soul that is in Covenant with him.

3. God has tied himself by ^ovenant to his People, to heal ^^m, and help
them, and to give ^^m all needful good things, and to be all in all to them; I
will make an everlasting Covenant with them, Jer. 32.40.
that I will not turn away from them to do them good, yea, I will rejoice over
them, to do them good.

Now the Soul knows that God is no Covenant breaker, and therefore in
remembrance of this tie which God has laid upon himself, while faith is awake
and active the believer has a dependence on his God, O Lord, thou art my God,
I will trust in thee; I shall not perish; I shall not want, there, is wisdom
enough, and power enough, and goodness enough in my God; and these Attributes
of his are engaged to me, that I may stay my self upon them.

Oh, Christians, the acting of faith with strength and vigor upon Gods
Covenant, would make us to depend on him, and have confidence in him, even in a
Sea of miseries, in the deepest affliction, casting our selves upon the power,
and mercy, and faithfullness of our God, when our condition seems to be
desperate: Is it thus and thus with me, are matters brought to this pass? yet I
will not let go the Covenant, I will not lose my hold on God, I know God will
deliver me one way or other, even in that way which he sees to be best for me.

This well be one happy improvement of our interest in the Covenant, by acting
faith upon it.

7. By this means our interest in the Covenant would be improved unto love,
toward God, and obedience to him; (I put them together as for hafts sake, so in
regard of their necessary, connection, and conjunction, they being ins^perable,
in as much as obedience does naturally flow from love) I say, the more?
constant, and the stronger the actings of faith upon the Covenant are, the more
affection^tly will the Soul love God, and the more cheerfully, and constantly
obey him. True faith is a loving faith, which carries the affection of love
unto God, who has given the Covenant of his love unto us, and it is a lively,
working faith, which moves and acts the soul toward God, and gives it up to
him who has not withheld himself from us, but has bestowed himself upon us.

A clear apprehension of an excelling good, and a knowledge of my interest in
it, must needs draw my affection to it: Relation has ever been a ground of
affection, where loveliness is apprehended.

Now, the Lord full of all glorious excellencies, transcendently good, is my
God, my Father, my Husband; he love's me with an abounding, immense, constant,
everlasting love, oh! how can I choose, but love him, yea, love him much, while
he vouchsafes to give himself full of all goodness and blessedness, into my
bosom; and so satisfies my soul, fills me with himself? I cannot choose but
love a satisfying good; and oh! I truly desire to please him, my soul is
grieved for any unkindness of mine toward him, or disobedience to him;
Gospel Grace, the grace of the Covenant, which appears bringing salvation,
teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12.
and to live soberly, and righteously, and godlily in this present world.

This is another notable effect and fruit of acting Faith upon the Covenant of
grace.

8. By this means our interest in the Covenant will be improved, (...), to that
strong consolation spoken of in the sext.

Therefore God with whom the soul is in Covenant, is called the God of all
consolation. 2 Cor. 13.


Now they are (as has been said) pure, full, sure comforts, that are fetched
from the Covenant by the extractory virtue and power of Faith, which is a rare
Chemist indeed. God comfort the believer acting faith upon him, shall
tribulations, in every pressing, pinching condition. This is my Comfort in
affliction, (...). Psalm. 119.50.
for thy word has quickened me. When the believer is damped in spirit, and as
it were dead in regard of spiritual operations and affections, faith reviveth
him drawing lift out of the word of promise, from the Covenant of God. Though
it be thus, and thus with me, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant;
The sense hereof does not only support the soul, but rejoice it; The soul is
comforted against sin and Satan, and death, and Hell, and amidst sorrows, and
afflictions in the world, when a Christian remembers what he has in the
Covenant, and how he stands related to God; and are these consolations of God
small?

9. Faith acted upon the Covenant leads the soul, as it were, to the top of an
exceeding high hill, or mountain, and thence shows it the kingdom of heaven,
and the glory thereof. And says, All this will God the Father give thee, this
is thy inheritance, thy God has given in thee in promise and will give it thee
in hand, for his Covenant is sure. Faith acted upon the promise of God gives
the soul a lively hope of salvation; verily there remains a rest to the
people of God; it is certain to them by the certainty of God's promise; God's
Covenant gives believers a right to it, and it is certain to them (as to their
fruition of it) by God's unchangeable decree; Though it be to be enjoyed upon
condition of enduring to the end, of persevering in faith, and new obedience,
yet in as much as that condition is likewise absolutely promised, and Christ
has undertaken to be the worker and finisher of our faith, and perfecter of
our salvation, this salvation is still absolutely certain upon promise. Hope, O
my Soul, says faith, hope to the end for the salvation which is to be brought
to thee at the revelation of Jesus Christ. Will thou distrust God? have thou
not his promise to rest upon, has he not given thee his Covenant and Oath for
thy assurance rance? When the flesh has nothing wherein it may rejoice, yet do
thou, O believing soul, keep the rejoicing of hope firm unto the end.

10. A lively acting of faith upon the Covenant, will raise the Christian to
heavenly mindedness, to have his heart much in heaven with his God, who is his
portion and his treasure; when faith reads the love, and goodness, and
desirableness of God, as he has expressed himself in the lines of the
Covenant, and gives the soul a true account of it, now the soul must needs
love, where it is thus loved, and where there is such lovliness, for this is
attractive of love; Now, anima est ubi amat, the heart, the soul is where it
loves; if the treasure be in Heaver, there will the heart be; therefore if we
would have our hearts to be in Heaven, let us keep them still possessed with
true believing thoughts and apprehensions of the free, abounding grace and love
of God toward us, expressed in the Covenant which he has given us.

Oh, if we could by faith lodge our souls in the bosom of Gods Covenant, that
there we may see how God loves us with the truest and fullest, and most
constant, and most advantageous love, it would not then be a hard matter, to
have our hearts with God, and surely, when the heart is with him, it is where
it should be, and where it finds the sweetest being.

Thus you have seen the fruits of acting faith upon the Covenant, the
improvement of the Covenant thereby to such sweet advantages of the soul; thus
our Covenant interest in God, will be improveed.

1. To the sweetning of our thoughts of God.

2. To a holy boldness in our approaches to God.

3. To the sweetning of all mercies to us.

4. Unto patience and chearfullness in afflictions.

5. To contentedness with our conditions.

6. To a firm settled dependence on God.

7. Unto love and obedlence.

8. Unto consolation of the heart in tribulations.

9. To a lively hope of Salvation.

10. The heavenly mindedness, and a heavenly conversation.

Now to proceed to a Ninth counsel.

If you have applied Gods Covenant, Couns. 9.
so that you have a feeling apprehension of your interest in it; then let not
the enjoyments and outward supposed felicity of men in the World be an eyesore
to you, or move you to envy; Alas, they are not to be envyed, but to be
pitied, because they have not such an inheritance as you have; their
enjoyments are but small heaps of dust; whereas the believers enjoyments and
hopes are great Mountains of Gold; O happy believers, if they know their own
happiness in such an interest: We read in History, That when the Spanish
Ambassador boasted of the largeness of his Masters Dominitions, and his many
Titles, that he was King of this and that, and the other Kingdom; and Prince of
such a place, and Duke of such a place: The French Ambassador answered, My
Master is King of France, King of France, King of France, intimating, that
France was more worth than all places under the King of Spain his Power.

When the men of the World shall boast that this is theirs, and that is theirs,
and shall cry out, O their riches; O their honors; now let the believer make
his boast in the Lord his God, and cry, Oh, the Covenant! Oh! the Covenant of
Grace: Oh! the Covenant of Gods Love is mine; why! this is more worth than all
the riches, and glory of the World.

10. Has God been pleased to make a Covenant with us, Couns. 1^.
and to give it so confirmed to us; oh! let us then more and more break off the
Covenant, and disanul the agreement, between our Nature and the Devil, and let
us break off the league which has been and is between our souls, and any lust
or vanity; let us renounce all for God; and as he vouchsafes to become our
God, so let us give up our selves more and more unto him, as his People; as he
is a Covenanting, Covenant-keeping God, so let us be a Covenanting,
Covenant-keep in People: Let us with all our hearts accept the Lord to be our
God, solemnly and cordially entering into Covenant with him, and yielding our
selves up unto him, to be wholly at his disposal, resolving that we will not be
led by the Devil, or the World, or the Flesh, any more; but that our God shall
lead us, and order us in all things.

And let us see, that we prove not unfaithful in the Covenant which we have
made unto God, wherein we have promised, to renounce the Devil, and the World,
and the Flesh, and to serve our God only. Oh, let us labor to keep, Covenant
strictly with the Lord our God: Let us not conform our selves to the World: Let
us not willingly give one affection or thought unto any lust: Let us labor to
work our hearts to, and keep them in an abhorrency of the Devil and all his
works; and let us be still warring against the Devil, and the World, and the
Flesh; and let us labor to become daily more spi^t^^l an^ holy* and heavenly,
(...) God, and more (...) ^o him, endeavoring th^^ (...) may be found in all
things to the praise and glory of God. Oh, that we may love him, and delight in
him, and walk with him, and live to him, who has loved us, and set his eyes,
and his heart upon us, and has given the Covenant of his love into the bosom
of our souls.

It is so that the Covenant confirmed to Abraham, is confirmed to all belivers
to the Worlds end; confirmed I say, as by Gods Word, and Oath, and Seals, so by
the death of Christ, by his perfect, allsufficient satisfaction? Oh, then what
a feast of comfort, what a banquet of sweetmeats is here for believers? Here
is that which is sweeter than the honey, and the honey-combe.

Believers; The Covenant wherein you are interested, that is so confirmed to
you, is most comprehensively comfortable, carrying in it all matter of sweet
consolation, so that from this confirmed Covenant Gods Covenanted ones may
fetch sufficient consolation against any thing that may put in for their
discomfort.

This Covenant is comfortable against sin, and all self unworthiness, for what
says God in his Covenant; I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins and their transgressions will I not remember any more. Oh, how many
and how great have my sins been (says the poor soul) how exceedingly
aggravated? I have sinned against God who wonderfully made me, and has
graciously preserved me, and plentifully provided for me; I have sinned against
the bowels of Gods mercies, against the blood of Jesus Christ; against the
riches of Gods free Grace; are there any sins like to my sins? now is there any
pardon, any mercy, any hope for such a sinner.

Now, let a sinner fasten mediation upon this branch of the Covenant, which is
confirmed by the death of Christ, and consider, here is pardon of sin, offered
in the promise, and it is Gods pardon, and it is a Free pardon, and it is a
Final pardon, never revoked. Here is admirable comfort for humble souls that
are pressed down even to the Gates of Hell, under the sense of their own
sinfullness and guilt. The Covenant of Grace confirmed to believers is
comfortable against sin. And hence it follows, that it is comfortable against
the wrath of God, and the threatenings of the Law, and against Death.

I might show you, how this Covenant answers all objections against, and
removes all impediments of the believers happiness, and Salvation; how it is
set up against the guilt, and filth, and power of sin; against the curse, and
condemnation of the Law; against discouragement from weakness of graces, and
imperfection of duties; against death and Devil, and whatsoever may be supposed
to hinder the Salvation and Happiness of Gods Vovenant People.

Would I stand further to instance in the several positive priveledges and
blessings of the Covenant; I might show you what abundant comfort flows from
each of them.

How great is the comfort of Redemption and Reconciliation, and Justification,
and Sanctification, and the Promise and hope of Glory? and now all these
Wellsprings of comfort are carried in the Covenant, which is confirmed to
believers by the death of Christ.

Here now Christians, is Wine and Milk, here is N^ctar and Ambrosia, here are
delicates indeed for those that have laid hold upon this Covenant of Gods love.

Eat, O Children of Abraham; drink, yea drink abundantly, O ye believing
Souls.

Blessed Soul that can say, Gods Covenant is mine.

God's Christ OUR'S.
Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all;
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
IN the former verse the Apostle boasts of his own, and every Believer's
security against all enemies and evils, grounding this his triumph of Faith the
upon unchangeable love of God toward Believers, and the presence of his Grace
with them: And whereas the flesh is ready to cast many doubts, and the weak
Christian is apt to be discouraged by cross events, and afflicting providence,
and by the consideration of the Devils malice, and the Worlds enmity against
believers, the Apostle obviating such doubts, and anticipating such objections,
answers and clears off all, that faith may not be entangled with any of them.

The scope of the Text, the Apostle h drift therein, Scope.
is to take off from the children of God, the fear of want, assuring them of
all needful good things, and for this purpose he uses an argument drawn from
the consideration of what God has done for us, what he has given; he has
given us his own Son, a gift more worth than ten thousand Worlds; why then
should we doubt, but that he will give us other things? undoubtedly, the love
of God which has been commended to us in such a wonderful gift, will not stick
at small matters.

How shall he not with him also freely give us all things?

This interrogation has the force of an affirmation with an asseveration:
Shurely God who for our sakes has not spared the life of his own only, dearly
beloved Son, Jesus Christ, but has delivered him up to death for us, will
together with him give us all things.

Though there be not much difficulty in the words, yet it may not be amiss to
give a little light to the terms.

(...) he who relates to (...) God. The Apostle insisteth on the commendation
of the love of God, illustrating that, and seeking to establish Souls upon it,

(...) his own Son, (...) does most strictly signify propriety and a peculiar
interest in a person, or thing; and it is one of those distinguishing notes,
whereby the natural Son of God is distinguished from the rest of his Sons, who
are not Sons by Nature, but by Grace, by Adoption, and Regeneration; Gods own
Son is Jesus Christ.

(...), He spared not, but delivered up. The Apostle here amplifyeth the great
love and rich grace of God, he spared not, but gave i. e. he sticked not to
give; he spared not the Life of his own Son, his dearly beloved Son, but
delivered him up for us, delivered him ^up ^o Death. thus Romans ^.2^. Christ was
delivered for our offenses, i. e. He was by his Father delivered to death; that
there we must so understand it, is clear, from the opposite term raised, and he
was raised again for our justification, was raised from the dead. We have other
Texts speaking this plainly. For the suffering of Death, Heb. 29.
that he by the grace of God should taste of Death for all men. 1 Pe^. 3.18
Christ also has once suffered for sins being put to death in the flesh. (thus
here [(...), for us, pro nobis; i. e. vice nostri in our stead; and propter
nos, or bono nostro, for our benefit: we sinners must have died, if Christ had
not died for us, for Death is the wages of sin: God therefore delivered up his
Son to death for us, that we might not dye.

And surely, very many and great are the benefits and advantages that accrue to
sinners from Christ his dying for them, which may be all reduced to, and sum'd
up in this one word Redemption; which is the great fruit and effect of Christ
his Mediation; and being taken in its full Latitude, is all spiritual grace and
blessing in this World, and the World to come.

The whole work of Gods grace toward sinners in Christ Jesus, is usually in
Systems of Divinity, called Redemption; Pro nobis, hec nostrae salutis causa
and nostra vice ac loco nempe ut morte sua peccatis nos tris expiatis a morte
nos redimeret, and justitiam atque vitam amissam nohis repararet, Par.
Christ was delivered to death (...) for us, in our stead, suffering what we
should have suffered, that we might not suffer, but might be set free; and for
us, for our sakes, to our behoof, that he might obtain eternal Redemption for
us, as Heb. 9.12. (...) he does not say for all, but for us all, for me and
such as I am, Elect and Beloved, as afterward ver. 33.34, 35, Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of [God's Elect.] It is God that justifies; who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that dyed. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? see here who they are for whom Christ dyed to clear them from
accusation, to set them above Condemnation; they are Gods Elect, they are those
that have Christ his love; so that here in the Text we have an universal
Particle, with a restriction upon it, [Vs] is exclusive of some, of many, of
all others; according to that of our Savior, John 10.15
I lay down my life for the Sheep, for them only.

And indeed the Scripture does limit, and appropriate the death of Christ, the
fruit and benefit of it to a certain sort of persons, those for whom he
undertook to be their Redeemer, and does not extend it to all.

He gave himself to dye for his Church his body, Ephesians. 5.23, 25.
now the Church is not the World in the universality of Men and Women, but Gods
portion in the Wo^^* contradistinguished to the World; Jo. 17.9.
those that are Redeemed unto God, Rev. 5.9.
by the blood or Christ, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation, he does not say, all Kindreds, and People but some out of every
kindred* etc. here is no holding forth of Universal Redemption.

Christ is said, Jo. 10.11, 15.
to give his Life, to lay it down for his sheep, n^w not all men and women are
the Sheep of Christ, Mat. 25.32
we read of Goats as well as sheep. Christ died for his People, to Redeem them,
Mat. 1.21.
to save them from their sins, viz. for those that are in a special
consideration, the People of God; Romans 11.
those whom he has foreknown, his Elect People. Christ gave himself for his
Children, his seed. Heb. 2.13, 14, 15.
And whereas it ^s said, ver. 9. That he tasted Death for every man, It is to
be understood of every sort of men, Gentiles as well as Jews, for this is
afterward limited to Sons, Brethren, and children of Christ: The Spiritual seed
are those many and all those for whom Christ suffered Death.

Christ died only for those that were given him of his Father; Thou have given
him power over all ^lesh; Jo. 17.2.
that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. How does
Christ give them eternal life? by dying for them, thus purchasing by his death,
and ^hen applying to them the purchased redemption.

Surely Christ did not dye for all, ^e would not dye for those for whom he
would not pray; Jo. 17.9.
now see what he himself says of this, I pray (...) for the world, but for
those whom (...) have given me out of the world.

He who delivered by his own ^on for us all, (says the Apostle in ^he Text)
(...), how ^all he not freely give? give of grace, and with gracious thoughts
and purposes. This word stands (...) opposition to ^an's merits, and ^o Gods
common bounty.

(...) with him, viz. with christ: All the good of souls is ^easured up in
Christ, and all the ^^joyments of Christians are ^^etened, and become valuable
^^d profitable to them by their enjoyment of Christ. He that has not Christ
has nothing that is truly good to him, or that will prove comfortable in the
end, there is no more than a shadow of good things without him; (...) all
things.

Some expound this of all things that God has made; others interpret it thus,
all things that are good and necessary, others, all things that may be
furtherances of our salvation.

The two latter senses hold very clearly, and the other may be admitted, if we
distinguish between the right of God's children, and their possession: God has
given them a right in and through Christ to all things for their good; 1 Cor.
3.22.
all things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; and as for
possession of earthly things, it (...) given or witheld, according to the most
wise and gracious dispensation of God, as he sees to be for the good of his
children.

Well, thus understand the Apostle: God, who has given his Son, will with him
freely, graciously, and in good will give all things that may further our
salvation, and that are good and necessary for us.

Now there are two general parts of the Text.

Parts of the Text.
1. An argument of God his surpassing love toward the elect, that he gave his
own Son to dye for them.

2. A most comfortable inference thereupon, that having given his Son, he will
give all things with him.

The words being opened, the Text gives us many doctrines.

Doctrines deducted.
1. That Jesus Christ (who is here called Gods own Son) is very God.

2. That this Son of God was given by God for the ransom of souls.

3. That God did not give his Son, nor did Jesus Christ give himself to dye for
all, but only for the Elect.

4. That the love of God is wonderfully made out to souls in giving his Son to
dye for them.

These four observations lie very clear in the antecedent, viz. that God spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up to death for the Elect.

Now in the consequent or inference, [that God will surely together with Christ
give all other things) we have these notes.

1. That even all earthly things are given and dispensed by God. Doctrines.


2. That Jesus Christ is the great gift of God,

3. That where God gives Christ, he will give all other needful good things.

4. That all the enjoyments of believers are gifts of grace; where Christ is
given, there is (a gracious) gifts of other things with him.

5. Where Christ is not given, nothing is given with a purpose of grace.

6. That where the love of God in giving Christ, is apprehended and
particularly applied, there faith has sure footing to stand and bear up the
soul in expectation of all other needful good things, (This comes up to the
scope of the Text.)

Thus you see, this 32th verse of this 8th Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, is like a special branch of a fruitful tree, singularly well laden
with precious fruit, yielding us many useful observations.

But now I shall pluck and give you to eat only two of those choice Apples
which grow upon this most fruitful bough, Two doctrines handled.
opening and improving two of those Doctrines which the Text gives.

The points are these,

1. God the Father delivered his own Son Jesus Christ unto death, for the
redemption of souls.

2. Jesus Christ is the principal gift of God.

God the Father delivered his own Son Jesus Christ unto death,

Before I take into consideration the express terms of this proposition,
Explication.
I shall premise something that here is supposed and implied.

1. It is supposed, that this Son of God was made Man; here is a necessary
supposition of the incarnation of the Son of God; for as God he could not dye;
the divine nature is impassible: The Word therefore must be made flesh, the Son
of God must become Man, that he might be capable of suffering for sinners, who
were to be redeemed by his death.

2. Here is necessarily implied the union of two natures in the person of
Christ; he was both God and Man; therefore he is called Immanuel, God with us:
and hence it is said, Acts 20.28.
that God purchased his Church with his owe blood; Christ, as God had no blood
to shed, and considered as a mear man his blood could not be a valuable price
for the redemption of souls; he must be man therefore, that he might be in a
capacity to dye, and he must be God, that his death might be satisfactory and
meritorious.

Now to the point, as it is expressed, herein we are to consider, the Agent,
the Action, the Object, and the End.

1. The Agent, God, (that is his name) the Father, (that is his relation to the
Son, who is the Object here.)

2. The Act, delivered to death.

Obj. But the Evangelists tells us that Judas delivered him, (...), the same
word that is here used, though there it is englished, betrayed him.

Ans. The same action may very well be ascribed both to the principal, Sol.
and the instrumental cause; God the Father was the principal cause of the
delivery of his Son to death, appointing, and by his providence ordering the
actions of Judas, and the Jews, and of Pilate in this business; God by the
teachery of Judas, and by the malice and cruelty of the rest of the actors of
that Tragedy, delivered his Son to death. He was smitten of God, Isa. 53.
The Lord laid on him the iniquities of us all, it pleased the Lord to bruise
him, and to put him to grief.

3. The object, his own Son Jesus Christ; Of this term of special relation, or
singular appropriation, I spoke something when I opened the letter of the Text;
I shall say no more of the object now.

4. We have in the point, the end of this act put forth by this agent, upon
this object, that is, the redemption of souls.

Redemption deliverance.
The word Redemption notes both a Deliverance, and the way of accomplishing it.

(...), to redeem, is Emere ri, to buy off, or buy out a person, or thing, to
set a person free from prison, Dato pretio asserere in libertatem.
or punishment, or slavery, to set a thing free from alienation, or engagement,
or morgage, or forfeiture (be it house, or land, or goods) to clear it, to
fetch it off by the payment of a price.

(...), redemption, signifies both the act of delivering, or freeing, and the
effect, the liberty, or freedom procured and enjoyed.

(...), redemption, is improperly taken up sometimes, to note any deliverance
from any danger, or evil, as Heb. 11. this word is used concerning a temporal
deliverance from the danger of death. Heb. 11.39. (...) ^st liberatlo allcusu^
ab Incommodo, intere^dente
-- Others were tortured not accepting deliverance.

Properly, (...), est vinditatis personae vel rei, etc. is a vindication, a
clearing, or freeing of a person or thing captived, or all^nated, by paying, or
giving a price.

And such redemption is either corporal, or spiritual.

Now Christ his redemption is not corporal, but spiritual.

Man before he finned had spiritual liberty; this being lost by sin, there
comes in the room of it guilt, and a spiritual captivity; partly under the
wrath and judgment of God h^s Judge, and the curse of the Law, partly under
spiritual enemies, sin, devil, death, and hell.

Now there is a spiritual redeemer given, the mediator Christ Jesus, and a
spiritual price or ransom paid, the death of Christ, which however according
to the history it was corporal, yet in respect of the end of it, is wholly
spiritual; and the fruits and benefits of this redemption are spiritual, viz. a
deliverance from the wrath of God, and the curse of the Law, and the power of
Satan, death, and hell; remission of sins, adoption, regeneration, and eternal
salvation; and in our doctrine, we say, it is the redemption of souls.

This is the redemption that is in Christ, or by Christ, purchased; procured,
effected by his death, which was satisfactory to the justice of God (so that
upon account hereof God is ready to release sinners from his curse and wrath,
and the punishment due for sin) and destructive to the Devil's power and
kingdom; so that in respect of Satan, the Redeemer fetches of his poor
captives from him by strong hand, an almighty power. Thus the redemption that
we are speaking of is the vindication or recovery of sinners, from the bondage
in which they were under sin, Satan, death, and the wrath of God, into the
contrary spiritual liberty, by the payment of a sufficient price, which was the
blood of the Son of God.

Yet let me add a word more concerning this redemption.

As there is a twofold adoption pointed out in Scripture, the one inchoat,
whereby we are made the Sons of God; the other consummate, whereby we are
manifested to be the Sons of God, and entered into a full possession of the
inheritance of Sons, (which adoption the Sons of God are said to wait for) so
there is a twofold redemption. Romans 8.


1. The work of redemption once wrought, Plena ac perfecta beratio liomnibus
gradibus and numeris absoluta redemptio tumanimae, tum corporis, in die
judicii, Gerh. in Harm. Eu.
whereby we are redeemed from sin and death, pardoned and reconciled to God, etc.

2. That which is called the redemption of the body Romans 8. and the redemption
of the possession, Ephesians. 1. which is a full deliverance and freedom from all
corruption and misery, unto a full fruition of immortality and blessedness,
which believers are said to wait for, which they shall have at the day of
Judgment.

This is the end for which Christ was delivered to death.

God the Father contrived, commanded, and ordered the death of Christ, of his
own Son, as a satisfactory price to his Law and Justice (that thereby poor
sinners might be redeemed; i. e. bought out of slavery and misery, delivered
from the guilt and power of sin) and as the means by which they might be
rescued from out of the hand of Satan, and from all the powers of darkness, and
vindicated into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

Now for proof of the point. Proof.


To those Texts that were hinted in opening the Word, I shall add oath s; He
made him to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21.
which knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, i.
e. He made his own guiltless Son to become a sacrifice for sin, offered up to
God for the expiating of our sins.

He of God is made to us redemption. 1 C 30. Gal 3 13.
He has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us.

Thus you have had the Quid si^, and the Quod sit; the Explication, and proof
of the Point.

Now as to the Cur sit, Demonstration.
the why so, of the Doctrine; there are two questions about this, which shall
be satisfied in two words.

Quest. 1. Why must Jesus Christ needs be delivered to death for the redemption
of sinners?

Ex hypothesi.
Answ. There must needs be a mediator of redemption for the recovery of lost
sinners (God having decreed this way of saving souls) and he that would deliver
sinners, must mediate for them by blood, must answer the offended law and
justice of God, which could not be satisfied, but by the death of the sinner,
or of an undertaker, or surely for him; (this was the price of satisfaction)
Man could not by himself any way satisfy God's law and justice, for that
required infinite satisfaction, but a finite creature cannot make infinite
satisfaction; nay, a finite sinner can make no satisfaction at all, therefore
one that was no sinner, and one that was true man, and one that was more than
man, no less than God, must be the redeeming Mediator, to deliver poor sinners,
by paying down a price, a sufficient price, satisfactory to the justice of God;
and that must be his blood: Heb. 9.22.
For without the sheding of blood, there is no remission of sins; So that it
must needs be Jesus Christ, God and Man, that must suffer death in the flesh,
for the redemption of souls.

Quest. 2. Why would God deliver his own S^n up to death for the redemption of
s^uls?

Answ. 2. This may satissie us, because so it pleased him; it proceeded only
from the free grace, and good pleasure of God, there was no other imp^lsive or
moving cause. This is a part, and a great act of God's special gracious
providence toward his Elect, which is a stupendous argument of the freeness
and the riches of his grace to sinners: God was not cruel to his own Son, but
merciful, and most tenderly compassionate toward poor sinners, wretched
creatures, that had undone themselves; either we must dye eternally, or the Son
of God must dye for us (must be under the power of death for a time.) Now
guilty sinners are spared, and the innocent Son of God, the Son of his love is
given to death for us, that we might live: This is grace indeed, and as this
proceeded from grace, Ephesians. 1.5, 6, 7
so it was aimed by God at the glorifying of his grace to all eternity, So much
to the Doctrinal part of the Point.

I come now to Application.

APPLICATION.
First, Information.
I shall draw up some inference for information.

1. It follows hence, that by nature we are all miserable captives, and
wretched slaves; otherwise there needed not a Redeemer; The Prophet tells us,
I^a. 61.1.
what was the office of Christ, and to what purpose he was sent; to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to those that are bound.

Paul tells us, Romans 7.14.
that he was by nature sold under sin, and though he was redeemed with the
blood of Christ, and regenerated by the spirit of Christ, yet sin did still
hang about him, he could not shake off his fetters, nor get wholly clear from
his bonds, but he was still so clogged and fettered with corruption, that he
cries out, (...)? O wretched man that I am, who shall deliv^r me?

And as for unregenerate men, 2* Tim. 2.26.
they are said to be taken captive by Satan, according to his will, the Devils
absolute slaves: Ah, woeful is the condition of those souls, to whom Jesus
Christ is not a Redeemer.

And (now, by the way) the worse the dis^ase is, the better is the remedy, and
the more to to be prized; the more wretched the condition of poor souls is by
nature, the more is grace to be esteemed and adored, that translateth us out of
so bad an estate, into so good a condition, that from such a depth of misery
raises us up unto such a height of happiness, as souls are advanced to by
Christ Jesus: Surely the greater, the viler our bondage is, the more gracious,
the more glorious is the work of our redemption, and the more precious should
our Redeemer be to us.

2. This informs us of the vileness and cursedness of sin, Infer. 2.
which brought us into such bondage and slavery unto Satan, death, and hell,
that the Son of God must dye to deliver us from it, which when it took hold on
Christ our surety, took away his life, as dear ^s he was to God; if he
undertake for sinners, he must dye, surely then those sinners must dye, for
whom he did not dye; woe to those souls whose guilt is not transferred upon
Christ, that have no share in the redemption purchased with his blood: Let
wicked persons that trample under foot the blood of Christ, that contemn the
doctrine of Christ, and wallow in the filth of their lusts, refusing the grace
of God, which is offered to them, and rejecting Christ the Redeemer; let them
consider what they are like to suffer for sin, from the impartial justice of
God.

Oh that sinners may be awakened to repentance, that they may seek to make
their p^a^e with God, coming in, and closing with Jesus Christ, that in him
they may have redemption through faith in his blood.

Oh that our hearts may be wrought to a due hatred of sin, considering that it
brought* the Son of God under the power of death, when it was imputed to him.

3. This informs us of (or we may hence infer, Infer. 3.
the exceeding worth or souls. The Lord did set a great prize upon them, or
else ^e would not have given such a price for them (he spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us) if God had not valued the souls of men at a great
rate, he would not have laid out the life of his Son for them.

Ah what foolish creatures are Men and Women, so to undervalue their own souls,
as to prostitute them to base lusts, and to the Devil's pleasure, and to sell
them for toys?

Let us consider the worth of our souls, and make more account of them, and be
more careful of them, and watchful over them.

4. We are hence to take notice of several attributes of God, Infer. 4.
wonderful glorious in the redemption of sinners.

1. His wisdom in finding out a way, and such a way for the effecting of it.

2. His power in thus confounding and overcoming Satan and sin, and death, and
all the powers of dar^ness, opposing themselves against poor man.

3. His justice in requiring such a satisfaction before he would remit the
offense, and release the sinner.

4. The immense mercy of God is here to be admired, who would rather that his
own Son should suffer a most shameful, and painful, and accursed death, then
that Mankind should perish. The sending of Jesus Christ into the world to be a
Redeemer, is a special evidence, and a wonderful stupendous demonstration of
the mercy of God. 1 Jo 4.9.
Herein was manifested the love of God toward us, that he sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, hereby perceive we
the love of God, because he laid down his life for us; (this is the mercy of
mercies.) It was not with gold, or silver, or any corruptible thing that we
were redeemed, but with the precous blood of God's own dear Son; and this is
that which commends the exceeding riches of God's grace, that he gave his son
to die for sinners, for enemies, for rebels, to reconcile them to God.

2. Terror.
Here is matter of terror to all wicked despisers of such Gospelgrace, are not
souls worthy to perish, if when God sends his Son to save them, they will not
be saved? God delivered his own Son up to death for the redemption of souls,
and Jesus Christ offers himself to you, as a Redeemer, and foolish creatures
prefer bonds before liberty, will still continue the servants of sin, slaves to
lusts, the Devils vassels, they care not for Christ his redemption. Oh, how
shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; Christ will be one day
terrible to them, who now despise the Gospel-offers of his grace.

3. Here is encouragement for poor sinners that feel themselves pinched, has
delivered his own Son to death for the redemption of poor creatures, and he
has paid a sufficient price for the ransom of all; therefore come to Jesus
Christ, and cast thy self upon him, giving thy self up to him; he can, and will
redeem thee from sin to God, from death to life, from the power of Satan into
the glorious liberty of God's children.

4. Was the Son of God himself delivered up to death for the redemption of
souls, condemnation there is none to him: Christ has taken it away, he died
for this purpose, he was delivered to death for our offenses, and the dying of
the Son of God cannot be in vain, cannot fail of its end; surely, the
satisfaction that Christ made to his Father, was a very full satisfaction, and
his death was full of merit, for those for whom he died; For,

1. The sufferings of Christ were infinite (though not in respect of time) yet
in respect of the quantity, and quality of them, and in res^ect of the person
suffering, who was God as well as Man.

2. Christ his death must needs be satisfactiory, and meritorious on behalf of
those for whom he died, because it was that which God required, the means of
satisfaction, and acquisition which he himself appointed; it was according to
the Covenant of redemption, a performance of that Romans 3.25* (...). Has
fore-appointed.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation for sin, through faith in his
blood. This fore appointment of God, must be referred not only to the person of
the Redeemer, (as that God had appointed his Son to be the Mediator of
Redemption) but likewise to the manner and means of Redemption; that Jesus
Christ being made man, should expiate the sins of men by the sacrifice of
himself, by shedding his blood, and that his death should be the meritorious
procuring cause of righteousness and life, and the favor of God, and all
blessing and happiness to those for whom he died.

So then here is that which may give satisfaction to Believers, to cause them
to rest in Christ's Redemption because he is God, and because his Father from
Eternity designed him to be our Redeemer, and his Death to be the effectual
means of a full Redemption.

Therefore when Satan tempts and Conscience accuses, and the Law threatens
a Child of God, and when Death and Hell would make him afraid, let him turn his
eye to Christ, and let him fix meditation on the Death of Christ the Son of
God, it was to purpose; the work which his Father gave him to do, he did
thoroughly; he fully expiated Sin, and so the Law is answered, the Curse
removed, the Devil conquered, the wrath of God appeased, and righteousness and
life restored to those for whom he died; and the evil from which he has
redeemed them, shall never return upon them, and the good which he has
purchased for them, shall never be lost from them.

5. I shall now close with words of Counsel. Exhort.
Did God give his Son to die for Sinners? Then let us search out and consider,
what that good is which the death of Christ brings to souls, that so we may
take comfort in meditating on this great gift of God. Certainly it was for
special purpose that God gave his Son to die, now we must know the advantage
that hence redounds to souls, or else we cannot taste the sweetness of such a
mercy.

I shall instance in some fruits and benefits of Christ's death, which
comprehend all the the specialties of advantage by it, amounting to a full
redemption.

1. Hereby full satisfaction is made to the justice of God, for believers; The
word satisfaction indeed is not found in Scripture, applied to the death of
Christ, but the thing is made out fully in other expressions, as when it is
said, that he did bear the sins of many, Isa 53.12. 1 Pet. 2.24
and he bare our sins in his body on the tree, the phrase imports (according
to the signification of the original word) the taking of the punishment of sin
off from us upon himself, and so intimates satisfaction. Christ is said to be
the propitiation for our sins, 1 Jo. 2.2. (...).
(...), is to expiate sin by making satisfaction to justice, and so to render
God propitious; in what sense can Christ be said to be a propitiation for sin,
but by satisfying Gods offended justice, and violated law. The Apostle says by
the righteousness of one, Rom 5 18. (...).
the free gift came to the justification of life; it may be read, by one
satisfaction: Jesus Christ by death for sinners has paid their debts (has not
left one farthing upon the score) has satisfied for their sins, (not leaving
one sin unsatisfied for, so that they stand not liable to the justice of God,
which inflicteth everlasting punishment upon sinners, (as all poor souls will
find, who have not a part in Christ.) Christ has made full satisfaction for
all those who apply to themselves the fruits of his death, so that they are
acquitted and justified by virtue of his death, for the merit of his
satisfaction.

2. Gods justice being satisfied, his anger is appeased, he is reconciled to
souls, by this propitiatory sacrifice, so that now God and they are friends,
there is am^ty betwixt them, being enemies, Romans 9.10.
We were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; 2 Cor. 5.18 ^^a 53.5. Modo
Deo fiuamur propitio, nihil metuendum a creaturis.
God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him.

Now, as it is a fearful thing to have God to be our enemy, so it is most sweet
and comfortable to be in his favor; for if God be for us, who can be against
us? This reconciliation to God is a great privilege indeed, that which lets
the soul into the enjoyment of all other privileges and blessings.

3. The Devil that great Enemy of Souls is conquered, the Serpents head is
broken, the Seed of the Woman has broken it: Jesus Christ the Son of God was
made flesh, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, Heb. 2.14.
that is the Devil.

4. By Christ's dying, 1 Cor. 15.54. 2 Timothy 1.10.
Death is swallowed up in victory: Jesus Christ has abolished Death, and has
taken away the fear of Death from Believing Souls; That he might deliver them,
Heb. 2.15.
who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. Christ
delivers his from spiritual death in sin, and from eternal death for sin; and
as for natural death, the death of the body, unto which God has appointed
them, it is not now formidable, the sting of it being plucked out by Christ, it
is that which Saints have desired, which is welcome to Souls steadfast in the
faith of the promises, because death frees them from the power of sin, and
annoyance of corruption, puts an end to their sinning (which is grievous to a
gracious heart.) Now comes that happy deliverance from the body of death, which
St. Paul so earnestly longed for; and by death they have their passage to
everlasting life.

5. Regeneration and the sanctification of souls, is the fruit of Christ's
dying; he of God is made to us sanctification; 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 Pet. 2.24.
he his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being dead to
sin, should live unto righteousness; he gave himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works.

The mortification of sin in us, and the vivification of grace, the healing of
our nature, and the renewing of the image of God in us, is a great benefit of
Christ's death; he merited this for the Elect, obtaining at God's hand, that
the holy Spirit should be given to sanctify them, that the Spirit of his Son
should be sent into their hearts.

6. Christ by his Death has purchased eternal life for Souls. God gave his
only begotten Son, ^ John 3.16
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but haeve everlasting life;
1 John 5.11
God has given us Eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

Thus the full benefit of Christ's Death is a full redemption from all evil to
all good, from sin, Satan, Wrath, Death, and Hell, to Grace and Glory, to the
enjoyment of all good here and hereafter.

Now unless we know these things, and except we know our selves to be
interessed in Jesus Christ, whose Death is of such exceeding great advantage to
those for whom he died, we can take no comfort in the notion of Christ his
Death.

Therefore having counseled you to search out what the benefits of Christ's
Death are, I should in the next place exhort you, to make sure your share in
them: to labor to clear up to your selves your interest in Christ, and in the
advantages of his Death. But this will be a special part of the application of
that other point, which is to be opened and improved, therefore our second
counsel now shall be this.

Did God give his Son to Death, Counsel. 2.
to satisfy for us; to reconcile us to God, to obtain for us Remission of
sins, and Sanctification of the Spirit, and life eternal, then let pardon of
sin, and peace with God, and the grace of Sanctification, and the hope of
Eternal life, be valued by us, according to the price that was paid for the
purchase of them, It was the Blood of the Son of God, which was of infinite
value. Therefore that which was purchased by it is more worth then all the
World; Carnal hearts have no such estimation of these things; if they had, they
would look more after them, and seek them diligently in the use of the means:
Bu^ alas, how many poor souls are the^e, that have no apprehension of the worth
of these mercies? Gold is of more account with them then Grace, and the
countenance of man is more looked after then the favor of God; but David can
tell us, that a comfortable apprehension of God's love is more worth then all
worldly enjoyments, and Solomon his judgmant is that Wisdom i. e. Grace, is the
most excellent thing, that the most desirable things in the World are not to be
compared with it. Now therefore, let Christians who by faith have laid hold on
Christ, and are int^rr^ss^d in the benefits of his death, let them know what
and an excellent portion they gott^n, and let them judge of their priveledges
by the price that was paid for the purchase of them, and prize them accrdingly.
And let Worldlings consider the means by which Spiritual blessings,
soul-mercies, the Christians Privileges were procured, and let them esteem
them accordingly, never resting till they come to be made pertakers of them.

Did God give his son to Die for sinner, Counsel. 3.
then let us take heed of sinning against Christ's Death? Abel his blood cried
for vengeance on them that shed it.

What will Christ his Blood do?

Certainly, the Blod of the Son of God is very precious, and they who sin
against it, draw horrible guilt upon themselves.

Now there are many ways by which souls sin against the Death of Christ.

1. When men do deny the efficatious merit of Christ his Death, and will piece
it up with their own merits, as Papists, who teach and boast of humane
satisfactions.

2. They who r^sist or despise the means of the application of Christ Crucified
to themselves.

3. They who have low thoughts of those things, for the purchase whereof Christ
died; The privilege of Justification, and Sanctification, and the Scriptures
of God and a Gospel Ministry, and Gospel Ordinances, and all Gospel
priveledges, and all true Gospellers in the Church, are all the purchase of
Christ his Blood: So that it is clearly a sinning against the Death of Christ,
to cry down or reproach, or slight any of these,

4. They who make much of sin, which caused the Death of Christ, and that allow
in themselves, and maintain the life of that, for the destruction of which
Christ died, they sin against the Death of Christ; And many other ways do
people sin against Christ his Death.

Now let us take heed of this, that we sin not against the Blood of the Son of
God, which was given to be shed for us.

I may take a hint from the Doctrine to counsel you to mercifulness to your own
sulles; Counsel. 4.
Is God so merciful to us not be cruel to our selves.

Did Christ die to Redeem us and set us free, then let us not enslave our
selves, let us not yield our selves servants unto sin and Satan; Did Christ die
to Redeem us from destruction, let us not be self destroyers; I remember what
Paul says in the case of Scan als, what a charge he gives to shun giving of
offense, and upon what ground; Do not for meats sake, Romans 14.15.
destrom him for whom Christ died; Oh do not for any Lusts sake destroy thy
soul for which Christ died,

5. This consideration is to be urged upon our selves, Couns 5.
as a motive to mercifulness toward others? Has God bin so merciful to us, as
to give his own Son for us, let this stir up in us, bowels of compassion toward
our brethen, and let us be ready to do good to the souls and bodies of our
fellow creatures, specially, let us desire and endeavor to be instrumental for
the saving of others.

6. Did God give such a price for us? Couns. 6.
Then let us remember that we are not our own, we are not Satan's; therefore
we must not live as we list, must not seek to please our selves, must not be
ruled by Satan; If God has given such a price for us, Nor be devoted to the
world.
he is worthy to have us, and we must be wholly his own; therefore, let us
yield our selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, (as the
Redeemed of the Lord) and our Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God.

Consider, my beloved, wherefore God gave his Son, and to what end Christ gave
himself; viz. That he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Christ died,
not only to redeem us from Hell and Condemnation, but also from our vain and
wicked Conversation. 1 Pet. 1.18


Christ was given to Death for us, not only that we should not die for sin, 1
Pet. 2.24.
but that we should die unto sin, and live unto Righteousness. We are taught in
Zacheriahs Song, Lu. 1.74.
That for this end Christ has delivered us from the hands of our Enemies, that
we might serve him in holiness and Righteousness. and if we refuse to serve our
Redeemer; th^s is to deny the Lord that bought us.

This was an Argument which the People used, to provoke one another to return
to their obedience to David, and to cleave to his Service, 2 Samuel 19.9.
even the consideration of the deliverance that they had by him; and this is
the Argument which Ezra uses, to tie himself and the people to strict
Obedience to God: Seeing thou O Lord have given us such a deliverance as this,
Ezra 9.13 14.
should we again break thy Commandments?

O let us Consider what a deliverance God has wrought for souls by the Death
of his Son, and let us think what horrible ingratitude this would be, if we
should deny his service, and serve his Enemies.

Well, to conclude this Use, and so to finish this point.

Do we lay claim to Christ, and pretend to an interest in his Death, which he
suffered for the Redemption of souls, then let not the Devil have any more
service from us, let not lusts be any longer obeyed; let us not make provision
for the flesh, let us not ser^e Mammon, Christ died to Redeem us from these
Tyrants, to himself; therefore let us willingly serve our Redeemer, and let us
glorify God in our souls and bodies, for they are Gods.

I Come now to speak something to that other great point; which I promised to
take into consideration.

He who has delivered up his own Son for us, h w shall he [ not with him]
freely give us all things.

S^e the te Text up^ned and dvided in the beginning of this dco^rse, and you
will be able to prevent me, in raising from hence the point, which I am now
about to hold forth to you, from the Apostle his way of arguing and manner of
expression, this truth naturally ^^we^^.

Jesus Christ is the greatest and best gift of God.

I shall give a brief (but full) account of this assertion, clearing up the
truth of it; and then shall improve it:

Christ is the principal best gift because,

1. He is the most comprehensive good. demonstration.
2. He is a conveighing gift, as well as a gift conveyed. 3. He is the
Engaging gift of God the Father.
1 Jesus Christ is the most comprehensive good, carrying in him that which
serve's for a supply of all the wants of Souls: Hence it is, that we have such
resemblances of Christ, that he is compared to those things which are most
useful and comfortable, John 6.
He is bread to feed the hungry Soul, and to nourish it to everlasting life,
Ie^. 2 13.
He is a fountain of living waters, of which who so drinks, shall never
thirst more, but this water shall be in the soul a well of water springing up
unto life eternal, Ioh. 4.14.
hi^ flesh is meat indeed, Ioh. 6.55. ch 15. v. 1.
and his blood is drink indeed, he is a vine, the true vine, which bears the
sweet grapes of consolation, Rev. 3.17.
for the comforting and glading of the souls of his people, he is raiment to
cover the nakedness of people and to put a comeliness upon them and adorn them;
Romans 13.14.
put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, he is a father and a husband to every
believer, his Name shall be called the everlasting Father. Thy maker is thy
husband.

Now Christ is held forth to us under such notions, Isay. 9.9. c 54. v. 5.
and by such metaphors, not only to way-lay our thoughts that we should look up
to Christ in all these things, but to teach us, that whatsoever sweetness is in
the creature, all that and much more is to be found in Christ.

Is bread useful, is water useful, is wine useful, is raiment useful, is a
tender father, or a good husband or wife, or a towardly hopeful offspring, a
blessing and a comfortable enjoyment, why of more use, of more concernment, a
greater comfort than any of these, yea than all these is Jesus Christ to the
souls that enjoy him.

2. Christ is a conveighing gift, he is the Lord high-Steward (as I may say) of
God the Father, who by the appointment of God, gives to every one of the
household his portion; It is in and by Christ Jesus, that God blesses us with
blessings spiritual and temporal; we are elected in him, adopted in him,
justified by faith in his blood, sanctified through him, and by his spirit, and
saved by him: and all things are bestowed upon the people of God through him,
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, ye shall receive. Ioh. 16.23.


Now it is good for us to note the fullness and the freeness of the conveighance
of mercies and blessings made to us in and through Christ.

It is a full conveighance, the fullness that was put into the person of the
mediator, was all for poor souls, that of his fulness we might receive, grace
for grace, and there is through him a conveighance of all things pertaining to
life and godliness.

2 There is a free conveighance of Gods bounty to us through Christ Jesus, how
shall he not with him (freely) give us all things If the first gift were free,
the accessories must be free also; but the first gift was free, whether we look
to the decree or the execution, what was there to move God to appoint his Son
to be mediator, and to send him in the fullness of time to work out the
redemption of sinners, surely nothing unless it were the creatures misery.

3 Jesus Christ is the engaging gift of God the Father, God having given his
Son, cannot but with him also give other things, for,

1. An argument from the greater to the lesser, concludes probably in reason,
but the conclusion made by faith, is necessary in this case, if we look to
Christ as heir of all things, upon whom all is ^ntailed (as I may say)

2 This appears more clearly, if we look upon God's faithfulness in making
good his promise, and his Justice engaged by Christ his purchase; Jesus Christ
purchased all things for those for whom he gave himself, therefore God is
engaged to give all things together with Christ.

Now if Jesus Christ be such a comprehensive gift, such a conveighing gift, and
such an engaging gift, then he is the principa gift of God, a gift above all
other gifts,

I come to some improvement of the point by application. Application.


I shall make a fourfold use of the doctrine.

1. If Christ be such a comprehensive good, Information.
then we see the nearest way and indeed the only way to the enioyment of all
needful good things, whether should we go for water but to the fountain, when
it is near, now Jesus Christ is near, he is brought home to us, and there are
free offers of Christ. made to our Souls, and he is a Fountain that is always
full, always open; and always running, therefore let us make out to Christ,
from whom, and in whom we may have all supplies, when all other comforts fail,
when riches fly away, and when friends die away, and when health is gone, and
life is going, then Christ will stand us instead, and be All, and more then all
those things to us; When the the leaking Cisterns will be found empty, then
shall we find the fountain full, and that will still yield us as much as we
need, if we want not the Bucket of Faith, to draw water out of this well.

2. If Christ be the conveying gift of God, then we must seek all good from God
in and through Christ, and give thanks to God by Christ, for all the good that
we receive; God bestows in and through Jesus Christ, all that he gives
graciously and in a way of love, and so God receives all from us in the way of
duty and service by the hand of Christ, So that we must have mind upon Jesus
Christ, and take in the consideration of Christ, in all our prayers and praises.

3. If Christ be the engaging gift of God, and if we reckon that God has
bestowed his son upon us, and so (as it were) bound himself to give us all
other needful good things, then there is an engagement upon us, to give our
selves back unto God; it is contrary to Religion and reason, that we should
think to be loose from God, and yet to have him bound to us.

4. We are informed hence, who are the richest men and women, surely they are
believers, such as enjoy Christ; for though such may be sometimes in a poor
outward condition, yet they cannot want any thing that is necessary for their
Spiritual and Eternal welfare, and having Christ, they have that which can
supply all wants, that which can satissie the Soul; When Paul was come to
Christ, then he had learned in what soever estate he was, therewith to be
content;

5. This speaks the unspeakable happiness of those souls that enjoy Christ,
God gives all things with him, and all proced's from love;

There is a great difference betwixt Believers and Unbelievers, as in point of
hope for the future, so in respect of their present enjoyments.

1. They are exceedingly distinguished in their hope;

Alas, What hope has a wicked man, or a carnal worldling! why? he is full of
vain hopes; He hopes that he shall live and see many good days upon Earth; he
hops to increase his estate, he hops that his posterity shall prosper; But
what hope has the Hip^crite, Job 27.8.
when God takes away his soul? Alas the confidences of vvorldly men shall be
plucked up, their hopes shall perish, they build in the sands, and building
sinketh, the house falls, it is the house built upon the Rock that stands,
hope sixed on Jesus Christ will never fail, will never make a man ashamed; It
is true that carnal worldly men, such as are faithless and Christless, do
profess their ^opes of happiness hereafter.

Some bear themseves up upon their good meaning and honest lealing^, civil
honesty is the best soundation that their hope has. Others that have not this
foundation, that have no honesty nor civilitie, yet say, they hope well, and
they trust God will be merciful to them; many souls are undone for ever, by
presuming upon the mercy of God, turning the grace of God into wantonness:
Sottish drunkards and profane sweaters, and such as live viciously, slatter
themselves in their sins, and even die with this in their mouths, God is
merciful; but be not deuived, says the Apostle.

Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, ^^r Adulterers, 1 Cor. 6 9.
n^r Thieve^, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, no such ungodly wicked persons,
shall inberit the Kingdom of God.

Let no man decive y^u wi^h vain words, Ephesians. 5 6.
for because of these things, comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience; It appears from both these scripturs, that there were diverse who
had such deceitful thou h^s, as if livng and dying in such sins as are there
mentioned they should yet go to heaven, presuming upon Gods mercy; but friends
this is most certain, that no man has any reason to hope for salvation, till
by faith he h^th said hold on Jesus Christ, who is the only Savior of souls,
God deals out mercies through Christ, where he bestows Christ, there he
gives grace glory, and withhold's no good thing: but without Christ, and out
of him, there is no exibition of any thing to men and w^men, in a gracious way,
nothing proceeding from love, Christ is the conv^ighing gift of God, who
brought all good with him out of the bosom of his Father, to those that
enjoyhim; now if other gifts of Gods good will, lesser gifts be not bestowed,
but through Christ, and with Christ, then surely, he will not give Eternal life
without him, or out of him.

Therefore so long as souls are ^^thout Christ, stranger^ to him, (...) they
close with him by faith, ^^d take him as Lord and Jesus, ^^y have no ground to
hope for ^^lvation: He that has the Son, ^^blife: 1 Ioh. 5 12
This is the will of him ^^t sent me, that every one which (...) the Son, and
believes on him, Ioh 6.40.
^^y have everlasting life*

The spirit of God speaks ex^^sly, 1 Ioh. 5.11
that eternal life is in Jesus ^^ist, and that he who has not (...) Son has
not life and that people ^^not have a confident expecta^^^n of any good from
God, out of ^^rist.

But now it is as clear as the Sun, ^^t many who pretend hope of ^^vation, are
without Christ, and ^^thout Faith, for where Christ ^^meth, he works a
change, ^^ere Faith is, it purifieth the ^^rt, and purges the conscience ^^m
dead works, to serve the Li^^ng God, it acts a man toward ^^d, it gives up
the Soul to Jesus ^^rist; it frames people unto ^liness, and new obedience:
Therefore all unholy and irreligious persons, all workers of iniquity, being
without Christ, are without hope of happiness, whatever they say. Po. 14.32
But the Righteous has hope in his Death; He that by Faith has laid hold on
the Righteousness of Christ, and is Sanctified by the Spirit of Christ to bring
forth the fruits of righteousness in his life; he has hope through Christ
Jesus, that God who has bestowed Christ upon him, to Justify an^. Sanctify
him, will together with him, and through him, give life Eternal, Acts 28.10 1 Timothy 1.1 1 Cor 15.19.
Christ is called the hope of Israel and the hope of Believers; The Christians
hope is in Christ; If in this life only we have hope [in Christ] Beloved, he
that has the Son has everlasting life, is saved by hope; living and dying he
is in certain expectation of Salvation by Christ.

Here is a main difference now betw^xt the Believer and the unbeliever, between
the true Christian, and the worlding in this particular.

And truly, the condition of men and women in point of happiness is to be
judged of, not by what we see, or what is now possessed, but by what is hoped
for hereafter upon good ground; he is a poor man, a wretched man, that has no
hope in Christ; As for your present outward enjoyments, what an emptiness is in
them, and how uncertain are they? these earthly considences shall be plucked
up, they must perish; If a man take up any serious thoughts of Eternity, what
comfort can he take in his present enjoyments, when he has no hope of Heaven
hereafter? Now alas, the Christless soul is a hopeless soul, when the truth
of the matter comes to be tried, and therefore is a miserable soul inded. But
as for the Believer who possesses Christ, though he has but little here of
the World, yet has hope of an excceeding eternal weight of glory, has hope
of enjoying a Crown hereafter, and this hope is the anchor of the soul sure
and steadfast, which will not give way, it enters into that which is within
the Veil, it is fastened on the Rock Christ Jesus, so that it cannot be broken
off, there can be no disappointment of the Christian his hope, he has Christ,
that is the engaging, and conveying gift of God, and the rest must follow.

This is the great happiness of 7 those that enjoy Christ, such souls, and such
only, have hope of eternal life; Grant that the children of God do live here in
a poor outvvard condition, and are under Gods Rod in the School of affliction,
while the ungodly flourish, aboud in wealth, and have no changes; (allow I
say to wicked men the greatest ^dds in this life) Yet Believers have
infinitely the advantage of them, in regard of the hope that they have of
another life, which is transcendently beyond this in the best condition of
living here.

2. There is a great difference between the Believer, and the Unbeleever,
betvveen the soul that possesses Christ, and the soul that has not Christ,
in respect of present enjoyments.

There are many carnal men that have this worlds goods in a plentiful measure,
in great abundance, but as long as they are without Christ (if they seriously
think upon it) they have little reason to bless themselves; they can take but
little comfort in their enioyments: for where Christ is not given, nothing is
given of God with a purpose of Grace, so that the unbeliever has reason to
think, that these things are given him in anger, and in judgment to make him
the more inexcusable, to be a snare to him, to fatten him against the day of
slaughter, to aggravate his sin, and increase his condemnation,

But now where God has bestowed Christ, and where the soul takes him up by
faith, other things coming in with him are gifts of God's will, they are fruits
and tokens of God his love; whatsoever comes from God together with Christ,
must needs come from love.

This is a sweet consideration indeed, and surely all other enjoyments of
Christians, are (as has been hinted) much sweetened to them, and become much
more valuable and profitable by their enjoyment of Christ; he that has not
Christ, has nothing that is truly good to him, nothing that will prove
comfortable in the end; but when I know that Christ is mine, then I can look
upon every thing that I enjoy, and say, This is the good gift of my God. This
is a gracious Dispensation; this my Fathers love; now let my Soul rejoice in
the God of my comforts. 6. Infer 6.
If Christ be such a gift of God, the great all-comprehending gift; then
Christians should be satisfied with Christ, though they possess not these
outward things; Christ makes up all. If God has given Christ to us, he has
done enough for us, though it is sure that with him he will give us all things,
and things needful, and that which he sees to be good for us.

2. If Jesus Christ be the great and principle gift of God, Conviction.
then it is great folly in people to prefer any thing before Christ; now
surely, many are they, who may be convicted of folly upon this account; for
alas, how few are they that make out after Christ? People are content
generally to be without him, to be strangers to him; some are Voluptuous, some
Covetuous, some Ambitious, Haec tria pro trino numine vul gus habere
some for Pleasure, some for Profit, some for Honor; these are the things that
men look after, but there is little looking after Christ; he is held out to be
the great gift of God, the most comprehensive gift, in whom there is a fullness
of all good to give abundant satisfaction to the Soul; that makes him its
portion, in him we shall find contentment, which is not to be found in any
thing beside him; and he is such a conveying gift, as brings along with him all
things pertaining to life and godliness, and this gift is held forth by God;
and offered to souls in the Ministry of the Gospel, Come says God, take my
Son, and give your selves up to him, you shall surely find enough in him, but
oh, how is Christ slighted, as a thing of no value, so that people will not be
persuaded to seek an enjoyment of him; Ah foolish wor^dlings, you will not be
called off from your vain and sinful courses, nor from the eager pursuit of the
things of this world, to look after christ, to get an interest in him, Do you
not in effect say, rather let us enjoy the pleasures of sin, rather let us have
this Worlds goods, we judge these things to be better then Christ: Ah poor
souls, Why do you follow after lying vanities, forsaking your own mercies? John
4.10.
What says Christ to the woman of Samaria? If thou knew the gift of God,
and who it is that says unto thee, give me to dri^ke, thou would have asked
of him, and he would have given thee living water, Oh, did you know the gift of
God, and what it is that he holds forth to you, when he offreth Christ to you
on condition of your repenting and believing: I say, did you know this gift of
God, you would not despise an offered Christ, but would close with the motion,
and accept of the tender withal your heart, crying out to God, o Give me Chapter
above all things, Christ, though without any thing else. Lord what ever thou
take a way, or withold'st from me, give me thy Son, bestow Jesus Christ upon
me. See how it is with Paul respecting this matter: when the eyes of his
understanding were opened, and he once b^came thoroughly apprenensive of the
excellency of Christ; I account all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, Phil 3.8.
and d^ count them but^dung; that I may wi^ Christ, Were we thus taught of God,
were we convinced, that Christ is such a transcendent good, that he is beyond
comparison, the richest gift and best for us, then desire would be carried unto
Christ, then you would be enquiring, how may I get christ, and how may I know
whether I have him, or no; and then people would come carefully to the
Ordinances, and attend to Preaching, and wait without weariness upon the
Ministry of the Word, wherein God upholdeth the Mystery of Christ, makes this
gift known, and sets forth the riches of it, wherein he offers it to those
that will take it, and which is the means of Faith, that is the hand to receive
this gift of Go^: But when people turn their ^acks upon the Ordinances, or
sleep under it, slighting the Doctrine of Christ, it is because they are
ignorant of the worth of these things; they have no Knowledge of Christ, they
see no desireableness in him, and so they prefer any thing before him. And
surely the Prophets Charge falls heavy upon a number of people; They are
foolish people, they know not Christ, Jer. 4 22.
they are sottish Children, they are void of Understanding; while they set
their hearts upon tristes, highly prizing that which is worth nothing, and in
the mean time slight and make no reckoning of that which is infinitely more
worth than all other things; Ah foolish Creatures, to forsake the Fountain of
living waters, and hew out to our selves broken Cisterns, that will hold no
waters.

Now to carry on this Use of Conviction, by particular demonstrations of
peoples folly, in neglecting and slighting Jesus Christ.

1. Is it not folly to refuse that which will be to us (...) om^ium, as much as
all things, yea more than all other things; that which will serve our turn at
all needs. Now Christ is such a full good, he is all in all to the Soul that
enjoyes him; he is light in darkness, peace in trouble, comfort in affliction,
liberty in imprisonment, health in sickness, life in death; and yet the offers
of Christ are slighted, and despised: Surely upon this account people are
justly charged with notorious folly.

2. Will not every one be ready to call him fool, who shall accept of a small
piece of money, rather then of the gift and conveyance of a very great estate?
Now Christ is a conveyance beyond all conveyances, in him, by him, and together
with him, God conveyeth all things pertaining to life and godliness, makes over
Heaven and Earth to us, all things are ours if Christ be ours; Ah what fools
shall we prove our selves to be, if we slight the offers of Christ?

3. Christ is the engaging of God, so that where Christ is received, all other
things may be expected, because God has promised to give all things with him,
and because Christ has purchased all things for those who by Faith close with
him, and God cannot prove unfaithful, to fail of his word, nor can he be
unjust, to withhold from us, that which Christ has purchased for us.

Now will any wise soul refuse an engagement from God? is it not a great matter
to have God engaged to us, So that we may be able to urge him with his own
engagement, coming to him confidently in the want of grace, or when we stand in
need of any comfort. Lord give me this for thy Son's sake, For thy promise
sake: Christ is mine, and through him, by virtue of thy Covenant and his
purchase, I have a right to other things; therefore let not this be denied me.

Thus the believer that has laid hold on Christ, may with an humble boldness
plead Gods gracions promises, and Christ's merits, while he denies himself, and
in low abasement of spirit acknowledges his own desert of the contrary to that
grace and mercy which he lays claim to through Christ, and acting faith upon
God in Christ may expect a gracious return from God, in giving all that is
necessary for salvation, and in bestovving, or else vvitholding, or
withdravving other things, as he sees to be for the good of his poor servants:
And is it not folly, I say, to refuse such an engagement from God, tendered to
us.

Thus you have had a treble demonstration of peoples folly in refusing Christ,
and so I have done with the use of conviction,



First, To all. Exhortati.
Secondly, To those that have received Christ.
I shall suggest and press two general counsels. Exhort. General.


1. Seeing Christ is the principal gift of God, labor above all things to get
Christ, Get Christ.
make out after him, and seek to lay hold on him.

By way of motive, I shall urge nothing but what has bin already suggested,
desiring you to think feriously thereupon, for the vvorking of your hearts over
unto Christ.

Consider, Motive 1.
that Christ is the engaging gift of God the Father, so that where this gift
is received, where Christ is apprehended and applied, there Faith has good
ground and sure fo^ting, to stand and bear up the soul in expectation of all
other needful good things: For God has given in Christ, and with him a right
to all things; Christ is Lord of all things, and in and through Christ,
Believers are Heirs of all: So that if if we do possess Christ, we may
confidently expect to receive from God, all that may further salvation, and
whatsoever he sees to be good for us, and the having of this gift gives the
soul a certain hope of enjoying Eternal life hereafter. It is good to look
after this ensuring gift, which gives assurance of all needful good things
here, and of all complete happiness hereafter.

What a quieting will this be to the spirit of a Christian, in all the changes
and turnings of this life, in every condition, which providence orders for
him, to be able to say. This is best for me now, and I know that it shall be
otherwise with me, when God sees another condition to be better for me: And
what a stay and support will this be to the heart of a poor creature, ^midst all
the storms that arise upon him in the troublesome Sea of this World; When
considering his interest in In Jesus Christ can say-I know that my Redemer, my
Deliverer, my Savior lives; I know that there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness.

2. Consider that where Christ is given, there is a gracious gift of other
things together with him, not only they are given, and given freely, beside
and contrary to our deserts, but they are given in good will, so that there is
love in all Gods dispensations to us.

This we may be sure of, if God has once given us Christ; for God does not
love to day and hate to morrow, but having once loved, he loves to the end; If
the first, the great gift were a gift of grace, so are all the rest, they all
flow from one Fountain, viz. the love and Grace of God.

Now surely the love of God is admirablie made out to souls in giving them his
Son, therefore there is love in the rest: Therefore get Christ, make sure of
him, and so make sure of the love God in all other gifts.

3. Consider, that Christ is a full good, a most comprehensive good, all in all
to the soul that enjoys him

1. He is all in respect of sufficiency, a man needs no more then Christ to
make him happy

2. He is all in respect of Efficiencie, he brings to the souls of Believers
all those privileges that ^rs spoken of in the Word of grace, He of God is
made to them Wisdom, Righteousnses, 1 Cor. 1.30.
Sanctification and Redemption, and in him all things are theirs. Now when a
man can have all things wrought up in one, is it not wisdom for him to seek to
possess himself of that thing, if it may be had? Why Christ is that great all
comprehending good; once get him; and ye have in him, Whatsoever good the
believer has, he has from and through Christ; and whatsoever he expects it
is by Christ, In Christ are all the treasures of hol ness, and happiness, and
if he be thine, all that is his is thine; Therefore beloved, lay out for
Christ, and lay about you to make sure of him.

Directions for the getting Christ.
Now I shall show you briefly, what is requisite and necessary to your getting of
Christ, shall give some few directions concerning the way by which you may come
to be possessed of him.

1. You must be convinced of your spiritual poverty, nakedness, and misery of
your lost and undone condition without Christ, that so you may be prepared for
him, being taken off from other foundations, from resting on any thing else:
you must see the need you have of Christ, that you may desire him, and may be
ready to reach out the hand of the Soul, to receive him, when he is offered to
you.

2. You must be persuaded of the worth of Jesus Christ, believe his excellency,
Ignoti nulla cupido.
that he is valuable above all other things, that so desire may be carried to
him, and that you may be willing to take this gift of God, as he is willing to
bestow it: Oh, if souls were once otherwise persuaded of the desirableness of
Christ, and of the usefullness of Christ, and of the fullness that is in him,
and did duly weigh his excellencies, then they would account all things lost
for Christ and would esteem all things as dung that they may win Christ, and
would cry out with that blessed Mar, None but Christ, none but Christ.

3. Think often and seriously upon Christ, what he is, and of what advantage to
souls, that Adoption, and Righteousness, and Grace, and Glory come with him,
and by him, let this I say be often thought upon, and probably by this means
the soul may be wrought upon to look more after Christ, and the heart may be
prepared to close with him, this means has been successful, in Isa. 52. there
is a speech of the exaltation of Christ in the hearts of People, and an
intimation of the means by which they should be wrought to entertain such
high thoughts of Christ; that which had not been told them, Isa. 52.13.15.
shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall they consider: it
shall it shall be discovered to them, what that Christ is whom they have
despised, and now they shall speak against him no more, but shall condemn
themselves for contemning him, and shall be willing with all their hearts to
embrace him.

4. If you have any apprehension of the excellency of Christ, and any desire
to enjoy him, then you must be willing to take him upon God's terms, must let
go self, let go the World, let go Lusts, let go Pleasures and Profits, when any
of these stand in competition with Christ, must part with all for Christ; The
Merchant man that will have the Pearl of great price, must sell all to make
purchase of that. All must be sold in our judgment, and in our affection; and
in respect of our confidence, and in respect of a full resignation of all up
unto God, so that we must not set a high price upon these worthless things,
must not cleave in affection to them, must not trust in these things, must be
willing to let go al, when God will have it from us; and s rely there is
nothing lost by exchanging all other things for Christ, if all worldly trash go
for this true Treasure it should be no ill bargain; It is better to be with
out all other things then to be without Christ; and it must needs be a great
gain to get Christ, with the loss of other things; because God has treasured
up all riches in him, and has appointed him to be instead of all other things,
yea and far better then all other enjoyments.

But now people stick at this; when Christ and self, Christ and lusts, Christ
and pleasures, Christ and profits stand in competition; so that if they will
have Christ they must let go these things, they like not to deal upon such
terms: They see not so much in Christ, as they do in other things, therefore
they will not be persuaded to part from these things for Christ, many are kept
off from Christ by a conceit of self wisdom and selfrighteousness, and by
carnal interests and advantages in the World, and by the love of lusts, so that
they are ready to say, as those Trees in the Parable, Judge. 9.
Shall I leave my fatness, says one, Shall I leave my sweetness, says
another, to be promoted over the trees? What shall I get by Christ, says the
carnal heart shall I leave my pleasure, and take my self off from my advantages
in the World? to take a naked Christ? What gain is there in this? Are there not
many, who do in effect say as those daughters of Jerusalem: What is thy bel^ved
more then other beloveds? Cant. 5. 9.
What a do is here about Christ? you say above all your gettings get Christ's;
let go all and take Christ, you tell us, he is the great Gift, he is all, Why,
we find that there is something beside him, and that which pleases us well
that which we will hold Fast, say you what you will, or may we not have Christ
and hold fast the World? May we not have Christ, and take our pleasure, may we
not enjoy Christ and our lusts together?

O friends, if you will have Christ you must be resolved upon the terms, to
part from all for him.

5. You must seek Jesus Christ, in the use of those means which God has
appointed and afforded, particularly, in attendance upon the Ministry of the
word, wherein God makes offers of Grace, and holds forth Jesus Christ with
his fulness to you, if you will receive him; God will be sound of those that
seek him; Christ will come to those that wait for him in his own way. But as
for those Fanatics, and seduced souls, who reckon themselves to be above
Ordinances, and those profane ones, who do wickedly despise them, and
stubbornely refuse to bring their spirits under them, and turn their backs upon
the Preaching of the Word, Surely they are not in the way to find Christ.

6. As you must attend upon Ordinances, that you may find Christ in them, so
you must heed God his offers of Christ, and Christ his tenders of himself to
you; You must observe how Christ comes to you in the sweet motions of the
Spirit, knocking at the doors of your heart, and importuning you to open to
him; Istand at the door and knock, if any man open to me, I will come in to
him, Reve. 3.26
Christ speaks in the Ministry of the Gospel, calling you to faith and
repentance, and new obedience, and he knocks at the doors of your hearts by
the motions of his Spirit, and this standing and knocking implies an carnest
desire to be let in, to be entertained; Now when we repent and believe, and
give Christ entrance into our hearts, this is to open the door unto him; Oh,
take heed you do not neglect the calls and knocks of Christ, but open to him;
let the everlasting doors of your souls be lifted up, that the King Glory may
come in. Oh, how long have you kept Christ out of door? though he has knocked
hard, and called aloud, yet he could not hitherto obtain to have the door
opened to him, you would not be persuaded to cast the World out of your hearts,
and to turn out lusts, and take him in; but still continue as vain, as proud,
as worldly, as intemperate, as irreligious, and every way as bad as you were? O
firs, take heed of resisting the Spirit, of giving Christ such often repulses,
least he be provoked to be gone, and resolve not to solicit you any further,
that his Spirit shall not more strive with you, lest you be given up to your
own counsels, to perish by your own gainsayings; Dear souls, give Christ
entertainment; Oh, that the power of Gospel Revelations and Gospel Counsels may
come in upon your hearts.

2. Seeing Christ is the principal gift of God, Counsel. 2. Make sure an
interest in Christ.
let us labor to clear up to our selves our interst in him, to get assurance
that we have him; for many there are, who are ready to say, that Christ is
theirs, when indeed they have no part in him.

Quest. How shall I know that I have Christ?

Answ. In order to a solution of this, or to give satisfaction herein* I shall
in general acquaint you with this.

Our having received Christ; our being in Christ, and Christ his being in us;
are notions that serve to express one and the same thing.

This being premised, I shall propound two heads, or two ways of discovery
for answer to the question.

If Christ be ours then we are in Christ.
1. If we have received Christ, then we are in Christ.

Now I find, that the Spirit of God uses a threefold comparison or similitude
in setting forth a Believer his being in Christ.

1. A Christian is in Christ as a branch in the stock; so that if we bud and
blossom, and grow in grace, and be fruitful in holiness, this is an agrument,
that we have received Christ, that we are in him.

2. A Christan is in Christ as a member in the body, united to the head; so
that if there be Spiritual life in us, and Spiritual sense, and Spiritual
motion and action; this is an argument, that we have received Christ, that we
are in him.

3. A Christian his being in Christ, is set forth by the marriage union, so
that if there be a sweet intercourse between Christ and the soul, if the
soul receive comfort from Christ, and take pleasure in his company and delight
in communion with him, then he has Christ.

2. If a man has received Christ, then Christ is in him; Christ is in us.
Christ is in the Saints, as the soul in the body, as the Sun in the World, as
a man in his house, as a King on his Throne.

Now there are two means, or two manner of ways by which Christ is thus in
the Saints, both expressed by the Apostle in one place, viz. the Spirit and
Faith;

The Believer's union with Christ, Ephesians. 3.16, 17.
is not a natural mixture of Substances, of Christ his substance, and our
substance, as if there were a real entrance of the body or Soul of Christ,
into our body or Soul.

Nor is it only a conjunction of love, or an union in affection between us and
Christ; but it is a mistical union, in which Christ-and Believers become one;
Christ stians are knit to brist and to one-another by joints and bonds, col
2.19.
(The Spirit and faith are those bonds) and this union is (as has been said)
shadowed out in Scripture by the union of the head and the members in the body
of man, and by the union of a man and a woman in a married estate; This union
is made on Christ his part, by his Spirit, on our part, by Faith.

1. By his Spirit.
1. Christ is in us by his Spirit, (this is first in order, in as much as the
Spirit is the worker of Faith, The cause is before the effect,)

Evidenoes he e^f.
Now there are diverse effects whereby Christ discovers himself to be in the
soul by his Spirit.

1. As the soul in the body is the principle of life, motion, and action, so
is Christ in the Saints by his Spirit, the principle of spiritual life, putting
into them, and preserving in them that life which is called the life of God,
Ephesians. 4.18. and as the soul acts the body, and every member of it, so are
Saints acted by Jesus Christ, by Spirit in them.

John 3 6. Romans 8.14.
That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.

The children of God are led by the Spirit of God, which leads from sin unto
duty, and acts the soul toward God, (not as though we were merely passive,
so acted, as not at all active, but) Christ acting the soul, puts spiritual,
holy activity into the soul; he works in us both to wiland to do, there is
the willing and working of that soul which is acted by Christ, by his Spirit.

2. As the Sun is in the World, to give light and to give heat, and to cause
fruitfulness, so that precious things are brought forth by the Sun, Deuteronomy.
33.14. and to make beauty and glory upon the Earth. So Christ is in the Soul
by his pirit, scattering darkness, bringing in spiritnal light, rendering those
things visibl and evident which before were hidden, yea making those souls to
be light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8.
which which his coming to them were darkness it it self; it is the Spirit of
Truth, Joh. 16.13.
which is the Spirit of Christ) that leads into all truth; and Christ by his
Spirit brings in heavenly heat, and makes the heart within a man to burn in
affection toward God, Romans 12.12
and the things of God; -- burning with the Spirit, therefore the spirit is
likened to Fire. And as the Sun in the World, so the Spirit of Christ in the
soul, causes fruitfulness, so that every branch in this Vine Christ, is a
fruit bearing branch, every soul in which Christ is, is by the influence of his
Spirit made fruitful in Grace; Grace in the heart of Christians, and holy
actions and duties in their lives; are called fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
And Christ by his Spirit in the work of Grace, makes the soul beautiful, and
puts a glory upon it, Cant. 4.1. (if he be master* If provident. If friendly)
How beautiful art thou my love, behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art
fair, the Kings daughter is all gl^rious within, etc.

3. As a man dwells in his house, 2 Timothy 14
there commanding, and ordering all things, and making provision for those of
his household, and entertaining and chearing his friends and making them
welcome; So Christ by his Spirit dwells in the soul; and by the Spirit he
bears rule in the soul, so that his Word is a law to the soul. The Saints, so
far forth as they are spiritual, are ordered in all things by Christ dwelling
in them, though they find with Paul, that there is the flesh lusting against
the spirit, and often interrupting the course of their obedience: and Christ
dwelling in the foul, provideth for the soul takes care that it want nothing,
deals out to it the gifts of grace, which ^r^ given by the spirit according
to the measure of Christ, and Christ dwelling in the soul gives his refreshings
to the soul, makes it a feast of fat things brings it into the banqueting
house, or the house of Wine comforting the heart, by applying the promises of
the Gospel, and the Grace of Christ to the soul, revealing his love, and
speaking peace to the soul, thus feasting it, and filling it, as with marrow
and fatness: These refreshings of Christians are from the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in them, therefore the Spirit is called the Comforter, and the joy
which Christ gives into the heart, is called the fruit of the Spirit.

4. As a King on his Throne swayeth the Scepter of his Realm, having all the
people of that Realm subject to him, and governed by him according to
Constitutions, and Laws of that Kingdom. So is Christ in all true Christians,
giving laws to the conscience, and governing the whole man to the obedience
thereof; he is there in power, making them a willing people, willing to obey
his commands, willing to subject themselves to the laws and ordinances of his
Kingdom, (which Earthly Kings cannot do. Psalm 110, 3.
( Thy people shallbe willing in the day of thy power: And Christ is in the
heart, as a King to subdue rebellious lusts, and tame nur^^y affections, to
cast down all strong holds that are raised up by the Devil and the flesh,
against him, and at last to bring under every thought into subjection to
himself.

And as a good King seeks the good of his subjects, and desires, not to
impoverish, but enrich them. So does Christ seek the good of that soul, in
which he has erected a Throne for himself, is always doing good to it, and
enriching it with Grace here, and glory hereafter.

And it is by the Spirit that Christ bears rule: It is the Spirit that
represseth corruption, and mortifieth the deeds of the body; It is by the
Spirit, that Christ enricheth the soul with Grace, Knowledge, Faith, Love, and
all those precious things of Grace, are the gifts of Christ, which he conveyeth
to them by his Spirit.

5. The Spirit of Christ, where he comes in a spirit of supplication, teaching
men to pray, and and framing their hearts to prayer, He has sent the Spirit of
his Son into ur hearts, Gal 4.6.
whereby we cry, abba father.

6. Where Christ dwells by his Spirit, there is the influence of the virtue of
his Death and Resurrection, to the mortification of sin, Romans 6.6. (...).
and vivification of Grace, Our Old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin should be destroyed, that it should be rendered inefficatious, unable to
work; that sin may become powerless in us, that we may be freed from the law of
sin, by the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, i. e. by the lively
powerful working of Christ's Spiret in us, which breaks off the yoke of
bondage that lay upon our necks in the state of nature, whereby sin held us
wholly under subjection to it self; and in Verse 17.18. the Apostle makes out
this more fully, that Believers are freed by Christ, from the dominion of sin,
(so that the strength of corruption is abated in them, the old man, is weakened)
and that by the Spirit of Christ, the soul is made alive unto God, and is freed
unto righteousness, set at liberty to walk in the ways of God.

In a word, take the Evidence of Christ his being in the soul, thus.

Christ and his Spirit are not sundered, nor is the Spirir in us without the
fruits of the Spirit.

Let no man say that he has Christ, unless he has the Spirit of Christ.

If we look upon a body, when the soul is gone out of it, we cannot say, this
is a man; no more can we say of a man without the Spirit of Christ, This is a
Christian; That is no true member of the body, which is not animated by the
soul in the body, no more he a member of Christ, that is not quickened by the
Spirit of Christ: Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, 1 Jo. 4.13.
by his Spirit which he has given us.

Now again, the Spirit is no where idle or fruitless: but is operative, and
has its fruits, both in heart and life; Gal. 5.22.23.
The fruits of the Spirit are reckoned up by the Apostle Paul. Here is the
issue; do thou say, that thou have Christ? if this be true, then his Spirit
dwells in thee, if the spirit be in thee, the fruits of the Spirit will appear.

Thus we may prove by the effects of the Spirit of Christ, whether we be
possessed of Christ.

Where the aforesaid effects of the Spirit are, Christ is in that soul.

But where there is not that life, that light, that warmth, that fruitfulness,
that willing subjection to christ and obedience to his commands, which have bin
spoken of, there Christ is not by his spirit, where there is nither skill nor
will to pray, there Christ is not, where sin is in its full strength, where the
old man is not Crucified, and sin mortified, where the soul is not raised up to
newness of life, and quickened unto holiness, there Christ is not possessed.

2. I told you that Christ is in the Soul by Faith, that Christ may dwell in
your hearts by Faith.

Christ is in us by Faith. Eph^^^ (...) 2 By s^^^^.


1. When by Faith we have a right and true apprehension, and knowledge of
Christ, of his Person and Offices.

2. When by faith we apply Christ, and his benefits, when we take down (as I
may say) and digest the fruits of his death and Resurrection, so that he
becomes indeed Righteousness, and Holiness to us.

3. When being Justified and Sarctified by Faith in Christ Jesus, and by the
Spirit of the Lord, we bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, walking not after
the flesh but after the Spirit.

Thus Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith.

Well, you have had two General Counsels suitable, and necessary.

First, Seek Christ above all your gettings, labor to get him.

Secondly, See whether you have Christ or no.

Both Counsels urged.
Now to press both Counsels jointly.

I shall hint a few considerations, which should be of force with us, as
serving to evince this, that Jesus Chrst is worth the looking after, and that
it is wisdom, to make sure of him.

1. Christ is our Reconciliation, taking away all enmity betwixt God and us,
and making us accepted to God.

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. Ephe.
1.6, 7
(or in whom Christ is) God has made us accepted to himself in the Beloved, in
whom we have forgiveness of sins.

2. Christ is to the soul that possesses him, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption.

Christ is in us to make us wise, 1 Cor. 1.3.
giving us the knowledge of God, enabling us to understand in some good measure
the mysteries of Salvation, he makes us Righteous, in putting his own
Righteousness to us, and justifying us thereby, he makes us Holy, Sanctifying
us by his Spirit, and he will make us completely happy in the end, delivering
us from all the miseries to which we are subject in this life, and translating
us from death to life Eternal.

3. If Christ be in us, dwelling in our hearts by Faith, and possessing us by
his Spirit, then all the promises of God are in him, yea and amen to us, then
we have the earnest of all the Spirit, and all sealed to us by the Spirit,
which is given us.

You know the use of a Seal, it is obligatorie on the one part, and serves for
assurance on the other part.

You know the meaning of an Earnest, it binds a promise; As it is part of the
price to be given, or the sum promised, So, it is a pledge of a full
performance.

The Spirit of Christ in us is a Seal, and an Earnest, serving to assure us,
that we shall in due time receive through Christ, all that good which God has
promised for his sake to give to us.

4. If Christ be in us, his Grace is sufficient for us in every temptation to
strengthen us, and to give a good issue to make us victorious, and in every
evil that befalls us, to support us under it, and to deliver us from it, and to
make our Consolations to abound, as our sufferings abound.

5. This is a very great priveledge, which the soul has by Christ dwelling in
it, he wounds and weakneth corruption, and frees the soul from the do minion
of sin; makes the Soul alive unto God, sets it at liberty to walk with God,
and to run the way of his comandments, gives it a freedom unto righteousness:
here is a freedom indeed, when the soul is thus made free by Jesus Christ the
Son of God; If the Son make you free, Joh. 8.36.
then shall ye be free indeed.

Surely, this is accounted a great privilege indeed by those who are sensible
of the grievousness of that bondage in which they were held under corruption,
when sin did reign and bear full sway in them, by those who apprehend the
sweetness and preciousness of that freedom which Jesus Christ brings unto
souls; by those who have proved the glory of this liberty into which souls
are brought by Christ Jesus.

What a base, vile, wretched condition is a man in, while the Devil is Lord
Paramont to him, when every stinking lust has power over him, and full command
of him.

What a happiness then is it, to have the Devil's yoke broken from off his
neck, to be freed from sin, to have his spirit sweetly subjected to Jesus
Christ, to have his will determined to that which is good, and bound over to
Righteousness, to have the whole man given up unto God; though none knows the
misery of the one, or the happiness of the other, but they who have experienced
both.

6. Where Christ is given, there is a gracious gift of other things with him.

God does not deal out his gifts to all men, graciously, and in good will, to
some he gives in displeasure, and for evil to them, gives health and
strength, gives children, gives gract parts and abilities, gives riches and
abundance of these outward things, but bestows none of these things in love:
but here is comfort for a soul that has made sure of Christ, he may look upon
other matters, dealt out to him by the hand of Providence, as gifts of God's
good will; as gracious dispensations; That which a child of God has of the
World, though it be but little in it self, yet is much with the love of God in
it, and upon account of his blessing with it, thus that of David holds
excellently and eminently true: Psalm. 37.16
A little that the righteous man hathis better then great Reverenues of the
wicked, then the riches of any wicked.

7. Eternal life is the gift of God bestowed in and with Jesus Christ; so that
he who now possesses Christ by Faith, and has him dwelling in him by his
Spirit, has assurance given him that he shall possess glory with him hereafter.

Now friends, Is not Christ worth the looking after, is not he above all things
to be sought? Christ our Reconciliation, taking away all enmity betwixt God and
us? Christ that becomes to us, Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification,
and Redemption by whom we are enlightened, justified, sanctified and glorified.
Christ, in whom the promises of God are yea and amen to us, who will be to us
(if we have him) as a seal and an earnest, to assure us, that we shall enjoy
all that good which is carried in them? Christ that will support us in every
temptation, and trial, and be a comfort to us in every condition? hrist that
will be the death of sin in us, and will bring in the life of Grace into us;
that will bring such a happy liberty to us, making us of Satan's slaves to
become the Lord's freemen; Christ with whom other things are given, and that
graciously, in love and good will; Christ that will bring us into the bosom of
God, to live with him for ever in Glory.

Is not this Christ, I say worth the looking after, wherefore, let your aim be
at Christ; and above all things labor to get him, to be possessed of him, and
to be assured, that he is yours, and you are his.

You invite friends to come to your houses, and tell them, that you shall be
glad of their company, and ready to give them the best entertainment that the
house affords, and heartio welcome; (though often times, with some persons, this
is but a complement) Ah beloved; do you in reality invite Christ to come to
your souls; entreat him to come and dwell with you, in you; Tell him that he
shall have the command of every room in thy heart, the whole house of thy
soul shall be at his disposing, that all the faculties of thy soul and all the
members of thy body shall be at his his service; thus beg of him, woe him, to
come and make his abode with thee; and in the use of Ordinances, and in Duties,
wait for his coming to thee, and when he shall come and knock be ready
according to thy invitation to open the door of thy heart, and receive him in
with joy; for surely, he will prove a good Guest indeed, that will feast thee
with his love, and will fill thee with delights; and make even the worst
condition on Earth to be a very heaven to thee,

Having urged these incentives to the seeking of Christ: I thought not to have
proceeded any further in pressing this Counsel, but for as much as I am now
dealing with people about a business, that is of the greatest concernment to
them, and because I know that souls are not easily prevailed with in such a
case. I shall beg a little more of the Reader's patience, while I make an
essay for the driving of sinners (if they will not yet be drawn) unto Christ,
and I think, that having a whip put into my hand by God, I must make some use
of it.

I shall therefore now urg some considerations about the want of Christ,
setting forth the misery of being without him.

1. If Christ be the life of the soul, Gal. 2.20. 1 John 5.12 Col. 3.4.
(as he is certainly, Christ lives in me. He that has the Son has life, When
Christ who is our life shall appear, Christ is our life, as in this respect,
that he made us, and gave us being and life in the World; and because he has
purchased Eternal life for us, and will bring us to it, and because he will in
the last day, put life into our dead bodies and raise them up; So likewise he
is our life, because by his Spirit he quickens our souls, when he finds them
dead in sins and trespasses) I say now if Christ be our life, then souls
without Christ are dead souls, and all their works are dead works, (there
being nothing of the life of God put forth in any thing that they do, Nil dat
quod non habe. 2.
because there is nothing of this life in them,) Here is the misery of being
without Christ; the Soul is dead, as loathsome in the eye of God, and as
stinking in his nostrils, as a piece of carrion or a dead Corpse that has lien
rotting a long time in the grave, is offensive to us, yea much more loathsome
is such a soul unto God.

2. Without Christ the soul is like the Would without a Sun, so that there is
no Light, no Heat, no fruit, no Glory.

1. Souls without Christ are in darkness.

Ye are in darkness faith Paul the believing Thessalonians; 1 These 5.4.
Now ye are not, but you were, before Christ came to you, 1 Pet. 2.9. Col. ^.
3. Ephesians. 5.8.
Christ calls souls out of darkness; yea souls without Christ are under the
power of darkness; yea, they are darkness it self.

Oh, do but think, what a sad condition we should be in if the s^ll should
forsake our Horizon, so that we should never any more see the light thereof:
much more sad and dolourous is the condition of a soul without Christ, that
has not one glimps of true, spiritual and heavenly light, has no saving
apprehension of God, or Jesus Christ, or of any thing that concerns his own
^^lvation, that belongs to his

2. Where Christ is not there is ^o heavenly h^at; men are hot spi^ited in
pursuit of the profits and ^leasures of the World, are carried with heat of
affection, to sin and va^ity, but there is no fire of zeal for God, or toward
him, no fervency of spirit in serving the Lord, they are ^old spirited, yea
frozen hearted in ^espect of any affection to that which is good, what an
indifferent thing is it to them that are without Christ, whether they do or
leave ^^ndon those duties which God requires of them, I say, they are not
carried to any duty with any warmth of spirit upon any spiritual consideration,
or to any good ^^d; and so nothing that they do in the way of their duty finds
acceptance with God.

3. Where Christ is not, the soul is barren and fruitless altogether, in
respect of that which is good, As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
unless it abide in the vine, Jo. 15, 4 5.
no more can ye except ye abide in me, be that abides in me, and I in him, the
same bringtch forth much fruit with* me. He that abides in me, and I in him
the same brengeth f rth much fruit, without me ye can do nothing. Unless Christ
be in the soul, it brings forth no fruit unto God, nor is it, or can it be
profitable to it self. And now what is the doom of the barren tree? Cut it
down, why Combreth it the ground?

Ah, the soul without Christ, Heb. 6.8.
is like that earth which bears Thorns and Briars, that is rejected, and is
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burnt.

4. Where Christ is not, there is no glory nor beauty, because no light,
because no Grace, because no Righteousness, because no Holiness: In Christ
Jesus the New man is created after God, Ezekiel. 16.
in Right cousness and holiness of Truth: In the state of nature, the soul is
like a wretched infant in it is blood, whose navil is not cut, that is
unvvashed, cast out in the open field to the loathing of its person, But Christ
makes the Christian like the King's daughter, all glorious within, So that he
is beautiful through the comeliness which Christ puts upon him; but I say there
is none of this beauty, none of this glory, nothing but ugliness and
deformity, til^ Christ comes into the Soul,

3. A soul without Christ, is like a house that is without a Master or
Governor: and so there is no order in it, no provision made for it, there is
none to refresh, and comfort it, where the reviving consolations of the Spirit
of Christ are not.

4. A soul without Christ is as a Kingdom without a King, as a people without
government, there all things are in a confusion, tending to ruin and
destruction; Such a heart is not framed to the obedience of Gods laws, there
is none to subdue sin, and repress rebellious lusts in the heart, that rise up
against God, and fight against the soul, which if not quelled by an Almighty
power, will destroy soul and body utterly, where Christ is not, there is none
to seek the good of the Soul efficatiously, and to the souls undoubted
advantage; none that can enrich the soul with Grace here and bring it to Glory
hereafter.

5. A man's soul without Christ is in such a deplorable condition, as is the
body, in which are all the principal defects of Nature, like a man deprived of
all his senses, that can neither see, nor hear, nor taste, nor smell, nor feel,
(if we could suppose such a one in life,) That such a soul is spiritually
blind, I have showed already.

Further, it is Christ in the heart, that furnishes a man with a spiritual
ear, it is only the ear bored by the Spirit of Christ, that can hear the voice
of God, Multi habent aures audiendi; pauci aures obediendi. Aug.
that so hears as to understand, and believe, and obey the Word of God:
others are as deaf Adders, that hear not the voice of the Charmer, charm he
never so wisely; Many reproofs, many instructions, many admonitions, many good
counsels, and exhortations are dealt out to people yet they are deaf to all and
so will be, nothing will enter into them, till Christ be with their Spirits.

Souls without Christ are without feeling, like a man all over in a dead Palsy
(we speak of spiritual feeling) neither Gods Word, nor his works make any
impression upon such a heart; it is as senseless of the smitings of God in the
ministry of the Word, as the Anvile is of the strokes of the Hammer. That is
true of such a soul, which Solomon speaks of the drunkard; They have stricken
me, Pro. 23. ult.
and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not. So may such a soul
say, or we may say of him, he has been smitten with reproofs for his
Drunkeness, for his Oaths, for his Coveteousness, for his Sabbath-breaking, for
his ordinance slighting, etc. Oh, many blows have been given him, but he felt
them not; it appears so, because he is never the better, for these smitings,
he reformeth not those evils, for which he has been reproved.

Lastly, In a word; A soul without Christ savoureth not the things that are of
God. This term savor, is in Scripture applied both to tasting and smelling: to
tasting, so meat is said to be savoury, Genesis 27. to smelling, and so there is
the savor of ointments, and the savor of garments, spoken of in the Book of
Canticles. Now, as a man that has not the sense of tasting, cannot distinguish
meats or drinks, all are alike to him, he perceives no sweetness in Sugar or
Honey, no tartness in Vinegar, no bitterness in Gall, and as a man that has
not the sense of smelling, senteth neither sweet nor stinking, takes no
pleasure in those things which yield a most fragrant smell, nor is offended at
that which senteth most noisomely and odiously, so is it in a spiritual sense
with the soul that is without Christ, there is no sense of tasting or smelling,
no perceivance or apprehension of the sweetness of Jesus Christ, and of the
doctrine of the Gospel, of the deliciousness of the things of grace; such a
soul savoureth not the heavenly Manna, the Word of God is not at all sweet unto
his taste, but unsavory unto him; nor is sin disgustful, he perceives no
bitterness in it, but takes pleasure in it, so putting bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter.

6. Till you can find that you are in Christ, and Christ in you, you cannot
look upon your selves, but as vessels of dishonor ordained unto wrath. Romans
8.1.
There is n^ condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, but to all out of
Christ. Christ is wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, to those to
whom he is made redemption; it is Christ in us that is the hope of glory to us;
Examine your selves, 2 Cor. 13.^.
says the Apostle, prove your selves, know you not that Jesus Christ is in you
except ye be reprobates.

If thou have not Christ, who is that best garment, which the Father of the
returning Prodigal called for, to put it upon his Son, if thou have not put on
the Lord Jesus Christ, who is that Wedding Garment spoken of in the Parable,
M^t. 22. I say, if thou have not Christ, thou will be speechless, dumb, not
able to speak one word for thy self in that day, when the King of Kings, the
great Judge of all the World shall ask thee, why thou should not be
condemned, and cast into hell, for the sin in which thou was born, and the sins
in which thou have lived; whereas the soul that has gotten Christ, that has
taken him up by Faith, and has him dwelling in it by his Spirit, has the
merits of Christ his death to plead, and the righteousness of Christ to hold
forth unto God: Lord, though in my self I am worthy of death, and have deserved
to die a thousand times, though I have no righteousness of my own, yet in as
much as Christ has died for me, I must not die, in as much as thy Son, whom
thou have given me, has fulfilled all righteousness for me, and is made of God
righteousness to me, I shall not be condemned; but, I say, he that is without
Christ, will have nothing to say, when it shall be demanded of him, what he can
plead for himself, why he should not die for his sins: and what has the judge
then to say, to such a Christless wretch: Oh, he passes a dreadful sentence.

Bind him hand and ^oot, and take him away, and cast him into ou^er darkness,
there shall be weeping and guashing af teeth.

Ah now, dear souls, seeing the ^nhappiness of men and women, and their misery
is so great in the want of Christ, labor to be deeply sensible of this great
want, and greatly to bewail it. Surely, this is the greatest want in the World,
this is the only Damning want, better it is to want land, to want money, to
want clothes, to want health, to want bread, to want all outward things, then
to want Christ, to be without him, therefore let all your sorrowing for other
wants, be turned into mourning for this great want; For surely, as long as your
souls are Christless you are in the way to die for ever to perish without
rememedie.

And being thus sensible of your want and grieving under it, go to God for a
supply urging him with his promise to bestow Grace upon all humbled souls, that
are afflicted in the sense of their own want of Christ and Grace. God has
promised Christ, and Salvation by him, to those that are afar off, Seeing the
promise runs in such general terms, and holds forth Christ, and Grace to every
poor humbled, dejected sinner, to every desiring Soul; Lay thy self now at the
foot of the promise, and say unto God, Lord, my soul is Christless, and
graceless, and so in danger of perishing Eternally, Have thou not said that
thou will give Christ and Grace, and Salvation to them that are afar off; O let
this promise be good to me poor wretch, let me receive Christ, and all Grace
with him, and be brought into a state of Salvation, for thy mercies sake, so
shall I speak of thy goodness and sing unto thy praise, declaring what thou
have done for my soul.

Now, having pressed such general counsel, as I judged to be proper, naturally
flowing from the Doctrine. Special Counsels.
I shall drop some special words of advice to those that are possessed of Christ,
upon whom God has bestowed this great gift.

Counsel. Be satisfied, with Christ
1. If you have Christ, be content, be satisfied with him, and say with David. I
have gotten a goodly heritage: and with Jacob, I have enough: Let us not reckon
that we lack any thing, if we enjoy Christ; have you that all comprehending
good, and will you be complaining as if you had nothing? Surely the wants of
people in respect of temporalls, are commonly more in desire, then in the
absence of things, more in conceit then in reality; (for set aside fancy, and
there is nothing indeed necessary for the body, but food and raiment daily
bread, that which serves for the sustentation of life, and preservation of
health.) There was never any worldly minded man that was satisfied with the
World; He that loves Silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that
loves abundance with increase. Eccle. 5.10
This is vanity says the Preacher: The heart of man is still coveting this and
that, and the other thing, which seems to him desirable, and when he has this
and that and the other thing too, yet he wants something, (not that there is
a true want, but the appepetite is not filled, the greedy, or wanton or proud
desire is not satisfied) I say Worldly men are never satisfied with the World,
with that which they have of it because they are Christless, and all things
without Christ are vanity, and vexation of Spirit But they that have Christ
have all in him and with him; Therefore let the Christian possessing Christ say
to his soul; Soul, thou have enough, be at rest thou have all good laid for
Eternity. Should the rich man be complaining of want? now Christ where he is
possessed, is great riches: Therefore Christians, who are poor in the World,
are said to be rich in Faith, because Faith I yes hold on Jesus Christ, and by
faith we possess him who is the only true riches. Thus the Apostle his riddle
is expounded, as having all things, yet possessing nothing, though possessing
nothing in the World, yet having all things by Faith, having all in Christ: Oh,
let the Believer be satisfied with Christ, would you have more then all?

Counsel. (...) Be thankful for Christ.
2. Have you Jesus Christ, Oh, then be thankful to God for this gift, admiring
and adoring such grace, Oh, what a rare gift is this which God has bestowed
upon you? to how few is it given? Now the rarer gift, the more thankful should
we be. Ah Lord, had thou not given Christ to me, what a sad condition had my
soul still bin in? Before Christ came to my soul, what a b^ndslave was I to sin
and Satan? How full of noisome lusts was my heart? What a hell was in my soul?
Magnified be the Father of Mercy, who has given me Jesus Christ, to work a
change in me, to cast those unclean spirits out of me, to Redeem such a
wretched slave, and to make a Heaven in my soul by Christ dwelling in me:
Blessed be God for Jesus Christ.

Couns. 3. Hold fast Christ.
3. Christians, Take heed that you do not loose Christ, when you are once
possessed of him: Not that Christ can indeed be wholly lost from the soul that
once, has him; but the working of the Spirit of Christ in the heart, may be so
remitted, yea intermitted, in respect of direction, and quickening, and
strengthening and comforting, that the soul may be at a loss for Christ; having
no feeling of the presence of Christ in it, Christians may so carry themselves
toward Christ, as to provoke him to alter his carriage, and to change
countenance toward them; When a Christian hearkeneth not to the voice of
Christ, consents not to the motions of his Spirit, takes liberty to himself,
to sin against Christ, and against that light which Christ has given in to
him, in such cases, for such causes Christ will withdraw himself, and not
vouchsafe to have any Communion with the soul, and so leave it in a lightless,
lifeless, uncomfortable condition.

Therefore Christians, be careful so to carry your selves toward Christ, that
he may not withdraw himself, and hide his face, but may abide with you, and
reveal himself to your souls, working more powerfully in your hearts, that you
may clearly perceive, he is still present with you, in you, and may have more
comfortable experience of the sweet operations of his Spirit in your souls.

Now that you may keep Christ, Directions,
so as to be still taking in the comfort of such an enjoyment.

1. Take heed of grieving Christ by any unkindness toward him, by the
unyieldingness of your spirits to the motions of his Spirit, by sluggishness,
and security, and by taking in the World and lusts to be i^mates with Christ,
or by allowing your selves in any thing that is contrary to the mind of Christ;
for this will grieve the Spirit of Christ, and make him to v^il his face, and
(as it were to draw a curtain between himself and the spirit of a Christian.

2. If you would keep. Christ still with you, would enjoy his presence in a
feeling apprehension of it, so as to be sensible of his gracious and
comfortable workings in you, and of the shinings of his face upon you, into
your souls; th^n see that you do that which may delight Christ, so will he be
working sensibly in your spirits, bringing in more light and li^^, and heat,
and making you more fruitful in holiness, revealing his love in your hearts, so
that you shall still say, blessed be God for Jesus Christ.

Now to give some directi^ns about this, showing how you may delight Jesus
Christ.

1. Show your selves willing and ready to take commands from Christ, to hear
and obey his voice, and to yield unto, and be ruled by the motions of his
Spirit, Christ is much taken with the willingness and cheerfulness of
Christians in their obedience: If ye love me (says Christ, Keep my
commandments, and I will pray the Father, Joh. 14.15, 16, 18.
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with y^u for ever;
I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you; If you shall have a care
of your obedience, I will take care for your comfort.

2. Make out to others the preciousness of Christ, and speak it to the honor
of Christ, what a gift he is, and what a happiness it is to enjoy him: If we
prize Christ, he will delight to continue with us, and the more we impart our
experience of the comfort and sweetness of Christ the more will he communicate
himself to us, we find it often in the Canticles, that it was thus betwixt
Christ and his Spouse.

3. Acknowledge unto Christ his wonderful love, and rich Grace toward you, in
giving himself for you, and in bestowing himself upon you, and in that which he
has wrought in you, O Lord Jesus, how infinitely am I engaged to thee for thy
love, that thou have vouchsafed to come to my poor soul, and to bring in
light, and life, and comfort, and happiness, with thy self? Such thankful
acknowledgment made unto Christ, Gratiarum actio, est ad plus dandum invitatio.
will tie him fast to you and cause him to do more for you.

4. Let there be longings of the soul to enjoy more of Christ, here in the
Kingdom of Grace, and to be brought, (as soon as the Lord pleases to a full
fruition of him hereafter in the Kingdom of Glory.

Beg of Christ, to reveal himself more clearly to thee, and to carry, thee on
further in understanding of Divine Mysteries, to lead thee into all Truth, and
to fill thee with the knwleedge of his will in all wisdom and Spiritual
understanding.

Beg of him quickening grace, and strengthening grace, and beseech him to be
more mightily this way upon thy spirit, causing a great increase of spiritual
strength, and holy activity in thy soul humbly desire Christ to reveal himself
more and, more in thy soul as a Comforter even to power in flagons of his love,
and to fill thee with the consolations of his Spirit.

Thus account, that you are never near enough to Christ, that you are never
intimate enough with him, that you have never enough of him, and so long to be
fil^ed with him here, and to be taken to a full enjoyment of in glory hereafter
desiring with good old Simeon, to depart in peace, having Christ in your
hearts, and embracing him by Faith, and with Paul, desiring to be dissolved and
to be with Christ.

This is very pleasing to Christ, and he delights in that soul, which takes
pleasure in him; and surely, he will never forsake the soul in which he
delights.

5. If you desire that Christ should continue with you, and not withdraw
himself, or hide his face from you; then see that he have a place of residence
in you suitable to him, and such as may give him content, he must have thy
heart, and he must have all thy heart, and it must be a heart well kept, a
heart clean swept: he will have the heart or nothing, and he will not be thrust
into a corner of the heart; he will not endure that the World should have the
chief room, or indeed any room there, or that lusts should be entertanied in
the heart where he dwells; he will not lodge in a filthy heart, a stable is
not now a receptacle for him, a place to entertain him in; If you desire the
company of Christ, you must carefully fly the pollutions that are in the world
through lusts, you must be casting sin and the world out of your hearts, and
cleansing your selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit. When Christ
sees that there is a desire and care to make the heart clean, fit to entertain
him, and to keep out of the heart every thing that may offend him, and ^o keep
the Spirit pure and entire ^or him, he delights to dwell in such a soul.

And surely, if you labor thus constantly to please Christ and to do that
which may delight him, and then will he be so powerfully comfortably operative
in your souls, that you shall be able to say, I find, I feel that of a truth,
Christ ^s in me, This is Christ his working ^n my heart, none but Christ could
do that which is done in my soul, Surely, My beloved is mine and I ^^m his.

Thus I have dealt out a third Counsel to Christians that have Christ.

Take heed that you do not ^oose him, keep him with you, ^old him fast, and I
have held ^orth some directions in this ^ase.

If ye have have received the Lord Jesus Christ, Counsel. 4. Walk in Christ.
Col. 2.6.
Walk in him, This is the Apostle his Counsel.

Quest. What is it to walk in Christ?

Answ. Plainly, to walk in Christ, (according to the Scripture sense of this
phrase) is so to live, that we may make it to appear to others, that we may be
sure in our selves, that we are in Christ, and that he lives in us, to walk
according to the rule of Christ, to live as a people acted by the Spirit of
Christ, which leads from sin unto duty, and guides souls in the way of God,
in our conversation to hold forth the virtues of Christ, to be Patient as he
was, Meek and lowly in heart as he was, Loving as he was, Heavenly minded, as
he was, Zealous for God's glory, as he was, in all things to express Christ, to
walk in the light of his Doctrine, and according to his example; to keep up
Communion with him in the exercise of Christian Graces, and practice of holy
duties, and to walk in Christ, is to live by the Faith of Son of God who lives
in us, to ^elie on him for Justification, and Sanctification, and Preservation,
and provision, and comfort here, and for Eternal Salvation here^fter.

And this phrase, To walk in Christ implies.

1. Light, and knowledge of the mind of Christ.

2. A progress in that way which is pleasing to Christ, a go^ng onward, and a
rising up to fur^her measures in Christ,

3. An uniformity in this course, ^ot to go in and out, to take one step ^n the
right path, and two steps ^eside it, but to walk steddily in Christ.

5 If God has given us his Son, Counsel. 5. Give jour selves up to Christ.
and all things with him, if Christ ^ath given himself for us, and be^owed
himself upon us; then let ^s give up our selves wholly to ^im, in all that we
are, and all that we can do, let us be his, truly ^his is but just; and alas,
What is my all, to his? We are infinitely advantaged by this gift, which God
has given us, (Christ is in life and death advantage) but we cannot in any
thing be profitable unto God; Can a man be profitable to God, Job. 22.2.
Yet if we give our poor all unto God, if we give our selves to him, devoting
our selves to his service, though all this be nothing in comparison of God's
gift to us, Yet he is graciously pleased to account it something, and takes
pleasure in the willing offering of his servants.

Thus it must be, beloved, and thus it will be with the Christian that has
Christ; upon the receipt of this gift from God, there is a giving up of the
soul unto God; Faith that takes Christ, or rather Christ who is taken by Faith
caries the believer unto God in all duty: Faith or the Spirit of Christ
persuades the soul to make the Word of God its Rule, and so to give it self up
to God in all obedience, Faith works by love; Cant. 2.16.
My beloved ^s mine, and I am his, says the spouse of Christ, when we do by
faith truly apply Christ, and all his grace ^o our selves, we shall by holiness
of life give our selves to Christ, de^iring and endeavoring to do his will.

Couns 6. Let Christ be your support.
6. If we have received Jesus Christ, ^et us then to the honor of Christ make
show of our riches, let it appear that we are possessed of him, let ^s not be so
cast down by crosses or losses of any kind in the world, as if we had no other
or better portion to trust to or take comfort in, but let us still rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and amidst all the changes of this life, and in all conditions,
let us walk cheerfully in the way of our duty, having a propriety in and
possession of, such riches and treasure as this which God has given us; let
Christ be to us a support and comfort in sickness, peace in trouble, liberty in
imprisonment, riches in poverty, enlargment in straits, life in death, Let him
be to us a heaven upon earth; certainly, the believer may have, and ought to
have sweet peace and tranquillity in his soul, in all conditions, arising from
his enjoyment of Christ.

I come now to the last Use of the Point, with which I shall presently finish
my work.

Consolat^on.
4. Is Christ the great gift of God, a gift above all gifts, this is a ground of
much comfort to Christians, to true believers, that by faith close with Jesus
Christ: A believer that has Christ has all in him, and carries still his
happiness ^ith him, a happiness that cannot be lost; the true Christian stands
fast forever in his happy union with Christ, so that here is the Christian his
happiness above all others in the world, that he alone is sure never to loose
his happiness.

Now the happiness of a Christian in the enjoyment of Christ might be much
amplified, and held forth in many particulars. I shall hint something for the
comfort of Believers.

1. As many as receive Christ, have by him and with him this privilege; he
makes them the Sons of God: As many as received him, Joh. 1.12. (...).
^them gave he power, (rather pri^iledge or prerogative) to become ^he Sons of
God. The soul that tak^th Jesus Christ receives sonship with him, and surely
many and great are the privileges of God's Children in this world, and in the
world to come.

2. They that have received Christ, are by Christ interessed in ^he gracious
providence of God, which orders all things for their good.

3. All things are theirs by Gods ordination and promise, in respect of the use
and end for which they ^re; (all things in kind, not in the ^ndividuals.) This
is held out by ^he Apostle in a notable enumera^ion of particulars: 1 Cor. 3.21
All things are ^urs, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or
life, or death, ^r things present, or things to come: All Officers and
Ordinances in the Church, all creatures in the world, ^ll conditions, and all
events, all are for the good of believers, are in this respect given them with
Christ, all things are yours.

4. The having of Christ is a firm ground of consolation in all troubles and
distresses: Is the conscience troubled and distressed through the sense of sin
and guilt? 1 Jo. 2.2. Romans 3 25. 1 Jo. 1.7.
why Christ is the propitiation for the sins of believers, him has God set
forth to be a propitiation for sin, through faith in his blood. It is the blood
of Christ that cleanses from all sin.

Now Christian, this Christ is thine, by whom thy sins are taken away, through
whom God is reconciled to thee, by whose blood thou art cleansed from thy sin.
Does Satan come to winnow the soul by temptations, and vex it with accusations,
telling the Christian, that he is thus and thus sinful and guilty, and that the
Law which he has transgressed, threatens death and damnation to him? what
says Paul for the believer his comfort in this case? Romans 8.33.34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? it is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died; yea, rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. Who shall lay any thing to thy charge, if Christ clear
thee? who or what shall condemn thee, seeing Christ (who is given to thee) has
died for thee, for thy sins, and risen again for thy justification, in as much
as thou have by faith laid hold on Christ, who died, and rose from the dead,
and sits at the right hand of God, making intercession for thee? And
further, this Christ is with thee, in thee, to strengthen thee in temptations,
that thy faith fail not, and that thou be not overcome of the evil one, Heb
2.18.
he was therefore tempt^d himself, that he might succor them that are tempted.

Does the consideration of thine own weakness discourage thee, because thou
have not strength and abilities to do that good, and perform those duties which
thou ^houldst and would do? why! now consider, that Christ is thne for all
saving purposes, for all soul advantages; he will be thy strength, and show his
power in thy weakness; his spirit is with thee, in thee, to help thine
infirmities.

Do outward troubles annoy thee? art thou in an afflicted condition? why!
Christ, whom the Father has given to thee, gave himself for thee, that he
might deliver thee from this present evil world; he is a covert from the
tempest, as Rivers of waters in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a
weary Land; he has a fellow-feeling of thy sufferings, and will not suffer
thee to be tempted above measure, and his grace is sufficient for thee, to
strengthen, and support, and comfort thee, in every affliction and tro^ble, and
to give thee a great advantage by it, causing sweet to come out of the sower,
and meat out of the Eater, and in due time to deliver thee, wholly to deliver
the burden from thy shoulders. So that believers may have (what our Savior
promised to his Disciples) peace and and comfort in Christ, when in the world
they have tribulations.

Does death look upon thee with a grim countenance, to put thee in fear? Now
consider that Christ who is thine, has overcome Death for thee, and has by
his Death destroyed him that had the power of Death, has delivered thee from
the wrath to come, has opened to thee the way to Heaven, and every gate of
Heaven, he himself is the way, and the door for thee to enter in by and he
will be to thee the Resurrection and the life.

Thus, if Christ be thine, he is thy Propitiation, thy Justification, thy
Srength, thy Salvation: Wherefore let Faith carry thee to lean on him in all
temptations and afflictions, that thou may be borne up by him, and comforted
with the thoughts of thy interest in him.

Yet I cannot thus leave this theme, but must add something for a further
amplification of the comfort of Believers, who are received Christ.

As I have showed you, that the having of Christ is to believers a firm ground
of comfort, for Faith to pitch upon in all Spiritual and corporal inward and
outward afflictions, so I shall give you to see, how Christ is actually and
effectually a Comforter in such cases to those that have received him.

If the soul be afflicted with strong temptations Christ comfort it with
this Word, My grace is sufficient for thee, to keep thee from being overcome,
and to make thee more then a Conqueror.

If Satan has prevailed against the Christian by temptation, and drawn him
into some great sin, whereupon there follows soul affliction, when the
conscience is awakened; Then Christ comfort the soul, leading to the
Fountain which is set open for sin and for uncleanness, presents to it the
flowings of his Blood, sets before it the fullness and freeness of the Grace of
God in Christ, for the pardon of all sins, for the refreshing of every weary
soul, for the satisf^ing of every hungring, thirsting soul, that hung^reth and
thirsts after Righteousness; and when a humbled Christian closes by faith
with this Grace of Christ, and washes his soul in the Fountain of his Blood,
then is he comforted.

If Christ for the trial of a Christian do hide himself from him, so that he is
troubled and inwardly afflicted for want of the felt presence of Christ, and
for want of the manifestation of Christ his love to his soul, in this case
Christ will be a seasonable Comforter to the poor humbled soul, he that casts
the soul down, will lift it up again, leading it by his Spirit to lay hold upon
the comfort which lies for every child of God, in that of the Apostle, There is
no temptation has taken you, but that which is common to men, 1 Cor. 10.33.
but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted abo^e that ye are
able, but will the temptation also make to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it, and Christ helps the soul to gather up comfort from those sweet words;
Isa. 45.7, 8.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee; In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee, for a moment but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon the,
sai h the Lord thy Redeemer: And thus Christ returns in due time to receive the
spirits of his humble ones.

Christ in the believer is seasonable Comforter in all Spiritual distress, in
all soul affliction.

So likewise in case of outward trouble, and temporal distressess, Christ in
heart is a Comforter, telling the Believer, that he is all sufficient for him,
tells him, that there is in him a sufficiency of Wisdom, to find out a way for
his deliverance, and a sufficiency of power, actually to accomplish his
deliverance, how great soever the evil be that lies upon him, yea and a
sufficiency of Love and grace, to make out his power and wisdom for his good,
and so comfort him abundantly, filling him with this persuasion, that all
things shall work together for good to him.

Here is the happiness of a Believer, that he has a Comforter in his bosom,
in the midst of all troubles.

This is made out clearly in the experience of the Saints, of which I might
give you sundry Scripture instances, David in his soul trouble found Christ a
Comforter.

When Peter was by Herod cast into prison, was not Christ there a Comforter to
him.

When the Jews fell maliciously and desparately upon Stephen, and in their rage
Stoned him, did not he receive then glorious comfort from Christ dwell ing in
him? Paul found this to be true, at sundry times, and in sundry cases: And Paul
and Sylas together in the Prison, had experience of this truth. Where Christ is
in the soul, helping the soul to act faith upon him; he is actually a Comforter
in all conditions, in every distress of soul and body.

Well, now for a cl^se; I shall sum up in few words, the happiness of
believers, upon account of their interest in Christ, and possession of him.

Christ brings with him all good to those that enjoy him.

1. They have by Christ all temporal good things, as much as is needful for
them, and that which God sees good for them to have; (now if a man has what is
for his necessary use, and so much as is for his good, is he not well provided
for?) and he that has Christ, has that which will make full amends for all
seeming and conceited wants, that which is infinitely better than those things
which God is pleased to withhold from them; and Christ being in contentation to
many pirits, so that in a poor outward estate, the believer is as well pleased,
as if he had abundance, and so he has all in contentation; he that is content
wants nothing.

2. Christ brings spiritual good to the soul, bringing in the treasures of
grace, and the riches of consolation (though to some soul he gives more of
that treasure, more of these riches, than he does to others.) Christ is made to
us sanctification, he is the author and worker of grace and holiness, so that
the hearts in which Christ is, must needs be gracious and holy; he gives in
wisdom, and meekness, and love, and zeal, and other graces of the spirit, and
he tells his Disciples, (and all believers in them) that he will not leave them
comfortless. I am he that comfort you, says the Lord Christ.

3. Jesus Christ brings believers to the enjoyment of eternal good, he
brings them to heaven, ^ven all those souls to whom he is united on earth.
Father, I will that those whom thou have given m be with me, Jo. 17.24.
where I am, that they may see my glory: My sheep hear my voice, Jo. 10.27, 28.
and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life.

Every soul that is here an habitation of God through the spirit, in whom
Christ dwells, shall be received into everlasting habitations with Christ.

This is the happiness of every soul that enjoys Christ.

And now, as the Apostle says, Christ in you, the hope of glory; so I may say,
Christ in you, a spring of comfort.

Blessed soul that can truly say Christ is mine.

FINIS.

