AN ELOGIE OR EULOGIE ON THE OBITS of the Right Honorable FERDINANDO Lord
FAIREFAX* Who dyed upon Monday, the 13th of March, Anno Dom. 1647.
depiction of standard bearer portrait of Fairfax blazon or coat of arms
depiction of tomb depiction of standard bearer

A CROSTICKE.
FAR more DivINe, AND clear, is nOw, LORD FAIREFAX gone,
Above; to praise JEHOVAH, at his Royal Throne;
Remote from Earth: He swift to Heaven ascended (high)
Dect in a wreath of Triumph, (peircing through the sky.)
Into Celestial glory (upon Angels wings)
Now Halelujahs to the Lord of Hosts he sings.
Adieu, brave Honor, England with brinish tears may say,
Night clad in sable black, mournes for the loss of day.
Death has be friended Heaven with the Fathers soul,
On whose meek Son; let Angels miriads of blessings roll.
Light (shining down from Heaven) the darkest cloud expells,
On Earth; when Sun with glittering most bright excells:
Rises in splendour, ascends with smiles: But sets in dismal turning,
Death thus has veiled our light, and left us all in mourning.
Fairefax; valiant, and true: For Englands peace he stood,
And to his wife, kindred, neighbors, was wise and good,
Just unto all; And merciful; As orbs of Stars.
Relief shined comfort, from his sparkled hands. And bars
Effectual, for truths defense he did erect:
False hypocrites unmaske, and wickedness detect.
And now his soul's in glory (though Xenius mount above)
Xanthius his Son is here; The General of love.
The Etymology of his name from the Hebr^w.




Faradh-dhi-nin da Fere-Fakahh.

The Hebrew of the Lord Fairfaxes name, translated into English.

He has separated a sufficient Son, that wounded the wild Ass.

An ELOGIE.
Renowned Fairfax, whom the State did love
Is now ASSENDED to His GOD above,
He lived and died in Honor, full of years:
His death sets sluices open, to power out tears.
When wicked men began to rise,
The godly Party to surprise,
And make them slaves
To many Knaves,
To spoil our Goods
And spill OUR Bloods;
He parted with his Son most dear
Who of their holes did them all clear,
The Father's dead, and gone to rest above,
The Son has wrought our peace, if we had Love.
By God Almighties power, then let us all,
Give him the Glory, and Love, reciprocal.
By H. Walker, S. S. Theol.
Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, dwelling in Smithfield near the Queens
head Tavern, 1648.


