A COLLECTION OF Several Passages concerning his late HIGHNESS Oliver
Cromwell, In the time of his Sickness; WHEREIN Is Related many of his
Expressions upon his DEATHBED.

Together with his PRAYER within two or three days before his Death.

Written by one that was then Groom of his BEDCHAMBER.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson, dwelling in Smithfield, near Hosier-Lane
end. 1659.

A Collection of several Passages concerning His late Highness Oliver Cromwell,
in the time of his Sickness, wherein is related many of his Expressions upon
his Deathbed.
HIs Highness being at Hampton Court, sickned a little before the Lady
Elizabeth died, whose decease was on Friday the sixth day of August, 1658. she
having lain long under great extremity of bodily pain, which with frequent and
violent Convulsion-fits brought her to her end.

But as to His Highness, it was observed, that the sense of her outward misery
in the pains she endured, took deep impression upon him, who indeed ever was a
most indulgent and tender Father, his affections being regulated and bounded
with such Christian wisdom and prudence, which did eminently shine forth in
filling up, not only that of a Father, but also all other Relations, wherein
he was a most rare and singular example.

And no doubt but the sympathy of his spirit with his sorely afflicted and
dying Daughter, considering also his great burdens, cares, and labors in
Government; Hard censures, bitter reproaches, and unjust calumnies from
friends; the plots, conspiracies, and ingratitude of enemies, of all whom he
better deserved; Besides his deep sense of suffering Christians in other parts
of the world, as far as the Protestant Interest extended; I say, considering
all this, and much more, which such a large heart and comprehensive spirit as
he had, could and did take in, It was enough to have deprest and sunk the
stoutest and most undaunted courage in the world; And I have often wondered he
was able to hold out so long, But that he was born up by a supernatural power,
at a more than ordinary rate, whereby (doubtless) he had held out longer as a
mercy to the truly Christian World, And to us in these Nations, had we been
worthy of him, and not sind him away; Upon which account the Nation, especially
the godly, and his own Family, and personal Relations, have great cause of
self-reflection and humbling before the Lord, in order to a Timely Return, lest
a worse thing befall us, and the effect and consequence of this great blow of
Gods hand, prove worse than what we (at present) feel or fear.

But, I say, his time was come, and neither prayers nor tears could prevail
with God to lengthen out his life, and lend him longer to us, although
abundantly and uncessantly poured out on his behalf, both publicly and
privately (as was observed) in a more than ordinary way. Besides many a secret
sigh, yet like Moses Cry, more loud, and strongly laying hold on God, though
neither perceived not heard by man, than many vocal supplications. All which
(the hearts of Gods people being thus mightily stirred up) did seem to beget
confidence in some, and hopes in all, yea some thoughts in himself that God
would restore him.

And yet we could not be more desirous he should abide, than he was content
and willing to be gone, as he expressed near his end, knowing that there were
better Mansions, a better Kingdom and Inheritance, a better Crown, and a
better Throne, yea every way better things in Heaven provided for him, as might
be gathered from his own expressions, yea the whole course of his life,
exemplary conversation, and close communion with God, ever since his effectual
calling and acquaintance with Jesus Christ, observed many years by such as knew
him, and in the Lord had intimate acquaintance with him, some whereof are
living witnesses to this day.

But truly, since God raised him to the Government, the truth hereof has so
abundantly appeared, that the mouth of envy its self must needs be stopped.
And which things (although he be dead) yet speak in the hearts of some, his
nearest and narrowest observers, and may speak to the conviction of most
professors of godliness, and be an excellent pattern to them, especially such
in great place and power, as best acquainted with his temptations, which
through grace he was enabled to bear and overcome in a great measure.

And truly we may say, that the one half of his worth, as a great Christian
and servant of God, was not known to others, and therefore little comparatively
can be said; yet that little may be of much spiritual advantage to be
remembered, and as a copy to be writ after, seeing the original is taken from
us, and now in Heaven.

Therefore in order thereunto I shall only set down a few Observations
occasionally made of what past from himself at times, before, and in his
sickness; the whole (as I said) being but one letter of his name, as an
excellent Christian, or a few fragments of what may be said by others, and I
hope will, for public use, this being only a private Remembrance.

And first his great Knowledge in the Mysteries of godliness, the depth,
soundness, and solidity of his judgment being such, that he was enabled to
discuss the greatest truths of God, with so much clearness and evidence, that
few of any sort of men could match him, to the great advantage of such as were
so happy (as the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon) to stand before him; his
speech always mixed with that humility and zeal, and so peircing, that it could
not but leave some impression upon those that heard him; And has been to some
of more than ordinary use to edification.

And indeed, the excellency of his spirit lay principally in the wonderful
insight he had attained unto, and clearness in the Covenant of Grace, which
doubtless, as it was his greatest study, as that wherein his All, and the All
of every Christian does lie, so it was his greatest delight to be often
speaking thereof, that hearing him, sometimes, I have thought with my self, if
these things be so, that grace is so full, so free to sinners, to the greatest
sinners, what reason or room could there be for unbeleef? or what
discouragement can there be to any not to come and drink freely of this
open-fountain? only man's will stands in the way, until it be overpowered by
special grace, the unsealing of that great secret of Gods election. I say in
these things he was wonderfully instructed, and able to instruct.

2 But as was his Knowledge, so was his Faith, his head was not so full of the
one, as his heart was of the other, that as Christ said to the woman of Canaan,
Mat. 15. 28. O woman, great is thy Faith, etc. so it may be said of him, great
was his Faith. A taste of which I shall give, as it was taken from himself on
his deathbed, speaking of the Covenant.

Two in respect of the different Administration of the same Covenant of Grace,
but one as to the substance in Christ the Head and Mediator of the Church from
the beginning.
They were two, but put into one, before the foundation of the world.

It is holy and true, it is holy and true, it is holy and true. Who made it
holy and true? who kept it holy and true? the great Mediator of the Covenant.

The Covenant is but one, Faith in the Covenant is my only support, yet if I
believe not, Behold his rejoicing.
he abides faithful.

Is there none that will come and praise God? Speaking to some by him.


He did not mean that it was safe to sin, no, the laying hold of the Covenant
implies Faith and Repentance, which the Gospel requires, with new Obedience.
Whatsoever sins thou have, do, or shall commit, if you lay hold upon free
Grace, you are safe, but if you put your self under a Covenant of works, you
bring your self under the Law, and so under the Curse, then you are gone.

Is there none that says, who will deliver me from the peril? man can do
nothing, but God can do what he will.

Lord thou know, if I do desire to live, it is to show forth thy praise, and
declare thy works.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God, Heb. 10. 31.
This was spoke three times, his Repetitions usually being very weighty, and
with great vehemence of spirit.

All the Promises of God are in him Yea, and in him A men, to the glory of God
by us, by us in Jesus Christ.

The Lord has filled me with as much Assurance of his Pardon, and his Love,
as my soul can hold.

I think I am the poorest wretch that lives, But I love God, or rather, am
beloved of God.

1 John 4. 10, 19. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved
us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. We love him, because
he first loved us.

I am a Conqueror, and more than a Conqueror, through Christ that
strengthens me.

Romans 8. 37. Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerours, through
him that loved us.

Children, live like Christians, and I leave you the Covenant to feed upon.

1 John 2. 1, 15, 28, 29. cap. 3. 7, 18. and 5. 21. My little Children, these
things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Love not the world,
neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him. And now, little Children, abide in him, that when
he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at
his coming. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one which
does righteousness, is born of him. Little Children let no man deceive you: he
that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. My little
Children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed, and in
truth. Little Children, keep your selves from Idols. Amen.

Love not this world, I say unto you, it is not good that you should love the
world.

1 John 2. 15, 16, 17. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passes
away, and the lust thereof: but he that does the will of God, abides for ever.

Thus we see, not only his clearness in the Covenant of Grace, but the
strength of his Faith, even unto a high pitch of Assurance, and triumph, with
exceeding spiritual joy and rejoicing; And yet with a deep and soul-debasing
sense of his own sinfulness and unworthiness, thereby magnifying to much the
more the Riches of Gods Grace, with his deep apprehensions of the dreadful
consequence of despising the same, or turning it into wantonness, or by drawing
back from our holy profession and obedience after Conviction, Illumination, and
some taste of the heavenly Gift, so falling into the hands of the Living God,
which is a fearful thing. But as to his Faith, had it not been great,
considering the many trials and afflictions, terrors and temptations he was
under, before these times, upon and after his turn to God, And the difficulties
and dangers he encountered with, with continual ha^^ard of life in his military
employments; Besides much more than ever, since called to the Government of
these Nations, a burden of its self too heavy for any man or men to bear,
without a mighty power of God: I say, considering all this, had he not been
strong in Faith, he had sunk long ago.

In the next place, let us consider the exercise of his Faith, in a few
experiences of many (wherein he was Rich) declared by himself, and which were
not ordinary, But such as few (I think) of the choicest Saints have attained
unto, one whereof was as follows.

Being at Edinborough in Scotland, it pleased the Lord to exercise him with
sore sickness, a high and dangerous Feavor, whereby he was brought so low,
that his Physicians and others had little or no hopes in reason of his
recovery; For one fit of his distemper having lasted about twelve hours,
Immediately a second fit returned upon him without any intermission, for as
long a time, and likely to have continued in that extremity, until thereby he
had expired. But behold this was Gods opportunity to show his Power, and to
magnify his Word, a Portion whereof by the hand of the Spirit of the Lord was
then given in unto him, not only to feed his Faith, and revive his heart, but
also to rebuke his Disease, which immediately left him, to the astonishment of
himself and others, it being little less than a miracle. For his Distemper
returned no more upon him, but the Lord raised him up, intending further to use
and honor him, as he has done.

The Scripture is, Psalm. 91. 14, 15, 16. Because he has set his love upon
me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high; because he has
known my Name. Verse. 15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will
be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him. Verse. 16. With
long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.

Which Promises, as then his Relief, so all along in every condition, have been
eminently made good unto him in his own experiences, and would be of good use
to others, had not his own backwardness in uttering any thing wherein he might
seem to glory, for the most part concealed them.

But as in sickness, so also in the high places of the field, as at Dunbar,
Worcester, and elsewhere, when he carried his life in his hand, ready to offer
up the same, as a willing Sacrifice in the great Cause of God, and his People,
Did not his Faith then work at a more than ordinary rate? insomuch that
success and victory was in his eye, whilst fears and despondencies did
oppress the hearts of others, and some good men too, when great
discouragements, and that not groundless as to the strongest reason, did lie in
the way; I say, was he not like another David, not fearing the face of any
Goliath, nor the over-matching numbers and strength of Enemies? Yea like those
Worthies, Heb. 11. did he not by Faith suddue Kingdoms, work Righteousness,
obtain Promises, stop the mouths of Lions, quench the violence of flames,
escape the edge of the sword, out of weakness made strong, wax valiant in
fight, and turn to flight the Armies of Aliens?

Although I will not say, that his Faith alone had a hand in these successes
(yet not the least) but all the people of God by Faith and Prayer had a great
share therein, which must vigorously be kept up still, if we desire to
prosper. But this by the way, being of public concernment, and better known to
many others than my self.

And therefore to come nearer, a few days after the death of the Lady
Elizabeth, his Daughter, at Hampton Court, which touched him nearly, being then
himself under bodily distempers, forerunners to his sickness, which was to
death, and in his Bedchamber, he called for his Bible, and desired a person
honorable and godly, then (with others) present, to read unto him, Phil. 4.
11. 12. 13. Not that I speak in respect of want, but I have learnt in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content; I know both how to be abased,
and how to abound, every where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be
full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. v. 13. I can do
all things through Christ that strengthens me.

Which read, said he (to use his own words as near as I can remember them)
This Scripture did once save my life, when my eldest Son -- died, which went as
a dagger to my heart, indeed it did.

And then repeating the words of the Text himself, declared his then thoughts
to this purpose, reading the 10th. and 11th. verses of Paul's Contentation and
Submission to the Will of God in all conditions (said he) it is true, Paul, you
have learnt this, and attained to this measure of grace, but what shall I do?
Ah poor creature, it is a hard lesson for me to take out, I find it so! But
reading on to the 13th. verse, where Paul says, I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me, Then Faith began to work, and his heart to find
support and comfort, saying thus to himself, He that was Paul's Christ, is my
Christ too; And so drew waters out of the well of salvation, Christ, in the
Covenant of Grace.

But a little nearer yet, after his return to White Hall, his sickness
increasing upon him, he was observed to be in a very spiritual frame of
heart, and full of holy expressions, catched up by one or other fearing God
that were present, as a hungry man does meat. A little whereof it was my
comfort to meet with, the very night before the Lord took him to his
everlasting rest, which were to this purpose following, viz.

Truly God is good, indeed he is, he will not -- there his speech failed him,
but as I apprehend it, it was, he will not leave me; this saying that God was
good, he frequently used all along, and would speak it with much cheerfulness
and fervor of spirit in the midst of his pains.

Again, he said, I would be willing to live to be further serviceable to God
and his People, but my work is done, yet God will be with his People.

He was very restless most part of the night, speaking often to himself. And
there being something to drink offered him, he was desired to take the same,
and endeavor to sleep, unto which he answered, It is not my design to drink
or to sleep, but my design is to make what haste I can to be gone.

Afterward toward morning, using diverse holy expressions, implying much
inward consolation and peace, among the rest he spoke some exceeding
self-debasing words, annihilating and judging himself. And truly it was
observed, that a public spirit to Gods cause did breath in him (as in his
lifetime) so now to the very last, which will further appear by that Prayer
he put up to God two or three days before his end, which was as follows.

LORD, Although I am a miserable and wretched Creature, I am in Covenant with
thee, through Grace, And I may, I will come to thee for thy people, thou have
made me (though very unworthy) a mean Instrument to do them some good, and
thee service; And many of them have set too high a value upon me, though
others wish, and would be glad of my Death; But Lord, however thou do
dispose of me, continue and go on to do good for them, Give them consistency
of Judgment, one heart, and mutual love, and go on to deliver them, and with
the work of Reformation, and make the Name of Christ glorious in the world;
Teach those who look too much upon thy instruments, to depend more upon thy
self; Pardon such as desire to trample upon the dust of a poor worm, for they
are thy People too. And pardon the folly of this short Prayer, then for Jesus
Christ's sake, and give us a good night, if it be thy pleasure.

Some variation there is of his Prayer, as to the account diverse give of it,
and something is here omitted; But this is certain, that these were his
Requests, wherein his heart was so carried out for God and his People, yea for
them who had added no little sorrow to his grief and afflictions that at this
time he seems to forget even his own Family, and nearest Relations.

And thus we see in part something of the clearness and strength of his Faith
in the Covenant of Grace; and some tastes of the exercise thereof in a few of
his experiences, with the excellency of his spirit in prayer; And that
spiritual and public frame of heart breathing forth in him, even to the last
period of his life, whose name shall and will be as ointment poured out,
notwithstanding the mouth of envy.

But further, that we may see his Faith was not alone, nor an idle Faith, let
us consider him in his other Graces and Excellencies, in some observations of
his Conversation in general, which was worthy Imitation of the most eminent
Saints, And that since he arrived at that greatness unto which God raised him,
which caused no abatement in him (considerable) as usually it does in men: But
rather as his power and opportunity was increased, so his talents were drawn
into exercise and usefulness.

1 And first his Zeal for God, his Cause, his Truth, his People, and the good
of men, which in a manner (as it was said of Christ) did even eat him up.
Insomuch that he did not count his life dear to him, nor any thing else, so he
might be useful. What else engaged him in, and carried him through, the great
Work of God, as a prime and choice Instrument for so many years together, with
so much stediness and constancy, as to the true aim and scope thereof, viz.
Gospel liberty, and Civil Right, etc. Notwithstanding many difficulties, and
discouragements, such as Paul met with in some sort. 2 Cor. 11. 26. In
Journeyings often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of Robbers, in Perils by mine
own Countrymen, in Perils by the Heathen (Irish) in Perils in the City, in
Perils in the Wilderness, in Perils in the Sea, in Perils among false Brethren,
in Weariness and painfulness, etc. Known unto all, much more than I can express
it.

2 Again, His Zeal did highly appear in furthering the preaching of the Gospel
in its Power and Purity, by the great encouragement he gave to Godly Ministers,
And laying such a Foundation thereof, that the Generations to come may reap the
Benefit of it, If we sin not away that greatest of mercies, as we have cause to
fear. Besides, what care did he take to remove hindrances out of the way, by
discountenancing and laying aside Idol Shepherds, such as were found ignorant
and scandalous men, Dumb Dogs, such as were more ready to bark against Truth
and Reformation, than able or willing to speak for, or promote the same.
Considering also the pains he took in his own Person, in sifting and finding
out man's worth, or worthlesness for so great a work, especially when his own
Concernments did more immediately require the same, which is known to most, he
being herein also a most rare example to succeeding Rulers, and indeed the
first of this Kind in so high state and Eminency.

3 Again, His love to the Truth, unto which he was a faithful Friend, Laborious
in Contending for it, Powerful in Conviction of the contrary, and stopping the
Mouth of Error; Having often to do by reason of his great place, with many men
of erring Judgments (as well as others) the most obstinate of whom I have
often heard him silence, discountenance their errors with greatest detestation,
especially when of Fundamental Consideration, as once dealing with some of the
Quakers, he rendered their opinions in the most dreadful and yet truest
Character that ever I heard, Saying, they were such as took the Crown off the
head of Christ, disrobed him of his Priestly Garments, and denied his
Prophetical Office, by setting up a spirit of their own in the Room of his, by
the whole utterly making void his Mediatorship, who is God blessed for ever,
And that he had rather be buried alive under a heap of stones, than in the
least to countenance the same, and much more, which I have now forgot.

It Is true, his heart being tender to all men, especially such as were
peaceable, he did not use that severity ordinarily toward them or others of
that kind, as was by some expected. But what other consideration did therein
sway him to so much Lenity, I cannot tell, neither is it for every one to know,
much less to judge; but this we know, that he was merciful to all.

4 Again, His Zeal appeared in laying much to heart the afflicted condition of
Gods People under Persecution in other parts of the World, and laying out his
Power and interest to the utmost he could, for their succor and relief, both
by Arms and Alms, whose sorrows and sufferings added not a little to the grief
of his Soul, and whom he carried much in his heart, as appeared by his public
spirit to his dying hour, and it is sufficiently known, 'twas the Protestant
interest, so far as it had footing, was mainly in his design in all his foreign
undertakings, and not Riches, Honor, and Dominion, which most Princes have in
their eye; And from which he did not withdraw, notwithstanding discouragements;
in which Principle if other Protestant Princes and States were more firmly
unite, the Gospel-Cause against its enemies would in probability better succeed.

5 His Zeal appeared in his love to Justice, as the Scripture speaks of Job,
Chap. 29. 16. searching out the cause of the Widow, the Fatherless and the
Oppressed, and yet no respecter of persons in Judgment, as commanded, Deuteronomy. 1.
17. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment, but you shall hear the small as
well as the great; you shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the
judgment is Gods: and the cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto me,
and I will hear it. And Levit. 19. 15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment: thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person
of the mighty: but in righteousness thou shall judge thy neighbor.

6 Again, His Zeal did show forth its self in punishing of evil doers,
especially in his own family, where looseness or profaneness durst not
appear, or if it did, and came to his knowledge, David's Resolution, Psalm. 101.
was also his, that such should not dwell in his house, but were cast out.
Besides his readiness to countenance them that were good, and did well,
according to that Rule Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. Let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers: For there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves domnation.
For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou then
not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same.

It were too hard a task for any to reckon up all those Graces which did shine
forth in him, especially for me; And therefore I shall touch only upon two or
three more, wherein he was a most rare Example of Believers, and an excellent
Pattern for those in highest Power.

1 And first, His love to Saints, to all Saints, and that as such, although of
different Judgments: Unto whom he was a Father, to protect them, and care for
their welfare, a friend, to favor them in all just ways, and a peacemaker,
to reconcile them, at least to carry things with that wisdom, prudence and
moderation toward them, that so guiding them (as it was said of Moses, Psalm.
78. 72. So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and guided
them by the skilfulness of his hands.) With the skilfulnesse of his hand, in
these dividing and divided times, that their divisions, through Gods mercy and
blessing on his endeavors, have not broken forth into a flame of all devouring
contention, as was feared by us, and waited for by our enemies, thereby
securing our Peace to this day continued to us.

And truly, had not God furnished him with extraordinary wisdom this way, our
condition had been (in all likelikood) very sad ere now, bearing with the weak,
forbearing the froward, and injurious, and ready to forgive such as appeared in
the posture of enemies against him, upon the least appearance of penitency, yea
many times in hopes thereof, endeavoring after the Command and Example of
Christ, to overcome evil with good, to the wonder of most men.

2 Again, As his Love was great, the like rarely to be found in the times was
live in, so was his Charity to the Poor, the Widow, the Fatherless, and the
Distressed. In which respect we may say of him, as Job of himself, Chap. 31.
17. Or have eaten my morsel my self alone, and the Fatherless has not eaten
thereof? He did never eat his Morsels alone, a great many living upon his
allowed Benevolence, who must otherwise have perished, besides occasional
distributions at home and abroad, with his readiness to promote by his
authority and influence good works of this kind, as well as by his own example;
for which the souls of thousands have blessed him, even beyond the Seas.

3 And lastly, His closeness of communion and converse with God, not only
publicly, keeping up, and waiting on Gods Ordinances, in the most solemn and
set times of his worship with great Re-Reverence, Attention, and Intention of
spirit; But also on other extraordinary occasions, when Gods providence called
for it (whereof he was a strict observer) in seeking his face with fasting and
prayer, and that with wonderful success, the Lord giving in visible Returns;
And this (as I said) not only in a public way, but also in his family, and
especially in his secret retirements. And indeed Prayer (as one calls it) was
his daily exercise, which he never neglected, notwithstanding all his weighty
affairs, yea the more weighty and urgent they were, the more he buckled to it,
and sometimes with such fervor of spirit, that he could not contain himself,
but with great breakings of heart, send up strong cries with tears unto God,
heard, when he has not known any to be near him; so that it may be truly
said of him, that as he was a man ( Abraham-like) strong in Faith, so (like
Jacob) mighty in Prayer, and as a Prince prevailing with God; such as indeed in
all respects this Nation was never before blessed with, to sit in the Throne,
however he was judged, and censured, and lightly set by, by many who were not
sensible of our and their mercy, and who yet in time may be sensible (if God
prevent not) of his Remove, where his Prayers are turned into everlasting
praises.

And thus godliness was the true rise of his greatness, and the root out of
which he sprung into public use and serviceableness; whence as David says of
such a one, Psalm. 1. His leaf did not wither, And whatsoever he did (in the
main) prospered, even to the wonder and terror of the world, And the fruit he
was eminently an Instrument to bring forth, and designed more to do, was, that
the cause of God, and Reformation, might prosper in these Nations, yea as far
as his head, heart or hand could reach.

And although by the fall of this great Branch, the whole at present is much
clouded, yet if those Branches still (through Gods goodness) remaining, spring
out of the same Root he did (as it is hoped) and go forth in the power of that
Spirit, and principles in which he was carried, They shall also (without
doubt) flourish, and the Lord will make them to grow; But if otherwise, Faith
fail, the Spirit of prayer (yet stirring) cease, and the work of Reformation
run retrograde; Or, that Instruments fit, faithful, and fearing God, should
ever be discountenanced and disused, whom God has hitherto owned and
honored; And carnal men, enemies to Gods work, by fair pretenses, like Tobia,
and Sanballat, creep in, into their room, our leaf will quickly wither, yea,
there will be a withering every way upon these Nations; And we may fear our
strength, our glory, and our God will leave us. But our hopes are, that God yet
will do better for us, according to his promise, than at our beginning, for he
can do it, and continue his presence with us for our future good, and the
peace, welfare, and prosperity of these Nations, if we be not wanting in our
duty to God, to those he has set over us, and to one another.

And therefore, O that God would put it into the hearts of all his People, yea
of all the People of the Land, seriously, sincerely, and seasonably, as Lam. 3.
40. to search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. And then he
that has torn, will heal us, and he that has smitten, will bind us up, and
revive us again, that we may yet live in his sight, Hosea 6. 1, 2. And praise
the Lord.

FINIS.

