Private-men no Pulpit-men: OR, A MODEST EXAMINATION OF LAYMENS PREACHING.

Discovering it to be neither warranted by the Word of God; nor allowed by the
Judgment, or Practice, of the Churches of Christ in New England.

Written by Giles Workman, M. A. And Master of the College School in
Gloucester.

In Answer to a Writing published by JOHN KNOWLS.

Jer. 23. 21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken
to them, yet they prophecy.

Romans 10. 14. How shall they hear without a Preacher?

15. And how shall they Preach except they be sent?

1 These. 4. 11. Study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work
with your own hands, (as we commanded you.)

LONDON: Printed by F: Neile for Tho: Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet.
1646.

To the READER.
Reader,
KNow the occasion of the first writing, and now Printing this ensuing
Discourse. About the beginning of the year 1641. a namelesse writing justifying
the practice of Laymens preaching, was published in Answer to some Reasons
written against it by a Minister for a young man's satisfaction. To which I did
offer a Reply (if any of those who were thought to be the Authors of it, would
have owned it) b^th for the mani^estation of the Truth, to the undeceiving of
people; and for the Vindication of a painful Minister, deceased, near in
relation to me, from a foul Aspersion and unchristian slander laid upon him in
that writing. But none owning it, I was contented for peace sake to let it lie
and die: And so had it done for me: but in July 1644. one John Knowls of this
City challenged me in the presence of Major General Massy, then our Governor,
to Answer i^, which I undertook (when he had first ^wned and subscrib^d it) and
sent him in August following, this ensuing Examination, hoping either by
^nformation ^o have removed him and others from this unwarrantable practice, or
by an Answer from them to have received Information, if I were in an Error
(resolving to be for them, if they ha^ the Scripture on their side, which I
then did, and now do conceive to be against them in this Point. But I missed of
my expectation in both. I take not John Knowls as a meet Antagon^st in this
Controversy; but because he and others to^k the boldness publicly before the
Magistrate to d^fend this practice with such co^temptu^us language against the
godly and faithful Ministers of this Kingdom, as the five Reverend Apologists
abhor the thoughts of; and D^filements in worship, nor u^warranted power in
Church Governors did never work in any of us any other thought, much less
opinion, but that multitudes of the Assemblies and Parochial congregations (in
England) were the true Churches and body of Christ, and the Ministry thereof a
true Ministry. Much less did it ever enter into our ^earts to judge them
Antichristian, which to imagine or conceive, is and has been ever, an horror
to our thoughts. Apol. Nar. p. 6
because many people are deceived, and unsettled in this Point, I was willing in
these few lines to give them a taste how little is said for it, how much may be
said against it. And herein I have had an eye to what others have said for this
practice, that a common understanding may, by that little help, which is h^re
l^nt unto him, satisfy himself in whatsoever I have yet found said or written
for it. As for Printing; but for a mere accident, this Discourse (as it was
first written) had (without my privity) been Printed by others that had Copies;
to prevent the same, I am enforced to let this go: wherein I have left out that
which concerns the slander, being of more private concernment, and have taken
in what I find in learned Mr. Cottons Books, which I had neither seen nor
heard of, when I first wrote this Examination. In it I know no worth but the
Scripture; and in the publishing, I desire nothing but the furthering of Truth
and Order: in the which I shall be glad for thy good to be

Thy Servant, G. W.

Private-men no Pulpit-men. OR, An Examination of Laymens Preaching: In Answer
to a Writing published by JOHN KNOWLES.
It is needful we premise:

FIrst, that by a Layman both of us understand a private man, or a man not in
Office, a man not a Preacher by office. The term Layman I find in John Knowles
his writing; and take it, as we do, in opposition not to Clergy but Ministry,
it is inoffensive; for though we reject the Papists distinction of Clergy and
Laity, or people, yet we embrace that of Ministers and people, and a Layman is
but one ((...)) of the people.

2. It is not my purpose to set down, and make good the Ministers Arguments (to
which John Knowles his writing is an Answer): we want not matter against it,
but proof for it, and affirmantis est probare, they who practice or justify
such Preaching, must make it good out of Scripture; and that is our aim and
work in this Examination, to see whether they can do so. Nor is it my purpose
to answer any more of John Knowles his writing, then what concerns the point in
hand, nor to omit any thing of that, as for other things he there scatters, I
shall gratify him with the omission of them.

3. This Writer himself grants this to the Minister his Adversary, that Laymen
preaching were guilty of Vzzah's sin, had not God commanded them to preach:
therefore let us see where God commands this, and they shall clear themselves,
and satisfy us, and we shall have not a word against it, God forbid we should.
If any doubt, it is meet we give Reasons to satisfy, as this Minister did; but
if any Laymen will preach, or justify it in others, he must produce his
warrant out of Gods Word for it or by this Writers confession he is guilty of
Vzzah's sin: Vzzah's sin was, he put his hand to the Ark. 1 Chronicles. 13. 10.
which ^^ne might ^ouch but the high ^riest and his sons Numb. 4 15. David and
the peoples sin was, because it was not done after the due order. 1 Chronicles. 15
13.
because as Vzzah without warrant from God, did that, which by Gods ordinance
belonged to another man's Office, namely, the Priests; so private persons
preaching do that, which by Gods Ordinance be^ongs to another office, namely,
the Ministers.

The Doctrine defended by J^hn Knowls i^ this.

Kno. That it is lawful for a Layman, a (...) being met together, to preach
the Word, and that not only in p^te, (...) also in pub^ique, when the whole
Church is met together. And this is Gods ordinance, and the Apostle commands
it.

And for proof of this, he produces three texts. Romans ^2. Act. 8. 1 Cor. 14. To
these in order.

The first place is Romans 12. 6. Having then gifts, d^ffering according to the
grace that is given unto us, whether p^oph^sie, let us prophecy, etc. What is
hence concluded?

Kno. G^d has commanded all that have the gift of prophecy to use it.

Answ This is true, but no proof of his Doctrine; the truth is* this Scripture
concludes against him. The A^le requires, that they who have these gifts, (...)
and (...) (i.) Prophecy and Ministry (or Deaconship) exercise them in
humility and fidelity. He that has the gift of Prophecy, must prophecy,
and he that has the gift of Ministry (or Deaconship) must do the duty of a
Minister or Deacon. Now who be they who have these gifts? They that are by
office Prophets and Ministers (or Deacons)? or they that have abilities only?
If you say the former, the sense is, they that are by office Preachers must
preach, which is most true, but not to his purpose; If you say the latter, then
the sense is, Preach he that can, and it will follow baptize he that can, and
rule he that can too. Now to prove that the Apostle does not take gifts here
for abilities only (as you do) these Reasons I propose to consideration.

1. The word Gift is used in Scripture (as I expound) for the Office it self,
or gifted calling. So Ephesians. 4. 8. He gave gifts unto men: what were those
gifts? See ver. 11. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. The office of an Apostle, that is a
gift; the office of a Prophet, that is a gift; and so of the rest. And so Mr.
Cotton expounds The way of the Churches of Christ in New England c. 2. Sect. 2.
this place, his words are. That they were gifts we willingly acknowledge,
because all the Offices and Officers of the Church were given to the Church, as
well as the spiritual gifts and graces, whereby they do execute those offices;
for so says the Ap^stle, when Christ ascended up on high, he gave gifts to
men. What gifts? Some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. So
^e.

His Testimony I gladly use, not only as he is a learned and godly man, but
because in this and all other particulars, wherein I shall use him as a
witness, he (is not singularis testis, but carries with him the voice of the
Churches of Christ in New England, and of many in Old-England too, as we shall
see anon

So again, Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me is this grace given, that I should preach among
the Gentiles, etc. q. d. God of his grace without any merit in me has given me
the gift to preach to the Gentiles. And what was this gift? See Romans 11. 13. I
am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office. His office of
Apostleship to the Gentiles (with answerable abilities, that is employed) was his
gift to preach to the Gentiles. So you see Gift is taken in Scripture as well
for the office, as abilities. And so Mr. Cotton does expound this place, Romans
12. 6. which John Knowles urges, his words are (citing this Text) Having then
different gifts, etc. gifts, Ibid. c. 2. S. 1.
says he, comprehending both offices and grace. Now John Knowles must prove
it is not so taken here, or he proves nothing hence.

2. If we take gift in his sense for abilities only, then these absurdities
will follow.

1. We may then proceed from abilities to the exercise of other callings, for
if ability to preach be sufficient to authorize one to preach without any more
adoo, then also ability to baptize, and to rule, and govern, is sufficient to
authorize any to baptize, and to take on them to rule, govern, and judge, as
Rulers, Magistrates and Judges do. For there is the same reason for this in
other Callings, as in Preaching. And the Apostle in this place speaks generally
of other Callings, as well as of Preaching. Whether prophecy, let us
prophecy, etc. ver. 6. He that rules, let him do it with diligence. v. 8. So
then he that concludes hence, That whosoever has ability to preach, may
preach; must conclude also, that he that has ability to rule, may rule: of
which, the former is usurpation; the latter, Sedition. We say gifts are but the
foundation of a Calling, they do not warrant any to do the works of that
Calling without any more ado. To a Calling two things are required. 1. Gifts,
or endowments. 2. Authority. This is plain, in Joh. 20. 21. As my Father has
sent me, so send I you. There Christ gives his Apostles Authority. v. 22. He
breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the holy Ghost. There he
gives them their gifts (as we commonly call them) viz. abilities for their
Calling. So Jesus before his Ascension gives the Apostles their Authority,
Matthew. 28, 19, 20. Go ye therefore, etc. But for the plenitude of Apostolical
gifts, they must wait at Jerusalem till after his Ascension. Act. 1. 4. Wait
for the promise from the Father which ye have heard of me. Where? Luke 24. 49.
where this promise is expounded, to be endued with power from on high. And that
was when they were all filled with the holy Ghost, Act. 2. 4. Now gifts and
abilities are not enough without Authority. Christ we see gives these
distinctly, and the Apostles went not with one without the other. If gifts
without Authority or Calling were sufficient, Vzzah might have carried the Ark
as well as the Priests, he and others had as able bodies, and as good
shoulders, as the Priests, if abilities were enough. And there had been more
Apostles then ever Christ made: there were Preachers at Corinth who thought
themselves, (and others thought them too) in abilities before Paul, whom they
looked on, and bade others look on him as one in respect of them base in
presence, and in speech contemptible. And have not private persons Gifts to
baptize, as well as to Preach, since Scripture and Reason show that Baptism is
also in respect of Gifts a business inferior to Preaching?

And have not Lawyers and some other private men Gifts to do those things that
belong to the Judges and Magistrates office? And by this Doctrine every such
one may, ay and must step up into the Judges and Magistrates seats of Justice:
Must I say, because they teach, that Gifts are their warrant sufficient, and
that ^od requires the exercise of them. All then who have gifts to be Judges,
and Magistrates are sent of God to the Bench and Sword. What bloody confusions
would this breed? (...), such a confusion as is inconsistent with, and would
soon subvert the Offices. And will it not be the same in Ecclesiastical
Offices? Yes, it is of Church matters Paul there speaks 1 Cor. 14.
and says, God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the
Churches of the Saints. Yet extraordinary gifts (that is miraculous) we will
grant bring authority with them; therefore as these men take on them to
prophecy (which was an extraordinary and Temporary office (of which anon) as
appears, Ephesians. 4. 11.) so could they speak with Tongues too, we would not
question their Authority, but hear and defend their Preaching.

2. If all that can, may and must preach, the Ministers office were needless.
What need of Authority by office to do that, which every one may and must do
without it? For Jo: Knowls says, it is Gods ordinance, and the Apostle commands
it, and then, I hope, every one must do it. In this City what use was there of
Justices of Peace, if every one here that has any knowledge in such things
(and who would be found ignorant?) might do the Justices work in determining
Causes, and punishing offenders? Preaching is the chief part of the Ministers
office: it is the first and principal act of the Key of Authority or Cotton.
Keys of the Kingd. c. 5.
Rule. And if it were the will of the Lord Jesus, that this first and
principal part of the Ministers office should be done promiscuously by any as
well as by officers, why then may not other less principal Acts be done by
them too, and what need then any office for this purpose?

To conclude about this place. Does St. Paul here speak of This was one of the
extraordinary degrees of the Ecclesiastical Ministry in those days in which
some persons by especial inspiration of the holy Ghost were enlightened in the
knowledge of Gods mysteries to expound them in the Church, to which was often
times joined the Revelation of secret and future things. Diodat. in loc.
prophesying by the Spirit (i.) by Revelation, as some do interpret his
meaning? or of ordinary Preaching? as others. If of the former, then Revelation
is the gift, and the sense is, he that has Revelations must prophecy, which
we grant. If he speaks of ordinary preaching, as I think he does, then we
say, either prophesying here is a general word containing under it the two
Offices or Faculties immediately following, viz. Teaching and Exhortation,
which answer to Pastors and Doctons, Ephesians. 4. 11. And then the meaning is, He
that has received the Gift (i.) the Office of Pastor or Doctor, must wait on
Exhortation or Teaching. Or if with others, we make not Appellat Prophetiam,
non solum eorum, quae futura, praescientiam; sed eorum etiam, quae sint
occulta, cognitionem. Theodoret.
so many offices in this place, as Pastors and Teachers to be two several
officers, but say Exhortation and Teaching to be but two several gifts in the
same office: yet none of them say, that Paul speaks here of any other Exhorters
and Teachers, but such as are by office Ministers. Nor that St. Paul speaks
here of any other Prophets, but such as were by office Prophets. Prophets were
set in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 29. set as officers, even as Apostles, and
Governors, and Teachers, who are officers. And you have as good warrant to say
there were Lay-Apostles, Lay-Teachers, Lay-Governors, who were gifted men
Ruthers Right of Presbyt. c. 5. S. 1 p. 300.
not in office, as you have to say there were Lay-Prophets, or Prophets not in
office.

Thus Divines expound this place, either sense serves our turn, and crosses
our Writers. If this Exposition be not liked, let this Writer, or any other for
him, prove that there are in Scripture any other ordinary Prophets besides
Pastors and Teachers: or if he cannot prove that, which will be hard to do, let
that be proved, which he afterward affirms, that prophecy is here
di^^inguished from offices, as one particular differs from another, else he
says nothing to the purpose; nor can he conclude any thing certain, or
probable hence. For we say Pastors and Teachers are the ordinary Prophets, and
none besides them.

Kno. It is the business of a Servant of God to use those Gifts for the
edifying of the Church, which God does bestow on them for that same end.

Answ. This is true, but not as he applies it, That private persons gifts are
bestowed on them for this end, that they should be preachers of Gods Word we
deny, it must be proved. And to what end then are women's gifts given them, who
must not preach? He can no more hence conclude that private persons may preach,
then that every Lawyer gifted in the Law may step into the Judges Seats at
Westminster, and do their work. For a Lawyer is bound to use those gifts God
has given him in the Law for the good of his brothers estate, as well as a
Christian is bound to use his gifts of grace for the good of his brothers soul.
Must every Lawyer therefore say, it is his business to do the Judges and
Magistrates functions? He would soon be taught to his cost, that it was his
usurpation, if any should be so mad to enterprise it. For satisfaction we
answer.

1. There are other ways of using gifts for the edifying of the Church besides
preaching. Family-governors, and Parents must edify their children and family,
and God gives them gifts in prayer and knowledge, and for that purpose. And
Christians must exhort and comfort, and so edify one another in Christian
Conference and discourse, and God gives them gifts for it, ay to women many
times no mean gifts this way, as Scripture shows us in Priscilla, and others,
and experience in many; and yet no woman must preach: yet has she a large
field to exercise her edifying gifts in.

2. Sometimes Gifts are only pretended. In St. Paul's time some desired to be
teachers (or would be teachers) who were 1 Timothy 1. 7.
not qualified for such a business. Wherefore the Apostle in that Epistle
gives Timothy order, that a Novice should not be admitted Cap. 3. 6.
into the Ministry; such having an eye to the (honos) credit, but weigh not
the (onus) burden of the work. And as his persuasion of his own gifts will make
him aspire, so the tickling of applause in the exercise of his gifts would
swell him with pride, and endanger him. And St. James has an eye to this (I
think) when he says, speaking of censures, My bretbren, be not many masters,
it is ((...)) teachers (indeed a Iam. 3. 1.
Teacher has a mastership,) and therefore a woman is forbidden to teach, for
that were to usurp authority over the man. 1 Timothy 2. 12. 1 Cor. 14. 34.
Reprehendit eos, qui cum ad docendum vocati non sint, tamen munus illud privato
ausu affectant, ac proinde ex ambitione jus rigidae censurae sibi ^n proximos
arrogant. Pisca, in loc.
Let there not be many amongst you that attribute to themselves the authority
of teaching, reproving, and censuring of others, as thinking themselves more
wise, more holy, and more sufficient. Diodat. in loc.

Beza's note on this place is. Agit de eo morbo, qui pervulgatus est in
corporis etiam morbis, quo fit, ut plures sint medici quam aegroti. Sic solet
quivis existimare se ad docendum, quam ad discendum, aptiorem. (i.) St. James
treats of that disease, which is common also in the diseases of the body, by
which it comes to pass that there are more Physicians, then Patients. So every
one is wont to think himself fitter to teach, then to learn. So he.

3. Where be gifts indeed fit for the Ministry, such must desire the office,
and the exercise thereof. Hear the Apostle to all such. This is a true saying,
if a man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires 1 Timothy 3. 1.
a good work. God does, and the Church must, encourage, and receive such into
the Ministry, as are fit for it, and encourage them to desire and undertake
it. For the charge is so great (as the great Apostle felt) that some (sensible
of it) need encouragement and drawing, a spur; as much as some others do a
bit, a bar. What means e^se that phrase of our Savior, Pray ye therefore the
Lord of the Harvest, that he will ((...)) thrust Matthew 9.
or cast out Laborers into his Vineyard. We in our days may with compassion
look upon as great a Harvest in the three Kingdoms; as our Lord Jesus did in
Judea: As He commands, we must pray the Lord of the Harvest to Gift and send
more out, where they are wanting. The Church (and such as are entrusted in this
business) must call, and they must enter into office, and then be Preachers.
This is Christ's order, to be called to the office of the Ministry, then
preach; they that do not this, do (for ought I know) cross Christ's order,
preach unwarrantably, and walk disorderly in this particular.

We come to the second place alleged for Laymens preaching, and that is,

Act. 8. 1. At that time there was a great persecution against the Church which
was at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad thorowout the regions of
Judea, and Samaria, except the Apostles.

4. Therefore, they that were scattered abroad, went every where preaching the
word.

Here he supposes, that these who preached here were private persons, in the
same condition as Laymen with us. And therefore our Laymen may preach, so as
they do; even as these Primitive Christians did

1. We will examine his proof, that these Preachers were private men; and if he
makes not this good, he proves nothing.

2. We will show, that if it could be proved, that these were private men, this
example will no way help to prove the lawfulness of that practice which our
Lay-preachers use, and plead for.

1. How does he prove them private men? this is all this proof, which is
nothing satisfactory.

Kno. They were not the Apostles, as it is apparent, v. 1. and at this time
there were no Offi^ers in the Church save the Apostles and Deacons, as we read
of.

Answ. We grant they were not the Apostles, for they stayed at Jerusalem, v. 1.
and he grants there were Deacons, and they were more then Laymen, for he calls
them Officers; and the Scripture shows, that they had imposition of hands. Act.
6. 6. so they were not all private persons. But grant it was not a Deacons
office to preach, how does he prove there were no other officers at this time?

He must prove out of Gods Word, that before this persecution, there were no
other Officers; and if these were all private persons at Jerusalem, he must
prove that the Apostles gave them no Commission to preach, when they went
thence; and supposing this, then, that God did not give them commission by
immediate Revelation; till he prove this, there is nothing hence to satisfy
them, that seek Scripture-warrant, but only to beguil inconfiderate people.

All that is said for this is, there were none as we read of. He may read of
them, if he will, as others do.

But by [this time] does he mean before this scattering by this persecution, or
after? If before, I answer two things.

1. A very learned man says, that the seventy Disciples Rutherf. Due Right of
Presbyt c. 5. S. 1. p. 292. Id. ibid. p. 293.
were Pastors in office, v. 1. The Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent
them, not only to preach, but to work miracles, and this makes them more then
private persons. And the same man tells us, that learned Divines think that
these of the scattered Church, who preached, were the seventy Disciples.

2. Grant that the first commission of these seventy Disciples was but
temporary, and that all these before this dispersion were at Jerusalem but
private persons. No need of other Preachers at Jerusalem whilst all the
Apostles were there, and Deacons were not made till need required them. Act. 6.

But after this dispersion, he may read of others if he will, (...).
Prophets, and Evangelists, the Apostles fellow laborers in the work of the
Ministry. That there were such, see Act. 13. 1. chap. 15. 32. and often. And
Act. 21. 8. we shall find that Philip (one of the seven Deacons, and one of
these that were scattered abroad) is now an Evangelist. And that these
Prophets, and Evangelists, were Officers is plain, Ephesians. 4. 11. Now can this
Writer find the time when they were put into office? He will have Philip, and
all the rest of the scattered Christians to go from Jerusalem private persons:
(Philip but a Deacon at most) afterward we find some of them Prophets, some
Evangelists; can it be proved, they were not appointed to these Functions when
they left Jerusalem? It will be hard to prove it; yet that, and more then that,
must be proved (as we shall see anon) or his Argument and Cause falls, for any
help it can have from this place. Wherefore I oppose these three considerations
against what is said to prove, that these Preachers were private persons.

1. The Apostles had a charge from the Lord Jesus to preach the Gospel to every
creature, and herewith they had power as to preach themselves, so to authorize
and send forth other men to that work. And this they did practice every where
as opportunity offered, and necessity required (witness the Acts and Epistles
of the Apostles) sending forth Prophets and Evangelists (the Apostles
Assistants in their extraordinary work) to plant and gather Churches, or to
confirm them that were planted: and to ordain Pastors and Teachers in settled
Churches. And how will it be proved, that the Apostles did not give Authority
to these men, to preach the Gospel as they went? Was there not need, when the
Apostles themselves must stay at Jerusalem, v. 1. and the Gospel must be
preached abroad at the sametime? And is it probable (nay is it not to question
the Apostles care) that they, being trusted with the spreading of the Gospel,
should let these men go, and give them no order to preach it? (which if they
did it is enough) especially since this persecution came by Gods Providence for
this very end, that they (whom peace held together in comfortable fellowship at
Jerusalem, being dispersed) might spread the Gospel as they went? Is there any
Scripture, Reason or sense to the contrary? And if the Apostles gave them order
to preach, then they were no longer private persons, but authorized for the
work, and so no president for Laymen to preach.

2. Grant, that these preaching Christians had no Commission from the Apostles
to preach, yet might they be put out of the condition of private persons by an
Immediate Call from Jesus Christ, such as the Apostles had. Evangelists and
Prophets, as they were extraordinary Officers, as the Apostles themselves, and
had extraordinary gifts, so might their Call to the work be either in part, or
whole, as the Apostles was, Gal. 1. 1.
not by man, but by Jesus Christ, though they were moved in an inferior Orb
to, and by the Apostles; for they did go and come as the Apostles did send
them. And it is apparent that some men were thus called by the immediate voice
of Christ Gal. 1. 23.
from heaven. Saul (afterward Paul) was called to preach the faith, when he
was going to destroy the faith, and this Call he had by the immediate voice of
Christ from heaven, when he was going on the high Priests cursed Arrand to Act
9 4. V. 1. 2.
bring bound to Jerusalem the Disciples of the Lord. And this Paul often
mentions as to exalt the grace of God toward him, so to make good his Calling
of Apostle-ship against those who questioned his Calling to preach, that so
they might work in people a light esteem of that Doctrine he did preach. His
Gal. 1. 16.
calling to preach was by Revelation; The Gal. 1. 11, 12 Ephesians. 3. 3.
Gospel which he preached he had by Revelation; he Gal. 2. 2.
went to Jerusalem by Revelation; Thus was his Calling by Revelation from
heaven.

And it is as apparent that some of these men in this very Chapter, as Philip
by name was ordered what to do by the immediate direction of the Lord himself
by his Spirit and Angels, who did speak to him, and in a miraculous way carry
Act. 8. 26. 29, 39.
him from place to place. And can it be proved that the rest did not preach by
the like direction? And if so, then none can argue for Laymens preaching from
this place, unless they have the like Call by immediate inspiration, and by
the voice of the holy Spirit and Angels as Philip had.

Simile. Suppose all the Officers of this Garrison were to stay in, and the
common Soldiers to depart out of the Town, and these we find in the Country
gathering Companies, and doing those things that belong to a Captains or
Colonels office, and that in so doing they do well (this we must suppose too,
for The hand of the Lord was with them. Act. 11. 21.
neither of us question, but these primitive Christians did well, and their
duty in preaching) what could hence be concluded? one of these two things.
Either that these common Soldiers had Commission from the Governor at, or from
the Lord General after their leaving the Town, to do what they did. Or else
that it is lawful for common soldiers without any Commission (of their own
authority) to raise Companies, and do the offices of Captains and Colonels.
Would any conclude thus? Yet thus our Writer concludes. We find these primitive
Christians preaching, therefore, say we, they had authority from the Apostles,
or from God himself by immediate Revelation (because preaching belongs to
Officers which have their commission from Christ for this work. Epbes. 4. 11.)
But because we find these Christians preaching, and they were not the Apostles,
therefore it is lawful for private persons, without any other authority than
their own gifts, to preach: thus our Writer concludes. And thus he produces a
new way of authorizing Preachers. The old ways the Apostle acquaints Tit. 1.
5. Act. 14. 23.
us with. Gal. 1. 1. (...), by Jesus Christ (viz. immediately, so the Apostles)
and (...), by man, so ordinary Preachers are called. This Writer adds a third
way of making a Preacher, and that is ((...)) by himself. A way that Christ
himself, nor no man else may be called by, as St. Paul says. Heb. 5. 4, 5.

Thirdly and lastly. Tell me: were all these dispersed Christians private
persons, or only some? If only some, then other some of them were out of the
Condition of private persons, and how then prove you, that any did preach
besides those that were out of the Condition of private persons? He says, All
of them did preach, but the text says not so. And if all of them did preach,
and were all private persons, then private persons may baptize too. For some of
these in this Chap. v. 12. 13. (Philip by name) did baptize the Samaritanes,
men and women, and Simon Magus too. And what here Philip did, the rest did,
unless you will say (that which I think you will not, having taken notice what
the Scripture says of them, Act. 11. 21.
that the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed, and
turned to the Lord, viz: by their Ministry) that they which had such power to
preach and convert, had not power to baptize believers converted. And if they
had power to baptize also, then hence you may as well conclude, that private
persons may baptize, as that they may preach. One conclusion is as good as the
other. If you be of that opinion, let us know. And then by good consequence it
will follow, that women also Eliam soeminas in extrema necessitate posse
baptizare. Bellar. de sacr. bapt. ca. 7. ^^. 3.
(Midwives) if need be, may baptize. And here Bellarmine will help in the
proof. For you hold Gifts a sufficient Call to preach, yet deny a woman,
whatsoever gifts she has, to exercise them in preaching, because she is
forbidden; but where is she forbidden to baptize?

And if you say, a woman may not speak in the Church, we may expound that as
you do, she may not preach, (...), not speak as Doctors. Thus you had need (you
see) take heed how you break the bounds Christ has set, otherwise no stay till
you come on the shelves.

In this Point also hear Mr. Cotton. We do believe, that they to Way of the
Chu: of Christ in N. Engl. c. 4. S. 2. Certe eosdem constituit and Evangelii
praecones, and baptismi administros. A Christo enim haec conjunct a esse
ostendo, Evangelii praedicationem and baptizandi ministerium. ex Mat. 28. 19.
Call Tract. Theol. p. 350.
whom the preaching or dispensing of the Gospet (or Covenant of Grace) unto the
Church is committed, to them also is committed the dispensing of the Seals of
the Covenant. He brings this as an argument to prove that Teachers may
administer the Sacraments as well as Pastors, because they have power to
preach, as well as the Pastors have. So you say Laymen have power to preach as
well as Ministers, therefore (if Mr. Cottons argument be good) they may baptize
as well as Ministers. In his judgment they may do one as well as the other,
that is neither. And (says he) that the administration of the Seals is annexed
to the preaching of the Word, is plain from Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Go make
Disciples, and baptize them. Reys of the King. cap. 5. p. 20.

Obj.If you distinguish between Pastoral preaching, and preaching by virtue of
a Gift, and say, Laymen may not administer the Sacraments, because they do not
preach Pastorally.

Sol. A learned Divine has shaped a good Answer to this, Rutherf. Due Right of
Presbyt c. 5. S. 1. p. 277.
The same distinction, says he, may as well hold, that there is a pastoral
administration of the Sacraments, and a common administration of them by virtue
of a gift. The former way Pastors and Teachers only may baptize, the latter
way Laymen may baptize too. And why may we not lead on the distinction
farther, and say, there is a ruling by office, and so Rulers and Magistrates do
lay censures, taxes and punishments on offenders; and there is a ruling by
Gift, and so private men may lay censures, taxes, and punishments on others.
Apage^^gas; away with such fooleries. But let us suppose, that these of the
scatrered Church, who preached were private persons, this will nothing at all
help our Writer to justify that practice of preaching, which he defends,
unless he could prove, that these private men did preach at Jerusalem too,
where all the Apostles were. For this his proof, these private men, being
scattered among those, who had no Ministry, nor ever heard of Christ, did
preach, therefore there a private man may preach, and that ordinarily (for that
is the practice) where a Ministry, a faithful Ministry is or may be had,
Does this follow? Yet A positive law may yield in case of necessity. Matthew.
12. 4.
thus our whole Discourse is to be understood. Whether a private person, coming
into such a Country, among such a people, who never had the sound of the
Gospel among them, may preach, is quite without the bounds of our Question? Let
our Writer therefore prove, that these Christians did preach at Jerusalem,
where the Apostles were, and then there is some consequence, that private men
may preach, where Preachers by Office are; else not.

Now of the last place alleged by John Knowls to prove Laymen may preach, it
is, 1 Cor. 14. the only place, and yet he slips over it with slender proof,
and as slight answer to that, which was laid in his way in the Ministers
Reasons, the sound of the words being more for him than the sense.

This whole Chapter runs upon extraordinary gifts. And I take prophesying here
to be prophesying by the Spirit, by Revelation; and good Reasons may be
produced (I think) to prove it, if John Knowls will deny it. See his proof.

Kno. It is Gods Ordinance (viz. that Laymen do preach) this does appear in
that the Apostle commands the Church to desire it, and he exhorts all to desire
to prophecy, and tells them, that they may all prophecy.

Answ. To this he shall have my Answer after Mr. Cottons, who makes this
Objection.

Obj. If (says he) it be objected: Private members may all Keys of the Kingd.
of heaven. c. 5.
of them prophecy publicly, 1 Cor. 14. 31. and therefore also baptize: and so
this act of authority (viz. to preach and baptize) is not peculiar to Preaching
Elders. To this objection he returns this Answer.

Answ. The place in the Corinths does not speak of ordinary private members,
but of men furnished with extraordinary That you may receive the miraculous
gift of Gods Spirit Diodat. in 1 Cor. 14.
gifts. Kings at the time of their Coronation give many extraordinary large
gifts, which they do not daily pour out in like sort in their ordinary
government. Christ soon after his Ascension poured out a larger measure of his
Spirit, then in times succeeding. The members of the Church of Corinth (as of
many other in those primitive times) were enriched with all knowledge, and in
all utterance. 1 Cor. 1. 5. and the same persons that had the gift of prophecy
in the Church of Corinth, had also the gift of Tongues, which put upon the
Apostle a necessity to take them off from their frequent speaking with tongues,
by preferring prophecy before it. 1 Cor. 14. 2. to 24. so that though all they
might prophecy (as having extraordinary gifts for it) yet the like liberty is
not allowed to them that want the like gifts. In the Church of Israel, none
besides the Priests and Levites did ordinarily prophecy, either in the Temple,
or in the Synagogues, unless they were either furnished with extraordinary
gifts of prophecy (as the Prophets of Israel) or were set apart and trained to
prepare for such a calling, as the sons of the Prophets. When Amos was
forbidden by the high Priest of Bethel to prohesie at Bethel, Amos does not
allege, nor plead the liberty of any Israelite to prophecy in the holy
assemblies, but alleges only his extraordinary calling. Amos 7. 14, 15. It
appears also that the sons of the Prophets, that is, men set apart, and
trained up to prepare for that calling, were allowed the like liberty. 1 Samuel
19. 20.

This is Mr. Cottons Answer, and it is so full, that for brevities sake I will
spare mine here which I gave to the same purpose formerly.

He tells us, these were not ordinary private men, but such as had extraordinary
gifts, the gift of Tongues, and the like liberty of Preaching is not allowed
them that want the like gifts, etc.

Therefore, it is not Gods ordinance, but crosses Gods ordinance, that private
men should preach the Word, if Mr. Cottons judgment be right, who tells us,
that the preaching of Keys of the Kingd. of heav. c. 5.
the Word is the first and principal part of the Key of Authority or Rule,
which Christ has given to the Officers of the Church, and not to all Officers
neither, but it is peculiar to preaching Elders.

Who are they then that the Apostle commands and exhorts to prophecy? Those
that were desirers of spiritual gifts. What gifts did they desire? and what
gifts did they most use? (...) v. 12.
Tongues; as it is evident, for the Apostles scope is in this chap. to take
them off from their frequent speaking with Tongues, as Mr. Cotton. And the
Apostle exhorts and commands these to desire and use these gifts, Tongues, but
rather to prophecy: Loc. cit.
Well then our Laymen are exhorted and commanded by the Apostle in this place
to preach, so are they then exhorted and commanded to speak with Tongues, for
beside v. 1. 12. see what he says, v. 5. (...), I will that ye all speak with
Tongues. So I read it as it is in the original. Hence then we will argue as he
does, as we must argue thus, that it is Gods ordinance and the Apostles will,
that all Laymen (or all private persons) do speak with Tongues. And what is
the gift of Tongues? and to speak with Tongues in the Scripture sense, what is
it? Not to speak Tongues as we learn by study and pains-taking, as by study we
learn the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Caldee, etc. This indeed is a Gift of Tongues,
but not in the Scripture sense, but such Tongues as are given by God without
man's pains, for Tongues are a sign to unbeleevers. 1 Cor. 14. 22. It Is when men
do by the Spirit of God speak those Tongues which they never learned, and which
the hearers know they are ignorant of, otherwise they cannot be a sign to them
being unbeleevers. So the Apostles, known to be unlearned men, on the sudden,
the holy Ghost descending on them, spoke many several sorts of languages, at
which the hearers were amazed. Now how will John Knowls avoid this, but that he
and all Lay-preachers are commanded here thus to speak with Tongues? See what
absurdities follow wresting Scripture, which wresters have for their pains.

Kno. He (Paul) would, that they all did speak with tongues, but rather that
they prophecy, etc. from whence we gather, that a man may prophecy, though he
cannot speak with tongues.

Answ. You gather that which is not there sown. In my Logic all that you can
gather hence is, that the Apostle here prefers prophesying (which was most
edifying) before speaking with The Corinthians did more desire the gift of
tongues as that which caused more admiration. Dioda. in loc. 1 Ioh 4. 20.
tongues which they most affected, because it served most (ad pompam) for
applause and admiration. That this is all you can gather hence, you shall see
in an instance; Let me thus argue, I would that you should love your brother,
but rather that you love God; whence I gather, that a man may love God, though
he do not love his brother; this is false as the Apostle teaches us; and so is
your collection, unless you can prove by Scripture, that it is contingent that
prophecy and tongues should be in the same person. As indeed thus I may argue,
I would have you a good Artist, but rather a good Christian; hence I gather, a
man may be a good Christian, though no good Artist. But, that it is thus
contingent, that tongues and prophecy be in the same person, you are to prove.
Mr. Cotton you see is against you. The same persons (says he) that Keys of the
Kingd. of Hea. c. 5.
had the gift of prophecy in the Church of Corinth, had also the gift of
tongues, which put on the Apostle a necessity to take them off from their
frequent speaking with tongues by preferring prophecy before it. And we shall
find the twelve first Disciples at Ephesus receiving the Act. 19. 6.
Spirit by Paul's laying on of hands, spoke with tongues, and prophesied. They
who spoke with tongues, prophesied. But grant him, that one man may have the
gift of prophecy, and not of tongues, yet one Church has not; the gift of
prophecy is in no Church, but the gift of tongues is in the same. If one man
has the one gift, another has the other in the same Church. They spoke with
tongues, and prophesied go together, if 1 Cor. 13. 8. Act. 19. 5.
not in the same person, yet in the same Church.

Kno. All may prophecy, v. 31.

Answ The Minister had told him that these all were not Laymen but Prophets.
v. 29. 32.

Kno. Herein He (the Minister) has put his Reader in as great doubt as before,
to know who these Prophets are, which the Author has not here expressed,
either because he was ignorant of it, on else because he feared, that if he
should rightly define them, it would make little to his purpose, and therefore
glosseth it over as well as he could.

Answ. No such ignorance, nor cause of fear, we shall define them, and then let
the Reader judge whether our definition of them be not as much to our purpose,
as his definition, he gives by and by, is little to his purpose.

To answer therefore. 1 Cor 14. 29. 32.
The Scripture here says, they were Prophets, and Prophets were set in the
Church 1 Cor. 12. 28 Ephesians. 4. 11. Rutherf. Right of Presbyt* c. 5. S. 1 p. 300.
as Officers, even as Apostles, and Evangelists, and Teachers and Pastors who
are Officers, as a learned man observes. But to help John Knowls and his Reader
in this great doubt, I will tell him who these Prophets were, by the help, and
in the words, of two men (too mighty in the Scriptures for him to slight so
easily) Dr: Rainolds, and Mr. Beza. Hear the first.

Illi sine controversia Prophetae sunt Paulo qui extraordinariis quibusdam Dr.
Rainolds de lib. Apocr. praelect. 34.
donis ornati erant --. Ex ii^ etiam quae illis attribuuntur, manifestum est,
superiores eos fuisse Pastoribus and Doctoribus, etc. (i.) They without
controversy are Prophets in Paul's sense, who were endued with extraordinary
gifts --. And it is manifest by those things which are attributed to them, that
they were superior to Pastors and Doctors. So He. Hear the other.

Revelationem conjungo prophetiae --: ut plane hic opus sit caelesti Beza in
loc.
quodam dono peculiari, quod homines suo mart consequi non possint. --
Prophetia est effectum Revelationis. (i.) I join revelation to prophecy --:
that to prophesying there is need of a peculiar heavenly gift, which men cannot
attain unto by their own industry and endeavor; and prophecy is the effect of
revelation. So He. These men no children in Scripture-knowledge tell us, these
Prophets were without controversy men of extraordinary gifts, that it is
manifest they were superior to Pastors and Teachers, that prophecy is an
effect of revelation, joined Way of the Churches of Chr: in N. Eng. c. 2. S. 2.
with Revelation. And says not the Scripture the same? Observe. 1. They were
Officers. Ephesians. 4. 11. and 1 Cor. 12. 28. All there mentioned are spiritual
gifts. So Mr. Cotton.

2. They were extraordinary Officers, such as the Apostles and Evangelists
were. This is evident in the last cited places. Ephe. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Mr.
Cotton on those places says, The Apostle Loc. cit.
reckons up here ministeries or offices, which God has set in his Church,
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, under whom your Evangelists are
comprehended, as being of equal rank with them. So He; and speaking of
Evangelists, says, Whose office was alike extraordinary Ibid. S. 8.
as that of Apostles and Prophets.

3. They were in order and place above Pastors and Teachers, the ordinary
Ministers: so they are placed, Ephesians. 4. 11. Some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists: not only before Pastors and Teachers, but before Evangelists. And
the Apostle is more curious in enumerating. 1 Cor. 12. 28. First Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers. It is evident by the words of order,
Loc. cit.
that he intends to reckon the first sorts in their due order. As Apostles
are before Prophets, so are Prophets before ordinary Teachers. So Mr. Cotton.

4. Their gifts must be extraordinary, because they were extraordinary
Officers, and the Scripture witnesses the same. Agabus one of the Prophets
signified by the Spirit, that there Act. 11. 27. 28.
should be great dearth throughout the world. Barnabas another, Act. 13. 1. His
gifts, see Act. 14. 3. And this Chapter, 1 Cor. 14. may evince this, if it be
denied, for v. 6. speaking by Revelation and by Prophesying are the same, as
speaking by Knowledge and Doctrine are the same. He that prophesies does it by
revelation; He that speaks Doctrine does it by knowledge. Itaque haec non
sunt quatuor, sed duo; siquidem prophetia est effectum Revelationis, Doctrina
vero notitiae. i. e. Therefore Bez. in loc.
these are not four, but two; for prophecy is the effect of Revelation;
doctrine, of knowledge. But I have some reason to think, that our Writer will
not deny Revelations to Prophets, and I will spare my proof, till it be denied.

Lastly, the use of these Prophets in the primitive times seems to be for the
work of the Ministry in primordiis Ecclesiarum, in Churches newly planted,
before an ordinary Ministry was settled, which could not be suddenly. Something
of this we may see in the Ephesian Church, which began with twelve men, which
twelve by Paul's hands received the gifts of tongues Act. 19. 6, 7.
and prophecy. And doubtless these (and such others to whom the Lord did
impart the like gifts, if any more such were in Ephesus afterward) did
prophecy (or preach) there, until Bishops were settled in that Church, which
we find to be done in Act. 20. 17. 28.
the next Chapter. And in this Church at Corinth, we find now many Prophets,
but I read not of any Bishops or Pastors among them, perhaps they were not yet
ordained there.

Out of all this we may thus describe the Prophets which the Apostle exhorts
and commands to preach in this 1 Cor. 14.

They were extraordinary Officers in the Church, endued with extraordinary
gifts, superior to Pastors and Teachers (the ordinary Ministers of the Church)
ordained by God for the work of the Ministry in those primitive times, so long
as extraordinary and miraculous gifts continued in the Churches. For to
continue extraordinary Officers in the Churches as Mar. 6. 13.
Prophets, etc. in these times, in which God grants not extraordinary gifts,
is to do as wisely as the Papists who continue Iam. 5. 14. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Beza.
Unction, when they have not the gift of healings. Quorsum nunc symbolum, si
nusquam extat donum?

Mr. Cotton speaking of these Prophets at Corinth, and saying, they were not
private members, but men of extraordinary gifts, says, As Kings at the time of
their Coronation give many extraordinary Keys of the Kingd. of Heav. c. 5.
large gifts, which they do not daily in their ordinary government; so Christ
soon after his ascension poured out a larger measure of his Spirit then in
times succeeding. So that in his opinion private men may not practice these
Corinthian-Prophets preaching, because they have not their gifts, which were a
largess at Christ's Coronation for those, but not for succeeding times. Let the
Reader now judge, whether this description of Prophets be not to our purpose,
and whether we need be afraid to produce it.

Let us now see whether his definition of Prophets be to his purpose.

Kno. They are those that use their gifts to the edification and consolation of
the Church.

Answ.This offends in one main, it does not convenire soli, for Pastors and
Teachers do the same. It Is true, Prophets by revelation 1 Cor. 14. 3.
did use their gifts for that end, and the ordinary Prophets, Pastors and
Teachers do so too. For the end of the labors of all officers (preaching) both
ordinary and extraordinary is the edification of the body of Christ. Ephesians. 4.
1^.


Kno. Prophets are Laymen, this we say for these Reasons. 1. Because the
Apostle makes a difference betwixt them, and men in office. Romans 12. 6, 7.

Answ. We have already answered this, that in two places of Scripture we find
Prophets (not differenced from, but) reckoned Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 12.
among Officers. And that in this place, Romans 12. the Apostle speaks of them as
Officers, Having different gifts, says Paul, whether Way of the Chur: of Chr.
c. 2. S. 1.
prophesic, etc. Gifts comprehending both offices and grace. So Mr. Cotton.

Kno. 2. Because he exhorts all to desire to prophecy, and all that can may
use it, and yet not all in office. Neither will any one (as I suppose) say that
the Apostle would have all officers, for if they were all eyes, where were the
body?

Answ. His Reason out of the Corinths is already answered. That the Apostle
would have all Preachers officers, is that I in this whole Discourse defend.
That the Apostle would not have all men to be officers I agree with John
Knowls, and his reason is good (it is the Apostles) but not for him. For is it
not all one for the body to be all eyes, and to have all the members do the
office of the eyes? And if the feet and hands can see their own way, and direct
the body too, may not the eyes be well spared out of the head, and no want of
them? especially if they might be otherwise usefully employed for the good of
the body?

But the eyes must see, and the hands and feet do other work. And Christ has
appointed in the Churches, Officers to preach, and do the work of the
Ministry, and private members to do other work, their own work. 1 These. 4. 11.


Beza makes another use of this Reason, Ye may all prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. 31.
Omnes, nimirum prophetae, ergo non quivis ex coetu, imo non nisi ad prophetandi
munus legitime ordinati. Number enim, ut, idem ait alibi omnes sunt prophetae? i.
e. All, namely, Prophets, therefore not every one of the congregation, nay
none, but such as are lawfully ordained to the office of prophesying. For, as
says the same Apostle elsewhere, are all Prophets? So He. 1 Cor. 12. 19.


There remains now not any one thing, that I observe, pertinent to the question
in hand, in Jo: Knowls his writing, unanswered. Other things impertinent I
shall do him, and the Reader, the courtesy to pass by. Only I must return
answer to one demand. The Minister speaking how needful the knowledge of Arts
and Tongues were in a Preacher, John Knowls demands.

Kno. Whether by Arts he does understand the Art of Geometry, Astronomy, or the
like, or whether all Arts; and for tongues, whether it be the Welsh, Irish,
Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, or whether all tongues be required to make a man fit
for prophesying?

Answ. Somewhat to this scoff. Should a man come to an Artificers shop, and
scoff at all his hammers, files, and tools, the Artificer In this Point of the
use of humane l^arning, I send him for his learning to Mr. Tho: Goodwins
Sermon, entitled, The great Interest of States and Kingdoms.
would but smile at his ignorance, because he knows they are all useful in
their time, and for some business or other, though perhaps he uses not some
of them in a year together. Our Writers scoffing at them is only a proclaiming
his ignorance of them.

For tongues.

1. I wonder at this youths impudency to jumble the Greek and Hebrew tongues in
a scoff amongst the Welsh and Irish: in a jeering manner to parallel the
original Languages (in which the holy Ghost was pleased the Scriptures should
be first written, and in which for that cause no Preacher can be unskilled, but
he is (ea part claudus) sensible thereof as a great defect) with the Welsh and
Irish tongues of least use and repute.

2. Extraordinary Prophets (such as they, 1. Cor. 14. and such our Writer
pleads for) must have all tongues, Welsh, Irish, Italian, French, Spanish,
Dutch, S^lavonian, Indian, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, all tongues, which people
understand amongst whom they come, otherwise the Prophet shall be unto him that
hears a Barbarian, if he know not the meaning of the voice, says Paul, i.
understands not his language. Wherefore the Lord 1 Cor. 14 11.
furnished the Apostles and Prophets with the gift of tongues, that they were
able to speak to every Nation in their own language.

3. Ordinary Prophets, Pastors, and Doctors have need of the Original tongues
especially, and the Latin, for the many books sake which that language is
privileged with.

Kno. We see men to excel this way (in preaching) though not endued with the
knowledge of the tongues.

Answ. And we reverence those Preachers which excel in preaching, though
defective in the tongues; and as much distaste those, that despise thus the
knowledge of the tongues, speaking evil of those things they know not, nor the
use and worth of them. And albeit I will not say as one (Impudentes esse
Theologos Erasm.
qui Graecarum and Hebraicarum literarum imperiti, etc.) i. They are impudent
Divines, who being ignorant of the Greek and Hebrew tongues, etc. Though I will
not say thus, unless we Qui docet major est eo, qui exhortatur. Hieronym, in
Romans 12.
apply it only to professed Doctors or Teachers (of whom we may boldly say
with him, they are impudent, if, ignorant of those tongues, they undertake that
function) because tongues are necessary (ad been esse) to the well being of a
Pastor or Preacher: yet we say, they are impudent who speak thus slightly of
tongues in a Preacher. And they that are friends (not to Barbarism, errors,
heresies, and irreligion, but) to the truth of God, must keep up in the
Ministers of the Gospel, the knowledge of the tongues, and all good learning
with all conscionable care. Quantumcunque cedendum est necessitati temporum and
populi -- Whatsoever Dispensation the necessity of the times and people may
plead for unto the judgment of the State and Church, I submit therein.

I shall now dismiss John Knowls with this advise out of the Apostle (...).
And shall desire the Reader to take notice of the kind of proof he uses,
which is not by express words of Scripture, but all by consequence; which kind
of arguing we grant, and maintain to be good, but for as much as it is denied
to us by many among us in point of Paedobaptisme, and some higher matters, we
will in like manner deny them the use of that weapon, which they except against
in us. And so by their own tenent all John Knowls his arguments are nothing,
because only consequentiall. Therefore as such ask us, where we read in
Scripture, that Infants were baptized? So we ask them, where they read in the
Bible, that a Layman, a private person, one out of Office did preach, or is
commanded so to do? It Is not ingenuous, nor fair, to deny Infants Baptism, and
to question and deny far greater matters, saying, we have not express words
of Scripture for the same; and they themselves in the mean time set up Laymens
preaching (and other things) for which they have no express words in
Scripture. Therefore they must either grant Infants Baptism, and such other
points, contained in the Scripture by good consequence, or they must lay down
Laymens preaching, and they must keep all women from the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, until they can find express words for it in the Bible; and
greater stones must they pull out of the building of faith. But I dare not
argue with these men (ab absurdo) with arguments taken from Absurdities that
will and must follow; because they are so ready to swallow the greatest
absurdities (as some have done already) rather then by them to be driven to the
truth. Yet the holy Apostle uses this argument against the denyers of the
Resurrection, If (says he) there be no resurrection 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14.
rection of the dead, then Christ is not risen, then is our preaching vain,
then your faith vain. These were horrid consequences to drive them from that
heretical opinion, to which those consequences were linked. And it is said,
that any now should (as they do) swallow as horrid con^equences, rather then
vomit up again such morsels, as they have taken, to which these consequences
are necssarily tied.

Postscript.
I Shall now give the Reader an account, why I single out Mr. Cotton to make so
much use of his Testimony in this controversy, and herein I shall make good
what is said in the frontispice of this discourse, viz. that Laymens preaching
is not allowed, by the Judgment or practice of the Churches of Christ in
New England. And I choose out Mr. Cottons testimony, not only because he is a
godly and learned Preacher, and expounds the Scriptures alleged (by J^hn
Knowls for private persons preaching) as I did (and do) against it (as others
also do) but because in all things, wherein I have made use of him, as a
witness, he carries with him the Vote of the Churches of Christ in
New England, and it should seem of all the Churches of the Separation in
Old-England, if N. H. and J. H. the publishers of one of these books of Mr.
Cottons be not deceived.

To make this good.

1. That Mr. Cottons vote carries with it the vote of the Churches of Christ in
New England, we gather, because the Title of one of these books (wherein he
speaks against Laymens preaching) is this, The Way of the Churches of Christ
in New England; and the subject of the book is to show and make good the
practice of the Churches there in matter of Order, and Discipline, and
Government. Now in this book there is no such practice as private persons
preaching mentioned, nay Mr. Cotton expresses himself often and pathetically
against it, and shows us, that they are so far from allowing mere Laymen to
preach, that they do not allow all Ecclesiastical Officers among them to
preach, for by this he distinguishes preaching and ruling Elders, that
preaching, and administering the Sacraments Keys of the Kingd. of heaven c. 5.
Ibid. p. 22.
is that Key of Authority that is peculiar to preaching Elders. The Ruling
Elders have not received power to preach, but to charge any of the people in
private, that none of them live inordinately without a Calling, or idly in
their Calling, or scandalously in any sort. So that the practice of the
Churches of Christ in New England allows not private men's preaching, and
therefore not their Judgment, unless their practice be not according to their
judgment.

2. What approbation these two books of Mr. Cotton (cited in this Discourse)
have in Old-England, we may learn from the publishers of them.

1. N. H. and J. H. the publishers of the one (viz. The Way of the Churches of
Christ in New England) calling it A Full Declaration of the Church Way in all
particulars measured and examined by the golden reed of the Sanctuary, have in
their Epistle to the Reader these words, -- with seconds of frequent
intimations, that we hold with the Churches of New England. And again, With
much adoo we have (say they) presented you with a fuller Declaration of All Our
Way, according to the Scriptures in this learned, yet modest Treatise of (The
way of the Churches of Christ in New England.) And we do in this our Epistle
certify Our assent thereunto, saving that we do not yet fully close with some
expressions passim in the book, before some of which we minded it to note a* in
the Margin. And we find not this star before any of the testimonies which we
have cited against private persons preaching. And therefore we have for us in
this Controversy the judgment as of Mr. Cotton, and the Churches in
New England, so of all those Churches and persons in Old-England which are
contained in those publishers ALL OUR, and WE. And who, and how many they are,
they best know, who made that Manifesto. Their We and All Our, with the drift
of the Epistle seem to imply an unanimous consent.

And the Reverend publishers of the other book (viz. The M. Tho. M. Goodwin. M.
Phil. Nigh.

Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven) albeit they seem to dissent from Mr. Cotton in
this point of prophesying, yet are express (I am sure) against that which is
practiced among us, defended by John Knowls, and oppugned by me in this
Discourse. For take their cautions in their own words, it must be, say they,
sometimes To the Reader.
only. 1. Occasionally not in an ordinary course. 2. By such men as are fit
for office. And 3 not assuming this of themselves, but judged such by those
that have the power, and so allowed and designed to it, etc. Thus* and thus
only, they conceive gifted Brethren may preach; and had these cautions been
observed, we had not had this controversy a foot; and how unsuitable the
practice of our private Preachers has been to these limitations is so
manifest, that I need not, nor will speak: it were to speak rather ad personas,
which I meddle not with, than ad rem, which is that I seek, the clearing of the
truth.

And, as I said, though these learned men seem to dissent from Mr. Catton, yet
wherein the difference lies (having considered their cautions and his writings)
I confess I see not, unless it be in the word Occasionally. For Mr. Cotton
permits none (though gifted men, and Ecclesiastical Officers) unless Pastors
or Teachers to preach. Mr. Peter's Colleague has himself Mr. Norice
held up all the ordinances in the whole work of the Ministry, all the time of
Mr. Peter's residing here in this Kingdom, in a letter to his friend.
for which he blesses God for Divine assistance, considering the greatness of
the Congregation, and the weakness of his body formerly.

I shall conclude with that patheticall passage of Mr. Cottons, which I wish
them to observe who make so small a matter of this business. We (says he) be
far from allowing that sacrilegious Keys of the Kingd. of heav. c. 2.
usurpation of the Ministers Office, which we hear of (to our grief) to be
practiced in some places, that private Christians ordinarily take upon them to
preach the Gospel publicly, and to minister the Sacraments. And if his eye
could have helped his ear, it would have affected his heart with more grief, to
see it done with that contempt of the ordinance of Christ. Why he calls it
sacrilegious usurpation, he gives not his reasons, but we may gather them to be
such as these. That it is usurpation.

1. It appears from that of the Apostle, I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to
usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. And 1 Timothy 2. 12. 1 Cor.
14. 34.
the same Apostle, Let your women keep silence in the congregations, for it is
not permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience.
In which places it is evident, that power to preach, is to have authority, and
this being not given by God to women, if they take it, they do usurp authority,
and are not under Obedience; and so do others if they take it. How is this
Authority given? From Mr. Cotton we have an Answer, and a 2 Reason.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ the Head of his Church is the (...) Rev. 3. 7.
(...) first proper subject of the sovereign power of the Keys. He Isa 9. 6
Keys of the Kingd. of Hea. c. 7. p. 29, 30.
has the Key of David, He opens, and no man shuts, etc. And himself
declares the same to his Apostles as the ground of his granting to them
Apostolical power. Matthew. 28. 18. And -- it is from the same sovereign power
that all the Offices or Ministeries in the Church are ordained by him. 1 Cor.
12. 5 yea and all the members are set in the body by him, etc.

And again, speaking of the Key of Order or Authority, he has these words.
This Key when it was promised to Peter, Matthew. 16. 19. Ibid. c 2. p. 20.
and given to him with the rest of the Apostles, Joh. 20. 23. they thereby had
power to bind and loose: and it is the same Authority which is given to their
Successors the Elders, whereby they are called to feed and rule the Church of
God, as the Apostles had done before them. Act. 20. 28. And afterward (says
he) -- By virtue of this Key as they (viz. the Elders, the Apostles successors
as before) preach with all Authority not only the Doctrine of the Law, but
also the Covenant of the Gospel; so they administer the Seals thereof Baptism
and the Lords Supper. And this is peculiar to Preaching Elders, viz. to preach
and administer the Sacraments, as before is cited out of the same Author.

So the sum of all this comes to thus much, That Christ Heb. 5. 4, 5.
took not this power and authority in the Church unto Himself, but it was given
unto him. All power in heaven and in Matt 28. 18.
earth is given unto Him. And he has set this Order in the Church, that some
should be officers to preach and rule. Other Si nem^ honorem sibi rite in
Ecclesia usurpat nisi qui vocatus est, ut Aaron. Heb* 5 4. Quisquis sine
legitima vocatione baptizat, eum temere in alienam functionem involare d^co.
Quid enim? Cum ne Dei quidem Filius se ingerere voluer it, an sibi nescio quis
Terrae fil^us se publicum tanti mysterii dispensatorem nulla authoritate
creabit? Calvin Tract. Theol. p. 350.
Members he has set in the body in their places (to do their own business, so
the Apostle, 1 These. 4. 11.) as in the natural body, so in the Church. 1 Cor.
12. 18. And they to whom Christ has given the Authority, Power or Key to
preach and administer the Sacraments, they must do it; And the Key or Authority
Christ has given not to private members, but to Preaching Elders, i. e. such
as are Ministers, called to the Office of the Ministry So then private members
taking on them to preach, or administer the Seals, do take to themselves that
Key, Power and Authority, which Christ has given to another, and so they
usurp, and their preaching is usurpation, and matter of grief to see Christ's
followers violate his Ordinance, and break His Order, and the more where it is
done with contempt.

The Lord Jesus is our Lord and King, under whose feet the Father has put all
things, and given Him to be the Head over Ephesians. 1. 22.
all things to the Church, let us sincerely and ingenuously endeavor to know
and keep his Orders; as we have received Col. 2. 6.
Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him. Prove all things, and hold fast that
which is good. And the Lord root out of our hearts the 1 These. 5. 21.
spirit of Contradiction, that we read not books rather to confute them, then
to throw down our selves humbly under the Cott. Way. Epist.
power of Truth. Amen.

FINIS.

