A TREATISE OF PRAYER.

Two Quaeries resolved touching forms of Prayer. And Six Quaeries relating
specially to the LORDS PRAYER.

That the Reader may have full Resolution, specially to the fourth of these
Queries, relating to the Lords Prayer, he shall find in the end of this
Treatise, That Holy and Learned Man's judgment, Dr Owen, as to that matter in
his Answer to Mr Biddles second question of Prayer Page 667, 668, 669.

They who ask not for the Spirit, that they may pray in the Spirit, are (...),
Brutes and Mutes. Chry:

A Malefactor expecting his sentence to death, needs not man or book to prompt
him how to plead for his life. He that can read himself Cast and condemned by
sin, needs not a book to prompt him how to plead his pardon. Paris: of
Divine Rhetor: Compare with this Jer: 3. 13. and Rom: 10. 9, 10.

The Lords Prayer is the mould, wherein all the Churches prayers are cast,
molded and formed: Bez: Luke 11. 2.

See to it, that God be as well pleased with thee calling Him Father, as thou
art well pleased to call Him Father. Cyp: Sermon the sixth upon the Lords
prayer: ^.

Thou shall call me My father, and shall not turn away from Me, Jer: 3. 19.
[that is, I will put filial affections, awful thoughts, constant resolutions
into thy heart, and thou shall not turn away from Me].

London, Printed by M. S. for Henry Cripps in Popes-head-Alley, 1656.

THE FOURTH TREATISE OF PRAYER.
Two Queries touching forms of Prayer, and six relating to the Lords Prayer.
I. Whether a wicked man may say that prayer? II. Whether our Lord gave His
Disciples this prayer, that they should pray to His Father in those very words?
III. Whether a Godly man takes it into his Closet? IV. Whether it be comely for
a Godly Minister to take it into his pulpit? V. Whether John taught his
Disciples to pray, by giving them forms of prayer to say? VI. Whether a Godly
parent can teach his child to pray, by giving him any form of prayer? And in
special, by teaching his child to say the Lords Prayer?

The Negative in all these is under our Maintenance.

CHAP. I.
WE shall not enter into the Common place of prayer, it is not a place to say
much of it; and to say little is to say little more than nothing at all. It is,
being mounted on the wheel of Faith, the great Engine of the world, and
wheels all about there; it is an Appeal to God in the Name and Mediation of
Christ; A committing the cause and Condition of His Church, and of His Truth,
the concernements thereof in General, His own in special, to Him, and so
taking fast hold of the Almighty, the Allsufficient God in Christ, it has
an Omnipotency in it, and can do what God Himself is pleased to do, all
things, that stand with His good will and pleasure for the support and supply
of His Church, every faithful soul there: And the carrying on of His Truth,
whereby immortality and light is brought to light in the soul. In a word, It
is the breathing-in and-out of the Spirit of God and of Glory; It is that which
fetcheth-in all from God through the hand of Christ by the Spirit; And the
Return of All to God the first spring and fountain of all by the same way of
Conveyance: For he or she, that Remembers they have all from God, cannot forget
to Return all to Him. The Disciple has all by askeing, and it is but ask and
have, the same he asks, or that which is better; he writes uponall he has,
Asked of God, The Gift of God; His Lord and Master Psalm 2. Math. 26.
had nothing but by askeing, Ask of Me, and I will give thee. And that He, the
Mediator of His Church, giveth-out unto His people at this present, He asks
His Father first. Surely the Saint must ask in Faith, if he will receive in
mercy; for so he asks His Lords leave, and acknowledges Him to be Lord of
the Manor of (...) and Earth. To shutt up this, and to proceed to what we
chiefly intend in this place; Prayers are the Ambassadors of the poo^^ empty
soul, to God for supply from the abundant Riches of His grace: We say a poor
empty Spirit, for that is full of prayer, and much supplication The poor man
Prove. 18. 23.
speaks supplications, (...) entreaties, that is his Character and his
Dialect. But (...) is no sense of poverty, there is no prayer, for there is a
(...) temper, Rich enough and wanting Revel. 3.
nothing; That person prays not, or not to purpose, it is but a Custom only
and a form.

Now we crave leave to put two Questions, and humbly to give our persuasion in
way of Answer unto both.

SECT. I.
1. WHether persons full of themselves, as we are all by nature, wholly empty
and swept of all Goodness, and garnished with noisome lusts, the furniture and
rich garnish of Math. 12. 44.
the unclean Spirits house, whether these are like to help themselves by
useing set forms of Prayer?

2. Whether Babes in Christ, newly converted ones, renewed in the Spirit of
their minds, have need of forms, those crutches and helps of devotion, when
they are addressing themselves unto their God?

Quest. ^. The first; Whether unreasonable and wicked men, as all are, that
have not faith, can help themselves in this their condition by useing set
forms of prayer?

Answ: To this we humbly give our opinion, That they cannot help themselves at
all, but the more they use them, the more they are disadvantaged by them, the
more indisposed to, and putt further off from the power of Godliness. For

First, The reason of this we take from the Philosophers known rule, which
indeed we think falls-in with common Experience, That habits, whether in good
things or in evil, are acquired and improved both by continual exercise.
These things, which we learn for practice, we learn by practice, as says
learned D^ Wilkins. Now for any one to habituate or accustom himself to
forms of prayer, that is, to prayers made or written by another, and said by
himself, shall find himself as unable, and as hard a matter to come off from
them (yet off he must come i^ ever he look to find acceptance with his God) as
it is with an Ethiopian to change his skin, or the Leopard his spots. O! we are
much taken with and hardly taken off from forms of prayer, we have been
accustomed to from our youth up, and never found these did the flesh any hurt,
putting it to Cost; as these never did the spirit or hid-man of the heart any
good. So then these forms of prayer we come with before God, do more
indispose us to God, and estrange us from Him: And it is not good to accustom
our selves to that, we must leave at last, and come off from, if ever good be
wrought in us or by us.

Secondly, Because we may say of these forms of prayer, as is said of the
wicked themselves, these are sensual not having the Jude 19.
Spirit: though we may suppose them very exactly composed; and by the most
accomplished Men, we mean, by Holy men, having the Spirit. For though they
might pray in prayer, wrought by the Spirit for that very thing; Yet being
written before their eyes, and prayed by the book visible or invisible, we
mean the memory, there is no more spirit and life therein, than there is in a
dead letter. Indeed we may call these prayers flesh, being written with ink
which profits nothing, it is the Spirit that quickneth; And thereby, that is
by the Spirit of God, His people call Him Father, and Jesus their Lord. But
praying without the Spirit, and wholly careless to ask after the Spirit,
calling for it in prayer, we are never more likely than at such a time, and
when we are upon that solemn work, never more likely than then to call Christ
accursed. Could we say, Abraham's, Isaac's, Jacob's ^ Cor. 12. 3.
prayers, with Paul's prayers, etc. And have not that Spirit, by which they
prayed, our prayers would become as we believe, in the ears of our God, but as
sounding brass or a tinkling Cymball.

Thirdly, We may Consider this. All that God gives to us, or works for us, He
does all by the Hand of His Spirit: So also, All that His people give back
again to Him, or work for Him, They do it by the special help of the
Spirit too; Therefore it is they see so much need of the Spirit, and call so
earnestly for a supply from the same.

Quest: 1. But it may be said, how shall sensual men, not having the Spirit
call for the Spirit; unless as they are taught to do it in other's words?

Answ: This is a lesson can never be taught by man, not by all or any prayers
suggested to us by Man; That every one of us by Nature is the Devill's house
emptied and swept of all Goodness, brim-full of all filthiness, adorned and
garnished with noisome lusts, the ornament and garnish of that house the Devil
calls his own; this we think no man questioneth. Now if all this were debated
upon and set down prayer-wise, according to the exactest form, It could not
accomplish the thing: what is it to say in another's words, I am a sinner, or I
have sinned, though, saying Job 5. 20.
so much, he had said all, if his heart had said it, and not another for him,
freely, feelingly, sincerely and beleivingly: So then one word spoken in desire
and endeavor from the heart, as aforesaid, has more virtue and efficacy in
it, than a thousand words suggested to us by the eyes or memory only.
Certainly we must confess sin in our own words, our Confession will not be
accepted else; as we must forsake sin in our works; they, that confess and
forsake sin, are the same.

Quest: 2. But is there not a double use of these set forms of prayer? first,
for directing of our desires? secondly, for execiteing our affections?

Answ: We humbly conceive there is not a single use of them; not first for the
directing our desires. These are all inward and are moved by a principle
within, never stirred to move after God, Christ, Grace, Glory, till there be
some inward sense, or feeling of the want, and necessity of having God in
Christ, and all the needs of the soul supplied by Him. Sense of want is the
Giving of Desire. Now we cannot see how this inward sense can be wrought in the
Soul, by a form of words lying before us, any more than painted bread can
stirre-up desire, or satisfy desire being stirred-up. As no outward thing can
inwardly defile, for all real and truly called defilement is within and from
within, else the Devil himself could not defile us; so no outward thing can
inwardly purify; and then, not purifying, it can give but poor directions, to
our desires. Secondly, Nor are they of use, (as we conceive) for the exciteing
our affections: These are warm and hott and do heat and warm, but still by
some workings from within first. Affection is like fire, it is hot it self
first, before it heat others; We must be affected before we can affect. Now we
cannot see how a dead powerless form (which as one has it, nourishes the
hid-man of the heart, no more than stock fish nourishes the body, and that
gives no more nourishment, says Erasmus, than a stone does) can excite
affections, unless to it self, because so exceeding pleasing to flesh and
blood, never crossing in the least the Desires of the same.

Quest: 3. But is not this to take the generality of men quite off from
praying?

Answ: No: to our seeming it putts them on upon prayer, to pray that they may
be enabled to pray in a deep sense of sin, and the need they have of the
blood of Christ to purify their hearts, and pacify their Consciences; all
which they are to pray for.

Quest: 4. But pray they cannot, unless they pray by the book, visible or
invisible.

Answ: To this we say, That to our seeming if they do pray by the book, they
do not pray at all in Gods account. And truly those men are b^lder with God
than they durst be with men; had they offended a great Lord, they must
acknowledge the offense with their own mouths, and not another for them, and
have righted their offended Lord, if he would have it so, with their own
hands; and glad with all their hearts, that the offended Lord would be so
accorded; But we are bold with God though who made us so, but our own
shameless impudent Spirits? We can offend God sinning against Him, and
confess it by a proxi, in his words who did not give the offense. We sin with
our own mouths, and will confess with another mouth: may not the Lord say,
offer this to your Governor, see whether he will Mal: 1. 18.
accept of your Person?

Quest: 5. But this will be said still, if they may not pray by the book they
cannot pray at all so the Lord God shall have no service from them at all?

Answ: Indeed the Lord God, to Whom all we are, and have, and can, is due,
has no service, none at all from a wicked man, his lusts are deep sharers
here, for they have all; as once so they say still, It is in vain to serve the
Lord. But all the Disservice Mal. 3. 14.
they can do, they do unto the Lord, even all they can against Him, because
they know Him not; for this is a Ruled Case, or a known Conclusion; The more
we know of God, the more we honor Him, and our selves the less; And the less
we know of God, the less we honor Him, and our selves the more; As God rises
in our thoughts, so we fall, and as we rise in our own thoughts, so God falls.
We would add this, That the hardness of our hearts appears in nothing more
than in these stout words, We cannot pray, our Spirits are so barren; These are
stout words indeed, and argue the stoutest heart, and much pride of Spirit, as
usually spoken by proud Men; It is as if so be a man should say; I sin and I
will sin: But I will not say unto God I have sinned, what shall I do? If He
will take my Confession from another's-mouth, let Him take it; I will not
confess my self a sinner, with my own Mouth; nor will I ask Him pardon.
These are as stout words, to our seeming, as can be spoken; upon the Readers
thoughts we leave them. When we have added this more; As we are Creatures, and
have our dependence upon God, every moment we are obliged to pray unto Him: As
sinful Creatures, such as sin and Satan can make us, we are obliged to
confess unto Him with our own Mouths. We would answer a Question one or two
more before we give Resolution to the other Case.

Quest: 6. But would not praemeditated forms prevent many rude, Crude or
indigested expressions?

Answ: Yes sure, with those, that know not in the world how to pray without
them; If sensual men not having the Spirit, wholly carried by sense, and
minding nothing above the place their foot treades on, if these should pray
without the book, possibly, as their parts might be, low and mean, they would
use strange and uncouth expressions. But they, who set themselves before their
God, and expect the supplies of His Spirit from Him, looking upon their own
strength as rottenness, to be rested on; knowing they cannot think a good
thought, as of themselves, and would not for a world utter rash words in His
presence; surely they shall find the assistance they look for, and such a
supply as shall be best for them; And if they rise not from their knees more
comforted, They shall be more humbled, which is as good; for a groan from the
heart is as good as a tear from the The Spirit of adoption may be in a groan
as well as in a prayer. Mr. Ford. sp. Ador. 480.
eye; And they shall be kept from speaking that in prayer, which is unbecomeing
their God to hear; or the Asking of that, which is unbeseeming their God to
grant. But we would add this, which we think more properly relates to the
Resolution of this Question. A wicked man's prayer, we mean him, who is
resolved to goe-on in his wickedness, comes from his necessities, fear and
dread being before him, trouble and anguish upon him, perhaps and terror
within him, looking upon death now not at a distance, but as the King of
terrors, requiring his soul of him, and killing him with death: his prayer
now, as we were saying, comes from his necessities, not from his heart,
therefore shall not come near Gods heart (to speak after the manner of men)
And then it is all one whether he pray by the book, or by his own Spirit, the
one as the other has the same acceptance with God. Dear children, followers
of God always, are always heard, though they do but chatter like a Crane.
And children of Belial, who never heard God speaking unto them in His Word, are
not heard of God, for He hears not such sinners, who wallow in their sin as
does a swine in the mire, and return unto it as does a dog to his vomit.
Whether then their expressions are exact, and as well composed as words in
print can be: or rude, indigested or incomposed, it is much the same, and comes
to as much as nothing. Such a wicked-mans praying is but tatling, and babbling;
or to speak as the holy Scripture does, It is as the roaring of Bears, or
howling of Dogs, Isa. 59. 11. Hos. 7. 14.

Quest: 7. Moreover, It is said, do not they, who dare not bring praemeditated
forms before their God, rush upon duty, without useing the Common means of
fitting themselves, and so tempt God?

Answ: To this we say, that to expect any thing from God, without useing the
means allowed by God, as helps that way, were to tempt God and provoke Him to
His face; Therefore doubtless it is the wicked man that rushes upon Duty, not
bethinking himself beforehand unto what a glorious presence he is come, and
what is the work he is to engage upon, and what the danger is of miscarrying;
He that thinks of none of all this, he Rusheth upon Duty; And indeed what
needs the meditation of what I am to speak unto God, when it is suggested unto
me? I can read it with mine eyes, and see my self speak? But that man, that
prays in the Spirit, though he does make a total resignation of himself
unto the hands of the Spirit, expecting His immediate suggestions, Yet so as he
has omitted no means before to fit and prepare for that high service; as
thoughts of himself and his nothingness; of the glorious Name of God, and all
his expectations, therein and from the same: These things together with the
word of God, he gives himself to, meditates upon, and is wholly in it, and is
so as the season fitts, he addresseth himself before his God: He knows, That,
that glorious promise, Math: 10. 19. Take no thought how or what ye shall
speak, for it shall be given you in the same hour; relates to extraordinary
services, when God calls forth unto them, that then they may expect
extraordinary assistance. But when he may use Common and ordinary means of
Gods appointment to prepare him for this praying work, and should be negligent
in the use thereof, which through grace he cannot br, then it were a great
presumption to depend upon extraordinary help; So now before we come to give
some resolution to the Second Querie, we would in the close of this, give-in
some Counsel, which we hope shall be well agreeing with the word of God, to
them, who being sensual not having the Spirit, must needs be wholly
unacquainted, with the Lord and Christ, who is the way, the Truth, and the
life, and yet happily, they pray to God, and praise Him, as ordinarily as they
riseup from their Beds, and Tables; lie down upon the one, and sit at the
other. This is the Counsel we would give, That they would cease from their
forms of praying, or from praying by a form, which differs as much from
praying in the Holy Ghost, as does the Sun in the firmament, from the Sun
painted on a signe-post: And apply themselves to hearing the Word, whereby
faith cometh-in to the soul; so may they, by the blessing of God, attain to
the knowledge of Him, to whom they are praying; and of Him in whose Name they
must pray, and find access unto the Father; of Him also through whose
intercession within us the prayer is formed ( Romans 8. 26.) and so finds
acceptance, by the Mediation of that Advocate without us, at the right hand of
the Father, being as sweet Odours now, all that from the flesh adhering to
them, being separated from them. Hereby also, we mean by diligent hearing the
Word preached, they may attain to a knowledge of themselves, what lost-ones
they are in themselves, and that they must be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of His power, if
they know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and be
found in Him; which may put them upon praying that they may profit by hearing.
Indeed we would take off these sensual persons, not having the Spirit from
praying by the book; and Reading the Holy Scriptures, as they read them; and
apply themselves to the hearing Gods Word in season and out of season, and
attend upon the moovings of the Holy Spirit, upon the Word preached, which is
the Chariot of the Spirit, therewith (for so it is appointed of God) the good
Spirit comes into the heart, as the Sun into the house; works Faith there,
and makes us light in the Lord: so as now we can see clearly how to pray, and
how to read, and set our seal to it; whereas before we did not pray, nor did
read the book, neither did we look thereon Revel. 5. 4. See Bright.
. We say it again, this is the Counsel, which has been given to us, and,
through mercy, we have received it, and therefore we would give it to others,
who may be (as we were when time was) as much versed in reading the Holy
Scriptures, as they are in praying, and all this while, as we did, slighting
the place appointed for Hearing, and despising the Word preached there. Thus
then, as we were saying, we would advise them to frequent Sermons, and give all
Diligence to profit thereby, we mean, to get faith by hearing, that therewith
they may mix that they hear, and make it profitable unto them. For if we
enquire at the Holy Oracle, we believe it will resolve us, as to Reading the
Holy Scriptures before we have profited by Hearing, That the word of God
preached, which is called, we think, The sword of the Spirit, is as different
from the Word read in our house, as is a sword in the hand of a Mighty man,
different, in point of working, or making execution upon our lusts, from the
sword lifted-up in Georges hand upon a signe-post. Give we then all Diligence
in Hearing, that we may read and pray at home with understanding. This is our
Counsel, and this our Conclusion, That, whosoever rejects it, multiplies
Transgressions, as he multiplies prayers, and praises. Nor can he think, and
show himself a man, That he shall be taught of the Father, who hears not His
Word: or that Christ appears in the presence of God for him in heaven; when he
visibly and apparently appears against Him on earth, turning His Word behind
his back, and setting his heart against it. We proceed to the second Querie.

SECT. II.
Q: II. WHether Babes in Christ, newly converted ones, renewed in the spirit of
their minds, have need of forms, those commonly called crutches and helps of
Devotion when they appear before their God?

Answ: We humbly conceive, no: If they that were Lame before cannot now leap
like an Heart, yet they can go to God without a Crutch. And this we think the
Scripture holds forth before us, that the Adopted of God in Christ, His Sons
and Daughters, have out-growne their Crutches and helps of Devotion, though
some of them but Babes in Christ. For whenever The Spirit tells a person, he
is the son or daughter of God, having wrought faith in his heart; The second
thing the Spirit does, it teaches him to pray, that is, to Call God Father,
which is the voice of Gods Spirit in a sanctified soul; It enableth him G^la.
4. 6*
to Cry Abba Father: to pray earnestly, to be fervent in prayer; They were cold
prayers before, but a lip-labor only; But the Spirit, comeing-in to witness
with his Spirit, and bringing faith with Him, makes the Child to go to God,
and look upon Him as a Father, whose favor he doubts not off; or if he do,
he would have his doubts resolved, and his evidences cleared; and for this he
cries; and is not helped at all, as we conceive, by any set form, which
heateth the Spirit no more than the Censer is without fire; for the Holy Ghost
having sanctified the heart, and put it into a whole-frame of Grace; The heart
speaks to God as it is quickened, acted, and moved by the Spirit of God: And
herein we would appeal to the experience and practice of all, that are but
Babes in Christ, whether ever they were gainers, by any forms of Devotion,
prayers set before them? And if they say, no; then they will not be easily
persuaded to pray by those forms, from which they gain nothing but more
dullness, drossinesse and indisposednesse in their Spirits. It is our
persuasion, That a child of God, who is afflicted with the sense of sin, and
affected with the sense of a pardon, had rather speak five words to God with
his understanding and suitable affections, than ten thousand words prompted or
suggested to him by a visible Books are a memory without us, and memory is a
book within* us.
book, before his eye, or an invisible, his memory; And more acceptance should
he find with his God. He has told his errand in his own words; perhaps he
wants words and can but chatter, like a Crane: It is, as was said, a prayer
notwithstanding, and may cry aloud in the ears of his God; It is delivered
with understanding, with suitable affections* with Humility, an excellent
ingredient in prayer, with an inward sense of his Condition; It is a good
prayer sure and finds acceptance with his God. We are generally deceived about
prayer, It is, think we, a work of memory, of a good wit, a ready
invention, a voluble tongue, This makes an excellent prayer in the esteem of a
man's self, and in the account of others; But this is not prayer; Prayer is the
work, Mr. Ford. p. 629. 525, 526 545, 546.
of Gods Spirit, in a sanctified heart, and feels no need of Crutches to
support and bear it up Heavenward; these help us not we find, when we are
lame; it is granted, these hinder us when we are sound; The Lord Christ is the
Churches Advocate by Office; The Spirit her Advocate by Energie and operation.
All the prayers, Romans 8. 26.
which prevail with God are formed, wrought and fashioned in our hearts by the
Spirit of God. Now we suppose here is a B^be in Christ, as weak as Babes are,
notwithstanding he has Bez*
no need of a form; he is in Christ, and therefore has the Spirit of Christ,
and therefore in the Spirit he can pray. The Spirit helps his infirmities*
Rom: 8. 26. helps. The Greek word is very emphaticall, a De-compound, helps
as a Father helps the little Child at a burden; The Child only puts to his
hand, the Father his strength. Indeed the Father does all, so does the Spirit
in this Babe: and if any thing else come to help with Him, He will not help
at all. If the Crutch do any thing, the Spirit will do nothing. He is an
help sufficient of Himself, The Spirit will not help with a Crutch. When the
Spirit of God sets home our misery and extreme necessity, we cannot want
witty words and Ingenious expressions. Grande doleris ingenium est miserisque
venit solertia rebus: misery felt is full of ingenuity, and energie too: It
will tell it is tale well enough; the man is sensible of his wants, you need not
supply him with words. If a poor Tenant, finding he has a hard bargain,
comes to his Landlord, Let him alone for telling his tale, (said excellent
Sibs) you may warrant his ability that way; he will lay open the state of his
wife and Children, and the ill year he has had; he will be eloquent enough.
There is no man that has an humble and broken heart (though he be never so
illeterate) but he will have a large heart to God in this kind. The great
work in our selves is, for the working whereof we must attend the Spirits
work in the Use of the means, is a true sense of our own necessity: See D.
in W. p. 27.
And then we shall not need, as the sentenced Malefactor needs not, Any Master
to teach us how to supplicate; nor any book out of which we might learn a
fit form of petitioning. The apprehension of our present danger will make us
both importunate and eloquent, in the desire of mercy. A spring of Desire
arises from the sense of want.

SECT. III.
THus we have told our Apprehension in this matter; It were no^ fair dealing
now, if we should conceal from the Reader, that the Godly learned have spoken
much in favor of set forms of prayer; And the latest, we think, that have
written for them, is Reverend Hilderson; I do not deny, says he, but a weak
Christian may use the help of a good prayer book; In this Psalm. 51. 63.
case better to pray with a book, than not to pray at all. Certainly it is a
Spirit of Error that has taught the world otherwise. First our Blessed
Savior prescribed to His Disciples a form of prayer, not only to be to them,
and to His whole Church, a Rule and Samplar, according to which all our prayers
should be framed; but even for them, and to say it, tying themselves to the
words of it. Luke 11. 2. It is clear also that John taught his Disciples to
pray, by giving them forms of Prayer to say, And the best reformed do now and
ever have, used prescript forms of Prayers, and have judged them of great use
and necessity for the Edification of the Church: Reverend Hilderson's words
all these; A man, as all know, of precious note and account in the Church, and
so with all, we think, that fear their God; we would be numbered amongst them
in this matter; but for our Reason, now that the Lord has, we hope, sanctified
it; and our Judgment, we reserve it as a Chaste Virgin for the Lord; our
meaning is, we will not give up our judgment to any man; In desire and
endeavor, through Grace, we will lay that level to the Rule of God's Word. We
will not, we are sure we ought not to call any man on Earth Father or Master,
That is, we will give no man power on Earth over our Judgments and
Consciences, such the Father has (or seem to take) over the person of his
Child. We are to follow none but as they follow Christ, Math. 23. 8, 9.
no^ ought we to be commanded by any, that Command not from His mouth; our
Leaders must le^d to Him, our Commander must command for Him, else we must not
be lead, or Commanded by Isa. 55. 4.
them. My Conscience, as one ^aith, is Gods throne, I cannot Mr. Ford. sp. of
Ad. p. 4^ ^.
answer it to God, if I permit (any man) much less Satan to usurp it*

So now it will be expected we should give some account of our dissenting from
those Learned and Godly men in point of set forms of prayers. For the same we
have read from worthy Hild. First ^ol p 348. Saints e^o p. 80.
we may read from others the excellent of the Earth, Perkins; Preston. These
were for set forms; Therefore We profess we are in some kind of pain,
while we are declareing our Judgment, which will be somewhat differing from
theirs in this point, these being as is well known in all the Earth eminently
Learned and Godly. But for the last of these, That excellent Preacher in his
time, Dr: Preston, it may be noted, That he allows the practice of the
primitive times, and of our times, in reference to their Liturgies only, in
their public meeting places; And tells us, it is not enough to be present at
and join in these prayers, but we must Go to God in secret, and he that is
exceeding weak, that is his See Mr. Ford of Adop: 525, 526. 545, 545.
expression, may use a prop to help him, as a Child that cannot go, he means
a set form of prayer for a time; In the next place it may be observed of them
both, That they take in this obiter, and as it were upon the by; It was not to
their scope, and therefore not in their purpose or intention to plead by way of
Argument for set forms to bring with us, when we go to prayer, that is, to
God; Only worthy Hild: as was said, speaks more for set forms than any we
have met with, Mr Rogers himself not excepted* so we take leave to examine the
proof he makes, these are his words, for we know there is much notice taken of
them.

I dare not Deny, but a weak Christian (him we called by Scripture allowance a
Babe in Christ) may use the help of a good prayer-booke: This is taken-up at a
very cheap rate, without the price of a proof; or if you will call it a proof,
this it is; Better to pray in a Book, than not to pray at all.

This we take to be, as, we think, the Scholars phrase it, Petitio principij,
a mere begging of the Question, It asserteth something, but proves nothing; It
asserts this, That if a Babe in Christ, a truly converted one, have not a
book to pray by, he cannot pray at all, whence he inferr's, it is better to
pray in a book, than not to pray at all.

Now we have asserted the Contrary, and do assert it still, That a Babe in
Christ would pray to his Heavenly Father in the Name of Christ, though there
were not a set form of prayer in the world.

And we would humbly add what we conceive to be a truth, if there were as many
set forms of prayers, that the world it self could not contain the boots
written thereof, yet all these, altogether, or apart, could not give the least
help to the Devotion of this Babe in Christ. All those would not make him cry
in prayer Abba Father. But this one Charge against himself, which surely 2 Samuel 12. 13. Job 7. Luke 5. 18. Jere: 3. 13.
he can do very readily, I have sinned, spoken from him freely, feelingly,
humbly, sincerely as David, Job, the Prodigal now come to himself, and as the
Babe in Christ can speak it, is of more account with his God, and more
prevailing to incline His ear, than all the Rhetoric in the world, suggested
to this Babe by another tongue or pen. Prayer, we have heard say, is the key
that opens all Gods Treasuries; But now another's key, be it never so exactly
made (to argue it by way of a similitude) cannot fit the wards of my lock; Our
plain meaning is, and without a figure; A form of prayer, the exactest that
ever was made, cannot surely fit my needs, cannot speak out the things, that
I want, to the ears of my God; or speak out His praises, for what I have
received from Him. It cannot reach the troubles of my Soul, nor can it tell
the Consolation there; or suppose it could, It would not supply me with the
Spirit, By whom I must, through Christ, present all this before my God; for
what man 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12
knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of man within him? and so forth,
for it requires our observation through-out. We will put a close to this, when
we have spoken two or three things more very briefly.

First, We conceive that those set forms cannot take any whit with a Babe in
Christ, one Reason is, Because set forms are so taking with us while we are
out of Christ, we cleave to them as fast as the skin to the flesh, or the flesh
to the Bone; And what we cleave to, we plead for. Surely it is otherwise with
him or her, that is in Christ; as the nature is changed, so are the actions,
the desires, the affections. They remember well they never prevailed any thing
by set forms; unless to the hardening and brawning of their own hearts; The
stupifying or deadning of their own spirits; they never prevailed with God to
give them a sight of their sin, and forgiveness of the same; for they were
never in earnest with Him about this matter; if they had, they had pleaded with
their God in their own words, and not in another for them.

It is the wicked man that sticks to his forms as fast as he cleaves to his
sins; The Babe in Christ not so; he or she is renewed in the spirit of
their mind, and therefore stand as much against set forms, as the wicked
stand for them.

Secondly, Suppose we, for information sake, That the person praying has a
sense of the want of that he prays for, That granted, we affirm, he has no
more need of a set form, teaching him to pray, than an hungry man has to pray
for his bread; If he has no sense or feeling of what he prays for, which
cannot be supposed in a Babe, then the set form of prayer will do him no
good; for the form of prayer is as dead a piece as the heart is, and two dead
things, like two withered sticks, cannot enliven and quicken each other.

Thirdly, We would appeal to the Conscience of every wicked man, seared
though it may be, as well as to the observation and experience of all the godly
that know them, and that are acquainted with them; whether by their set forms
or prayer books they have gained more strength against sin, or more strength
to sin? To our seeming the answer must be (for so speaks their conversation to
the godly that do observe it) by their set forms they have gained more
strength to sin, thereby their hearts have risen with more opposition against
God, and indignation against the Godly; for it is a ruled case, They that
stick fastest to forms of godliness, are the greatest enemies to the power
thereof. And this is a known Maxim also, That a man's lusts are no more shaken
by such prayers, though he should turn them over as fast as that Antichristian
does his beads, than a Giant is shaken by the shaking of a straw in a Pigmies
hand.

Fourthly, A form of prayer is an artificial prayer made by the art and skill
of another, and it is but like artificial breath of bellows, or the like,
cold, whereas natural breath is hot; surely cold praying has cold working;
and moves not at all with God; as good ask doubtingly as coldly, for, as the
saying is, it teaches God to deny.

Fifthly, Set forms of prayer are too pleasing and suitable to flesh and blood,
to be pleasing to God, or Good men or to do the soul any Good. That which
has any virtue in it to do the soul good, must hurt the flesh, even to a
torment; that must offend the flesh that does indeed defend the spirit. But
this prayer by a prayer-booke does no more execution upon our lusts, than a
potgun can against an heard of Hearts, or a Gun charged with powder among Armed
men. It is a lazy sensual prayer, else fleshly minds would never so plead
for it; for as was said, Give them that which is sweet, though it choakes them,
Per fallacia bona itur ad vera mala, through seeming good and pleasant things,
we hasten to real evils: As per fallacia mala itur ad vera bona, through
seeming evil things we come to true and real good things. It is but a
seeming good to please the flesh, and but a seeming evil to cross it, as the
Babe in Christ does, and wrestleth with God in His strength about it, knowing
he owes his flesh nothing but mortification, save only to make it serviceable
to his God, and his own soul.

Sixthly, We will close with this; possibly a Babe in Christ may want
convenient utterance, by reason of some defect in the tongue, or bashfullnesse
in the presence of others. And upon that account, our famous and excellent
Perkins (but it was forty years ago, when forms of prayer were of more
account then now they are, and the hurt they did, not so looked into, as now it
is, and with that allowance you must weigh them if they should not hold weight)
mooves in this Babes behalf, for a prayer-booke, in these very words; The
Grace and gift of prayer may be showed in Mr. Ford. 480.
reading of a prayer, other ways it would go very hard with them, that want
convenient utterance.

We humbly crave leave to say, That notwithstanding that want, which a Babe in
Christ may have, there is no want of a prayer-booke though; This Babe serves
his God in his spirit, who can supply that want, yea a greater want than that,
supposing he could not speak one articulate or distinct word before his God,
he can pray in his spirit through the mediation of His Son, and find
acceptance sure enough; his Lord takes not his prayers by number, but by
weight; nay, the Lord does not so much weigh the words of prayer, no nor the
grace of prayer by the scale, as he tryes both by the touchstone; He not so
much regards the number as the truth of prayers, and these may be but
breathings after God and Christ, yet they have a voice as loud in Gods ear as
is thunder in ours.

We will draw to a close; Who ever has the spirit of Grace has also the
spirit of supplication, who may be in a groan, as well as in a prayer. Whence
we may conclude, That he who has this spirit, has no need of a prayer-booke
whereafter to pray. If you grant, he has the one in his heart, he will
disdain, we think, to take the other into his hand. The Good Spirit is his
Great Helper at this great and high service, when he is engageing upon it. Take
this withal, if please you, it pleases this Babe very well, Non actibus sed
finibus pensantu^ officia.
for it makes much for his comfort; That his Duties are weighed, and reckoned
upon, not by their Acts, but by their ends.

SECT. IV.
WE have humbly given our opinion, in way of satisfaction to those two
Queries, relating to prayer, under that General notion. And here we have
forborne to reply any thing to the customs and practices of primitive times,
and times more lately bypast; for (first) They plead for forms of prayer in
their public places, we plead against the use of them in our private
Closets. (Secondly) Again, we are to walk close up to the rule of Gods word,
and not by the practice and precepts of men, whereunto something has been
hinted before more than once. (thirdly) We have replied nothing to John's
teaching his Disciples to pray by giving them a form of prayer to say, which
is not so clear to us, that so he did, but we may speak more to it hereafter.

CHAP. II.
WE come now to that special prayer, which by good warrant we call the Lords
prayer, and to make answer as we can, and as the Lord shall assist to six
Queries thereupon. But first we may not dissemble what we find written by
worthy Hild: and excellent Perkins, That the Lords prayer may be said by us as
we read it; Our blessed Savior prescribed to his Disciples a form of prayer,
not only to be to them and his whole Church a rule and sampler, according to
which all our prayers should be framed, as appears. Mat. 6. 9. After this
manner pray ye, but even for them, and to say, tying themselves to the very
words of it, as appears Luke 11. 2. When you pray say Our Father. So worthy
Hild: excellent Perkins speaks in these words; The Lords prayer is a direction
and as it were a sampler to teach us how and in what manner we ought to pray:
None is to imagine, That we are bound to use these words only and no others,
for the meaning of Christ is not to bind us to the words, but to the matter and
to the manner, and to the like affections in prayer; And then a little after
making answer to the third plea against the use of the Lords prayer, He
answers, That therefore the rather it should be used as a prayer. But he makes
no proof hereof, unless this which follows may be taken for a full proof;
Sure it is that ancient and worthy Divines have r^verenced it as a prayer
choosing rather to use the same words than any other, as Cyprian, Tertullian,
Augustine, And so concludes, Wherefore this opinion that the Lords prayer is
not to be used as a prayer, is full of ignorance and error.

SECT. II.
THus we have dealt faithfully in setting down what we find pleaded for the
saying of the Lords prayer. Yet we hope to acquit our selves of both these,
Ignorance and Error, in the words of truth and soberness, though our
Judgments bend from Mr Hilds words. That our Savior gave his Disciples that
prayer to say, tying themselves to the very words: nor can we fall in with
these ancient Divines, choosing rather to use those words in prayer than any
other. We shall in all humility and modesty interpose our judgment against
this, without making the least reflection upon the good knowledge, excellent
learning and Godliness of these two men, the one famous for all these all over
this Nation, the other over all the Christian world; And therefore how loath
are we to make mention of these things: But that here is a necessity for it,
because they that are such sticklers for forms of prayer, and are resolved to
bare themselves up upon those crutches. They also, who, as far can be observed,
never used any other prayer but the Lords prayer, do catch at such sayings as
these, coming from such excellent men, when they slightingly pass over what
they may find in every page for their edification; we were saying, full loath
we are to meddle in these things, but for the reason abovesaid; Though we
hope we shall do but our duty herein, which is to bring the sayings of men to
the sayings of God; The words of men, to the words of God, as to their standard
or scale, where they must be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary.

SECT. III.
HE is a perfect man that slips not with his tongue; and as perfect is he,
that slips not with his pen, Dabimus veniam petimusque vicissim, we give and
we crave the same pardon. But still we take leave to do our duty, finding
we have such warrant for it, to examine the forementioned words by the
touchstone of Gods word. Those brave and generous Bereans did show Act. 17. 11,
12
themselves to be such, by inquiring into, and questioning the Apostles words,
who yet, if any in the world, might have been believed upon his ipse Dixit, his
own word for it, that Apostle might; It was enough that Paul said it; no, not
enough, for these truly wise Bereans; they have a sure word to go by, and to
that word they will bring the Apostles words, to inquire of them whether they
be the words of truth, as we do inquire whether it be true gold by the
touchstone and fining pot; They that receive the word with all readiness of
mind, will with the same readiness search the Scriptures daily, whether those
things be so or no. And behold a blessed effect of this; Many of them believed.
We think this was spoken before, If so, so much the more we should observe it.

SECT. IV.
BEfore we proceed to our next Chapter, we desire the Reader to observe for the
close of this; That these excellent men have but spoken their own words, and
given us their own persuasion, as to the matter of our enquiry, only the
later of them tells us the Judgment of others, Cyprian, Tertullian, and
Augustine, these chose rather to pray in these very words: But what is this to
us, if we cannot understand our Lords words as they did? Indeed we find Cyprian
has a whole Sermon of the Lords prayer, which in order is his sixth. And it was
so clear to him, All were to pray in those very words; that he concludes That
to pray in any other words, argues not only ignorance but a sin. Yet these
are but words, spoken only not weighed, and in dark times compared with ours.
And, we think, there are some other words in the said Sermon more to be taken
notice of, which are these; The New man, now borne again, and like the
Prodigal, come Homo novus renatus quando Deum, patrem dicimus, quas^ fil^^ Dei
agere debemus, ut quomodo nobis placemus de Deo* patre sic sibi placeat and
ille de nobis.
to himself, and returned to his Father, the first word he speaks is Father.
And now he is declared a Son, he carries himself like a child. Whence he
infers it should be our great Care so to do, That as it pleases us well to
Call God Father; so it may please Him as well to call and acknowledge us His
children: which falls-in fully with what we read, Jer: 3. 19. Thou shall call
Me my Father, and shall not turn away from Me; that is as before explained, I
will give thee the Disposition of a child, when I give thee leave to call Me
Father. This now we have cited out of Cyprian, tends much, we think, both to
our edification, and information, that we may know how to balance his words,
and, by the just weight we find in the later, make allowance for the lightness
of the former. And all this we shall be able to do, we mean, we shall be
edified and fully informed in these and all other matters necessary to
salvation, when we shall humbly yeeld-up our selves into His Hands who leads
into all Truth, and will not suffer us to be lead by our own humors or
principles. So we proceed according to our proposed Method, to Answer some
Queries about the Lords prayer, where these matters will fall-in in their due
place and order.

CHAP. III
THe first Query is, Whether a wicked man may say the Lords Prayer. Now because
it is Questioned by some whether a wicked man ought to pray at all; We will
clear this first, That h^w wicked soever the man be, yet he ought to pray;
whereof that holy and learned Man's words, in the place forequoted upon the
Title page, make full proof; Prayer, says he, is a Natural acknowledgement
of God, That every man is everlastingly and indispensably obliged unto by
virtue of the Law of Creation, though the matter of it be* varied according to
the several states and conditions whereinto we fall, or are brought. Every
one, that lives in dependency on God, and has his supplies from Him, is by
virtue of that dependence, obliged to this Duty, as much as he is to own God
for his God. That excellent Expositor upon Job 22. p. 264. speaks the same
thing; We owe prayer to God as His Creatures, or in regard of our natural
dependence upon Him, much more as New Creatures, or in regard of our spiritual
dependence upon Him.

And this might suffice; but because we intend the instruction of the simple,
such as we our selves are, we intend to be larger here in showing what the
Duty of every man is, how wicked soever, though he be wholly unable to perform
that duty. First then

We would show whom we mean by the wicked man? Not every man in the horrid
state of nature, lying in his blood; for there we all were for as much as we
all were wicked: But that wicked man we mean, who lies in his blood in his
wickedness (for our blood is as we think was said, our wickedness, as our
Lords blood is our righteousness*) in that evil* one, under the Dominion of
Math. 1. 23. 5. 2. Acts 26. 18. 1 John 5. 19.
an unclean spirit within, and that other without, which rules in him, as he
does in the darkness of the world, in the children of disobedience there. And
he is best content it should be so, for in his blood he lies as on a pillow
of Down, or bed of Roses, never better content than now that God has made a
punishment of his sin, giving him up to his own hearts lusts, and laying him
in the lap of his own will, to commit sin with greediness, as the hungry beast
eats it is meat, or the thirsty, swalloweth down water, a very Epicure in
both, past-feeling now, and void of judgment, pride has so covered his eyes,
and drawn such a thick skin over his heart, that it makes him forget all
God and all, He is not in all his thoughts; he forgets all save himself. And
this his remembrance of himself serves him only to cloth and garnish, feed
and pamper that Idol his flesh, and then to Glory in it when he has so done;
he is out of Christ, and slighteth the means, the great Appointment of God,
whereby to discover this his horrid condition unto man, and to deliver him out
of it. Those he has slighted, turned his back upon them, while he was sitting
under them, with full consent of mind, withdrawing his heart from obedience,
when, in show, his ear gave audience; hating to be reformed; Zach. 7. 11.
Psalm. 50. 16.
fully resolved, as a man built-up upon the bottom of his confidence, that he
will not forsake his way, nor his thoughts, nor Jer. 2. 30.
will he return unto the Lord; he has no need of Him, being a Lord, and a God
to himself. This is the wicked man (he is a legion) twice dead; the Gospel
has been to him a savor of Jud. 12.
death unto death; unto the death they are involved in, and are obnoxious to by
nature, they add a second death, or rather seal See Dr Owen page 356. Mr
Caryl on Job 8. 19. 116. Dr K. Chapter 5. 63.
up their souls under the power, and misery of the other, by contempt of the
means of life, and recovery; We will add but this for the completing of this
man's misery, out of Learned Dr Rainolds (and all this we have said in the
description of this man, and his misery tends to this, that we might hear and
fear and not do as he does praesumptiously, for) these men, that Tree. with
us, page 25.
do their utmost to keep themselves out of Christ, and by consequence under
the curse, as their persons, so their possessions are under the same curse; as
their consciences, so their estates are still unclean, they eat their meat
like swine rolled up in the dirt of their own sin and of Gods curse.

Notwithstanding thus wicked though they are, and are resolved so to be, yet
pray they ought, though pray they cannot, but as a Dear roares, because of some
pain upon the flesh; or as a dog howles; or if there be no pain upon them,
then they pray as a Parret speaks: Yet, as we were saying, pray they ought,
though they be in praying, as they are in being, and their prayers are as their
persons are, an abomination to the Lord; for such is Gods Law unto them; yet
pray they ought, that is their duty, and the Homage they are to give unto the
Lord, as was said. The Counsel that Daniell gives to Nebuchadnezzar, Chap. 4.
27. and the direction Peter gives to Simon Magus, Acts 8. 22. cleares this unto
us, that a wicked man's duty is to repent and pray, and do the works of
righteousness, though he is no more able, of himself to do it, than a
mountain can moove and tear it self up by the roots and mount up into the
Moon; or a bramble yield grapes; or a Thistle figgs; or a Serpent spit
pearls; natural impotency can give no excuse to wilful neglect; A wicked
man's necessity of sinning, must not nullify the Law of God, which requires
the doing of these things, though not with such an unclean heart as he does
them. The impotency of man must not either prejudice Gods authority, or
Diminish his own duty; These are the words of our Learned Rainolds in his
Treat: page, 246 247. where the Reader may meet with much more, giving
resolution to the same case with this, that a wicked man ought to pray, it is
his duty. And oh! that he could pray for a sight of his sin, and sense of
that wrath, which he is treasuring-up every day against the day of wrath, being
busily employed every hour of the day in damning himself; that so he might
look after Him, whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world to be a
propitiation Joh. 6. 36. 1 John 2. 2.
for the sins thereof; and oh that he would pray against the Grand delusion
of his desperately wicked heart, which will persuade him to believe that he
looks after Christ Jesus the Lord for life and immortality from Him, while
yet he looks not after the means, but turns his back upon the Glorious
Gospel, whereby He is declared to the world to be a Prince, and a Savior, all
salvation in Him, and none other Name given among Men Acts ^.
under Heaven, whereby we might be saved; The desperate heart of man will
persuade to turn the Back upon all this, The Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and yet he shall have Salvation by Him, though not receiving His Word.

To our seeming now this is fully proved, That a wicked Man ought to pray,
though he does not pray, neither can he, nor will he, unless as Pharaoh did,
take away the plague, remove this evil of punishment. And then perhaps he will
cry Lord, Lord, for possibly he sees death, sin and judgment, not as
formerly at a distance, but near at hand, and upon him; and then with Balaam
he may say, My God; And oh! that I may dye the death of the Righteous;
Therefore he that lives like a Devil would die like a Saint, and so he may
pray at the hour of his death, when his time is gone, and the time of Gods
patience is spent, and the hour of judgment is come, but then it will be too
late, no remedy now but a Torment; He must live to God, that prays to God,
walk with Him, and before Him, who looks for special mercy from Him. For if
we expect God should come to us in ways of mercy, we must attend upon Him in
ways of Duty, dealing with us as Creatures endued with Reason, understanding,
wills, affections. But because all these are miserably depraved, he deals with
us as such, and so depraved, wholly dis-inabled in our selves for the useing or
improving any the forementioned without special Grace from Him, which He
bestows upon us in the use of means He vouchsafes to us. But though wicked
men do none of this, nor is it possible, as his estate now is, that he can do
it; nay it is the abhorring of his soul to do it, for he abhorr's the Lord;
yet he ought to do it, That is the point, and we think cleared, he ought to
pray, it is his duty.

CHAP. IV. Q. 1.
Q. I. BUt whether he may pray the Lords Prayer that is the Question, which now
we shall endeavor to put out of Question, A wicked man ought not to say the
Lords prayer; he is a proud, bold, and dareing person, he will adventure
herein. It is probable he know's no other prayer, and this he received by
Tradition from his Parents, who possible knew no other prayer neither. But he
ought not to say this prayer, say we, and these are our Reasons for so saying.

First, It is the Churches prayer, we mean not a National Church, we have not
a thought of it, when our thoughts are upon This Church, the Church of the
living God; A National Church a huge vast body, a Monster rather; and as cold
as frost, which we know congregates, and fastneth together very heterogenious
things, which heat seperates; we mean not that commonly called a Church,
which takes-in very heterogenious persons, wicked and righteous, the Beleiver
and the Infidel, if not worse; the Disciple and the Drunkard; the True Saint
and the Real Devil together, for these were borne in a Church, and quickly
after Baptized there, and growing up, though in their Debauchednesse* getting
strength therein* as years come on; yet by virtue of their water Baptizement
are become visible Saints: we mean not these, nor that called a Church, and
^ath but a Name only, till the Spirit within gives the thing; we mean a
company of New Creatures, differing as much from the common or National
Church, as Men do from Beasts: That we may be clear at this point, we mean
the General Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn, The Sons and Daughters
of God; begot and borne unto Him in Christ of water and of the Spirit; It is
their prayer; It is the Disciples prayer, their's, who are disciplined by the
Gospel, received, believed, and obeyed; by their Lords appointment it is
theirs. Both the Scriptures ( Math: 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.) we conceive holds it
forth clearly, pray ye; And when ye pray, say. Our blessed Lord spoke to His
Disciples, here is the mould wherein to cast your prayers; this shall be to you
a Rule and Sampler, according to the which all your prayers shall be framed;
but of this hereafter. It is the Churches prayer, the ^eleivers, the Disciples,
and Saints prayer really such and indeed, which they can hold forth and have to
show for, not only, because they were borne in England and Baptized there (a
mere vanity, and less if less can be) but they were borne of God through
Christ, by the Spirit with the Word, and so baptized with fire, and the Holy
Ghost, it is their Prayer. It is true the wicked man claims it for his,
because he was borne and Baptized in this Nation; so does he Childrens* Bread
too, it belongs to him upon the same score. But he has right to neither, as we
have heard, and may yet more fully hear. We proceed.

Secondly, And humbly offer this to the thoughts of reasonable men, can we
think that our Blessed Lord would put these words into a wicked man's mouth?
Bid him call God Father, Whom he knows not, endeavors not to know, nay
abhorr's to know? He indeed will say, for who so wilful as he, as Balaam did,
My God, and as he, and he was many, My Father. Number. 22. 18. Jer: 3. 4.
But who bad them say so? you know the saying; It is presumption in the highest
degree to speak of God, or from God, or to God, without His leave or command
so to do; You say, says the Lord Christ of my Father, He is your Father, your
God but ye John 8 54, 55
say presumptuously in so saying; He is not the Father of those that know Him
not, but as He is the Father of the rain; But ye have not known Him, says
the Lord. And not knowing Him, how care they, how they Rebel against Him? Can
we think that the Son of God, while He tabernacled here on Earth, would bid
notorious Rebels, rebelling against the light of their own Consciences
within, and of the Word without to call God Father, and Him Lord, while they
were speaking and do^ing evil things, as they could?

We humbly conceive, It cannot enter into the heart of a Reasonable man to
think that so our Blessed Savior would do. He has resolved the Case; Thou
shall call Me my Father, and Jer. 3. 1^.
shall not turn away from Me. I will give thee the disposition of a Child, or
give thee to look after it, before thou shall, with my leave, call Me Father:
I will put filliall-affections, awful thoughts; constant Resolutions into thy
heart, to love fear and serve Me. And then thou shall call Me Father.

Thirdly, Yet again, Can it enter into our thoughts, that our Blessed Savior
should bid a wicked man call Jesus accursed? No; you will say, for who can
think so? we do, If we hold to this, That a sensual man not having the
Spirit, can call God Father, 1 Cor. 12. 3.
or Christ Lord: No man speaking by the Spirt of God calls Jesus accursed.
What, they say, that speak by another Spirit, judge you, says That Learned
man; The Apostle would say, Dr. Kendall, Chap. 16. page 145. Psalm: 110. 19, 20.
They call Jesus accursed. And no man can say (heartily) Jesus is the Lord but
by the Holy Ghost. Because, as our Learned Reinolds says, other Lords are
present with sensual, and wicked men, who do with their own eyes oversee,
and by their own visible power order, and direct them in their service. It is
not possible, that they should fear honor and serve Christ (which is to say
heartily Jesus is the Lord) unless Christ be in them by His Spirit, and they
in the faith. Sensual men not having the Spirit may, out of external
conformity to the Discipline and profession under which they live, with their
mouths acknowledge Him to be Lord, yet their hearts will never tremble and
willingly submit themselves to His obedience; Their Consciences will never set
to its seal to the Spiritual power of Christ over the thoughts, desires, and
secrets (yet this is to call Him Lord) but by the overruling direction of the
Holy Ghost; Therefore he blasphemes in Calling God Father, and Christ accursed:
he has no allowance from Christ so to do, it were blasphemy to think so; and
that is our third Reason.

Fourthly, Nor would the Lord Christ put a lie into a man's mouth in bidding
him, this sensual man, we mean this Legion, call God, Father; when as He is
not their Father, but they are of Joh. 8. 34. 44.
their Father the Devil, and do that, which they have seen with their
Father, even the Lusts of their Father they will do. If it be asked how wicked
men see the Devil do, that which they did and do? Worthy Mr Burgess answers
it; Because they express in their lives such wickedness, as was and is in the
Devil, even the same things which the Devil would do, and we should see him
do, if he were visible before our eyes. Naturae sequitur semina quisque sua.
As man's Nature is, and his principle within, such are his actings and doeings
without; As he is in being, such he is in acting; If he be in the evil one,
that is, under the power and dominion of an unclean Spirit; most unclean will
his actings Math. 1. 23. 5. 2. Joh. 1. 5.
be, for he will do that which he has seen his Father do: Certainly the Lord
will not bid such an unclean wretch call God Father; for that were for the
Lord of truth to put a lie into a man's mouth, which were Blasphemy to think.

Fifthly, Yet again, though as Excellent Turkney has it out of Morney first
Chapter first words; A man has never less De veritate Religionis. Cap. 1. ^.
to say than when that, which he is to prove or clear is more certain and
manifest than his proof. Omni luce clarius, omni interpretatione notius;
Notwithstanding we will proceed. The Lord Christ would not bid a man, (we
should tremble to speak this, or to hear it, but since it is commonly done,
and in a zeal for our God we would not have it so done being assured from a
sure word; That a wicked man Blasphemes the Name of his God, and hastneth his
own Curse, by letting this prayer go out of his mouth; as he does by taking
into his mouth the Bread and Wine at the Lords Table) we were saying, The Lord
Christ would not bid a man blaspheme This Glorious and fearful Name, The Lord
his God; and so hasten his Curse, bringing upon himself Deuteronomy. 8.
swift destruction; but so he must that Bids a wicked man say 1 Pet. 2. 1.
Isai. 52. 5.
the Lords Prayer; call God Father; My Name Continually every day is
blasphemed? how so, or what had they done? why, they would lie, and steal, and
swear, and yet would come unto Jer. 7.
Gods Temple, and call upon Him; They that did wickedly as they could, liars,
Cursers, opposers of what is Good (These are worthy Mr Burgesse's words) Yet
they will: come here and say our Father. Nay you cannot meet with any beastly
Jer. 3.
sinner, but his heart is filled with this bold impudency, he will say as they
did we are Jews* i. e. true beleivers (for as that Revel. 2 9. Mr Caryll. Job
11. 4. 21.
Learned man says, under the old Testament-Termes, Gospel professors are
expressed in the Revelations) I am such a one, a true Christian, for the time
was, when I was Borne, and quickly after Baptized, and a visible Saint I was
ever since being a member of a (National) Church, and yet this Beast-like man,
does not so much as pretend to piety; which yet were double iniquity; for the
show of his countenance does witness against him, he declares his sin Isai. 3.
as Sodom, he hides it not; yet so impudent he is, he calls God, Father. And
so goes on to the end of his prayer. Tell us your opinion here Sir, does not
this tread upon the brinks of Blasphemy at least? And if it do so, It were
blasphemy to think, That our Savior Christ would bid a wicked man say that
prayer, for that were to bid him blaspheme the Name of his God, fearful and
glorious.

Sixthly, And in the last place, to bid him say this prayer, were to bid him
hasten his own Curse, and to bring upon himself swift destruction, which he
must needs do continually, and daily blaspheming that holy and sacred Name,
which yet he takes into his mouth, and says before the Lord and His people,
Hallowed be Thy Name; As if a Malefactor should set* himself before his Judge,
and remember the Judge of the Murder which he had committed, and call-down
vengeance upon himself: So does every wicked man that calls God Father, and
continues to rebel against Him; he minds God, as we may say, to inflict the
Curse upon him, which he has deserved, which certainly shall be done so soon,
as he has filled-up the Measure of his Blasphemies: We leave it to your
judgment, Sir; so you will rule it by the Scriptures, whether a wicked man
does not hasten his Curse by letting this prayer go out of his mouth? Whence
have and still do issue forth so many vain, lying, and deceitful words, and
Cursed Oaths, as he does by taking into his mouth the Bread and Wine at the
Lords Table? We shall speak more to this in the next Treatise where we shall
hold-forth this undoubted sign of a faithful Minister, whom Satan's tongue (in
his instruments and servants) is still disquieting, and as they possibly can,
vexing and tormenting, because the tongue of this good Minister is still, and
still will be vexing and tormenting him and them: But if a Rev. 11. 10.
Ministers tongue will not torment Satan, Satan's tongue will not torment him.
There we shall also commend unto your reading, and, if you please, to your
translating Isidor: Pelusiot's Epistle to his friend about this prayer, that so
your Saint (that has no more to plead for his Saint-ship, but that he was
borne in sin, so he will acknowledge, only he is cleansed from it, and he
hopes thoroughly purged by Baptism quickly after he was borne, and can say this
prayer before your face in the Congregation:) We were saying, That so your
Saint may, by Gods blessing upon your instruction of him at that point, your
self being better informed about it first, may consider, at what an high
degree of blasphemy he has arrived, that dares say that prayer before his God,
while his heart riseth-up in Rebellion against Him.

Here we would add this, that the more excellent your prayer is, and this is
excellency in the abstract, the more unbecoming a loathsome person it is, as a
pearl in a swines snout; But this is Prove. 13. 5.
not the worst, the more excellent and sovereign a thing is, being received or
used after the due manner, and according as God has appointed it to be
received or used, the more deadly it works; the more distractive it is, the
more it hasteneth the curse upon the spirit, and bringeth-on destruction
swiftly, being profaned, and blasphemed by unclean lips, and hands; We might
make instance in the Word of God despised, and rejected; cast behind the back,
it is a savor of death unto death; at once it kills twice, like the strongest
poison mixed with the strongest wine, the very sent kills, or as the wine
received at the Lords Table by a visible sensual person not having the Spirit:
See by their out-workes, what dreadful workings the wine has upon their
spirits! But look to the thing in hand, and here is a loathsome person, and
delights in his loathsomenesse, which should be loathsome to him, yet he says
the Lords prayer. Now observe him in his walk, his cursed act^^gs therein, and
tell your self whether the curse of God, which (...) has been plucking down
upon himself with both hands, (...): as with cart-ropes, does not cleave as
fast to him as his heart cleaves to his sin?

We think we have made sufficient proof, That a wicked man ought not to say
this prayer, certainly he has no warrant from our Lord and Savior so to do;
But since he will do it on his own head, as we say, and so is carried
headlong toward his curse, meeting it as it were half way; we have read how
he curses himself by calling Christ accursed; and how he has drawn upon
himself swift destruction; And we have been the longer at this point, That
all that see this man with his curse upon him, clothed with it as with a
Garment, eating his meat, as was said, as a swine does his, rolled up in dirt,
may see and fly away, as he will do, that hears, and fears, and will no
more presumptuously call God Father, as the wicked man does, while, with a high
hand, and an uncovered head, he acts villainy against the Lord. We will
close this with worthy Mantons words; I have read of a Jewel, says he, that
being put into a Upon James 5. 16.
dead man's mouth, loses all its efficacy; Prayer is such a Jewel in a dead
man's mouth, it is of no power nor efficacy, but to hasten his ruin and utter
destruction.

CHAP. V. Q. 2.
Q. II. WE come now to make enquiry into the second Question; Whether our
Blessed Savior gave his Disciples this prayer, That they should pray to His
Father in those very words?

The Affirmative is much pleaded for, but generally, and usually, by those, who
are enemies to the Cross of Christ, adversaries to all goodness, and not
acquainted at all what prayer in the Holy Ghost means: We say it again,
because we would not be mistaken, The Affirmative is generally and universally
pleaded for by such kind of men, who cleave as fast to their forms, as sin
cleaves to them; or they to their sin; And they bear themselves out at this
point from these words of our Blessed Savior; when ye pray say. But indeed it
is not much to be minded what such manner of persons say, who will catch at any
thing, that may make for their present ease, and put the flesh to no c^st. Yet
it is to be regarded what any good man says learned and godly. And thus, as
we have heard, worthy Hild: says; Our Blessed Savior praescribed to His
Disciples a form of prayer, for them to say by, tying themselves to the very
words of it. Had he attempted the proof of this assertion, perhaps he would
have found it, a more difficult undertaking than barely to affirm it; so that
excellent man speaks upon a different account, whose words are so much in our
hearts, that they must needs be much in our mouths; we will tell our
persuasion here, That a man shall not readily meet with such like an expression
in any godly man's writings; and we thought it our duty to set it down, that
we may wrest it, what we can, out of their hands, who are unlearned, and
unstable, and do wrest words, such words as these, as they do all other
Scriptures, to their own destruction; so we will now endeavor to evince the
Negative; That our blessed Savior did not give this prayer to His Disciples,
that they should pray this prayer, tying themselves to the very words ^^ it:
for indeed we (...) worthy Hilds: words to be the outlashing of his pen,
starting aside, as the ablest pen may do, from its very scope, and maine
intendment. Which was to show, That our blessed Savior praescribed to His
Disciples a form of prayer, which should be to them and His whole Church a
rule, and sampler, according to which all our prayers should be made: Which is
the same with learned Beza's latin note; for it is not in the English,
Perfecta Christianae precationis formula, and (...) typus, a most perfect form
of Christian prayers, and the very type and mould, wherein to cast all our
prayers; which words have no agreement with those, that went before, not only
to be; nor with those that follow, tying themselves to the very words of it,
very cross, as we said, are these latter words, to the good man's scope, and
intendment: as they are to excellent Perkins words; The Lords prayer is, as it
were, a direction, and samplar to teach us how, and in what manner we ought to
pray: None is to imagine, we are bound to use these words, and none other: For
the meaning of Christ is not to bind us to the words, but to the matter and
manner; and to the like affections in prayer.

Thus we have heard what others say; now we crave leave to cast in our own
thoughts here, and to give our opinion; That our blessed Savior prescribing
this prayer, did not intend, That any one of His Disciples should pray unto the
Father in these very words.

SECT. I.
FOr first; The whole carriage of this prayer, from the Alpha to the Omega,
from the beginning to the end, and closing words thereof, argues it to be of
general concernment to the whole Church of God, more relating that way to the
good of the Body, than to the peculiar good of any member thereof: though we
know this cannot be severed, the good of the whole, and of the part; for that,
which is good for the Body, is good for the member too; and what is good for
the member, is good for the whole Body; as what is good for the Bee-hive, is
good for the Be, and what is good for the Be, is good for the Bee-hive; Yet
we conceive when a Disciple comes before God, he spreads before Him, his
peculiar case, and says, not our Father, but my Father; not others cases, but
his own. This we conceived relates to the Church in general; but a Disciples
prayer relates to himself in special, and his own concernments, though he
can no more forget the Church of Christ, than he can to eat his bread, or his
right hand forget its cunning.

SECT. II.
Again, our thoughts are, That the scope, and intendment, of this prayer, is
mainly to be looked after, And tells the Disciple what he is mainly to tend
unto, and bend against, be his prayer long, or never so short, Viz, The
Hallowing the great and glorious Name of God, in the laying himself out to the
utmost for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ, in his own heart, His
interest there, and through the world; and the throwing down the kingdom of
sin, and Satan there, and here and every where. This we conceive was our Lords
maine scope in prescribing His Disciples this prayer; And this must be the
Disciples scope in the moulding their petitions thereafter.

SECT. III.
WE cannot conceive that this prayer should be put into the Disciples mouths
to say it in those words; and yet they never said it so far as we can hear,
not one of the Apostles, nor Disciples in those days, yet we meet with many
of their prayers: nor any of the Blessed Martyrs that we read of, and we have
read some volumnes of them.

SECT. IV.
ANd lastly, the height and depth, length and breadth of the Contents in this
prayer, which we think the understanding of an Angel cannot comprehend,
makes us believe; That the Lord intended not, That His Disciples should huddle
it-up as he reads it; Nor can we think, That any true Disciple in the world,
that shall well ponder on the matter, and weigh the contents thereof with all
his heart and soul (which every true Disciple does not do) will say that
Prayer after the manner; Sing ye praises with understanding: so, put-up your
petitions with understanding. It is good to be full of affection, but it is
best to work in the full Assurance of understanding. Affections without
understanding, are blind; understanding without affection is lame; the want of
either run's us upon a thousand inconveniences. But if any duty, then that of
prayer calls-up all our Affections; It calls for a work of the understanding
also. Now, we think, no godly man's understanding (though his only is opened,
renewed and sanctified) is able to go along with this manner of saying it, as
he reads it; he will make a pause sure at the ontrance* My Father. We have told
you our thoughts, as to this matter. Only we entreat the Reader to observe
what he met with in the first Chapter second and third section, and in the
second Chapter, specially the fourth paragraph there; together with the first
paragraph in the Chapter following, which we think, refers much to that which
precedeth, as to that which follows.

CHAP. VI. Q. 3.
Q. III. WHether a Godly person he or she, brings this prayer into the Closet
with them, there and then humbling themselves before their God.

We told you, we maintained the Negative, our Reasons are.

SECT. I.
ANd the first we would only offer to your Consideration, being rejected by
the godly Learned, yet we conceive no reason is given for their refusing of it:
That, which is a pattern to make all prayers by, should not be used as a
prayer. To this the only Answer is; Therefore the rather it may be used as a
prayer. But this makes no proof, nor do the words following. That sure it is,
Ancient and worthy Divines have reverenced it, as a prayer, choosing rather to
use those words than any other. And so many worthy Divines do now, and yet by
so doing prove nothing to the purpose. We will offer but a word in it, and tell
you what we conceive, that the Argument is very strong; The pattern to make
all prayers by, is not to be used as a prayer, for if we use the pattern for
our prayer, we shall never pray according 1 John 3. 2.
to the pattern; As the Disciples do not stint themselves with any degree of
holiness, Gods own purity being their Copy, so neither can they stint
themselves in prayer, the Lords own prayer being their pattern: We proceed.

SECT. II.
WE think it clean besides the scope and intendment of our Blessed Savior
in giving His Disciples this Prayer, if they shall plead their case with Him in
those very words; Now in this Case we cannot reach our Lord's mind, nor eye His
scope, but by observing what He did while He tabernacled among men; He put up
many prayers to His Father, and indeed, though Lord of all, yet as Mediator of
His Church, and so a servant to His Father in the Churches behalf, He could
have nothing, nor Psalm. 2. 8. Ma^^. ^6. 5^. Heb. 7. 25.
has He to this day, but He must ask for it: And among all these prayers we
read not (and quod non ligitur, non creditur) That this sacred prayer came-out
of His sacred lips any more than once. Nor have we observed it from the mouths
of any of His Apostles, or other of His Dear Children Yet we read of their
prayers, and though short, yet were they molded after this manner, That the
throne of His Glory may be advanced in their Hearts; And that the world, and
all that, which mightily opposes the lifting-up of the same, may be
throwne-downe, Crushed to the earth and ruined: but never heard we this Prayer
from their lips, nor from any of the Blessed Martyrs. Now, certainly, these,
being of the Number of That Virgin* Company, follow their Leader and Commander,
though haud passibus aequis, yet they follow Him, and did eye, mark, and
behold His Blessed scope, and intendment in all He did or spoke.

SECT. III.
THe Disciple does not, as we think, bring this Prayer before His Lord for
this were to limit and stint himself, and so to Restrain prayer, which sure
was far from the Intent of our Lord to prescribe so Contrary to the workings of
His own Spirit in the hearts of His Chosen; These find a restraint upon
themselves, as often as they find not the Blessed Spirit enlargeing of them to
pray; and then humbled they are, when Comforted they cannot be: But it is far
from them, as it was from the Mind of Christ prescribing this prayer, to stint
themselves, so many words, and no more, as acceptable with their God, as so
many Ave-Maries and Pater-nosters given out by Number, you know by whom. A
natural prayer put-up by the strength of Nature, is a stinted and a limited
prayer: But a Spiritual prayer, as a Disciples prayer is, has always an
Infiniteness in it; his spirit being right set, is enlarged to a kind of
Infiniteness in Gods Service; There is a Natural Bias in his soul, which
inclines him to a limited prayer; But we know the strength of the Arm takes
away that Bias: So the strength of the Inward man takes away this Bias. Though
this Disciple is not able to do what is actually infinite, yet his desire is
infinite in this, That being to deal with an Infinite God, were he able to do
ten thousand times more than he does, yet his heart would do more. Oh that I
could do more; As he grows in grace, so his desire after grace is enlarged,
as much as a wicked man is after the world and sin; he enlarges his desire as
hell, and a godly man enlarges his as Heaven. He limits not himself; Those
desires are boundless which the Holy Spirit enlarges to a kind of
Infiniteness, Causing those to Center in the infinite Love of God unto them
through Jesus Christ; and this is our third Reason.

SECT. IV.
THese Disciples have their stated and set times for prayer every day. It is
true, they pray Continually, or without Ceasing. Acts 10. 2. 1 These* 5. 17.
Prayer never Cease to goe-forth, till the grace desired comes-in: Though the
words of prayer cease in the mouth; yet the grace of prayer cease not in the
heart: But they have their stated times for prayer, and the very flower and
cream of time it shall be, which is appointed for that high Service: from
hence we prove, That the Disciple brings not this prayer before his God; He
has more to say, and must take more time for it, than is taken-up in repeating
these words; They have many more words to utter before their God, we say not,
than are contained in that prayer (for all the Angels in Heaven cannot readily
tell us, and explain to us the Contents thereof, or what is contained therein)
but many more ^ords than numerically word for word are Contained therein;
Therefore he must take time for it, and, if we may so say, the firstling
thereof; As he prays to God continually, so he praises God continually;
prayers and praises go together, very few breathings go betwixt: but be they
few or many, the Disciple takes time for it. No sooner is he awake in the
morning, but he ascribes to God the Glory, Who alone g^ve him sleep, which
all created strength could not do; and awakned him out of sleep, else he had
slept on till the Great Day of the Lord God had come: he praises his God for
this in the Name of Jesus Christ. And no sooner is he set upon his legs, but
he is upon his knees, praising Him with heart and voice, That set him on his
legs, whereas He might have laid him restless upon his pillow, where many an
head lies akeing. But how if he be awakned with pain and sorrow upon the
flesh? (to take it-in by the way) Notwithstanding he finds matter of praise,
and his heart enlarged that way; He can sing the high praises of his God, for
those glorious excellencies, that are in Himself, and for the Emanations or
flowings forth of the same by Jesus Christ in the exceeding abundant riches of
His goodness to His beloved ones in and through Him; and to himself in
special; For though his flesh feels pains upon it, yet says the Spirit, I
am not sick, mine iniquity is forgiven, my sin is pardoned: Hitherto he never
found, That his Heavenly Father did him any hurt by afflicting him, but good a
great deal. Which may mind you of him Chrysostom tells us off, who was
acquainted with greifes in his measure, as his Lord and Master was (in His
Churches stead, and for her sake) that they may never have any hurt therefrom)
and never came before his God, but the first words he spoke, were praises to
his God for his pains and sorrows upon the flesh (to use his own words) for
his hell here, as well as for his Heaven hereafter. And you may remember
another, A very good Man, who enjoyed health, and wealth, all was prosperous
with him for fifty years together; and after the Date of those years, he had
scarce a Comfortable day to the hour of his death: But this is for our
Learning, how praise-full was he, That his God spared him so many good days,
and instructed instructed him to that Discretion, as to make an improvement of
them, therein to lay-up, as we say, for a rainy day, or spending time, and to
bear his Crosses, now they are come, willingly, and more, rejoyceingly; for he
found no loss by them. Indeed this is the Glorious Privilege of Disciples
really and indeed such; Amidst all their Crosses they find not one Loss. But
this is it we were prooving, There must be time for this praiseing the Lord,
and these must be uttered with a Man's own mouth; and surely these will not
endure to be bounded within a set form, nor can they have acceptance with
their God* But that person, Man or Woman, who brings that Prayer before his
God, Cannot praise Him for that he has received (and what has he, and has
not received?) for himself, and for all his, for all which God must be
praised. Prayer and thanks are like the Double motion of the Lungs (as Dr. G:
of prayer, page 61.
says that Learned, Holy Man) the Air that is sucked in by prayer, is
breathed forth again by thanks.

Secondly, Nor can he pray unto Him for supply of what is wanting, keeping
himself to that form of prayer, and speaking to his God in these very words.
The Disciples of Christ are very wanting, at least none knows their wants or
sees their wants, or feel's their wants, as these do; And the^ none pray's for
the supply of their wants as these do, these poor ones and needy ones:
Indeed the Hebrew word for poor (as we have heard) springs from a root
signifying Desire; And the Reason is, as one says, Mr. Caryl. Job 5. 15. 298.
because poor men are commonly rich in desires. They that are full of sensible
wants, are full of earnest wishes. And the Reason why poverty of Spirit in our
Spiritual Estate is pronounced a Blessing, is, because the poor in Spirit are
full of Desires after Spiritual Riches. They are ever craveing and seeking to
be filled with that fulness which is in Jesus Christ, with Grace for Grace;
they would have the Image of every Grace in Christ engraven upon their Souls;
or (in an holy Covetousness) they would be as rich in Grace, as Christ is;
These are the words of that Excellent Man before cited; more there are and tend
much as to give instruction, so to our scope and purpose, That a Disciples
prayer, whereby he makes known his Requests to God, cannot possibly be
encircled or pent-up within that Compass of six lines, which may be utternd in
so many breathings, or within the space of one Minut's time; for we think
within that space of time and less, that prayer may be said, or rather hudled;
as within two Minut's-time the 67^h Psalm may be said over and over, whereby
as you may remember Bellarmine could measure the huge body of the Sun, and
the quickness of his race; For I observed (said he) the first peering of the
Sun on our side of the Globe, and by that time I have said that Psalm over
twice, the Sun is up: and in a full body appears to us: So then in twelve
breathings the Psalm is said over, and over, and in six breathings the prayer
is said. And is not this to the heart of a wicked man, In less than a minutes
time, and that is the smallest parcel of time, he can begin and end his
prayer, which being the Lords Prayer, he has said it as well as the best
Clarke in the National Church, and yet he prayed no more than that Pillar of
Antichrist, in his time, prayed, while he read over that Psalm.

But to proceed in this a little farther; A Disciples Prayer, wherein he
himself tells his whole mind to God, it is not uttered in six breathings:
Certainly he has much upon his spirit, when he comes before his God. We will
put a question here; and give you leave to Answer it. What would this Disciple
have more, than he has, that he is still begging? he has all, God and all; he
is complete in Christ, and now what can he need? It is granted unto him, being
one of the Number, to be arraied in fine linen, clean and white, which is the
Righteousness of Saints: his Defense is the Munition of Rocks; The promise is
made good unto him; Bread shall be given him, his waters shall shall be sure;
that is, he Isai ^3. 16. Call:
shall want nothing for this life, nor for that which is to come; What would
this man have more? You are, we hope, a Disciple, and not of the common Rank
or stamp of Disciples, that have no more to show for their Disciple-ship, but
that they were borne and Baptized in a National Church. But you are borne
again and made a Disciple indeed: And then you can make answer and tell us,
what this Disciple would have more, by what your self would have; he sees his
Lord in the shade, he would see him in the Sunshine; he would stand more in
the Sunshine of Gods favor; That Sunshine upon him never wearieth with its
beam; The more it is, the more refreshing it is; More of the light of thy
countenance, more and more good Lord; Show me Thy self more clearly: let me
have a fuller sight of Thee, and in-sight into my self; for I would abhor my
self more, I would repent more. We verily believe, That You, being a Disciple,
do pray after that manner. And yet you find not a word of all this in the
Lord's Prayer, we mean, explicit there, or expressed; Employed it is and much
more in that one sweet word, Father. We take leave to proceed yet farther, and
so to try your Discipleship.

You believe on the Name of the Son of God; you know Him, who is eternal life;
yet so sure as you are a Disciple, you go on praying, That you may believe on
the Name of the Son of God. 1 John 5. 13.
You do believe, and yet you would believe; you do believe, and this shall
save you from all evil; for as you know full well, and do teach it your
people, It is not this or that Degree of faith, which saves, but the truth of
faith, though but as the least grain or lowest degree thereof: Yet you rest
not here, nor will you suffer your people to rest; for he that sits down at
the lowest degree of Grace, it may be doubted, he has no grace at all, and
shall become a Christian indeed, when an Ape becomes a Man; or a He that has
true grace may go to heaven ce^tainly; but he who has strong Grace only goes
to Heaven comfortably. Mr. Jen: on Jude page 165.
Nominall Disciple, because Baptized in England, becomes a real Saint. Grace
is still aspiring higher and higher, so are you, being a gracious Man; you do
believe, then we believe, you would believe more strongly, that you might act
more vigorously in the whole worship of your God; Specially in those simple
Duties, which none but the Disciple performs, flesh and blood can do nothing
at them; as to love God; To Trust him; To depend on him; To have joy and
delight in Him; To have Communion with Him; To take Him for your portion, and
inheritance, and to be all in all to Him; These are simple Duties, are acts of
the soul, not compounded of matter and form, And these you are able to do
through Him, that strengthen's you: But this you 1 John 5. 13.
could not do, but that you are still aspiring after a full assurance of hope;
And for this you bow your knee before your Heavenly Father day and night, for
so true Disciples use to do; but then they bound not themselves within the
Lords Prayer.

More should be added to this paragraph; but that we have been large in it.
Sometimes this Disciple loses the sight of his God, A Child of Light and
walks in Darkness of discomfiture and sorrow. And what says he then to his
God? Whom perhaps, his evidences being now so blurred and blotted, he cannot
call Father. There is a Cup of trembling in his hand, there are sad
apprehensions in his heart; what says he now to his God? No man can tell, but
the Man in his Case; nor perhaps he neither; for he cannot tell himself. He is
in the same case his Lord and Master was in before him, and that is his
Comfort, if he could see it; he shall be brought out of it anon with joy and
gladness: but this is his case at present, his soul is troubled, and what
shall he say? John 12. 27.
We will cast a veil over this and pass on, Curae parvae loquuntur in^entes
stupent; but certainly he prays, rather the Spirit within him; and no set
form in the world helps him with a word here, much less with a groan, Once
more and so to come to a period, or full stop here: This Disciple now on his
knees; as we suppose him to be, spreads the concernments of his Churches
before his God, as near and dear to him as his own, he cannot keep silence
being a faithful Remembrancer: This takes up some time also, and more words,
than are numbered up in six lines; and so much to our fourth Reason, why a true
Disciple brings not this prayer with him when he kneeles before his God. Before
we proceed we would make answer to that we have heard argued for the bringing
the Lords Prayer before the Lord; It is this;

Quest. When a Disciple has but little time, and can speak but few words,
then he may draw-up all into a narrow roomth, and say the Lords Prayer only,
may he not?

Answ: To this we say first, That a Disciple (Remember you still* that we do
not mean a Disciple at large, a member of the National Church, because he was
Baptized therein; and received into that huge, we had almost said, and let it
go, Monstrous Body, to whom Duty is a burden, and sin light, with whom
praying time is waste-time, that takes up more time than saying the Lords
prayer, we do not mean him, he is not in our thoughts, unless it be to
mourn over him, and your self, that account him such, we mean a Disciple
indeed, and what we were saying of him, we are speaking out) That a Disciple
indeed, prays indeed, and being a man of much Grace, hears much, and reads
much, meditates much, and prays much: he is a man of much prayer; he spends
much time to get Grace, to make him rich to God, to get strength in the inward
man, to pass through all variety of afflictions; for all this he prays unto
his God, at the least Psalm. 55. 17. Dan. 6. 10.
twice a day, we verily believe thrice, as others have done before him.

It may be said, this spends much time; whereunto it may be answered, That no
time is better spent, than that, which is spent in Calling upon God, if called
upon in truth. It hinders not in our Buisinesse, though it seem to hinder and
though it takes (these are Excellent Preston's words) so much from the heap,
yet indeed it increases the heap; The baiting of the horse hinders not the
journey; nor the oileing of the wheel, nor the whetting of the Sith; though
there be a stop in the work for a time, yet as our Common saying is, A whet is
no let; and praying time as it may be improved, is the most gaineing time. One
hours Communion Dr. G.
with God may in a moment bring in more sweetness, than all other gaineings
can do to Eternity; The words of that Excellent Man Dr G: We would conclude,
That a Disciple holds on a Constant Course in prayer: He would rather forget to
eat his bread, than forget to pray to Him, and to praise Him for his bread. As
he has stated times for ea^ing and drinking, so has he for praying and
praiseing; and if he finds not a fit season for eating, yet he will for praying
He thinks much and often upon Glorious Preston's words: The neglect of prayer
uncovers the roof as it were, and the Curse is rained down upon our Tables,
upon our meat and drink, upon all our endeavors, and all the enterprises we
take in hand: Thus with the outward man. And the loss we suffer in the inward
man, upon the neglect of this Duty is very great, that being ready still to be
distempered, to go out of order, to contract hardness and soil; for it falls
out with a man's heart; as it does with a garden, that is neglected, it will
quickly over-runne with weeds, if you look not diligently to it* and the way
to look to it, is Constancy in this Duty -- there is much more to excellent
purpose.

But (2) now suppose, some great buisinesse comes to hand (there is none
greater than Prayer) and the Disciple has but a moments time to breath forth
unto his God. What will he pray in prayer? we mean, what words will he use?
Happily such like words as these; Lord hear, Lord forgive, Cause the light of
Thy Countenance to shine upon us; and take away that, which more than
Eccl^pseth it from us; Truly We cannot tell what he will say, if you can tell,
you may tell us. But we are verily persuaded, he ^ill not say the Lords prayer,
what ever his time be more or less; And this is our Confidence in this matter.
Now we proceed.

SECT. V.
WE suppose this will be granted, having its ground in the word of God, That so
soon as a Child Calls God Father, Luke 15. 18.
and Christ Lord, he remembers he has sinned against Him; That is all we will
say, he has sinned against Him; And now, what shall he do? here is guilt
Contracted, and filth too, who knows how much? and now what shall he do to
have the Guilt remooved, and his Conscience pacified, his filth purged, and his
Conscience purified; what shall he do? surely he has no way to take, but to
fly, as the Manslayer, whom blood pursued to the City of Refuge, unto the
fountain opned for sin and uncleanness, and Entreat (for all comes-in at the
door of free Grace) that he may be put into the Jordan of Christ His Blood.
Well, this shall be in good time, but not yet to his sense and feeling (for we
enquire not what was done in Heaven before time was, but what is done on Earth,
and within the heart, to make all sure there) we were saying, he, having taken
a right Course, and waiting at a sure door, he shall have a pardon sealed to
his Soul anon, in his Lords good time. But yet what shall he do? for surely
something is to be done. The Apostles (said that Learned Expositour) Upon Job
7. 20 p. 691.
gave Gospel Counsel, yet when men asked them, What shall we do to be saved?
they said not, ye must do nothing, God will save you by His free Grace; No,
they called them to repent and believe every one of them. Sin must be known to
be sin (call it by the worst name you can think of, then you call it Sin)
above Romans 7.
measure sinful, and must be acknowledged so to be; Only acknowledge thy
iniquity. Know the Plaegue of thine own heart and Jer. ^. 13. 1 Kings ^. 38.
mourn for thy sin, because Committed against the Lord; and do this as
David for his Son every day, for every day thou sinnest; 1 Samuel 13. 37. Zach 12.
and as true Mourners do, mourn bitterly; and mourn the more because thou
can not mourn enough. This is that the Lord will have the Disciples do. And
so now, for we must Contract, we will conclude; That Confession of sin is the
great ingredient in prayer for pardon of sin, whereunto the Scriptures speak
every where. Only Acknowledge: Confessing their sins; And forsaking of sin
must go before pardon of Sin; yea and subduing of sin too: All this in the
strength of God; but he must be enquired of touching these matters; He will
have sin acknowledged; He will have sin forsaken, put as far away by us, as the
East is from the West, as to our Love to it, likeing of it, desire after it,
delight in it: So far we must put it away, before the Lord will tell us, that
He has put our sins so far away from Himself and from Psalm. 103.
us; That it shall be as possible for the East and West to meet together, as
for a Man and his sin, to hurt him. So now we conclude, That this Confession
of sin, which every man will grant, must be with a man's own mouth, not by any
set form whatsoever, is not expressed, no not the least sound that way, in the
Lords prayer, Therefore his Disciples indeed, what ever your Disciples *
do, bring not this Prayer before their God. And

SECT. VI.
OUr sixth reason, why a Disciple brings not this Prayer before his God, is,
because it is already wrought to his hand: he need not take any pains about
it; The least Child in his house, that can speak, though he cannot read, can
say it. This Disciple, that knows in his measure, what a Disproportion there
is, betwixt the Great and Dreadful God; and this worm, the Creature, (yea
baser than a worm, considered in himself, because a sinful Creature) or, to
express it in excellent Greenhills words, betwixt Majesty and Nothingnesse;
And that sloth to use the same man's words, is a Gulf betwixt this God who is
all, and this Creature who is nothing at all, in himself considered, but a
thing of naught, worse than Nothing; This Disciple now knowing all this in his
measure, dares not, as we suppose, and were saying, Come before his God with a
prayer wrought to his hand, but having access to the Father, through the
Mediation of the Son, by one Spirit, he casts himself into the Arms of
the Spirit, looks for a supply from Him, enableing this Disciple to put-up a
prayer wrought James 5. 16.
now in him, and wrought out from him by the same Spirit. This prayer wrought
to our hands, The Lords Prayer, is the exactest piece of work in sight that
ever was: But yet this Disciple that says this prayer (if any such there be,
as many such there be in the National Church) is not exact in this prayer; for
praying this Prayer, wrought to his hand, he prays nothing to purpose; Nothing
wrought in him by the Spirit of God nor wrought-out from him by the same
Spirit; he does exercise neither the gift of prayer, nor the Grace of prayer.
Nay, he does not exercise any one faculty of his Soul in saying his prayer
wrought to his hand, nor any one member of his body, unless it be his tongue;
and what is lip-labor before the Lord, any more than eye-service before ^ Sam.
24.
a Man? Certainly this Disciple is of David's mind; I will not, said he offer
unto the Lord my God of that which shall c^st me nothing. There is a
body-prayer, of this we have been speaking hitherto (to use that Excellent
Expositours Distinction) which Upon Job 11. 13 p. 108.
is never alone with a Disciple, for woe to Body-prayer, when it is alone. And
there is a Soule-prayer, which may be alone, and 1 Samuel 1. 13. Neh: 2. 4.
as fervent and effectual both as Hannah's and Nehemiah's prayers were; For
the soul and spirit of a prayer, is the soul and spirit in the strength of
God lifted-up in prayer, which does infinitely more in prayer than the body
does; yet in saying this prayer the body does nothing, the soul less. But
this is the thing; A Disciples Body-prayer (wherein he exercises himself
every day, and likely thrice a day) exercises the whole outward-man: The hands
pray, knees pray, the eyes pray, (we have this in the place forementioned)
gestures are speaking in prayer. By these we pray when we hold our peace, and
lift-up a loud voice, when we say never a word; but in saying this prayer
wrought to our hands, the Soul and Body both, every power of the one and every
member of the other may fit as still as a stock; only let the tongue wagge,
and by help thereof say the prayer notwithstanding. The tongue is
all-sufficient for that work; All the Rest both the powers of the Soul, and
members of the Body, may stand stock-still the while; when one member is
all-sufficient for the work what needs more? Frustra sit per plura. We had
more reasons to give why a Disciple brings not this prayer before his God; but
we think this may suffice; only remember this, Fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord. We come now to the fourth Querie.

CHAP. VII. Q. 4.
Q. IV. WHether it be comely for a Godly Man, and true Minister of Christ to
pray the Lords Prayer before his people, that is, to add it unto the close of
his own?

It has been said by two only in our heareing; The one old enough to make a
Minister if years would do it. But -- Tempora certe

Virtutem nec prima negant, nec ultima donant. The other young enough, to say
no more: These two, and only these spoke this, more than ever we heard spoken
by any in the Close of their prayers. Thou may Lord justly neglect our
imperfect prayers if we should neglect to say Thy most perfect prayer, Thou
have prescribed to us and Commanded us to say. If this now can be proved, that
our Blessed Savior has commanded His Ministers to close their prayers with
His prayer, then The Question is resolved in the Affirmative, and put out of
all Question, That every Godly Minister must close his prayer with the Lord's
prayer. Why? His Lord commands him: and he is not a godly Minister that does
not do what his Lord Commands. But now we are persuaded, these are but men's
words, who are resolved to say something to carry forth their matters before
the people, though they can prove nothing Nay we are Confident, That these two,
the old Man, and the Novice, affirming, That their Lord commands them to join
His prayer to the end of their own, have spoken Contrary to the mind and will
of their Lord, and their presumptuous words will be required at their hands.
And herein we do appeal to the Godly in all the world, Minsters and people;
And if any amongst them all, should affirm it, That the joining of this prayer
to the end of his own is commanded him of his Lord, we would appeal from him,
to our only Lord God Himself, the Lord of Glory. He has commanded His
Disciples to pray; for they shall have nothing, as He Himself the Mediator
and Advocate of His Church has not of His Father, but by askeing, which was
said before. But if He has commanded them to pray this very prayer, then we
would humbly ask why should they pray any other prayer? or why do not they
not give this the praecedency before any other prayer? this being given them
under a special command to pray; When ye pray say; as to our understanding
they wrest their Lords words, and thwart His scope and intendment wholly: more
of this hereafter.

But we come to our undertakeing, which is to Maintain the Negative: That it
is not comely for a Minister of Christ to join the Lords prayer to the end of
his own. But first we would hear how they do maintain the Affirmative: That
it is comely for a Minister so to do; And what we have heard alleged for the
Maintenance thereof, we will take leave to set down in this place.

First, Godly Ministers say that prayer at the end of their own. We only
reply to that. So do the ungodly and Brutish Ministers too, all over your
National Church; It is their very Sibboleth. *
You may know a Brutish Pastor, as by his walk, so also by Judge. 12.
pronounceing of that prayer, we mean as to the words and syllables there,
these he can frame to pronounce aright, like a Clarke, as we say. But surely
what these Brutish ones do is not comely for the Godly to do: Nor indeed can
we possibly discern their Godliness, godly though they may be, and we hope
are, by their so doing.

Secondly, It has been anciently so done, and customarily so now and of
course. To this we Reply as follows.

All this makes nothing in the matters of God. Antiquity (though Truth indeed
be most Ancient) and Custom, or mos populi; the Mode of the people, will
plead as hard every whit for the greatest plague of the world, for the head
(that Man of Sin, merum scelus, as Learned Beza) of that Cursed Kingdom; For
the Shoulders and pillars of the same, for all their Cursed doctrines and
practices; Antiquity and Custom will plead as hard for all these; And for a
Service-Booke, will worship too, which is as unpleasing to God our Lord, as it
would be to a Prince if we should pay him money of our own Coincing; for which
he would be so far from thanking us, That he would arraigne-us for Traitors.
As a Minister must not speak from God, but the preaching of God, even as it is
written: So nor ought he to speak to God, but by the Direction of the same
Word.

Quest. But does not this Cast some blot upon the Universities manner and old
Customs? for Generally the Learned and godly there did conclude their prayers
with the Lords prayer; And it was so strictly observed, That the
Country-Minister who never used so to do in his own pulpit, yet going thither
to take his Degree of Bach: or Dr: It was expected of him, he should close his
prayer after the usual manner, and that he might not give offense to others,
so he did, though with some offense to himself.

Answ. This we think cannot be denied, no more than can this, That from the
Prophets in those places, Corruption in Doctrine, as well as profaneness in
life went forth into all the Land. But we believe, That it is not now, as then
it was; matters are done, we hope, at least in desire and endeavor in right
order, and measured forth, according to the Standard of Gods Word: for it is
true, we doubt not, which one says of the present state of the Universities;
There have been more Muses heretofore, but never so many Graces as now. But if
not, which God forbid, yet non ad Consuetudinem, sed ad Norman vivimus. And as
many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God. This Rule, fixing the eye thereupon, and enquiring not what was
the Custom of men to do, but what was the mind of God that they should do.

And this last said may suffice in way of Answer to that so commonly urged, and
is thought so Cogent upon Ministers, next to the pretended Command of Christ,
to add the Lords prayer to the end of their own; That the Assembly of Divines
in their Directory for Worship, have thought fitting, Ministers should close
their prayer with the Lords Prayer.

To that which has been said, we would add but these two words (1) That we
are inclined to think, That the fiery indignation of the Lord flaming forth
against those His enemies, who stood-up in their might for that old Directory
for Worship, commonly called the Service-Booke, or Book of Common Prayers, and
pressed it upon Gods people with Arguments, Cogent enough, and too much with
flesh and blood. Whereupon it might, nay it was said of that said Book, A
bloody book was that Service-booke unto them; and accordingly was it dealt
with by the powers above us, though not full-up to the rate of that bloody
persecution was raised against the Godly Ministers by the same. We were saying,
we are inclined to think, That the Destruction from the Almighty is a terror
to Godly Ministers to apply themselves to any other Directory for worship, than
to the Spirit of God and of Glory; Who, being the great purchase of Christ's
blood, promise of the Father* and prayer of the Son, is given to His Church for
their A^suffi^ient guide, only Help, and to make an A^undant supply unto them
when they are setting themselves in prayer to make their supplications unto
their Father in Heaven. (2) The other word we would add, is, That when the
Ministers of the Gospel and Glory of Christ, who have their Mission,
Commission, Institution, and Induction, chiefly and principally from Him, and
can show their Letters Patents for it, when these, are so hardly Driven, (as
those are, who are quite forfaken of the Spirit of God) that they may use those
platformes of prayer there prescribed, or else not pray at all, as we heard
before, then they will, (for necessity, they say, has no law) be so bold or
impudent rather, to use that prayer also, being the most exact form of all
forms. But these never were, and never shall be so forsaken of their God; And
in assured Confidence thereof we proceed.

Thirdly, This we have heard, some one of us at least, alleged for the saying
of this prayer. There is a sickness upon all the faculties of the soul. And
the memory amidst the Rest is a very sickly, weak, and infirm thing; So as we
many-times forget to put up those Requests unto God, which were in the purpose
of our hearts to do. Now to help and succor us in this matter, we adjoine
the Lords prayer to the end of ours, that being complete as we all know, in the
whole and in every part, and Contains in it, as the Creed, all things to be
believed, so this, all things to be desired. To this we reply.

Granting this first, That this sickness is Epidemicall, universally spread
over all men, and over all in man. And the Memory, the Soul's storehouse is
fearfully tainted with it, most unhappily, and tenaciously retentive of all
that is evil; So as what was but once heard, seen or done, giving pleasure to
the flesh, will be kept in the Memory and repeated there, who knows how long
and how often? (yet take-it-in by the way, as often as any evil, seen heard
or done is remembered with delight, so often is it acted over again) But now
when any thing truly Good is Commended to it, and received-in, of how short
continuance it is there? If a Hand Allmighty lodges it not there, and keeps
it there! The memory of it self, and in it is own nature is a very Step-dame
to Good or like a very leaking vessel. This is her Sickness, and if it be not
Cured, it will be our woe. And now to draw nearer to the point in hand, we
cannot possibly see* though, we hope, we Cry for His eye salve, which only
makes to see; how the sickness of the memory, causing the praying man to
forget what he would have remembered, and made his request to God for, Can be
helped (for to this particular we speak) by adjoining His Lords prayer.

We crave leave to ask this Godly Minister, what he has forgot to petition
his God in behalf of the people, to whom he is made an Over-seer. He has not
Confessed their sins so fully nor so feelingly as he should, and thought to
have done; This may be; He knew full well some special mercies his people had
received from God, and he quite forgot to render God the praise; He knew as
well some special mercies his people had not and yet felt not any want of
them, as a seeing eye, and heareing ear, but he quite forgot here also. He was
well acquainted with some particular misery, that was felt by some one or more
of his people, being sickness and sorrow upon the flesh: and another misery he
might know of also, which is the misery of all miseries, because not felt nor
feared, yet clapped fast upon them, perverseness of Spirit, and hardness of
heart. Here the Godly man's memory may fal^e him also. In all these, he might
not petition God as he ought and happily thought to have done, and in some of
these perticulars his memory wholly failed him. Now he will rele^ve himself and
his people, whose good he specially intends, by saying the Lords prayer. But is
that the way to relieve himself or them? We humbly offer it to the thoughts of
every intelligent Man. Will his repeating the Lords prayer before the people
help them, when they are returned home, to Confess their sin there more fully
or feelingly? does that prayer supply them with words that way? or to praise
God for the mercies they have, or to pray unto Him for what they would have;
for the taking away the Stone in the heart, if it be not all over Stone, as
desirerously as we would have the Stone taken-out of the Bladder; but is there
one express *
word in the Lords prayer that helps to the putting-up that great petition?
we meddle not with what is Comprehended there (which exceeds the Comprehension
of an Angel) but with what is expressed there: And to our seeming there is not
in that prayer, one express word there, that can help the praying man in all
or any of those perticulars beforementioned.

To close this we conceive it to be thus; every godly person going to prayer,
goes to God in the Name of Jesus Christ; Through Him by the Spirit, he has an
access unto the Father. Ephesians. 2.
And oh what a deal of Eloquence and Rhetoric is in this one word, Father!
how it works upon the bowels of the Father, upon the bowels of the Child too!
so as the Child cannot choose but crave, the Father cannot choose but grant, what
ever is good for the Child. There is a reciprocal work still, a reflexing Act
of the soul. The Father's bowels yerne toward the Child, The Child's bowels
yerne toward the Father. But we recall our selves, being to deliver our
thoughts what a Godly Minister does, when he has entered the pulpit. Surely in
desire and endeavor he comes wholly off from himself; he uses all that Ged
has given him, and lays out the very Male of his flock, for that very end
given him: but he trusts it not, he has no Confidence in the flesh: It is
fully and wholly set upon his God; He loves to be trusted, and cannot be trusted
too much; as the creature cannot be trusted too little. In a word, he rolls
himself upon God, putts himself as he can, into the good Spirits hand; Leaves
his matters there, humbly expects supplies from Him; He is in the place, where
he should be, unto which his God has called him; upon his work, which he does
with more Delight than to receive his wages. Now he would not doubt but that
the good Spirit to Whom he has committed himself and his work, will carry
him through it both in praying and preaching. And now, for now we are closeing
the point, notwithstanding the sickness of his memory, and many other his
infirmities, who knows how many? yet he knows Whom he has trusted, and upon
Whose score, and that He is able to lead him unto his work, and to carry him
through his work* nor dares he for his life take a dead letter *
(such a thing is the Lords prayer, as uttered by Man, as dead as other letters
he reads in the same Chapter) he will not, we were saying take a dead letter
to help the living Spirit. These are our thoughts of this matter.

Fourthly, We have heard in the Last place, this alleged for the saying the
Lord's prayer at the end of their own prayer; our prayers are very imperfect,
we all know, and God may neglect them; therefore we add the Lords prayer to
the end of our's, that perfect and complete prayer which the Father will not
neglect.

We reply, Granting as before, that the prayers of the best men are but
imperfect, as themselves are, very imperfect things. Prayer is a mixed or
Compounded Duty, for though it be wrought within by the Spirit of God, before
it be put-out by the tongue, yet flesh has much to do in it, enough to defile
it; and so the best prayer formed as we heard, passes from us, as Wine through
a Dunghill, therefore these can have no acceptance for the prayers sake, nor
for his sake that prays: if that be all which makes for its acceptance, it
will be neglected sure enough; but for His sake only, Whose buisinesse it is
now in heaven to take away the Revel. 5.
iniquity of our holy things, and to present our persons and our services pure
and spotless in His sight; And, in special, these prayers as the sweetest
odours in the Nostrills of His Father; provided still, that we loath this
uncleanness, that cleaves so fast to our persons and prayers, and put it away
as a loathed thing; Now it shall do us no hurt, nor hinder our prayers
neither; for it is not what Corruption cleaves to us, but whether we cleave to
it; not the having of it; for as sure we have it, as it is sure we have flesh:
but it is the Loveing of it. No more sin is imputed by God, than is seen and
allowed by us. So then it is granted, That Prayers are very imperfect, they
receive a tincture of uncleanness, which cleaves to the spirit and mind of a
man, though renewed, that are subservient and isntrumental in this praying
work; they are simple duties, that are so good, that none but the good can do
them, and they cannot do them ill, we mean, not sinfully, though imperfectly,
as to love God, to fear Him, to trust Him, to rejoice, yea to glory in Him,
having chosen Him for their portion, and set their hearts upon Him.

To put a close to this also. Will the adding that perfect prayer to the end of
yours, make any thing at all toward the taking away the uncleanness of your
prayers? or help at all against the imperfection thereof? We take it, you must
answer one way or other; It helps, or it does not help: if you say it helps,
how absurd were your saying? you know, Who lives ever to help at this work,
and all proud helpers together with Him shall stoop under Him; If you say the
adding the Lords prayer to the end of yours, helps not, no, not at all, then
you say all the Truth as to this matter; but withal we fear, you charge your
selves with some folly, in adding that to your prayers, which profits not at
all, being never intended for that end. We will conclude with this, It
profits no more than does dead flesh profit a quickened and quicking spirit:
So we come to make out the Negative, That it is not comely for a Godly Minister
to add the Lords prayer to the end of his own.

SECT. II.
OUr Reasons are these; First, Their Lord commands them not so to do; for if
so, an absurdity would follow; If their Lord has commanded them so to do,
then s^li and semper, this is the only prayer they must say, and always say;
for the Command (...)
of Christ must take place still. It is this prayer and no other, and not at
this time only, but at all times, When ye pray say. Thus we conceive it must
be, and this were very absurd and incongruous to common sense and reason. The
Commands of God in the old Testament, as to the Sacraments there, and other
legal observations of places and of Days, they had their until: until the
fulness of time shall come, until God be manifested in the flesh, for these
pointed unto Him, That was to come; ^^t the Commands of Christ now, as we
conceive, bind us to their observation till His Coming in some glorious way,
whether to restore His Church, Math: 17. 11. Acts 3. 21. or make her complete
in Glory, is too deep for our shallowness; But His commands bind us till His
Comeing. Nothing shall be added to them or taken from them. See Hild: on Joh:
4. page: 187.

Secondly, If their Lord commands them to say this prayer at the end of their
own, then the Godly Ministers all over the Land, truly and indeed such, could
have no more omitted the saying of it, than they could forbear to eat and
drink: for the Commands of Christ, all and every one do come with as much
force upon their Spirits, to do thereafter, as Eating and drinking come upon
them when their need is. For they have the same mind that is in Christ, they
delight to do His will, His Command, His Law is within their heart, the doing
of it is their meat and drink, (so says the Spirit) now what an absurd thing
were this, for can it take with a Reasonable man; That these words, when ye
pray say (this prayer at the end of you^s) ^or have not I commanded you? have
they not My Stamp upon them? And yet scarce one Godly Minister among many do
or dare say it at the end of their own. Certainly they would do the Command
of their Lord, boldly and constantly, and fervently too; though it should put
them to as much cost the doing of it, as is imaginable, yet they would do it,
Their Lord has commanded it. This is the poin^, The Godly Min^ster would do
it, he could not but do it, were it commanded him of his Lord, when ye pray
say. And it were absurd to say or think the Contrary.

And which we must not forget, It were as absurd to think, that any one
Brutish Pastor, amidst the Droves and Herds of them, ^ould say this prayer,
suppose now, what they pretend* our Lord Commanded them so to say, when ye pray
say; this prayer after your own, for it has My stamp of Command upon it,
suppose it so to be, as they say, Then it were absurd to think, they would
say, as now they do willingly and more, rejoyceingly, it being commanded them
of God; for all the Commands of God, as was said before, are an abomination to
them: they abhor Christmas day. page 18, 19.
to do them, as they Abhor God* their heart stands in the greatest
opposition to the Commands of Christ; as do the remotest extremes, Heaven and
Hell. These do wickedly as they can, and cannot but do it, fullfilling all
the wills of the flesh, and so they will do, that is the voice of their nature;
The Godly Man does foolishly sometimes, we mean sinfully against the commands
of his Lord, but not with full consent of his will, he does it* overtaken now,
or surprised, or betrayed, but, oh! he would not do it, that is the voice of
Grace. The evil man in doing God's commands, is as the good man in doing the
commands of the flesh. The evil man does do God's Commands sometimes, he
reads, and hears, and prays, but as unwillingly all this, as Haman brought
Mordecai on horseback through the streets of the City, that he would not do
in good things, that does he. The godly man sometimes does the Commands of the
flesh, which are most contrary to the Commands of Christ, but what He hates
that does he. This is the point, and so we have done, A Brutish Pastor, and a
brutish people are so far from doing the Commands of Christ, That they hate
to do it, with their whole heart, and with their whole soul; and it were
absurd to say or think the contrary. When ye pray, say (this prayer after your
own) The Lord Christ commands no such thing, neither ever came it in His
heart, for could we suppose, our Lord had commanded so to do, The Pastor
after Gods own heart had never omitted it; The Brutish one had never said it,
unless as a Parret his chair, he had not said it like a Clarke, as now he
says it, nor done it so, as he does the wills of the flesh. This is the second.

Thirdly, We would ask this Godly Minister, what good he finds by adding this
prayer to the end of his own, which we would suppose was wrought in him, and
out from him, by the Spirit of God. We know Cui bono? is the greatest enquiry;
and in this Case, what Spiritual advantage by so doing? what has this
advantaged the Spirit; God's Spirit, or his own, renewed by the same Spirit?
We pass this, leaving it upon his thoughts, having spoken so much thereunto
before; only this we would add; It is, you know, a sure saying, That every
act of Grace, extends grace in the heart of a Disciple; as every act of sin,
extends sin in the sinner; for grace, as corruption, gains by acting; Now it
is left upon your thoughts, whether you have found grace has been extended in
your heart, by the addition of this prayer to the end of your own?

Fourthly, What good does he do by repeating this prayer, or what advantage is
it to his hearers? Certainly a Godly Minister should look to that, whereby he
may profit his people. The Preacher was wise; and how did he evidence his
wisdom? He Eccles. 12. 9.
still taught the people knowledge, yea he gave good heed, and sought out: he
would not speak a word sure but to profit, and the building up of his people.
Two great works he is continually versed and exercised in, being charged upon
him, praying and preaching, Acts 6. ^.
and how studiously careful is he, being the peoples mouth to God, and God's
mouth to the people, that not one word pass from his mouth, which makes not
for the good of his people, and for the clearing of his account at the great
Day. He remembers well before Whom he is, and to Whom he speaks in prayer,
and from Whom he speaks in preaching. And he considers, as he can the
infinite distance betwixt Majesty and Nothing; and now how fixedly does he
look to Him who is the Middle person, and having laid His hand upon Both,
stands as a screen, betwixt everlasting Burning, and this piece of dried
stubble, as in it self considered: and so rolling himself upon This one
Mediator, and casting himself into the hands of His Spirit; and trusting in
His supply, he falls to his work, and now what advantage has he, or have his
hearers by addition of this prayer? that is the Question, and the answer
thereunto, you must make unto your God; only this which we have heard, we will
say more, which you know is a Ministers Motto, or should be, Nusquam doceo, ubi
non moveo: Nusquam moveo ubi non doceo, I never teach savingly, where I do not
move or stir feelingly; that is praevailingly: nor do I ever so move, where
I do not so teach, so we leave this upon your thoughts, and proceed to one
Reason more.

Fifthly, To our seeming, it is a very sinful doing to add this prayer to
the end of our own, and this upon a threefold account.

First, You glad the hearts of them that should not be gladded, the wicked we
mean; if yon have not heard it said by them, we have once and again, What a
Brave Minister have we to day? Why? he said the Lords prayer twice to day (and
oh how sweetly did he say it!) and that was all they observed; for the addition
of that prayer, rendered him so gracious in their eyes, and his Sermon so sweet.
Certainly we must not glad the hearts of wicked ones, for then we glad That
Wicked-One.

Secondly, Ye must not make the wicked Blaspheme in Calling God, Father; and
Christ accursed; but this they will do in spite of your heart; for they and
they only will say it after you, and if they should be asleep, as Commonly
they are, all the time of your praying, yet they will awaken at this prayer, or
if, while you are running it over with the speed of a good Clark, they should
chance to nod at the first or second Petition, yet they will be perfectly
awaked at that signal Conclusion, AMEN -- But we forbear -- for Nemo
libenter moratur in asperis.

Thirdly, Ye sad them, whom the Lord would not have sadded, ye sad the
hearts, we think, of all the truly Godly there; They cannot endure to hear
the Name of God profaned, That sweetest Name, Father, Blasphemed; their only
Lord, called accursed; They cannot endure it, it is more grievous to them to
hear this within the meeting place, than see their filthy Conversation without
We tell you again; The Truly Godly cannot endure to hear this, they can with
much more patience hear their Earthly father abused, etc. But their heavenly
Father, Who loved them, and Gave His Son unto them; and them unto His Son: and
this Son of God, Who, taking their nature, has redeemed their Souls from all
adversity, washing them in His own blood; we were saying, they cannot endure
to hear their Father Blasphemed. nor their Lord called accursed; nor that
Signal Word, Amen -- ecchoed forth by persons little better than Quakers and
Ranters; damnable Heretics; wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly.
But we have done: These are our Reasons, why a Godly Minister may not add the
Lord s prayer to the end of his own. Only you will remember here what an
Excellent Man said; It is Better to occasion wrath in the Bad, than grief in
the Good.

CHAP. VIII. And fifth Querie.
Q. V. WHether John the Baptist taught his Disciples to pray by giving them
forms of prayer to say? And, (which may be queried thereupon) Whether a Parent
can teach his child to pray, by setting forms of prayer before him whereafter
to pray? As thus (for we would be clear, as to the holding-forth our meaning,
and persuasion, in this matter) here, Child, is a form of prayer, when you
pray say as you see here is prescribed unto you.

That this ought to be, we mean, That a child may and ought be taught to pray
by forms of prayer set before him, is affirmed and argued from John's practice
with his Disciples. Now our persuasion is, That John did not give his
Disciples, nor should a parent give his child any form of prayer whereafter to
pray. And if he shall so do, we are inclined to think, he has not by so
doing, taught his child to pray, we mean, by giving the child a form
whereafter to pray.

We will hear, as hitherto we have don, what we have heard said, for the
holding forth the Affirmative; and

First, This is forced against us, without any show of reason, as we conceive,
That we allow not a parent to teach his child to pray.

Truly we would not say it for a world, for we know it is a parents Duty to
teach his Child to pray, and to make it their very work and their buisinesse,
that their Child may be still Learning at that high work.

Secondly, But this cannot be done, but by giving them a form of words
wherebyto pray.

We think, yes; it may, by Gods blessing upon the Parents faithful and
Constant endeavor, this way; and that a form of prayer prescribed will rather
hinder than further the work, as was said before.

Thirdly, But ye, in so saying, do Cross, I verily believe, the practice of
most the Godly all over the world.

It is but your Faith, and it is quickly said, and impossible to be Proved,
That most of the Godly give their Children forms of prayer, to teach them to
pray; though you do so, you will not conclude that others so do. You may be,
as was said, norma publica, as a pattern or standard to your own people and
Children, not so to others.

Fourthly, We are sure we have a sure pattern for it, John Baptist himself.

We had rather, you had said, we have a sure word for it from the Lord God
Himself: Yet we refuse not this pattern; As far from Despising what John
the Baptist did, as we are from rejecting what John the Baptist said; And this
you say John did, he Luke 11. 1.
taught his Disciples to pray; we yield it; and that every Godly parent is to
make him his pattern, in teaching his Child to pray.

Fifthly, The^ he must give his Child a form of prayer, not possible else to
teach him to pray. Besides so taught John his Disciples to pray, as worthy
Hild: says, by giving them forms of prayer to say.

We move heavily here, because against the Stream, even of the Learned in this
very matter; John's teaching his Disciples to pray. Yet if we have the Mind of
Gods Spirit, and the tide of the Scriptures with us, we shall hold-on our
course, and attain our end anon. To this we say then; That it is very
possible to teach a child to pray, without giving them forms of prayer to say;
And so we are persuaded John taught his Disciples to pray; we would be
rightly understood here, speaking after the manner of men, and according to the
possibility, our heavenly Father, for his only Sons sake, has made
possible unto men. It is not clear to us, nor do we think it possible for
any man to make it clear to himself from the word of God, That John taught
his Disciples to pray by giving them forms of prayer to say; He taught them to
pray, that is out of all question, for so we read, and so he did his duty,
and full-up to his charge. But that he gave them forms of prayer to say, this
is of man's adding, and upon an ungrounded supposition, as we conceive; That it
was not possible for John, but by those forms to teach his Disciples to pray.
We conceive, yes; And that John in those days, and that a godly parent in
these our days, can skill better to teach his child to pray without forms of
prayer, than with them.

Surely John did teach his Disciples, To Whom they were to address themselves
in prayer, after he had told them first what a solemn and sacred work it was;
And then acquainted them with the New and living way unto the Father, through
Whom and John 14. 6. Heb. 7. 19. 10. 19, 20. Ephesians. 2. 18.
by Whose hand, introduction, or hand-leading they have access unto the
Father. He manifested unto them, as he could, for that was his great work to
do, The Messiah; he showed Him openly before them; and what lost ones they
were without Him. And what glorious creatures they are, being found in Him, not
having their own righteousness, which more insnareth the soul, and
indangereth it also, than the grossest sins do. It is a grave and weighty Dr
G trial. gr. 1. 53.
speech which that excellent man has; There is no danger to be lifted-up hy
the righteousness of another, for it is without us, we cannot vainly boast of
it, for that faith, that apprehends it, emptyes us first of our selves, and
goes out to another for it. But sanctification being a work wrought in us,
we are apt to doat on that, as too much upon any excellency in our selves.

Surely John beat them off from their own righteousness, the putting any
confidence in their flesh; he clubbed down that Monster, for so Luther calls
it; he treated much with them, as we read, about Repentance toward God, and
faith in the Lord Jesus* Christ; and dealt with them much, specially with his
Disciples, in this, what blind, poor, naked, empty ones they must be in their
own sense and feeling, before it can ever enter into their thoughts to pray
for the anointing with eye salve, that they may see a far-off, or before they
will look after faith, which pitcheth the soul upon Christ, and then fetches
in all that makes truly rich, and puts upon the soul the glorious
clothing of the Saints, emptieth the soul, and then fills it with the
fullness of God, through Jesus Christ.

Thus we conceive, and by no other means did John teach his Disciples to
pray; We cannot reach to his words, and may seem too bold in making offer
that way; But thus we conceive, and we say it again, John taught his
Disciples to pray. And not by prescribing them certain forms of prayer to say,
when they come before their God. And this we conceive to be the ready way a
godly parent takes now to teach his child to pray to his God. What way must he
take? This he may know better than we. But he must teach the child to know
God first; or, if to pray first, then to pray, that he may know Him, believe in
Him and obey Him; And this the parent cannot well teach the child till he has
taught the poor simple creature to know it self first in some measure, and
what need he has of a God in Christ (for so the parent dropps into the child,
as he can, a little vessel, and a less mouth to receive in, and how much
falls by, and how little is in when it is there in such matters as these are?)
But this (we were saying) the godly parent endeavors to do now a little and
then a little, A little more knowledge of himself, what he is in the first
Adam, as he was borne in the world, a child of death, of, or under wrath
there; what they are, that are translated or taken out of the first Adam, in
whom all dye, and are pl^nted in the second Adam, in whom all are made alive:
This and what more we cannot so well tell the godly parent treats with his
child about, and so teaches him to pray; and a far more ready way does he
take by so doing, then if he could give unto his hands All the prayer-books
that are in the world. This is our persuasion, and that we are so taught out
of the word of God. And truly we are the more inclined hereunto.

First, By reason that this was the manner of all the godly in the holy
Scriptures, teaching their* children to pray so far as we can learn
thereby, and have any discerning thereof, held forth before us. Hear his words
to Solomon his son, they contain much; Know thou the God of thy father [A
mighty motive ^ Chro^. 28. 9.
to Solomon to learn to know the Lord; he had a godly father that knew him, as
the father had a godly mother that knew her God; and surely taught David to
know him also, The son of Psalm. 8. 6. 16. 116. 16.
thy handmaid] And serve him.

[ Solomon must know the God of his father, before he can serve Him, as his
father did. We cannot worship or pray unto Him, whom we know not, for in so
doing, we worship we know not John 4. ^2.
what.] A God.

A God in Christ must in some measure and degree be reveiled to us, before we
can come to God, and plead our matters with Him, in His Sons blessed Name, and
for His glorious* sake; We can no more serve a God* Whom we know not, then
we can be saved by a Christ whom we never heard of: for that were, as if a
captive held under the power of death, sin, devil, and hell, should be
redeemed by a price paid by one, whom never before nor after he had an^
knowledge of; or as if God for Christ's sake should save us, and yet never by
any means or in any measure make That Christ known to us. He must by some
means or other be reveiled to them, who, being grown up to the use of reason,
were ever saved by him. These are excellent Dr Tuckneyes words. We should, as a
Sermon upon Acts 4. 12.
godly parent will with his child, and whom he will teach to pray, go through
the forementioned Scriptures which contains so much, but we have attained our
scope thereby, A godly paren^ teaches his child to know God first what He is
in himself out of Christ mere wrath, a consumeing fire; and as such an one he
cannot be served. Then to know Him a God in Christ, and a Father, and so He is
served, and well-pleased with the service if it be in truth.

We pass on and shall pass over David's Catechism and Bathsheba's also,
whereof we read in the book of the Proverbs, but not a word there of
teaching the child to pray by form^s of prayer. We think that Paul's
direction to parents how they should order their children, and special^y how to
teach them to pray* contains as much to that m^tter as does that Catechism,
Bring them up, so we read it; the word is, nurse them Ephesians. 6. 4. 1 These. 2. 7.
up. As a nurse, says he, in another place, takes care of the bodies
concernments, so do ye parents of your childrens souls concernments. Nurse
them up in the nurture; It implies all care and diligence about the inward man
still, that all be done as matters shall require, whether they exhort, charge,
reproove, correct, or instruct, that all be done to the child in a motherly
way, or, as Paul says, as a father his children; remembering still, that
godliness is a rich and sure trade, if the child be taught well to follow
it.] And admonition [A dealing about the mind of the child still, rectifying
or moulding of it betime, as the nurse does the mould of the head, when its
tender: It signifies a dropping or putting into the Ephesians. ^. 4*
mind still. It is a thrusting of somewhat upon the child still with an holy
violence, which may mind him of his Lord Jehovah his God; so that the child may
see, that, what his parents speaks to him comes from his Lord, and tends to
this, to bring the mind of the child up to the Lord, there to fix and pitch his
soul for ever] Zanch: (so we are told) speaks usefully to this as his manner
is, upon this verse, where he tells us the manner of all the godly in the
primitive times, and what course Abraham took to teach his children. We
verily think we may add, to pray. And what way also L^is the grandmother and
Eunice the mother 2 Timothy 1. 5.
taught their young Timothy, we will add again, to pray. The very way which
the old Christians ( prisci christiani) did take to 3. 1.
teach their children [ to pray] by bringing them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. And all this is but according to the prescript and
charge unto us from the Lord God Almighty; These words which I command thee
this day shall be in thine heart, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7.
and thou shall teach them diligently (thy children) and shall talk of them,
when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And this is the way, we are
persuaded in our hearts, every godly parent must take, who makes it his
buisinesse to teach his child to pray, for this was the manner of the godly in
days of old: which is our first reason.

Secondly, And in the second place we are apt to think, That to bring up a
child in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, is the only ready way to
teach a child to pray; and not to give him forms of prayer to say; because
these forms hinder rather than further the work, carrying the child on in
such a high work (the calling upon God in prayer) by the Eye upon the forms,
or by the memory, which is all one, whereas he should understand what he does,
and know Him in some measure and degree, Whom he calls upon.

Thirdly, If to give a child a form of prayer, when you pray say these words,
were to teach him to pray, then to teach a child to pray is the easiest work
in the world, and of as quick dispatch, for so easy it is, and as quickly
done, to give a child a form, whereby to pray. But no godly parent ever found
it from ancient days to this day an easy work and of quick dispatch to teach
his child to pray, no more than it is an easy work or the work of a day to
rule well his own house, and to have his children in subjection 1 Timothy 3. 4.
with all gravitie, which falls-in fully with these words before-cited, to
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, whereby to teach his
child to pray. It is not the work of a day, or two, as was said in another
case, but the work of every day, while the child is under the parents eye and
ear, To teach the child to pray: Nay to add this; It is easy for the vilest
person in your National Church to teach a child to pray, if to give him a
form to pray be to teach him to pray; for so much he or she can do having
learnt so much themselves to pray that way. But sure he or she must be taught
to pray and help by the good Spirit to pray, before they can teach their
child to pray.

Fourthly, And in the fourth place, we think, it at least coasteth near the
brinke of presumption, nay is it not downright presumption to teach a child
to pray by giving him a form of prayer to say? As thus, for, as we said, so
plain we would be; Dear child, what ever thy ignorance is of God the
Father, thou prayest unto; or of God the Son manifest in the flesh, in whose
name thou prayest; what ever mercy thou have received, and would praise God
for; what ever want thou feel, and would pray to Him for a supply from
Him; what ever thy sins are thou should confess before Him, yet do thou,
child, pray in these words, according to this very form I have prescribed
unto thee. Surely we will not fear to say, this were presumption; and, so, as
may be feared, it will be accounted before his God.

Fifthly, Besides, and so we have done, In so doing, we mean so teaching
this child to pray by a form, The parent has told a loud lie in the ears of
God, and of all the godly, for he tells God and men both, he has taught his
child to pray, when indeed there is no such thing done; he has not taught his
child to pray; for by his own confession he has given his child a form
whereby to pray, which form will become a prayer wellpleasing unto God, when
copper becomes gold, the bramble a vine the Moon a Sun, or when the Sun
painted on a signepost shall shine in the firmament of Heaven. And so we have
taken in your reasons, and examined the reasonableness of them, That a parent
teaching his child to pray, must give him a form whereafter to pray. We have
given in our reasons also from sacred Scripture, as we suppose, That by giving
your child a form whereby to pray, is not to teach the child to pray. But
let it be committed to Him, Who guides into all truth.

CHAP. IX. Sixth and last Querie.
Q. VI. WE are come to our sixth and last Querie, to give* in our thoughts
thereunto; Whether a Godly parent has any Command from Christ, to teach their
children the Lords prayer, thereafter to pray, saying the very same words?

We said, a Command from Christ, for we suppose it granted, That a Godly
person will, in every thing he does, specially in matters of so high
concernment, look first to his Warrant; This I do, I have a sure Word for what
I do. And having his Lords S^quis De^^h ^empe^et jam ut da^ne u^ a ^en tum
Mand^^^ it is est h^h^r? D^um ^uth^ e^. Lum 3. 38.
word for that he does should he be condemned by an hundred worlds (to use
excellent Calvin's words) he has enough to bear him out* his Lord Commanded him.

But, Sir; before we proceed we crave leave to give-in a sho^t account,
wherefore we meddle with this here; your self giving the occasion thereof,
and little less, though perhaps against your purpose, provoking us so to do:
Our account in short is this: Our Minister in the course of Catechizing his
people (as was hinted before in our Introductive part) fell upon the Exposition
of the Lord's Prayer, and as an Introduction thereunto, he put some Queries
about this prayer, and among others, of special use all* as we thought, this
was one; Whether a Godly parent ought to teach his Children this prayer? and so
resolved it from Scripture, as we suppose, in the Negative he ought not. But
how were the Godly people (they seemed such to be and we would hope they, some
of them, more than seem) stirred at this? as much every whit as the ungodly
are, when their Idol is pulled at, to pull it-away; for whereas (we tell you
the words of one of them) they could have pulled out their eyes for their
Minister, before he meddled with the Lord's prayer, now they were more
inclined, at least, to pull out their Ministers eyes from him, than their own
for him. Truly we judge Charitablie, as our duty is, and conceive good hope,
that the Opposers or contrary-minded herein, some of them, are godly in the
maine, (only seduced or misguided by former guides) though one of them well
stricken in years, was taught that prayer at the first, when he was a Child,
and seldom said any other to that day, as has been told to us by one that did
know, if any did To Conclude our narrative part; These persons thus moved and
disquieted, addressed themselves to you Sir, as their Oracle, whereas their
Duty was to have Consulted with the Scriptures, our Minister laid before them,
and afterward, as occasion required, with himself; But it is not our manner
to do things after their right manner.

Though yet we Blame them not for adviseing with you, only we say they should
have searched the Scriptures, and have advised with their Minister first. Your
Answer to them was sweet and comely, far otherwise than was reported by one
of them, who may be as much taken with that prayer, as some are with that they
make an Idol. Only this you said to them, which they looked for and it pleased
them well, and it was abundantly enough to mar all our Minister had said
from the Lord unto them, That you teach your Children that prayer, or allow it
they should be so taught. And now we are forced to call your practice into
Question, which truly, but for the Truth's sake, we shall do unwillingly, and
so we shall state the Question in the Negative; That a Godly Parent ought not
to teach his Children the Lords prayer. You hold the Affirmative, for
thereafter you practice, we would hope you can make full proof that your
practice is Godly. So, Sir, we crave your reasons, at least, we crave your
leave to guess at them, by what we have heard from others, and so to set
down, as may be allowed us in these cases, what probably your reasons may be
to hold-forth your practice with your children to be godly and holy, full-up to
your rule and prescription in Gods word, whereafter you order, we hope, your
whole conversation, your sayings and doeings before your people, and your whole
house, your children specially the maine and principal parts, and your chief
goods there: for by your well-ruling of them, and care over them, you will make
full proof what care you take of the Churches of God; for he who knows how to
rule his own house well, is in a good posture of spirit to rule well the house
of God -- But this was spoken before in the second Treatise, relating to the
Lords Supper page 19. This we were saying your ruling well your own house,
will be a good Testimoriall, that you rule well as a good Steward in the House
of the living God. Therefore we hope, you can give good reason for all you do
in your own house, which you order, we would hope, in desire and endeavor, as
those whose praise is in the Gospel. Probably your reasons are these, or such
like, to these; for we will not mention here any of that, which went before,
one we would remind you of the same.

First, Can there be a more excellent prayer, and more comprehensive than the
Lords prayer is?

Verily, No; And therefore is it so taking in the world; for if any form may
be used whereafter to pray, useing the very same words, then this form above
any. No prayer being more excellent, nor more comprehensive. But therefore
think we, the more unfit to be taught a Child, the more unsuitable to his
understanding. The prayer is excellent, considered in it self, and as you may
be able to consider of it; but it has no excellency with a child; he speaks
as a child, he understands as a child, he thinks, or reasons as a child;
And with due regard to all this, you must speak to him, and reason with him,
in lower matters than are the contents of this prayer.

Secondly, You may say, I must reason with him about God, and Christ, and what
manner of person He is, and how He is to be served; but these are no low
matters, but high, and much above the reach of a child's understanding.

It is readily granted. Yet you may consider, it is one thing to drop-in, as
into a very narrow mouthed vessel, drop by drop, and to power in all at once;
we mean, To deal with a child word after word, then to see how the first
word takes, before you deal with him about the second; And to give him six
lines together, whereas each line single and apart, comprehends more of God and
of Christ in it, of grace and glory by Him, then do the visible Heavens; O the
vast comprehension of this Prayer! And the shallowness of a child's; shall we
say of a man's comprehension about it! You may teach your child to say it, so
you may your Parrot too; and teaching him it altogether to say it, as you, in
your pulpit, he will understand it as much as the Parrot does; and by so saying
it, you shall teach the people to understand it, if not all, yet but little
better also; You may put this prayer, as to the words of it, into the mouth of
your child, but he comprehends it no more, than does the darkness the light.

Thirdly, You may say as we hear others do, It is a commendable thing, and
well becomeing a godly parent sure, to teach his child to call God father,
though as Hieron says, he does but lispe out father.

You know, and you know it for your good, To call God father, or rather to cry,
Abba Father, is as was said, of the Spirits teaching, I cannot lispe Abba
Father, but as He has adopted me, that is, in Jesus Christ, in Whom alone He
is become the Father of mercies unto me, says that learned man Dr K: Chap: 4.
^: 115. Yet it is granted, you are to teach your child to call God father, as
you can. And you have heard of the method or ready way you may take till you
know a better in teaching your child, that great and high lesson. But every
thing is comely in its due time and order. We conceive you are to teach your
child first, to call himself rebel against this heavenly Father; that he was
borne into the world with his back against him, (being borne a child of wrath
as soon as he was a child of a man:) an enemy to this Father, even enmity it
self, and an hater of Him. And then we take it, the child is to be farther
questioned (and that is the best way of teaching by questioning) whether this
enmity is in any measure or degree discovered to him, by the Spirit with the
Word, and shine in him? (for enmity cannot become friendship, though enemies
may be made friends) enmity must be slain. This we conceive the child must
be taught first, before he can be taught to call God Father, after a due manner
and a right understanding.

SECT. IV.
NOw we take leave to give-in our reasons, as few and as breifely as we have
taken-in yours; Wherefore it is not becomeing a godly parent to teach his child
the Lords prayer. We shall not recall here neither, but reminde you only of
what went before, that carried very level to this very scope.

First, It is clean cross to the right method of teaching to exercise the
childs memory first, for it is to teach your child as you would teach your
Parrot, between whom you know to put a wide difference, Since God has made them
so to differ, Who teaches Job 35. 11.
us more then the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser then the fowls of
heaven. You teach a child as becomes a child to be taught; You teach a foul,
bird or beast, as is comely for them to be taught; besides, you put a greater
difference betwixt earthly and heavenly matters; sensual and spiritual; and
accordingly you must vary in your teaching. This may suffice for the first.

Secondly, You would have your dear child to be a gainer by your teaching.
We beseech you ask him, now you have taught him the Lords prayer, what he
has gained by your teaching? Our persuasion is you will find his gain to be
but small; only whereas when time was he said it as a child, Parrot-like now,
being growne-up, he says it with more grace in the ear of the hearer, saying
it like a Clarke, but perhaps with as little grace in the heart as he said in
before when he was a child. But yet we cannot grant you, That by all your
teaching, you have taught your child the Lords prayer* for if you have taught
him to read it, he can teach himself to say it without your help.

Thirdly, You should not do as all the wicked of the world do; we mean, of
your National Church, who have only this to show for their Christianity, and
whereby to make full proof thereof, That they were borne in your Church, and
washed there: We think it is not comely for you to do as they do; they hold
to that Injunction appointed them by their Priest, as he by the Bishop, whereof
hereafter. All the wicked persons in your Church, we are persuaded, not one
excepted, no not the veriest varlet there, but they all teach it their
children, they shall have it, as they themselves had it, by tradition from
their parents. These were taught their Pater noster; (they understand the
Latin as well as the English, and the Greek too) their Creed, and the ten
Commandments; and so much they will teach their children, either by themselves
or another, and having learnt so much without the book, they have learnt
enough for themselves and their children after them. You that know the
Country-folke and their usage, know it so to be, having heard them saying so
much you know not how often. You know better, and you must do better. You
would not be numbered among the wicked in after time, you must not do, as they
do now. And yet to excuse them a little, and blame you more. These, as they
conceived, had a command or charge laid upon them, when time was, by their
guides and rulers of their Church then; their charge is express in these
words; At the last end the Priest calling the Godfathers and Godmothers
together, shall say th^^ exhortation following, the fullest part whereof is
this, Ye shall provide that these children shall learn the Creed, the Lords
prayer, and the ten Commandments in the English tongue.

You will not* ground your practice hereupon, for so you would practice after
that heathen Priest, whom you may know; This Priest justifies his customs as
to Church Matters, by quoteing (as we have heard) the Service-Booke, and those
customs in use then, which he follows to a tittle; for as to that sacred
Book, we cannot tell whether he so much as looks upon it; certain it is he
hates the contents there with his heart; for he hates to hear it, and to be
informed by it. You abhor we hope, such doeings, which were in use amongst
us, when Tyranny and Popery were in their Tropic, or Zenith, the highest
vertical point; then indeed these words were in use, which some will call a
command or charge. But so will not you, for you (we would hope) do bless God
day and* night, who has delivered His Church (we mean, not that you call
National, for that is in Egypt Acts 7. 39.
still, being never out, or if a days journey out, yet returning thereunto,
and is there in heart, there it would be as before in the Bishops days) we
say His Church from out of that more than Egyptian darkness, whereunto it
shall return no more; being the Vineyard of red wine, which He has undertaken
to water every moment, and that nothing hurt it, to keep it night and day.

Fourthly, And in the last place; you should not teach your child that, which
you must unteach again: what is taught and learnt by the precepts of men, must
be untaught and unlearnt by the precept of God. But, we think, we have
prooved, That the teaching by forms, is but the teaching of men, and they have
their warrant, only by precept from men: You know what is storied of a godly
Matron, after her heart was turned, and set upon Christ, It was told us once,
and we heard it twice; before she was humbled, as was said of Manasseh, she
had taught her children 2 Chr. 33. 19.
as you do, the Lords prayer, and so she confessed, but comeing to her self,
or to use her own words, to her right mind; she endeavored all she could to
unteach them again; what she effected with all her endeavor is more then we
can tell. But you may tell us when you go about it, what an hard and difficult
work you shall find it to be to unlearne your children what you have so easily
and quickly taught them, (if it had been good, it had not been so easily
taught, nor so quickly learnt) In the mean time, we can tell our selves, That
children and grown-folke also are as hardly beat off from their forms, as an
hungry Mastyffe is from his prey. Naturally we cleave as fast to forms of all
fashions, and these to us, as the flesh cleaves to the bone, and sin to the
flesh. How hard a thing is it then to leave a form, and look to the power?
when in leaving this we must overcome a double Nature, our own first, and
that, which custom has made our own, or second Nature, having learnt it from
our Cradle, and grown up in the practice of it.

Take heed good Sir, Look over your scholars, and consider them well, you may
teach them in these easy matters, or please you, they can learn without
teaching, such easy lessons, six lines in six minutes time; Lenocinante
Natura, their nature is a very bawd hereunto, to learn forms, and cleave unto
them, when she has done; but when you come to unlearne them, which you must
do, if ever you learn them right, you shall find it a work impossible to
flesh and blood. Why! What think you? A child or a man prays, as you have
taught him, and exactly well he thinks, for he says the Lords prayer (without
either fear or wit, because without understanding) Can you think now that he
will be drawn off from this praying by a form? why not? because (1) his
father taught him so to pray, and he knew well what he did, for he was a
Minister of Christ: father and mother are dear names, and what they teach is
like to abide with them, specially if it put the flesh to no cost; but however,
it is like to stick, because a lesson from a father comes with authority, and
so with more advantage to prevail. (2) Because he can pray by a form, yet
read nothing to purpose, nor hear any thing to purpose: nor meditate upon any
thing to purpose that he hears or reads; this is most pleasing to the flesh.
Your child will part as hardly from it as he will part from his skin, yea or
from his sin. Dear Sir, remember what you have read, and add it, if please
you, to all that, which went before; He that reads much, and hears much, and
meditates much upon what he reads and hears, he prays much, (for to meditate
and to pray are from the same root) persuade your children to read much, and
hear, and meditate much, that is, to think on what they read and hear (for
thoughts are but exercising of the souls faculties, you know) and by the
blessing of God with you and them, you may teach them to pray, and to account
no more of their forms, one, or more, as to their help in that matter, then
they do of another mouth and teeth, thereby to chew their meat; or of
another feet whereby to go. Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, Exodus:
30. 9. Mr Ainsworths note there-upon is this; It figured the prayers of the
Saints, which must be according to the will of God, by His Spirit, and in
faith: not after the tradition of men, or will of the flesh.

Once more and we have done; Live well before your children, we hope you do,
a ready way also to teach them to pray well, for you know the saying, well
living is a well teaching; and the shortest way of teaching; a long way about
by precept, a short way by practice or example; he that lives well prays well;
and he that beleives much, prays much, though he say not a word. A good life
is a good prayer, it is a continued prayer, as you have read. We will close
with this; Train up a child (says the wisdom of God) in his way of Gods
prescribing, and when he is old he will not depart from it. As if he had said;
He will be the better for it while he lives. Train up a child in forms Prove.
22. 6.
(according to the wisdom of the flesh) and when he is old he will not depart
from them; As if we had said, he will be the worse for them while he lives,
if grace interpose not. These are too sweet to the flesh, for the flesh to
leave; these are all the comfort the flesh has while the man is living; but
dying shall stand the man in no more stead, than a paper wall can defend
against a Cannon shot, or the Cawle of the heart against the paw of a Lion.
We will shutt up with this, and so call to remembrance, That there was an huge
great person, who had learnt that in his Cradle, which he could not unlearne on
his throne; and it was no small dishonor to him. So may a child be taught a
form of prayer in his cradle, which if, through the favor of the times, he be
admitted to the pulpitt, he will use there also; and so exact he will be
therein, that all that hear him, may conclude, he was taught that form from
his cradle. It is important sure, and very momentous, else Quintillian (we
rather mention him) had not been so full and large upon it; what choice we
should make of Nurses, because commonly these parle first with the child in the
morning, and last at night, and much all the day long. And if they be bad, not
knowing their duty, or careless of what they know, we are like to have, as
was once said wirtily, but truly, a child, or a boy of him all his life long
-- The sum is this; Be well advised about that you teach your child in the
morning of his years, he will savor of it to the evening of the same. Nurses
or mothers, who should make all, commonly mar all, if special grace
interpose not. No more, for this contains much, if not all.

Now we will Contract, what has been said of this subject prayer, and the
scope whereto it tends, and give it in this brief.

We have shown what a serious work it is; and what a slight, and vain thing
forms are: we have declared against a wicked man's prayer; for so the Lord
himself does: it is an abomination; yet it is his duty to pray; though a
greater abomination it is to say the Lords prayer.

We have shutt it out of the Closet; It is too short for Closet-worke. And too
long for an after prayer, being, who knows how full of heavenly sense, and
spiritual meaning. Therefore we have cut it off from the Ministers prayer in
the pulpit; If he will set it too again, be it at his pleasure, it may be to
his peril.

We have questioned it very much, and endeavored to put it out of question,
that John did not teach his Disciples to pray by giving them forms of prayer
to say. We have cleared it to be a parents duty to teach his child to pray;
and, as we could, we have directed his practice, and concluded, That a parent
teaches not his child to pray, that gives him forms of prayer to say, for
that they learn without teaching, too prompt and ready that way. The Spirit of
the Lord teaches parent and child to pray; and the first thing the Spirit
teaches, we think, is, to say that they cannot pray; yet we should tempt
God, if we our selves should not pray, and teach our children so to do, to
pray, that they may be enabled to pray. To shutt up, The God of all graces and
father of mercies, in and through His Son, gives forth no temporal, much
less eternal salvation; no common mercy, much less any spiritual grace,
which is eternal, to His marvelously Psalm. 4. 3.
separated ones, His gracious Saints, but He will stir them up to inquire
after Him first before He gives it; They shall ask before they have; and but
ask, and have, yet not for their asking.

Now it is marvelous to consider Satan's devises here, that implacable enemy and
adversary of all righteousness He persuades the wicked to sit down fully
content with their condition, and satisfied with common mercies, and not pray
at all; and if they will be praying; it shall be but ^prating and babbling; A
mere prophaneing of Gods Name, if not blaspheming. If they will pray as the
most will, they shall pray in another words, and no matter in whose name; by a
book or without it, by the memory, never with the heart, unless for the
remooving of some plague, felt or feared. But never about the plague of the
heart, the plague indeed.

And for these gracious Saints, This adversary shows himself such an one, in
no one thing more than in this, To keep them from praying but if that cannot
be, then he imployes all his force policy and might to hinder and interrupt
prayer, and for the effecting of this -- what will he cast in; and how readily
does flesh comply with him* But these know whom they have trusted; And that His
grace shall be sufficient for them.

AMEN.
Postscript.
WE have purposely forborne to discharge our Treatise of that charge of
blasphemy once and again charged upon it; we have given a mark in the
margin all along where the yong-man, in the name perhaps of his elders, enters
not his dissent only but the charge of blasphemy against us. It is humbly
referred to God and His Scriptures to judge how just that charge is. And if it
shall please those whom God has made able Ministers of the New Testament, not
of the Leter but of the Spirit (for the letter kills but the Spirit gives
life) to give-in their judgment here also, we are assured it shall be
according to Truth. We will add two words more; The one we borrow from him,
whose words we shall hereafter set down; It is far more facile to give the
hardest Censures, than to Answer the easiest Arguments. The other is this which
one of us has read some where; A good Cause when plainly told is learnedly
pleaded, especially if a Meek Moses or just Joshua be the Judge thereof. So we
come to set down here, as was specified upon the Title page, the words of that
holy and learned Man, who speaks to all matters he undertakes in the Name of
his God to speak unto after his manner, which is to say all that can be said
in any subject whatsoever. This encomie or high Commendations was given to
Grotius by one of our own, in some matters of the highest concernment, relating
to our dear Lord and Christ, of the same persuasion* with him; And so thought
it not enough to Commend the said man without any exception, but he must admire
him also sine modo and without just reason. May it not be feared, That he
fears not his Maker as he ought, nor Considers how soon He can take him
away* who can give such flattering words, or high commendations to that man,
who has such low thoughts of our dearest Lord and Savior. To say no more;
Surely such an honor as this to say what can be said in any subject belongs to
that Man, who honors God, and whom God does honor; whose whole heart is
taken-up with the love of Him; his tongue with the praise of Him; and whole
life with the service of Him; And blessed be our God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who gives gifts unto Men, plenty of his Spirit, and variety of
His Graces, for the perfecting of His Saints; for the work of the Ministry;
and for the edifying of the Body of Christ. Having spoken this which every man,
we think, that has read all, or any part of this learned man's works, as one
amongst us has done, will find himself pressed to speak, and so give that
honor to the said excellent Man, to say what can be said in any subject his
God shall engage him upon. We shall now set down what he says for the
readers fuller resolution, especially to the fourth Query, relating to the
Lords prayer, as was specified in the Title page.

Q. ii. Did not Christ prescribe a form of prayer to his disciples, so that
there remains no doubt touching the lawfulnes of using a form?

A. Luke 11. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Ans. If Christ prescribed a form of prayer to his disciples, to be used as a
form by the repetition of the same words; I confess it will be out of
Question, that it is lawful to use a form: but that it is lawful not to use
a form, or that a man may use any prayer but a form, on that supposition,
will not be so easily determined. The words of Christ are, when you pray, say,
Our Father etc. If in this prescription, not the matter only, but the words
also are attended, and that form of them which follows is prescribed to be
used, by virtue of this command of Christ, it will be hard to discover on what
ground we may any otherwise pray, seeing our S^viours command is positive, when
you pray, say, Our Father, etc.

That which M. B. is to prove is, that Our Savior has prescribed the
repetition of the same words ensuing, and when he has done so, if so be he can
do, his conclusion must be, that that form ought to be used, not at all that
any else may. If our Savior have prescribed us a form, how shall any man dare
to prescribe another? or can any man do it without casting on his form the
reproach of imperfection and insufficiency? Our Savior has prescribed us a
form of prayer to be used as a form by the repetition of the same words;
therefore we may use it, yea we must, is an invincible argument, on supposition
of the truth of the proposition. But our Savior has prescribed us such a
form etc. therefore we may use another, which he has not prescribed, has
neither show nor color of Reason in it.

But how will M. B. prove that Christ does not here instruct his Disciples in
what they ought to pray for, and for what they ought in prayer to address
themselves to God, and under what considerations they are to look on God in
their approaches to him, and the like, only, but also that he prescribes the
words there mentioned by him to be repeated by them in their supplications.
Luk: 11* he bids them say Our Father etc. which at large Mat: 6. is, pray after
this manner: (...) to this purpose. I do not think the Prophet prescribes a
form of words, to be used by the Church when he says, Take with you words,
and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take away iniquity, (Hos: 14. 2) but
rather calls them to fervent supplication for the pardon of sin, as God should
enable them to deal with him. And though the Apostles never prayed for any
thing, but what they were for the substance directed to by this prayer of our
Savior, yet we do not find, that ever they repeated the very words here
mentioned, or once commanded or prescribed the use of them, to any of the
Saints in their days, whom they exhorted to pray so fervently and earnestly.
Nor in any of the Rules and Directions, that are given for our praying* either
in reference to our selves, or him by whom we have access to God, is the use
of these words at any time in the least recommended to us, or recalled to mind,
as a matter of duty.

Our Savior says when ye pray, say, Our Father; on supposition of the sense
contended for, and that a form of words is prescribed, I ask whether we may
at any time pray, and not say so? seeing he says, when you pray, say: whether
we may say any thing else, or use any other words? whether the saying of these
words be a part of the worship of God? Or whether any promise of Acceptance be
annexed to the saying so? whether the spirit of grace and supplication be not
promised to all beleivers? And whether he be not given them to enable them to
pray, both as to matter and manner? and if so, whether the Repetition of the
words mentioned by them, who have not the Spirit given them for the ends before
mentioned, be availeable? and whether prayer by the Spirit where these words
are not repeated, as to the letters and Syllables, and order wherein they
stand, be acceptable to God? whether the prescription of a form of words, and
the gift of a spirit of prayer be consistent? whether the form be prescribed
because Believers are not able to pray without it? Or because there is a
peculiar Holiness force and energy in the letters words and syllables, as they
stand in that form? And whether to say the first of those be not derogatory to
the Glory of God, and efficacy of the Spirit, promised and given to Believers*
and the second, to assert the using of a Charm in the worship of God? whether
in that respect Pater n^ster be not as good as Our Father? whether innumerable
poor so* les are not deluded and hardened by satisfying their consciences in,
and with, the use of this form never knowing what it is to pray in the holy
Ghost? And whether the Asserting this form of words to be used have not
confirmed many in their Atheistical blaspheming of the holy Spirit of God, and
his Grace in the prayers of his people? And whether the repetition of these
words, after men have been long praying for the things contained in them, ^s
the manner of some is, be not so remote from any pretense or color of warrant
in the Scripture, as that it is in plain terms ridiculous? When M. Biddle, or
any on his behalf, has answered these questions, they may be supplied with
more of the like nature and importance.

An End.

