THE RESOLVTION OF THE ARMY, concerning the Kings Majesty's going to Richmond,
and their further determination touching their proceedings with the Parliament
of England, and the Citizens of London.

Likewise his Majesty's last PROPOSITIONS TO THE Honorable Houses of Parliament
assembled at Westminster, and His loyal and faithful Subjects, the Citisens
of London.

Wherein is declared, His Majesty's gallant Resolution to unite Himself with
His two Houses of Parliament and to settle peace and Truth within the Kingdom
of England, and Dominion of Wales.

Together with certain Propositions sent from His Majesty's Royal Court at
Newmarket, to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax at St. Albanes, concerning the
Kings Majesty, the Parliament, and the ARMY.

London Printed for John Willet, June 24. 1647.

The Kings MAJESTY'S Desires and Propositions To both houses of Parliament, and
the Citizens of London concerning the preservation and safety of His Majesty's
Royal Person.
Worthy Sir,
HAving received your last, dated June 19. I find an earnest expression, wherein
you desire to be satisfied in that great business now in dispenbe betwixt the
King, Parliament, and Army; and indeed, it is a business of high concernment,
the eyes of the whole Kingdom being fixed upon this great Object.

But some rumor it abroad, that although we have his person, we cannot attain
his heart; for it is said, that his Majesty has lately sent a Message (or
Declaration) to the Militia and Citizens of London, declaring his resolution
and intention concerning the present design of the Army; the heads whereof, I
shall briefly communicate unto you, as follows:

The first Proposition. 1. His Majesty does propound, that He has no desire to
comply with the proceedings of the Army saying, that he admired at their
actions, and wondered by what Authority they durst presume to do that which they
have already done.

2. That He desired to reside no longer at Newmarket, for he found himself an
absolute prisoner, but with all willingness, (according to the Votes of both
Houses of Parliament) would take his Journey toward Richmond, that so a firm
Peace might speedily be settled within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales.

3. That his Majesty desires nothing more earnestly, then to join with his two
Houses of Parliament assembled at Westminster, that so by the happy uniting of
the Head and Body, there may be a speedy composure of all differences now
arising within this languishing Kingdom.

4. That for His Majesty's having any correspondencie with the present designs
or actions of the Army, He does declare to all his loving Subjects the
contrary, protesting against all their proceedings, and that whatsoever they
heard to the contrary, desired them not to believe, no, though under his own
hand, unless they spoke with one who had it from his own mouth.

Thus have I given you the chief heads of his Majesty's late Propositions to
the Citizens of London for a safe and well-grounded peace, I shall now
endeavor to satisfy your expectation, concerning the late Propositions sent
from the Commissioners at Newmarket, to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax at
St. Albanes, which follows in these words:

1 According to the Votes of both Houses of Parliament, you are required to
deliver the person of the King to such persons as both Houses shall appoint, to
be placed at Richmond, under such guards, and in such manner as they shall
think fit. And secondly, that your Excellency would be pleased to send a speedy
answer to the Votes of both Houses, concerning the removal of the person of
his Majesty from Newmarket to Richmond.

After reading of the said Propositions, the General summoned diverse
Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, and Captains to his quarters, to debate
and consult thereupon; but at the close of this Letter, they had not concluded
of any thing, diverse queries being propounded which highly concerned the King:
therefore, for further particulars, I refer you to the enclosed papers, and
remain

Your friend and kinsman. A. Woorell.
St. Albanes this 23 of June, 7 in the morning.
The Kings Answer and Resolution upon the delivery of the Votes to his Majesty
at Newmarket, being the substance of what was sent by Sir Peter Killegrew to
the Parliament.
THat his Majesty is content to remove to Richmond, it being nearer to His
Parliament.

That to remove from Newmarket to Richmond, is agreeable to what himself has
always desired in his late messages to the Houses.

That it being nearer to his Parliament, it is much more convenient for
treating with the houses, and concurring in such acts as shall be passed for
the peace and security of the Kingdom,

That on Thursday next his Majesty may go from Newmarket to Richmond, according
to the Votes of both houses.

His Majesty desires that there may be such a concurrence between his Majesty
and the houses, and so the Army also, as may conduce to a safe and well
grounded peace.

Sir, We hear that the General has gave his assent (together with the
Officers and Soldiers of the Army) that his Majesty's Royal person shall be
conducted to Richmond, there to remain, with such a Guard, as shall be thought
meet by the Officers and Soldiers under command of his Excellency, to perform
so great a Charge committed to their trust, with faithfulness and fidelity.
We hear that his Majesty is upon his advance from Newmarket toward Richmond,
being conducted with two gallant Regiments of horse. The Army is much satisfied
with the last Months pay sent down from the Parliament, it having silenced
many, and given great satisfaction to the rest. By the next you shall hear
further, from

Your most offectionate friend and Kinsman. A. Woorel.
St. Albanes June 23, 1647. His Majesty's Coach is gone from London toward
Newmarket, being a very sumptuous thing, and richly adorned.



FINIS.

