Mercurius Britanicus HIS Welcome to Hell: With the Devils Blessing TO
BRITANICUS.
I Joy to think, what Bone-fires shall be made,
When thou shall come, (great Master of our Trade)
Thou have out-libell'd Libellers, and reviled
Beyond Revilers, has thy pen compiled.
To thee, what was th'Oxonian Aulicus,
Or Grand Mercurius Gallo-Belgicus.
Moderate Intelligence, or Civicus,
Perfect Diurnall, or Hibernicus,
Kingdoms Intelligence, or Rusticus,
Weekly Account, Scotch-Dove, or Coelicus,
Perfect Occurrence, or Aquaticus,
The London Post, or sweet Candidius,
Amongst all these (dear Son Britanicus)
Thou Have showed thy self the best Mercurius.
Thou have out-slander'd slander, and prevailed,
And every railing rogue thou have out-rail'd.
Thou bravely did thy Sovereign vilify,
Pursud'st his Honor with an Hue and Cry;
Abused the Queen with scandalls, and the Peers.
And set three Kingdoms weekly by the ears:
Which we accept, as services well done
To us, our Reign, and our infernal Throne.
What though at small esteem the people rate thee,
And that God and all good men justly hate thee.
Fear not, though heaven and earth does thee expel,
Come to me, thou shall welcome be in hell:
For thy great merits and most ex'lent parts,
We Will entertain thee, fitting thy deserts.
Our brazen gates shall be set open for thee,
And churlish Cerberus shall refuse his fee.
His dog-like hanging ears for joy he will shake,
His three heads bow obedient for thy sake;
And, for thou art of his old race and kin,
His whole six rows of horse-like teeth shall grin;
His lolling lips shall smoothly smile and simper,
And ('stead of grumbling) shall but whine and whimper.
His warped ilfavour'd faces, beards all knotted,
To be new-trim'd when thou come, are allotted.
He shall not dare to snarle, bark, or look grim,
But welcome thee that have out-bawled him.
Thus, when thou have past the Porter ( Cerberus)
Then shall thou see stone-rowling Sisiphus,
And the tormented pining Tantalus,
Thiefe-filching heavenly fire Prometheus
(And therefore bound to frozen Caucasus)
The Gripe, that gnawes the guts of Titius,
And all the furies in Black Erebus,
Shall make a play-day for Britanicus.
And Danaus's nine and forty daughters shall
Leave their vain laboring, and sing Uptailes all;
Their Tubs shall Pulpits make, for men well able
To preach our Doctrine in a barn or stable.
Thus when thy soul shall enter into hell,
It shall be welcomed with an hideous yell.
We shall prepare such music for thine ear,
As that which pleased Caligula to hear:
He took delight to hear the parting groans
Of tortured wretches, and would praise their tones:
And all hells instruments with noise shall fill us,
Sweet as the Brazen Bull made by Perrillus.
The inner rooms shall all perfumed be
With Hemlock, Henbane, Sulphur, Mercury,
Rare Arsafetita, or any thing
That unto thee (my son) content may bring:
The scent of these sweet Simples I Will presume
Not Spain or Rome has any such perfume.
Of Sodoms apples we will lambswool make,
And drink Carrowses of the Stigian Lake:
And, for that thou art full of spleen and hate,
We make thee Secretary of our State.
Caine and Iscariot, we will to thee prefer,
The one thy Usher, the other Treasurer.
Thou still shall be my special favorite,
I Will make thee heir of everlasting night:
Honors on honors on thee I will heap,
And as thou sow'dst for me, so shall thou reap;
Gomorahs grapes shall yield thee precious wine,
And Jesabell shall be thy Concubine.
Megera, Alecto, and Tesiphone,
Shall all in flaming robes of tiffanie
Attend on thee, and dance like wanton Riggs,
Corrantoes horne-pipes, and fine Northern Jiggs.
This must thy garnish and first welcome be,
And all our Legions shall attend on thee;
Yet further shall our favor be expressed,
We will prepare for thee a sumptuous feast,
Nero, Vitelius, Sardanapalus,
Milo, and famous Heliogabalus,
The Bacchanalls, feasts of Olimpicus,
Thou shall out-feast them all, ( Britannicus)
For we will plunder earth, and air, and seas,
To find rare things that may thy pallat please:
The great Leviathan shall lie in pickle,
Sows'd in the sweat of many a Conventicle;
And oil for sallats, dropped from thousand twists
Of male and female, zealous Familists:
Thy brawn our purveyers carefully provides
Two Amsterdamnable Lay-Preachers sides,
Such as are pure Religions pure Rejecters,
Such as can stand out four or five hours Lectures.
These are my Chaplains, these are truths Infecters,
These cough, and spit, and spawle infernal Nectars:
These are the spirits which mad-mens brains inspire,
These blow the bellows of contentious fire:
These (with the vizards of devout intents)
Molest Church, Kings, Kingdoms and Parliaments.
These are my Clergy, who with zeal intrude
Into th'opinions of the multitude;
These make'em leave the Crystal stream for puddles,
And these send cheated souls to hell by huddles.
My Chaplains know no Laws Ecclesiastique,
But they can broach opinions mad, phantastique;
Such as from learned schools had never calling,
Yet have strong gifts of windy caterwauling;
Who with devotions cloak, gull men most purely,
Whose truly's false, whose surely is a sure lie:
And were it not for such, I know right well.
We should want many souls which are in hell.
For which collar'd (like brawne) their sides shall be
Well boiled in Jesuits piss, and sows'd for thee:
With Aqua fortis we will grind thy mustard,
And of Hiennaes milk, we will make thy custard
Of th'egs of Asps, O it is a precious dish,
And (for the taste) it does exceed man's wish.
Flapdragons we will drink instead of wine,
For with our brawn, we should drink Muskadine;
The which shall be (from several Mineralls drawn)
By cunning Chimists to digest thy brawn:
Which with our fiery breaths to flames we will turn,
And (like a furnace) in our mawes shall burn.
Four Antinomians chines cut out at large,
In Phlegeton well roast, we give in charge
Six Athiests haunches baked, ten wel-grown spare-ribs
Of Libertines, which we will all make bare ribs.
An Oleao we must have, (a dish of state)
A Spanish dish, never heard of till of late;
Th'Abortives of six wanton sisters wombs,
In their own liquor stewed with Stigian plumbs.
Twelve Seekers ears (grown of the largest size)
Minced with the marrow of a Leachers thighs.
Two dozen of pious preaching sisters tongues,
As many woodcocks heads, two foxes lungs;
Who eats this Oleao cannot choose but find
A strange increase of brain, and length of wind:
Twelve Rascals gammons (who will have no King)
Smoak't, black as jet, we to thy board will bring.
For the Westphalians learned that art of me,
I was the first that taught that cookerie.
My costly Haggost, I remember not,
Which is a dish that must not be forgot:
Six Anabaptists hearts with garlic stuck,
Two Jesuits brains, a sincere Brownists pluck
Boiled in a traitors skull with sublimate,
This Haggost has impoisoned many a State.
We (for our fruit) will of those apples have
Which Eve (thy mother) unto Adam gave:
(For our delights and pleasures all were hidden,
If we presume not to do things forbidden.)
Then from the West Peru, and th'Easterne China
We Will have Tobacco, rare and right Varina;
For 'twere a shame to us it should be spoke,
That we should keep a colefire without smoke.
Thus shall thou no good entertainment lack,
And brave Guy Faux with famous Ravilliack
Shall wait on thee from board unto thy bed,
And each of them shall be thy Ganimed.
Yet all thy cheer I have not named, by half,
I will give order to kill Walthams calfe;
It Is a most curious dish, his head and brains
Will fill thee full of raptures, and high strains:
We will have Tanzeyes made with herbs and spices
Of Mandrake, and the eggs of Cockatrices.
Then to conclude, we will drink healths around,
Which shall in loyal royal blood be crowned:
And We Will have shoinghornes to draw down drink
Beyond salt Herrins, or the Westphalian skink;
As drunk as Devils, we my boy will be,
We Will quaffe whole bolls of molten lead to thee,
Then shall thou see what honor shall be done
To thee, whom I adopt my dearest son.
THE Devils Blessing TO BRITANICUS.
HElls blessing on thee my blasphemous son,
Thou have thy brother Rabsheka outdone;
Shimei's a very fool compared to thee,
Thou (every week) writ'st higher blasphemy:
Korah's gainsaying if compared to thine
Was petty-Treason, thou in every line
Out-viest all these, thou bravely plaid'st thy part,
And in our service shew'dst a loyal heart.
All I can promise is, when thou shall come,
Thou shall be glorious for thy Martyrdom;
Nay, thou shall set thy house in order too,
And in thy death Achitophell outdo;
Thou fill'dst with mischiefs many thousand pates,
Thou made a hundred thousand Reprobates:
Thou taught'st the people better to blaspheme,
I furnished thee, with every strain and stream
Of villainy; which thou did so improve,
That thou for ever have deserved my love.
And therefore, in thy death thou shall excel
That great grave Councellor Achitophell,
And all the rest of such as lived before,
Since thou for us (dear son) have done much more.
Vicisti Gallilea, thou shall cry,
As Julian did, and cast thy blood on high;
Or thou shall die like Arrius, who withstood
The Nazarite, voyding both guts and blood.
In the mean space remember me to all
My friends particular, and general:
To Henry Walker I bear much affection,
He Is red-hair'd, of Iscariots right complexion;
Like Sheba, Bichri's son, he did rebel,
And cried out to your tents, O Israel.
He was an Ironmonger at first, and then
He turned Bookseller, after that his pen
Libelled against the King, and did incroach
So near him, that he threw't into his Coach.
For which he should have gone to the Triple-Tree,
But pity, and the Kings high clemency
Wrote to the Parliament, that they should spare him,
Whose power, unto the Pillorie did rear him.
Since when (to show his humble thanks the more)
Reviles the King worse then he did before.
Writes weekly News, and lies egregiously,
And oftentimes does preach most grievously;
For which I will prefer him unto thee,
When thou come, he shall then thy Chaplain be.
He shall thy solemn Funeral Sermon preach,
My spirit shall instruct him how to teach,
And he shall write in mournful Elegies,
In sad memorial of thy Obsequies.
Then my sons (Sectaries) with their zealous lasses,
And all the learned Mercurius Owly-Glasses,
Shall (with great grief) be in a sad quandarie,
And mourn in Claret burnt, and sweet Canarie;
Then will we have for thee an Epitaph,
Which who e're reads, perhaps 'twill make him laugh.
Epitaph.
HEre lies Britannicus, Hell's barking cur,
That son of Beliall, who kept damned stir;
And every Monday spent his stock of spleen,
In venomous railing on the King and Queen.
Who, though they both in goodness may forgive him,
Yet (for his safety) we will in hell riceive him.
FINIS.
Printed in the Year, 1647.


