SOFT ANSWERS, Unto Hard Censures: RELATING, I. To a Book printed without
License. A full Account given thereof. II. To my particular calling: 3 Offenses
relating thereunto removed: And the duty of visiting Families and Schools is
pressed upon Magistrates and Ministers, whose Duty it is to visit there,
enquiring how the Governors and Governed, do Answer their Relations, the one
commanding, the other obeying in the Lord. III. To the Offense given by a Book
called an Anti-Apologie, which I have said, is a great offense to the Church of
God; And that they, who write as Mr. Edwards does, too many by two, have
offended their Lord and Master, more than Moses did, when he said, ye Rebels,
for which unadvised speaking (yet the people were little better) though he
would, he could not compound with his Lord God Almighty. IV. And to the offense
taken by my short defense of the Apol: Narration; Whether the offense is justly
given, or unjustly taken, is humbly submitted to better judgment, upon due
consideration of two exceptions, all I ever heard made against it by discreet
and sober men.


Men and Brethren, hear ye my Defense which I make now unto you.

ACTS 22.1. Opinioni se venditat qui filet.

Verul. Quamvis imbecilla frons magna conscientia sustentatur.

Quint. By HEZEKIAH WOODWARD.

Printed according to Order, for John Hancock; at the entrance into Pope's Head
Alley, out of Cornhill. 1645.

SOFT ANSWERS, Unto Hard Censures:
REader, many things are charged upon my score, I shall account with thee
faithfully in all; That thou may understand matters well and throughout
before thou take upon thee to judge: And then also deal more tenderly with
thy Neighbors good Name (a precious thing, and it may be, his livelihood) than
thou do with a Glass of Crystal; and with his Meaning, be as tender as
with the Apple of the eye. I Will make no Apology for my words, I hope they shall
not need any. I shall speak in matters wherein no man ought to be silent.
Indeed I have been dissuading so long against strife and contention amongst
Brethren, that it has almost fallen out to me, as to Gods Faithful servant,
Moses, he dissuaded an Israelite so heartily from smiting an Israelite, that
the Israelite, who did the wrong, charged Moses with Murdering thoughts
toward him; Think thou to kill me, says he, Exodus ^.
when indeed Moses had no other thought but to Reform him, to keep his hand
and tongue from smiting. But to the Particulars of the Charge, Relating,

I. To a Book printed without License, which the Wardens have met with, and
dealt with it and me as they pleased; or rather, as they said, their Duty is,
and warant in their hands to do. I confess I took some offense at their
Dealing, which they say, was not given. I have no disposition, nor were it
fitting to dispute that. But because I took an offense, and, I thought, very
justly, therefore will I be the more tender of offending them. Only this I
must mind them of here, That their Dealing with my Book and Me, lays an
Engagement upon them, As they love the Book of God, and Desire their Souls
may thrive and prosper thereby, rather than fill their purse with gain
therefrom, To deal with other Books filled with blasphemies from top to
bottom; And with Doctrines contrary to the Mind and good Word of God: with
known Malignants (...) Pests and Plagues in City and Country, To deal with
them, and these as they Dealt with me, and my Book. It is their Duty so to do,
and but according to the power in their hands; And now it is their engagement
also, because they have, in their zeal to the Cause, they say, and due
execution of their office, dealt so with me; of whom I think, they judge so
honorably (though they were pleased to question me about a libellous paper
against the Lords, which my soul abominates) That I would not for a world speak
against the Lord Christ: Nor willingly against any the meanest of His Servants.
And so forbearing all other matters, which might fall-in here, I come to give
an account of my Doings in the Book, and the Reasons of my so doing: But first,
I must make a plain narrative of the business clamored against; and that,
which moved me to set upon the work, which was this. Observing an heavy and
most grievious charge drawne-up against those, I need not name, being so well
known unto us, for their known integrity and exac^ walking according to the
Truth of the Gospel, observing I say such a charge fixed upon the title page of
a book, that it might be in the fullest view of heaven and earth, so as he
that runs might read it; observing also the worth, Authority; and learning of
the Author, a well furnished man every way, I bestowed a few hours, in running
over the book from the first page to the last, that I might tell my self how
he makes good the charge. And this I have told the Reader already in its due
place. 2. Sect.
This remains to tell him here, how my spirit was stirred at the sight of this
charge. And the Reasons I had so to be stirred. All this I shall tell
faithfully, as in the ears of God, the searcher of all hearts.

1. That my soul could not bear the words of that charge. Therefore I had a
motion stronger than I could withstand, which rendered me restless, till I had
put my pen to paper, therewith to show, according as I was enabled, the vanity
(I Will give it but so light a name) of that so heavy a charge.

2. My reasons were many, the former, I will call for distinction sake,
Negative. First, I did it not thereby to show my self singular or to side with
any party: I love both parties so well, that the Lord knows, I know not, whom
I love and honor most: And am confident, that if they be two now, in
judgment, yet they are not two in affections (for so wise men should not be)
or if two at present, yet they will be all one anon. Amen.

2. Not to tell the world that my soul goes out in the way of Independency,
further, than I am persuaded, The Doctor himself would, upon sound debate
with his own heart, go out with me. However, I have spoken of it according to
my scant measure of knowledge, as the oor ur Psa 18 28. Esa. 10 17 2 Samuel 21.17.
light of the world has been pleased to lighten my candle.

3. Not to thwart Authority, or the Dictates therefrom: Certainly my soul
abhors so to do. You will say,

A. And yet I have done, what my soul abominated.

B. If I grant that, it is no more but what my betters will grant, and have
done before me; What I hate, that I do, said Saint Paul. But yet I cannot
understand it so:

For first, I sought for a License, but could not obtain it, though my manner
is to yield up my papers to be corrected, as the Licenser, in his better
judgment shall think fittest. And indeed so an Author should do, for he is
worst able to judge of himself; and he may slip with his pen as soon as with
his tongue, which the Licenser, by adding or leaving out a word, may help, and
reconcile the Authors words and his meaning. Therefore no man I think, is more
willing to crave judgment and submit unto it, then I am. And with this kind
of Licensing, any spirit can well close. But for a Licenser to withdraw his
hand, out of prejudice to that, he will not read; or because it may not suit
with his judgment, This gives an offense sure, which ought not be given.

Secondly, I observed books passing abroad with License, which I thought were
wanting to Truth in part; and to right Reason, more wanting; and to the Law of
Charity wholly wanting, all throughout: Yet these have their License. I thought
now, That since I craved leave and could not have it; I might take leave, and
the liberty to speak the Truth, keeping the Dictates of Right Reason, up close
in desire, to the Law and Rule of charity all along: certainly, so I did in
desire. But my performances, I know, all short of my own mind, and cannot
reach up to my rule: All good men will pardon me here, Their Lord and Master
will.

Thirdly, Not to cast the least scruple. much less a stone of ofence at the
way is now beating out before us. I have said in deed, That the way of Church
Government (I would name no more) is an Holy way; And that I can discern no
other in it, but what ought to be, Holiness therein all along: And this
Holiness, not so discernible in the other Way. But still I have said, I
traveled with hope, That the ways we have unhappily differenced, by two names
of Debate, will meet in one, and there shall be one way; my endeavors are
for it, so are my prayers, even so, Amen. And now, me thinks, I have in my hand
that which advances my hope, for I am reading the Directory for worship to the
Church in Scotland; (A thing I confess I stumbled at, hearing it so much
talked of amongst us: But I stumbled at it, as a man in the dark, at that he
neither sees nor knows before him) I am reading of that book. ^probe facitqui
in alieno libro ingeniosus est Mart. ad Lect.
And truly not to show my self curious therein, which I should not be, this I
must say. That they have spoken very well; and my soul can go out with it,
persuaded their endeavor is to live up in their practice, according as they
have spoken; And as their light comes in, so shall their commings in and going
forth be, before all their people: As the Lord shall be pleased to clear up the
way of Worship before their eyes; they will (for there is no standing still in
Gods way) hold it forth before all Congregations. ^ What we expect from the
Assemblies here, I cannot tell, great things sure, and sure we shall have them
according to expectation, if our sins, our murmurings, and repinings, and
(for want of faith) our making haste, our great sin: And the sins of some
Ministers also, which they know best, and we know too well, to be such as may
cast an offense in the way may hinder, at least, the faithful endeavors of
the Best approved: And therefore are matters of deep humiliation, unto all
before all the people: The sins of Ministers Assembled now; Oh let their sins
be found-out, and greatly humbled let them be for all they have done; That the
Righteous may have their hearts desire, touching the way of worship before
their God, which certainly they shall have, if sins hinder not, theirs and
ours, reaching higher and crying louder, than the prayers of all the Righteous
in the World can cry in the ears of their God: And if so (but surely so it
shall not be) and if matters answer not expectation; yet I praise God as well
as I can, I think (for I dare not be confident of my own heart) all within me
does praise His Holy Name, for all that good the Lord has done for His poor
people, by the unwearied labors of His faithful Servants; Abundantly
recompencing all the expense of Spirits, Time, and Purse. Though the expense
were a thousand times more than it is, And we should live to see no more, yet
abundantly sufficient is that we have seen touching the purifying of Gods
house; His worship and services there: Now the Lord be praised for this, And
all within us must bless His Name, for giving gifts unto His servants; and
hearts to lay-out themseves and their gifts, To advance His Name, A
Reformation, or way of worship, suitable to the excellency of His Name, Power,
and Godnesse. I have been the larger here to clear my intentions, That nothing
could stand so contrary to the purpose and tendency of my soul, than to
diminish any thing from the beauty of that way, is now beating-out before us;
or from the labor of love in those, who lay-out themselves in that work. And
these are the reasons I call, for distinction sake, Negative. The other you may
call Affirmative, are these.

1. That I might do as much for the Brethren, as I stand bound to do for my
enemies Ass, his that hates me; Exodus 23.4.
to my power, I must help the Asse-up, and case him of his burden. I conceive,
I have done no more now, I saw a mighty burden of Reproach cast upon the
Brethren; I have put to my hand to ease them of it.

2 I considered, who they were, that were so extremely laden with disgraces.
They are the precious and excellent of the world, which I speak, making no
comparison with those, whom I acknowlledge to be precious in Gods sight, and
therefore honorable in ours also: All of them the sons of a King, and servants
of the High God. These are the men so reproached.

3 And that the Gospel might suffer no damage, find no stop in their
mouths, who are (I would detract from none, giving these their due) eminently
gracious that way, and able above many to carry it forth, and to speak it from
their hearts, to the hearts of all that hear them. Indeed I have more then a
jealousy. That the way men have taken now a days (against their wills I hope
and besides their intentions) is the readrest way, that can be taken to
destroy the Gospel, (what man can do) and to take-off from the working of it
in the hearts of the people, when they lay such cart-loads of disgrace upon the
publishers thereof, as that they are, as Altars and Idol-services were in
Iudahs land, plagues and pests there.

4. This also, had the force of a reason mighty alone, to persuade with me to
do as I did: That (1) All the evil of manners is charged upon them, whose
conversation is before Angels and men, as becomes the Gospel they preach; and
the Faith they profess. (2) And all the evil Doctrines are charged upon them
too, who (we may be persuaded in our souls) rather then they would hold-forth a
Doctrine contrary to the mind of God, would hold their faces under a Millstone,
there to be ground as corn in the Mill: Yet so and so they are charged. These
are the reasons, which constrained me to write as I have done. If I had any
aims and ends of my own, as possible I might have, the Lord show them unto
me, and sanctify the counsel of my friends touching that matter; and if not
them, then a prison: for truly I desire to under-stand my way, and if contrary
to the Good word of God, then to return speedily and take shame to my self,
for my erring from the good way, and wandering in bypath, to the disturbing
the peace of the Church, which should be sought for and persued by all means,
warranted in the good Word of God. And the Lord humble them, on what side
soever, if they have persued peace after a manner not comely for Christans: If
so (I have more then a jealousy it is so) The Lord show them it that they may
be humbled for it, in deed and Truth. And now I feel my self plucked by the
ear, and charged with this Crime (so I call it, and accout of it) of Breaking
the Churches peace, blowing the Coal of Contention, and so helping to kindle
it to a greater flame. The least suspicion this way is grievous to me, but I am
not suspected only, so I am charged.

^. And so I come to the second part of my Charge, which relates to my
particular calling; offenses taken against me in Reference thereunto are three.
(1) That I abide not in the place God has set me, keeping my self to my proper
work there, while I meddle with matters without the verge of my Calling. And
(2) with some loss or hinder rance to my progress therein. And (3) in matters
too high for me, above the Sphere of my Activity. I answer,

If my practice can be justly blamed here, then a double Blame belongs to me,
because it is clear against my judgment and the charge, I know, God has laid
upon me. My judgment is, That a man out of his place, is like a bone out of
joint, he troubles the peace of the Civil Body, as that Bone does the peac and
quiet of our Bodies. The Charge is, In the place wherein God has set him, there
let him abide, doing his proper work with all Diligence in all faithfulness:
for such an one a man is, as he is in his Relations, As he stands, there, in an
Answerablenesse to the several duties thereunto belonging. And here I am
compelled to speak of my self, And yet not of my self, for that were not
comely; But of the Grace of God with me (but a common grace neither): By his
Grace assisting me I have kept my standding. served my Generation, done the
works proper to my calling in all sincerity and faithfulness, as knowing my
self called by God, and bound thereunto in my Obligations to man. And so I have
these twenty years, and more (in much weakness, yet according to the Abilities
God supplied me with) contended against the stream and strongest-tide of evil
Customs in the most schools in point of Doctrine, and Discipline (for there
is a little Church, or should be so tendered and accounted of): And evil
practices in the parents house, whence the Children come, too ordinarily, with
the Name of God in their mouths, which they heard not of till they heard their
parents swear by that Terrible Name. Ah Lord, But I have said enough; for if
that be all, which children, for the most part, learn at home, and bring to
school with them (as sure enough it is all, but not all the evil) Then
Ministers may teach from their Pulpits, and Masters in their Schools, till
their tongues are spent, and spirits wasted, and do as little good, work as
little Reformation, as now is discerneable: More of of this in my 5th Section.
For look about with all your eyes, and tell your self, if you can, where can
you see it? Though we have entered into Covenant with God touching that matter,
yet certainly that we call Reformation, is like a Commonwealth we have only
heard of or that placce, which is no where; Vtopia.
and no where will it be found, till it be found in Families; We poor folk do
talk of Reformation, and some faint velieties, wishings, and woulding, we have
that way; We wish that the Church were Reformed, and the Kingdoms all three.
Alas we do but mock our selves, for God is not mocked; Reformation cannot be,
while Families are like the Sluggards field, quite neglected. There is the
evil, the very head-spring thereof, Family-neglects; The unanswerablenesse to
our Relations there in all the Duties, belonging thereunto. And this evil in
Families, I have done my utmost to discover; And have, with enlarged affections
to our prosperity there, unfolded the duties proper to the parents care there;
and all to set that private house in order. In a book called, the childs
Patrimony.
And this service I have concluded to be proper to my Station and the greatest
piece of service, I was possibly able to perform, whereby to serve this
Generation, and that which is to come: For till this private-house be better
ordered there will be no good order neither in Schools, not Colleges, nor
Churches neither. Indeed the Masters in their Assemblies, Colleges and
Schools, do stand but as Cyphars there, without a figure put to them, If they
stand alone, the parents or Governors of families not with them, joining
together in their watchful care, and contributing their double diligence;
which parents will never do till they be told their duty better from the
pulpits: Nor told-onely, but till the Magistrates and Ministers both, go
together hand in hand, prescribing orders to families, their due observation of
them according to the Mind and Word of God. And here, if the command and
charge of God might prevail with the Ministers of the Law and Gospel, I mean
Civil and Ecclesiastical, To do their Duty in visiting Families and Schools,
I would direct their course unto Mr. Grantham, to visit his Family, and scoole
in the first place, after him, whom else they please. The Ministers may enquire
there, how things are, whether as Fame reports them, and as the cry is gone-up
against him in this City. Enquire they may, What manner of servant he is to
God, and himself; And what manner of Master he is to those entrusted to his
charge? And how Answerable he is to that great Trust, (the charge of Bodies and
Souls too:) and his undertakings touching that matter; I mean, how responsable
he has been, in deed to parents, when they have come to him, and spoken in the
old Fathers language, Read Depositum? I have entrusted my child, my earthly
Treasure into your hands, I have deposited him there, come give an account of
your Trust and mine, what has been your care over him? What cure have you
wrought upon him? What course have you taken with him, whereby, through Gods
blessing, you might make him obedient both in word and deed; a blessing to his
parents, and to his Generation? Let this be enquired into there, and every
where, as we tender the Glory of God, and the accomplishment of the parents
Hope; who has nothing but Hope-to bear-up their Spirits in their sore travel
under the Sun, Hope that their children shall be, by the Masters care, made
obedient to God, and their parents, able to serve their parents, and
themselves, and their Generaton as the Law of God, and Nature commands. O that
parents could consider this; and as their hopes are, to do thereafter in an
orderly pursuance of their hope, by discharging their own Trust first; And
then inquiring well into their conversation, into whose hands they will
transmit their children, those dearest pledges, I return to that I was saying;
That masters of Families, (Schools, are but families multiplied, made like a
flock of sheep) must be content to be taught here, and prescribed how they may
show themselves conscientious at this point, whereof they that make no
conscience, surely, they have no conscience at all: And the Magistrate has to
do with such, with them and their families. And when we begin there, in
Families, to Reform there, Then I shall believe that Reformation begins, and
never till then: For this is the Apostles Method, not according to the Course
of this world: But according to the course, the people of God, have taken, who
have so ordered their Families, and so walked in the midst of their houses,
that their praise is in the Gospel: And this is according to the Scriptures of
God, They oversee themselves first, then theirs; Act. 20.28.
First, their flock within doors; then the flock without; Tim. 4.3.
First, their own house, then the House of God. Tit. 2 7
There is the Apostles Method, which by Gods hand with me I have beaten-forth
through all the observations and experiences, by His assistance I had made, and
have desired to make them so legible, that he who runs may read them. What
acceptance my labor has from Man, I say not, for little I can say; but my
labor 2 Cor. 5.9.
is, I hope to be accepted of the Lord, with whom my work is, and judgment
from his Mouth; That I stand with my loins ready girt to be called forth to his
foot, content to be something or nothing, or any thing, so I might attain the
end of my placing in the world, the Glorifying God, and serving my Generation.
And truly, God has given me a Body, healthful, and able to do him service,
above many thousands. I scarce remember, that pain in my flesh held my eyes
waking one night; or made me keep my bed one day in all my life hitherto. And
this I looked upon, this health of body, of mind too, as a great mercy, and a
mighty engagement, to bind me over to duty. This Mercy has followed me all my
days, evento the declining of my day; and so Mercy has followed Mercy, which
convinced me what my duty was, and engagement is, That duty must follow duty,
else a double woe may overtake me. And surely I may say this more, that I
feared always since I had any understanding of my way and Duty, to walk my
own way, or to take my own course; What seemed good in mine own eyes. I say
the truth, I yeelded-up my self to Gods hand; as he would be pleased to go
before me, though his footsteps were as in great waters, that way, by His
Grace, I would go. I was long since convinced, how vain my thoughts were, (and
yet thousands do think as once I did) That I could mould forth my own trade of
life, track-out a course pleasing enough to God; and most useful to my self
(for self was my end; and high thoughts I had God knows, That I was somebody
as well as others, and could) beate-out my own Way, cut-out and order my own
Work, and then set about it in my own strength, These thoughts befooled me
many a time; and now-mine eyes are to the Lord, as the Pilats eye to the star;
let Him direct my couse, for He alone can do it; cut-out, and direct my work,
for that is His Work too; My work is no work but Duty, To eye, what He
directs, and to follow Him; To hearken what he will have done, and to do it
with all my might. And surely from His Hand it was. That I found a diversion of
my studies, toward some other matters, somewhat without the verge of my
calling.

But yet (2) which is my answer to the second exception: I took such hours for
those matters, which sleep might have robbed me of; with no hinderance at all
to my proper employment; for, truly such studies do enlive and quicken my
fancy, whereas semper eadem iisdem, still the same every day is a dulling
thereunto.

And (3) I do not conceive, I have showed my self a Busie-body, meddling with
matters too high for me; but such as, through Gods grace, my understanding
could very easily reach unto.

III.
And so I come to the third particular in my charge; The offense I have taken
at Mr. Edwards his Book, and have given to the Church of God, as one, that has
an hand in the breaking her peace, which rather then good men would do, they
would suffer their bones to be broken all to pieces. This is part of my charge;
Let it now be weighed with both hands, and this considered with all the heart.
(1) This which is legible, for he that runs may read it; That brethren have
troubled the Churches peace, and have broken the rule of charity, all
throughout their writings; We may say of some of them, as Cicero speaks of some
Orators in his time, Latrant Oratores non loquuntur: Or, as Calvin speaks of a
rough-mouthed fellow; Stridet non loquitur, I will not English it; as one says
in another case, we, common people, understand these matters too well; Nimium
est quod intelligitur. Quint.
They are so legible. (2) And this which is visible too, and in every man's eye,
That the sons of the Church, have shown themselves the sons of the Cole,
they have blown a spark so long, that it is become a cole; And now they have
blown up the cole to a flame: And from so small a matter, how great a fire is
kindled? Let it be considered, who has been blowing here? And when the fire was
kindling, who has brought fuel, as oil to the fire: or buckets of water to
quench it? If no man else will, I will speak for my self, That I thought it a
matter greatly conducing to the peace of the Church, to mark those, and their
writings, which have troubled the peace thereof: And here I noted Mr. Edwards
Book, and one or two more, more unreasonable, for more may be, and
uncharitable, than is that Anti-Apologie: yet so cross is his manner of
proceeding there, to the Dictates of right reason, and method of charity all
along, that he may follow peace and pursue it in that way, pleasing in his own
eyes; but he shall never undertake it while the world stands. It is my
judgment indeed upon such proceedings; And I shall be of the same judgment
till I die: And then also I shall not retract it, or repent of what I have
done, touching that matter; And this I have fully declared, and faithfully; But
the half of my papers are restrained. I may set them at liberty in due time:
for what ever the Censure is against those papers, yet the truth is, they serve
to declare the truth, and to maintain peace, as may appear in due time. But I
was saying, that surely these men must repent of their doings, loath
themselves, for the actings of their own spirit, before their labor 2 Cor. 5 9
Philotimoumetha.
(if they feel the weight of that word in the Apostles sense) can be accepted
with the Lord, and with His people. So I have said, and I do not doubt but
thousands, of a more refined judgment than my self, will say the same with
are: But therefore am I charged (I Will let petty charges go) that (1) I hold for
a telleration of all Religions. (2) And with the that hold for an universal
liberty of conscience, (3) That I speak evil of dignities, set my self as
they do, who now call themselves Independents, but are not (unless neither to
fear God nor reverence Man be to be Independent) against the powers which are
of God, Parliaments, Councels, Synods. To the first, I have spoken, to the
second I shall speak here; (2) That I hold with those; who think they may hold
to what opinion they will, live as they please; do what seems good in their own
eyes; It is their conscience so to do, the doings and actings thereof; And the
Magistrate has nothing to do there; And this is my opinion also, I hold for
universal liberty of conscience: I answer, no, but I do not; The Lord knows,
I abhor that opinion, As it is commonly understood, construed, pressed,
forced, I abhor it as a bloody Tenet indeed, and the most destructive to
Church and State, that possibly Satan could have suggested: or Satan's
Adversaries, the godly, could have forced against their friends, the children
and servants of the High God; which is, that we may walk every man his own way,
pleasing in his own eye, live as we list, stand up against the Law, and
Gospell-priviledge, Infants birthright; stand up against the Lords day too,
deny the due sanctification thereof; yet the Magistrate has nothing to do with
us, for it is our conscience so to do, and our judgment. Oh abominable!
Conscience! say we, It is our famie, a mere conceit suit; what ever it is, it
is not conscience for they that hold to that opinion, have n^ conscience at
all. And it will appear that conscience they have none, by some eminent
actions, flowing from that licentious conscience, whereby the way of God is
blasphemed, and others enticed to seatter their ways; and to walk in bypaths,
where the Magistrate ought to meet with them, and oppose them, while they hold
their foot in their (...) way, of sin and Death; There the Magistrate has to
do with them, in ways apparently evil, and must punish them before the Sun.
Indeed the Magistrate has no power over the conscience; I think no sober man
ever said, That Man has power there; It is an inward thing, and an invisible
Hand it is, That can reach unto it, and persuades there. But when the evil
effects of this licentious conscience do appear, then Must the Magistrate
appear against it and them. And that is all I will say, concerning my clearing
touching that matter.

The third particular of the Charge; It is against those, who standing single,
and alone, are worth ten thousand of my self. And indeed an heavy charge it
is; But it is but a man's charge; he (I will speak of him single, though he is
plural) has charged his brethren very heavily, though with weight of words
only, Hard and devouring; he has spoken much and proved nothing at all,
nothing by all his Allegations and Quotations. Notwithstanding, that which he
has suffered from the hand of the wicked; and the honorable esteem he has in
the hearts of the Godly, shall compound for all his hard words against his
brethren. But truly, how he will compound this Matter with his God, is a
question to me, Now I do remember, and he will remember it also, Numb 20.8.
That a better man than he, MOSES, having offended but once in the like manner,
could not compound with his God, touching that matter; verse 10.
Thus we read; God spoke unto MOSES saying, verse 12.
speak unto the rock; MOSES did contrary, he spoke unto the people, and smote
them with his tongue, ye Rebels, said he, Indeed such they were; Psalm. 106.32.
but MOSES had no warrant to call them so, not to speak, so unadvisedly with
his lips. But so he did speak, and God was angry with him; And O how fain Moses
would have compounded the business; but he could not compound with God; his
Lord and Master would not be entreated, no not by that most faithful servant
Moses; because he spoke unto the People, saying, ye Rebels; That was all, and a
Truth it was; yet an unadvised speaking with his Lips, and he could not
compound for it. It commands our mark, and saddest thoughts upon it; And then
it will be matter of so trow to us, who have spoken so unadvisedly, once and
again calling them Rebels, who are not so; and Presumptuous sinners before the
Lord, Whose daily Prayer is (as in charity we are bound to think) Keep thy
servant Lord from Presumptuous sins: Let not those have dominion over me:
Surely the thoughts of Moses story, his going-crosse to the command of God,
will make our hearts sorrowful, because we have charged our Brethren, So and
so, ye Rebeli; and ye teach others to be Presumptuous sinners before the Lord.
A grievous Charge; but matter of great comfort it is to all, that are so
charged, but are the faithful of the Lord, and do abhor evil, all that
which is presumed against them, matter of great comfort unto these: For so were
all the faithful of the world charged before them, That they were troublers,
meant to Rebel, chief enemies against Kings, and their Kingdoms; so the best
men in the world, have been charged by the worst men of the World: Yea their
LORD and Master Himself, He was so charged, That He was an enemy to the
Powers, which were of God: Luke 23 23.
And the more blameless He was found to be, the more * fierce the chief
Priests were against Him, and the more vehemently they accused * Him, till they
prevailed with Pilate so as he delivered Jesus, not to the justice of the Law,
but to their * will, the injustice thereof, to do unto him as they pleased. If
they have dealt so with the Master of the House, how much more with those of
His Household? But let not the disciples of the Lord Christ, bend themselves
against disciples, their dearest friends, Rather let them do, as is comely for
the servants of the high God, live together, love together, and build together,
the House and Household of God. Let there be no falling out between Brethren,
specially now, when the Argument whereby to argue the case, and to command
agreement amongst brethren, is as strong now as it was in Abraham's days, for
worse then Perezites and Cananties are in our land, who glory in this our
shame. But al^ toutoon, I proceed to the last particular.

IIII. My defense of the Apologeticall Narration, and the offense I have given
to the Godly party thereby. I answer. I cannot conceive how this can be: for
there are but two exceptions, which I could ever hear made by discreet men,
(to whom my ears stand very open) against that Apology.

1. That never any wise men before them did so commend themselves as they did.
I Answer, Yes, one of the wisest men, that ever was in the world commended
himself, I think, as much as they do: So much that he called himself fool,
for commending himself so much, I am become a fool in glorying, ye have
compelled me, Says Paul, 2 Cor. 11 2 Cor 12
ye who ought to have commended me. And so, for ought I know, might these
Brethren say too, I could say more to this, but I am straightened, sure I am, I
must not be too curious in other men's sayings, or doings: I am bound also to be
as tender in my censure thereof, as I am about the apple of mine eye. Again,
Admit the Brethren were too high in their own praises; can this warrant the
Dr. and his second to press them down as low as the earth, with cart-loades
of disgraces? Surely, it ought not so to be. It had not sounded well from the
false Apostles mouths, if hearing, as happily they did, Paul commending
himself, they should have said to him in these words; Paul Remember your self,
and what you were, now your mouth is so full of your own praises, you were a
Persecutor, and being mad with rage, you breathed out threatenings against the
Lord, and, His Holy ones. This had not touched well upon our ears from such
men's mouths: Much less pleasing is the language we hear from Brethren. But I
will take off my thoughts from this, and proceed to the other exception. (2)
That they plead for a Toleration. It is granted, they do. They plead with their
Brethren to bear, To tolerate them, suffer them to dwell in the land of their
Nativity; They will live as Brethren, converse before them, and all the world,
as becomes the Gospel; They will join heads, and hearts, and hands, and all
to build with them the House and household of God: Only they entreat their
Brethren to Tolerate them, to bear with them, suffer them to live securely by
them. This is their plea for a Toleration. A sober man should not dare to carry
this word any further; If he will so do, he will force it, give the sense of it
most contrary to their meaning, as commonly the men of the world do; That they
plead for a Toleration of all Religions: and for an universal Liberty of
Conscience; That a man may hold fast to what opinion he pleases, he may teach
others so, making many Disciples (that is) he may take a ready to way sear-up
his Conscience, and to destroy his own soul; And yet, since it is his conscience
so to do, what have the Ministers of the Law and Gospel, Civil or
Ecclesiastical to do with him? What a forced construction is this! Credat
Iudaeus Apella, non ego, let who will, I cannot believe, That they have spoken,
or done like Brethren, who have rendered that Word, Toleration so, so cross to
the minds of our dearest Brethren. I take not upon me here to dispute how just
this our Brethrens Plea is, for a Toleration: For it is not the question; Nor
do we question whether the Dr. with his Brother, have not forced the word
beyond all Reason, and Humane understanding, loading it with such disgraces,
and Reproaches, which were not Tolerable, not possible to be endured, but by
such men, who are so laden, innocent men, God knows; Who stand,
notwithstanding all those Reproaches, Recti in curia, upright under the
Burdens, and like Elephants in this respect, the more upright, the more
pressed; Because cleerd, touching that matter, in the Court of Heaven, and
their own consciences; we can make no question of all this:

But the qustion is; Whether the Dr. and his Second have broken the peace of
this Church in forcing matters so, or I my self in clearing them as I could?
Let the sober Reader judge by what has been said; And if he judge me to be a
disturber of the Churches peace, let him join hands with whomsoever he can
find an adversary to me, and bring with him the hand of Authority, they shall
find me ready girt to obey: I thank God I can say touching this matter, I
fear God, I fear not the face of man. The Lord knows, and man knows also,
That I have laid out my self, the male of my flock, the first borne of my
strength, all I am, and have to maintain the power of the Church, and to
promote this cause, because it is the peace of God, and Gods cause, and it
shall prosper though the Gates of Hell are wide-open against it, the rage of
devils, and men, their Force and their Fraud: yet it must Prosper: Nay, though
Heaven sometimes seem to be aginst this cause too, Turning back the weapons,
with which we fight against Babylon, as Gods manner is to do (till His children
and servants cease to fight against Him,) yet the way of God shall be Beaten
forth: yet the cause shall prosper as sure as God lives and loves his people.
Now blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has assured His
Servants, that the way of his worship shall be made more conspicuously
manifest, the more it is trampled upon by the foot of pride: And His cause and
church victory, in and over the world, shall be the more Glorious, at Last, the
more it is opposed, and persecuted now by the Devils in Hell, and those
incarnate, with flesh and blood, his Angels and servants on earth: Now blessed
be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has assured His poor sevants,
waiting their Lords time, and Doing their Lords Work. That He will give them
an expected end.

An end.

