The solemn LEAGUE AND COVENANT OF Three Kingdoms, Cleared to the Conscience
of Every man, who is not willingly Blind, or wilfully obstinate.

The Antiquity of the Covenant on the Scots-side; The seasonablenesse of it on
the English side; The Admirable Wisdom of GOD, in stirring-up the spirits of
men on all sides, at such a time as this;

All this with other things mightily conducing to, and promoting of the Militia
of Kingdoms, and the Posturing every Person there, is referred to a place,
where it may take up more room.

The clearness for the Matter of this Covenant; The solemnity for the Manner
of it, is the subject of these few Leaves, and yet to be made more clear to
them that have a mind to understand.

By E W.

Neh. 9. 38. And because of all this, we make a sure Covenant and Write it, and
our Princes, Levites and Priests, seal unto it.

Eze. 20. 37, 38. I will bring you into the Bond of the Covenant: And I will
purge out from among you the Rebels

Imprimatur

EDM: CALAMY,
the morrow after we lifted-up our Hands, and Subscribed our Names to this
Covenant, October. 2. 1643.
LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane. 1643.

To the Reader.
I Will take leave to set down my Comment upon the clearest Text, that ever was
seen in the world, except one, the most Sacred Text. What need a Comment then?
I will Answer with his Question, Who came down to see, how it fared with his
Brethren, when Goliath was Master of the field; Is there not a cause? We have 1 Samuel 17. 29.
Herds and Droves of Beast-like-Men, for Doctors (Teachers of lies) are their
Leaders, whose It relates to Pastors or people, for they are equally brutish,
Pastors rather.
tender consciences scruple very much at this Covenant, as always they have
done; They cannot lift-up their Hands, or Subscribe their Names thereto; but to
lift-up their eyes and hearts unto lying vanities, that they can do; That
cursed Liberty for Sports on the Lords Day, that they could approve;
Edification of Altars, bowing before them, and serving of Images, even all this
also, and more than all this; They could foment and puton a Bloody War against
their Brethren, this they could do, and no regret of Conscience at all this;
but this entering into Covenant, there they strain. Unreasonable men! These have
not Faith. Faith! nor Reason neither, nor any more Sense than a Beast has to
feel where it pincheth, and to taste their Pasture, where it is sweetest; They
grope at midday, blind with Light; Now show them the Sun in your hand, as the
Proverb is, they say they do not see it; though Gods-Hand be lifted-up before
all Israel, and before the Sun, they will not see; and though his people hand
be now lifted-up to GOD, yet these will not see, no not now, nor will they yet
understand. O ye brutish men! When will ye understand? When will ye show your
selves men? For GODS sake, for your Souls sake, your own, and the Souls
committed to your charge, consider; Ye must see, ye must understand whether ye
will or no: That ye may do both seasonably, look into the Covenant again, see,
what is it you quarrel with, or take offense at there? Ye are not resolved in
some Cases of Conscience; Have patience, I Will resolve you anon, according to
Truth: In the mean time you will remember, I hope, whose Proctors ye are, and
be confounded, because of your shame. When man commanded you a bloody work,
and abominable Services, how did you gird-up your loins, and stir-up your
selves, and People by exhortations and prayers! Now GOD and His people
cals-upon you to join with them in Covenant, and now you draw back!

Object. Yes, and good Reason, for when we did stir-up our good people to a War
with Scotland, then we were for the King, and for Religion, [the Service Book,
for all their Religion is there] now entering into Covenant, woe shall go
against the King, etc.

Answ. Much might be spoken in a fools Ear, and to little purpose; I will only
say this, Let these men make Conscience in point of fear (it contains the whole
worship) to their GOD: and then we will trust them in point of Honor to their
King; Let them cease from fighting against GOD, by lying vanities, then we
shall think them conscien^ious men, and loyal to our Prince; In the mean time,
doing as they do, such things, and taking pleasure in them, who do the same
things, which do provoke the Lord to his Fate, we must account th^se men, as
they are, most corrupt in their lives, and so in their Doctrines, and
drawing-back unto Perdition; Take heed, we know the word, It is utter
Destruction, a perishing for ever.

One word to thee Reader, whom I take to be an honest man; Ignorant enough, but
thy ignorance troubles thee, it is thy hearts grief; Thou art willing to
understand, and thou livest-upright according to thy knowledge: This to thee; I
said before, that this is a very clear Covenant; indeed it is, the clearest
that ever man Penned here below; The Finger of GOD is in it too; by help of
That Hand, which wrote the Ten Words at first, this was Indicted and Written,
sure enough, for truly it is as the good Word of GOD; Consider we, as follows,
Cursed is he That does not fulfill all therein contained, with full purpose of
heart, and endeavor according to his light and power; And yet so good and
clear though it be, even as is the Work and Word of GOD, yet many there are, as
thou see and hear, Doctors and Masters in Israel, who do fault it. Be not
offended at that; My little reading tells me of one, who found fault with all
the Works of GOD, His whole Creation; This might have been mended, and so might
that; here and there it might have been better than it is; Though GOD said of
every thing he had mad^, It (was) very good; Now thou hear, That GOD Genesis 1.
31.
has heard the Works of his Fingers blamed, and was patient the while; And I
protest unto thee, That I could name the Man, who said, The Word of GOD, His
Text, was seditious. Do not thou regard what brutish men say, whose gutts are
in their head, and brains in their belly, mind earthly things; regard them
not, but attend with all diligence* To what thou and I have lifted-up our
hands, and Subscribed our Names; This follows, not always in the same words;
for my Work is Explication, (i. e.) To clear the Text.

Of A solemn League and Covenant, explained and cleared to the Conscience of
every man, that is not willingly blind, nor wilfully obstinate.
THough I intend a continued Explication, yet I cannot think of a more orderly
beginning, than with a short Dialogue, so to debate a few matters one with the
other first.

A. Your prime care is for the Scots, the preservation of their Religion and
Discipline.


B. Yes, and great reason it should be so, for their care toward us exceeds
ours toward our selves.


A. You swear to maintain the Discipline of Scotland, a bold Oath! not one of
ten amongst you, that understands what he swears.


B. Indeed our light is not clear at that point, nor theirs neither, not so
clear as it shall be; yet, without doubt, I shall clear that objection fully in
due place: much must be said to it, which shall not interpose now.


A. But what need you think so much of defense, and managing a war? you may
have a Peace, and at an easy rate, if you can see the way unto it, and
Petition thereafter; the Irish may have it, nay, we hear it is granted them;
and, doubtless, if ye are modest and bashful, some there are who will
intercede for you, touching this matter. Besides, there are men amongst your
selves very many, who have been importunate Petitioners for Peace, as their
Wives were the eighth of August last, and will put on for it again.


B. Here are some State-matters, let Statesmen look thereunto: These are within
compass of our knowledge, and Eternal Truths. 1. That an Irish Peace is worse
than an Irish War, and then we want a word to express how abominable it is.
2. That cursing and blessing cannot come forth of the same Mouth. 3. Nor was it
ever seen in our Land, since men dwelt there, that the Idol and Peace, (except
an Idol-Peace) came in from the same Quarters. 4. Let then talk what they will
of their Peace, GOD has sworn, and his people too, That he will have war with
them, avenge upon them the Blood of His Servants, cast them down, and lay them
lower then the earth, who have endeavored to lay His Glory in the dust, and to
dethrone the Lord Jesus Christ. And for the other Petitioners, with their
commanding wives, they will come too late now, we have covenanted against them,
their Atheism, Superstition, Profaneness, and to throw these all out; so also
against the evil of our own lives, every man confessing the Plague of his own
heart, and resolving in Gods strength, to search his own tents, and to cast out
the accursed thing thence; and then to walk in the midst of his house, as a man
whose Vows are upon him; Gods people as His people; Gods Minister, as His
Minister, showing forth the Doctrine that it is from Heaven, by the light of
his conversation before men; for the Covenant ends, as we shall see anon, in a
personal Reformation.


A. Then Peace comes in now, a Peace of Gods giving, according to your own
hearts desire; what needs then such preparation for War, and Vows to defend
each others things?


B. The greatest need now, because of the Agony or fight of afflictions, we now
expect, and will be: We are but in a way to Peace, pursuing it orderly, as we
read before, every man resolving for his own part, to reform one, and to
contend for the Faith: But Peace, I mean a peace of Gods giving, (we abominate
any other) so abused, so perverted, so ill improved; and Truth, so
reproachfully thrust away, will not be given back again to us quickly: There
must be Time and Cost about it, and we must wait and expect the greatest brunt
now, the sorest opposition against all three Kingdoms: Ye end^red a great fight
of afflictions, says the Heb 10. 32.
Apostle: When? After ye were illuminated, after you had a clear sight of God
and your selves, of Gods ways, and your ways; how ye walked, how He walked;
how contrary one to the other: After ye were illuminated, a sore fight: so
after we enter into Covenant every Man for himself, to do so and so; then
expect a fierce opposition, a sore Agony; which well considered on, will knit
us the faster all together, all as one man; and make our bonds the stronger,
engage us more to look to our selves, and each to others matters.


A. What have you to do with Scotland, their Religion and Discipline? let them
look to themselves, and you to your selves: It is against the Laws and
Constitutions of Kingdoms, that you should meddle with their matters or they
with yours.


A. In truth I have heard as much as this once, and again, but I will hear it
no more; it is a wicked objection, it makes my Ears tingle: If we cast off the
care each of other, farewell all, for all falls to ruin. O abominable! All
under one Head and one King, Professing the same Faith, Heirs of the same hope,
Members on^ of another, and yet against the Law, To have care one of another!
The care of all the Churches lay upon Paul, what Law did he break there?
Elizabeth, whom every mouth did Bless, except that which does Blaspheme, (for
she loved the Nation) She Cared for Scotland, sent succors thither seventy
years agon; What law did She break in so doing? Not the Law of God, nor of
Charity, nor of Christian Community; then nor the Laws of men. Indeed is is a
Cain's Objection, Am I my Brothers Keeper? Yes, that he was, and so every Man
is, his Brothers Keeper. It is so of Kingdoms too, specially united under one
Crown, wherein there is a Common Interest, which commands a Common Care; There
is a Tit 1 4.
Common Faith, and a I^de 3.
Common Salvation, which engages us unto Scotland, Scotland unto us, To
contend for that Faith and to seek the Common wealth each of other: Therefore
we will not hear what Cain objects, for he slew his Brother: We stand every one
charged to Care every one for another things; Scotland to maintain our
Religion, and Discipline; we, theirs; and so our Conference ends; now I make
way to the Objection.

I. If so be the Devil and his Proctors, subtle Brokers for Babylon, shall
endeavor, as they have done, To put out the Eyes of our Brethren in Scotland,
To take away Religion (which we must be as tender of as of our Eyes, and
preserve with the same diligence, as we do our Qu^^ pura est p^p^lla occ^li,
etc. Salv. de Gu^. l. 2.
Souls) and Discipline in Scotland, or blend and mix it with their folly; mate
either the one or the other with their madness, Service Book, or Services;
oppugn or storm it by any other more violent way, we have lifted up our hands,
That according to the Power in our hand, (in our Calling and Station, mark
that) we will oppose the Devil and all his Bishops. The Adversary shall not
take away their Religion, nor mix it neither, nor their Discipline; we have
lifted up our hands unto it, and to the most High God in all the Peoples fight,
That we will oppose them, who will oppose our Brethren in these matters.


Object. Fools! first they take a Vow, and after enquire Eccles.
what is the Discipline of Scotland? They that have lifted up their Hands to
maintain it, do not know what it is.

Answ. Like enough, it is so with me and many more; And truly we are not
Careful, much less Curiously Inquisitive about it. Grant us to be Idiots,
Poor Illiterate men; Nay, if God has given unto any of us more Light in a Land
of Visions, Blessed be His Name; But we are Content to be accounted Idiots at
this time, having no more understanding, nor perhaps so much, touching the
Discipline in Scotland, (there is all the Question that can be made indeed, or
scrupled at) than Josiah (a young Saint, yet an old Disciple) could have in all
the Commandments, and Statutes, and Testimonies, and yet he made a Covenant
before the Lord, to keep them every one: So Josiah ^id, and made the People do,
according to the Light he had; but with a sincere heart, with all his heart,
and with all his 2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 32.
Soul to Perform the words. The Intent of the heart was sincere, and stood in a
direct opposition to Ahabs house, and all the Idolatries, and Heathenish
Services there; and that was as much as was required of him, or his people, and
to the extent of their Oath; I must add, and Ours, which stands in opposition
only to Ahabs House, the Pope, and his Bishops opposition against the said
Discipline. I will give one Instance more, because I conceive no seeing Man can
stumble any where else, (and there his Passage is cleared with excellent
Prudence) possibly we understand no more touching the Scots Discipline, than
the Potters, (I find them in the Text, and I will Instance in them all along)
Illiterate Men, their Wives, and their Sons, and their Daughters, could
understand the Commandments of the Lord, His Judgments, and His Statutes; and
yet all these entered into Ne^em. 10. 28.
a Curse (I pray you mark it) and into an Oath, To do, and To observe all the
forementioned. The Statutes and the Judgments of The Lord, were deep things,
hard to be understood: Not Levites only and the Priests, but the Rabbis might
exercise themselves in the search of those things, and for a full understanding
thereof.

Object. But the Potters and their Wives, having knowledge and understanding,
(as it is said they had) knew that those Judgments and Statutes were good and
just, for they were The Lords, His Statutes, His Judgments, Who is GOD in
Heaven, and over all the Earth: But the said Discipline is the Discipline of
Scotland, a Church upon Earth! The Potters and their Wives might Swear to the
one, for they were sure those were the Statutes of God His Judgments, and "
Nulla litura in Decretis sapientum, there is no doubt of any fault or
imperfection in the Decrees and Ordinances of Heaven; But in the Decrees and
Ordinances of man there have been, are, and will be defects and wants to the
worlds end; and so of the Discipline of Scotland, Therefore we cannot Swear to
it.

Answ. You are not called to it, not called to Swear, That the Discipline of
Scotland is perfect; Nay, you may Swear, if you were called to it, That the
Discipline of Scotland is imperfect, though as near to the Rule
, as Possibly, their Light could bring them, yet but according to the Line of
men, and then very Imperfect, and you may swear it to be so: For we may say of
the Statutes and Ordinances of Men, even in Church Matters, as the Author
concludes his Story, If I have done well, and as the story required, It is the
thing I desired; but if I have written slenderly and barely, It is 2 Mac. 15.
39.
that I could: You may be sure this is Apocrypha, you will not swear that all
there is true, but you dare say that all is imperfect there. I could say much
more, even that the Pure Word of God loses something of its Clearness in its
conveyance to us; and tastes something of Man, through the Corruption of that
Conduit-Pipe that brings it to us. For Application of all this, I add; We
enquire not about the Discipline of Scotland, we ask no Questions there for
Conscience sake, we are Christians by Profession, and Profess to walk and
judge by our Rule, That the Discipline of Scotland is according to that Rule,
as near to the Pattern in the Mount, as humane understanding can bring it: We
believe verily, That our Brethren in Scotland, have sought Counsel at Gods
Mouth, and Direction from His Hand, for we see with all our Eyes, That He has
Counseled them, He has Directed them, He has Blessed them, and they shall be
Blessed: He has (making Himself known unto them by His Name JEHOVAH) raised-up
amongst them a Stage, whereon He has Acted like a God: And this we believe more
touching this Matter or Form rather of Worship, (for I would clear this) That
as God shall be pleased to communicate more Light unto them touching His Pattern,
they will come-up yet closer thereunto; and by the degrees of Communication
that way, come-up yet nearer unto the Rule. But in the mean time, if the Common
Enemy, the Pope and his Bishops, shall, as they have done, thrust-in upon them
cont^ary to their Religion and Discipline established amongst them, we have
Lifted-up our hands according to the Power, there To make Head against that
Common Enemy, so opposing Gods People.

2. And if so for the Religion, and the Discipline of Scotland, then sure we
will do as much, and as heartily for the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England, and Ireland; In Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government.

Object. But what needs all this? May some good Body say (though I hope there
is no good Body so void of understanding, as to say) The Doctrine in the Church
of England, is a Pure Doctrine, The Worship so, The Discipline and Government
so; The Church of England! A glorious Church! [Archbishops, and Bishops, Deans,
and Archdeacons, (brave men in their Trappings and Accouterments) these were
the Church in Name, as Rome is now] and cryedup so to be all over the Christian
World: And must we swear to a Reformation? Where is there a more perfect
Church, for Doctrine and Discipline, under the outstretched Canopy? I have
heard them say, (the Bishops themselves) we are well enough, a brave Church;
Rich [well decked and trimmed with costly Ornaments, which were found lockt-up
in Paul's, and Westminster] we want nothing.

Answ Well! So said a Church, as much, almost, as this, That they wanted
nothing, when yet their Vaunts were but Conceits only, Thou know not that
thou art Wretched, and Miserable, and Poor, and Blind, and Naked Revel. 3. ^^.
Master Brightman.
. And truly, to add a word, Mutato nomine, dete narratur, All this is told of
us the Church of England, by one, whom we ought to believe, because he speaks
with the cleerest Evidence of Truth, even from the Mouth of God. But I am very
easy to grant at this time, for I will not contend; Let the Bishops have their
saying, That this Church (of England) is a Perfect Church for matter and form,
and in all the forementioned; [I can clear it to the world, That they have made
as great a Deformation in the Church, as ever was seen in the world, since the
Council of Trent, the Iliad of that Age;] Nay the perfectest that ever was, or
now is (I cannot perfectly tell what will be) upon the Face of the Earth: Grant
that, it shall do them no good, nor scruple, or offend us at this point; for,
can it be a dishonor to the most perfect Church, to Reform according to the
Word of God: I trow not; A Church cannot come up too near unto the Rule, the
Word of God, they may Rest at a distance too remote, and far off; but, I say,
again, yet I need not say it, but we have to do with unreasonable Men, we
cannot come up too near unto the Rule of Doctrine, and Discipline, and
Government. What is that? It follows, To the Word of God; That we endeavor
All, in All three Kingdoms, To come up, To the nearest Conjunction, and
Uniformitie in Religion, Confession of Faith, form of Church Government,
Directory for Worship, and Catechizing (O Blessed Work; I should speak to that,
but it would not be a little) and Catechizing, That we and our little ones may,
as Brethren, live in Faith, and Love, and the Lord may delight in us. This is
all we have sworn unto; And do we Repent? Yes, That we were so foolish, as to
make any Scruple here, upon so clear a Text. We are Satisfied now, and had we
an hundred Hands, as I Read one Man had, and half as many Mouths, we would do
as much, as much with all our Hands and Mouths, as we have done, and so for the
next.

II. That we will endeavor in like manner the extirpation of Popery (the
Rooting of it out) [What else? and] Pr^la^y [they were never separated, these
camein together, and they must go out together.]

Ay, but the (...) and his Wi^^ their Sons and their Daughters too (Pray let me
use those words. I mean) Illiterate Persons may stumble at this; for indeed,
though Pr^lacy has won^erfully Blasted it self, as Tyranny has done, yet good
words both; Tyranny is but Government; and Prelacy a Superiority amongst
Churchmen; and this must be, and we allow of it with all our Hearts; Therefore
the Po^ters, and their Wi^es (we find them entering into Covenant,) will
observe what follows for explication, and clearing their doubt, touching
Prelacy (for Popery they know it well enough; It is A walking in the ways of
Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin; and after the Whoredoms of Ahab and Jezebels
house, i^ lifting up the Eye and the Heart to lying vanities; this is plain
(...).) And now they will understand Prelacy as well, for, know one, and know
both, that is, Church Government by Archbishops and Bishops, and their
Chancellors, with their Etcetera's, together with (I cannot tell what to call
it, but I have heard it called,) The Refuse and Garbadge of their Courts,
depending, and following the Hierarchy, as their train, or as the shadow the
Body, bringing in Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, etc. Let Baal
Plead, for Baal, because not one, but three Kingdoms have sworn to Cast out his
Lordship, and his Images, and to break down their house, perhaps, and make it
as Baals, a draught house; Let Baal Plead and bring forth strong Reasons; The
Potter and his Wife will not Plead for them, for though they may live in the
Remotest Parts of the Kingdom, yet they are not such strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel, as not to know, (though they understand not the word
Hierarchy I^ is a Sacre^ principal^^^e, for it had its Original f^^m the
Heat^ens Arch Flamin^ and Fla^in^, co^inued with a very little change and ^esse
Reason up ^ll most to this ^ay; It is a cu^sed Government crept into the Church
^nsteed of an Hiera^^^^a a Sacred service, which 1. a^^ shall be.
) these Persons what they are, what Blasphemies they have spoken, (besides hard
words;) what Heresies they have maintained; what Injustice they have done,
(ungodly deeds;) and what In lets they have been to Profaneness: These cannot
be Ignorant, That the Government by Archbishops, has been Tyrannical, Pharaoh
like, from the first Archbishop to him, that, three years a gone, sat in his
Throne, I say, Pharaoh like: and his Bishops [for they were his, and at his
Beck, he said unto them, do ye this, and they did it; Countenance Altars, they
did it, and more; Give the People a grant to Riot on the Lords day, they did
it; Stop the Mouths of the Ministers, they did it; Thrust in the vile, Throwout
the Precious, they did it; his Bishops.] And his Bishops were as Pharaohs
Taskmasters, grievous oppressors, they have, by help of their Chancellors, and
their Etcetera's, St^r^ned the Church of God evermore; And for their
Superstitions, how Gross, Palpable, and how many, and Heresies, as many! How
many, all these? I have no leisure to number my hairs now: The hearing of them
would make a Man's hai^es stand up-right, and his ears to tingle; These are so
many, and so horrid. I Will report but one Heresy, and this I will report,
because it has been an Inlet to that, which follows ever, Prophane^esse; and
has done the greatest disservice, that is Imaginable to the Potters and their
Wives. I mean still my Poor Brethren and Sisters in the Countries, that live in
the dark, under the droppings of Cathedralls, and the Cure of the
forementioned, such Brutish Men. I Will Name the Heresy, and the Heretic (whom I
have not heard named hitherto, either in the high Court, or in the Assembly. In
good time we may hear he is both found and thrown-out, for that end I will Name
him.) And that both may appear (else, as the old Custom was, and as Reason is,
I Will appear for him to suffer his Censure,) You shall hear the Text first: I
will have Merry, and Matthew 9 13. Doct^r Turners Text of Scripture fear^ul^y
blasphemed.
not Sacrifice: I will take leave to explain it, I hope to my Lords meaning,
and that the Simple may understand.) If thou art going to offer a Sacrifice,
and a Work of Merry, offer it self to thee in thy way, which cannot be delayed
(w^rk that) Thy Good and Gracious Lord will dispense with thee now for His
Sacrifice; He will let that stand aside, that the Work of Merry to thy Brother
may be done. Nay let me add, That Merry may ^e shown to an Inferior Creature,
to an Ox or an Ass (I do not account him, as one Calls him, a Brother,
Brother Ox, and Brother Ass;) yet, that thou may show Mercy to either of
Both, and to tell thee how well Pleasing the showing of Mercy to the lowest
Be^e Anseltur.
Creatures (for His Mercy is over all) is unto The Lord The God of Mercies, He
will let His Sacrifice give Place the while, thou art showing this Mercy, in
helping these out of the Di^^l^, when thou see him fallen, as thou art passing
by to offer thy Sacrifice, the Calves of thy Lips now Prayers, and Praises.
Though I suspect my understanding in higher matters, yet I am Confident here,
That this Declares the Heart of the Lord to His Poor Creatures, and the very
scope of this Divinity. Now see how the Preacher turned head upon his Text,
and his tail to Heaven before a great presence, uttering a notorious Heresy,
as all Men will call it, except Archbishops, and Bishops, and their Curates.
Thus he Continued his Speech, I will give the sum of it. See the Indulgence
of a God! And a large allowance from Heaven! The Lord of Heaven and Earth, will
suffer His Sacrifice to give place, while Masters, and their Servants shall
recreate themselves, according as the Declaration (for sports) [condemned to
the fire by the hand of the Hang man] gives them leave. And Blessed be God,
That the Fathers [and Lords] of the Church [and Tyrants over the sam^] have
been as open handed in tendering Mercy to Poor Creatures [giving an Advouson to
Riot on The Lords day, and Causing it to be Read on that day, and in that
Place, where they are to be the Mouth of God] as their great Lord and Master
is. O Monstrous! Stay a little, This was Preached to their Lordships ear, and
Commanded to be Published by their Authority, [the highest in Heaven or Earth,
not only Asserted to be by Divine Right, but stablished by an Oath, which upon
true search, will be found to be the most Daring Act and Device, that ever was
thought upon, since the Devil first put it into the thoughts of the heart, To
be like God.] By their Authority, who, being above all, that is Called God,
set their Right-foot upon the Church, and their Left foot on the Common wealth
(wherein the Potters and their Wives are great sharers; I tell them of it,
because, if any thing in the World will make them sensible, that will) and
swore these should rise no more; By their Authority, Archbishops, and Bishops,
(else they should have hindered it) this Sermon was Printed, Containing such
abominable Doctrines, which with other the like, has Caused more then a
Schism in the Church, and been an an-let to that, which follows,
Profaneness, which, like a mighty stood Mr. Crook a Summersetshire Minister,
was the foreman to promote that cursed liberty for sports on the Lords Day; he
has now made himself vile before all the people.
, Came-in upon us in the Country most impetuously; and the Potters with their
Wives, whom we should tender as Brothers and Sisters, were Carried away with
the stream; and how many drowned in that Devouring flood, I cannot tell: I
Confess my Spirit is stirred now for my Brethren, whom I should so love, and
to stirre-up their Spirits also, I will enter into a Curse, before I Proceed, I
conceive I have very good Warrant so to do; Let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of
my Mouth, and that little cunning God in His good Pleasure, has given my right
hand, let is be quite forgotten, if I do not remember what Archbishops,
Bishops, and their Curates have done: Yea, Let my Arm part from my Shoulder, My
hand from my Arm, if I do not endeavor my utmost, in my Place, to extirpate,
and root them out, and to throw their -- (I may not call them Books) after
them. And truly I thought to take this way. To Petition the Assembly of
Ministers, That they would sentence these unclean and poisonous --, to the
fire, to be consumed there. But I considered, That the Assembly of Ministers,
as the Parliament, The most Glorious, that ever was seen in the world; have
their hearts intent upon these matters, therefore I did forbear. 2. I
considered my self, with the Potters and their Wives, the Poor of the City,
whom, God is not pleased (for I will never say it is at the pleasure of Man,
and I hope that consideration will make me more patient of Winter cold, so long
as God is not pleased) To supply with Coal, and therefore is Wood a dear
commodity; We have not sufficient for our selves, and that purpose too; for
indeed we want, and that purpose requires plenty: If I might express it so, I
would say, Lebanon is Isa. 40. 16.
not suffici^nt to burn. Whom? Archbishops, and Bishops (those that refuse to
Covenant with God and His people) I had almost said, for their Works deserve to
be burnt, else I Will burn for them: And if their Works be of such deserving. so
meritorious, much more the Workmen; Men of great Merit and deserving that way:
But truly, I mean their Works, as full of Superstitions, Heresies, and
Prophanenesses, as a viper is full of poison; But I said truly, our Wood is
not sufficient for that purpose, and to serve our own turns too, though yet, if
all were of my mind, we would not make spare of Faggots for that Work, though
we chillid the more: But I hope we may keep our Wood, yet the Work may be done
as well for the present, tell Coal come-in. That way we go, and have sworn to
take, will do the business very well. We will not ask what way, because we are
sworn Men, and our Vows are upon us, To do our utmost endeavor, To extirpate,
Pluck up by the Roots, the Hierarchichall Government; and then we will do well
enough with the rest: If the Roots of the Oak be grubbed-up, the Bulky Body
must fall, the Shreds, Arms, Boughs, and out-Leaves must wither presently. So,
if Archbishops and Bishops be thrown down; All that, which come-in, grew-up,
and spread forth with them, must down also: All Superstitions, Heresies, and
Pr^phanenesses: And we have lifted-up the hand and subscribed our Names, That
out these shall, even all that is contrary to sound Doctrine, and the Power of
Godliness; That was well put-in, the Finger of God put it there; All that is
contrary to sound Doctrine and the Power of Godliness. All Archbishops and
Bishops, with all their Etceteraes have been so. so contrary as Hell to Heaven*
The evil spirits to the good; so contrary. Then out they shall, we swear they
shall; we will all with one Zep. 3. 9. Consent, in English.
Shoulder, join hand to hand, and shoulder to shoulder at this dead lift, and
out they shall be cast; Left we partake of other men's sins, and then of their
Plagues too; and that The Lord may be one, and His Name one in the three
Kingdoms: There can be no doubt there. And this for the Religious Part of the
Covenant, The Civil follows.

III. And that concerns the Kingdoms Birthright, the Rights and Liberties of
Parliament; and then of the Subject, Mine and Thine, for we put altogether. And
God forbid we should not every Man lift-up his hand to maintain these, for
therein he maintains his own Rights and Liberties too, and the Liberties of the
Kingdoms: Then I hope we will Maintain the Parliament, which maintains all these;
but I go on: The Lord forbid it me, says Naboth, That I should give the
Inheritance 1 King. 21. 3
of my Fathers unto thee. Give it! he had but sold it, Ahah would give the
worth of it in money: Ay, but Naboth will not give, nor sell away the
Inheritance of his Father, his Birthright: A notable example, he would not
part with his Birthright. All the Reason then in the world, we should lift up
our hand touching this matter, as we have Protested and Covenanted twice
heretofore. See Covenant asserted, p. 5. touching our bounden duty to the
Parliament.


2. And to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person.

Object. Defend His Person! Defenders indeed! These rise up against His Sacred
Person, bear Arms against His Power and Authority.

Answ. I did not undertake at first to make Answer to this man, an obstinate
fellow, having his Conscience seared; he has Answer after Answer, and Reason
upon Reason to make his folly depart; but words are lost in a Fools Ear; Nay,
beat him as Wheat in a Mortar, it will not do: I confess, when I meet with
this unreasonable man, I depart from my self, for I lose my patience. I think
verily this fellow, and other like him, are the Beasts that Paul fought with at
Ephesus. I will not contend now, but I will give him a shorter word then M^ney,
which is Italian, a Plain Lie in Jnglish, for he is in earnest, and so am I
too: I will reprove this Cretian sharply, and so let him go; He is a Liar, a --
as he shall hear presenly, for he finds himself ra^ked amongst his fellows: We
bear Arms against the most bloody Villains, Monstrous Rebels that ever were
upon the face of the Earth. One of that Company, a very young Procter in their
Court, tells us, before he was aware, They are all Papists. A notorious abuse
against the Popes Holiness, to Father such a Regiment of -- upon his
Fatherhood, Papa the Pope! Hear what they are, as one sets-them-out very well
to the view of all the World; They are a Colluvies, a heap, a gathering
together of the Scum, and Dross, and Garbage of three Kingdoms and more; a
most accursed Confederacy, made up of Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the
Philistines, with the Inhabitants of Tire, of Jesuits, Papists, and Atheists,
of Stigmaticall and Infamous Persons in all Lands: Against these we bear Arms,
who have done as the Bishops before them, set their foot, etc. as before, and
their mouth against Heaven, Blasphemed the Holy One, and His holy ones; made
all the Laws of Heaven and Earth, void; trampled the Word of Truth under foot,
and swear God Damn them, the Lord Christ shall R^igne no more; We have lifted
up our hands against these Monsters, this Viperous generation, That we will
destroy them from off the Earth, and pluck his Majesty's Sacred Person from
amidst these cursed Hell Hounds; We are resolved so to do by all lawful
means. The Person of the King, a Sacred Person; Anointed with oil! But his
Soul! the Person indeed; we have lifted-up the hand, That we will Pluck it,
according to the Power in our hands, as a Brand out of the fire, for his Soul
dwells amongst Scorpions, those that are set on fire; He is amongst Lions, as
David Psalm. 7 4
complained, so grievous it was to him; It was his hearts grief, that his
Condition was such to be amongst Scorpions. The King is Content to be where he
is, though in the same danger that David was; We do Vow to pluck him thence, to
pray That is the manner, pray ^or his prese^^a^ion who se^ks their destin^tion.
1 Cor. 4 12; 13.
incessantly for him, as they do that can pray, and so they pluck at him; that
is the violence they use, and need there is of such a violence. We lift up our
hands to an hard work; an hard work it is, to deliver a man, whether he will or
no: But yet the world must bear witness with our Consciences of our loyalty;
We Vow nothing above strength, but to pray, and endeavor it to our utmost; so
we will, so long as we have an hand to lift-up, a Sword or Spear to put in
them. And for the Regal Authority, that will maintain it self whether he
will or not, in the preservation and defense of the true Religion. But we will
endeavor it, as was said, that all the world may witness too, That we have no
thoughts or Intentions to diminish his Majesty's just Power and Greatness.

IV. And as we swear our selves Faithful to God and the King, to our selves
and our Birthright; To maintain the Regal Authority set over us; so also we
do swear to Discover and make known all Incendiaries, Malignants, all who are
Enemies to all this, endeavoring to make all void, and their utmost to cut
asunder the Staff of Beauty, That the Covenant may break; and the Staff of
Bands, Z^^h. 11. 10.
That the Brotherhood may break betwixt Judah and Israel; that is the Eyesore:
But we have sworn to pursue these vile persons, these Sanballats, Tobiah's, and
Geshem's, even to death, sentenced thereunto by those, that have Authority in
their hands to cut off those Murderers from the Earth; or can give-out that
Power unto others to execute the vengeance of the Lord upon them.

V. By the Providence of our good God, and His exceeding kindness to His
People, we that were twain, are now made one, and as one Stick in Gods Hand,
Ez. 33. 19.
ready to flee upon the Shoulders of the Philistines, who were, two Centuries
ago, as Scorpions, each to other, flying each at others Faces, and eating each
others Is. 9. 21. Is. 11. 13.
Arm, Manassch Ephraim, and Ephraim Manassch Now that the Lord has Put such a
Pri^e into our hands, has caused the Envy of Ephraim to depart, and made
manifest their Adversaries to be the Adversaries of Judah also; we do Vow to
set our Hearts to the maintenance of this Brotherhood, That it may be kept firm
and fast for ever.

VI. And do these Enemies and Adversaries what they can, as they will do to the
length of their Chain, We Swear it, lifting-up our hands to Heaven, That we
will do our utmost against them; those open Adversaries, and those more secret,
but more dangerous, who give themselves to a detestable Indifferency or
Newtralitie in this case, which so much concerns the Glory of GOD, The good
of the Kingdoms, and Ho^our of the King; We are sworn to do our utmost, that
those may he Spewed sorth: We will Eye them narrowly that make Divisions
amongst us; would thrust us from our God, and withdraw us from our standing in
firm Union, each with other; And we will wish that those were cut off that
trouble us; and what we cannot do, (for we work in our Sphere, and according to
our Capacity and Power of Working) We will Reveal to others, who are in
Authority, and Place, and will do it, cut them off betimes, who sow Tares of
Discord, so infesting and troubling us; All which we shall do as in the sight
of GOD: That Is well, for then here will be no respect of Persons; If a Brother,
a Son, a Daughter, Deuteronomy. 13.
a Wife, a Friend, if any of these be a Malignant, or a Neuter, he must not be
spared; Self and Self-respects, with References to Him and to Her, to this and
to that, has much to Plead here; but all is easy Answered; We are Sworn Men,
we are entered into an Oath, we must do as King Asa did, not Spare; He is my
Friend, perhaps my Child, (that is the sorrow:) But he is an Enemy to God, to
good Men, and to the Churches best Friend, The Lord Jesus Christ: And a Child
of Belial he is, I cannot be to seek what I am to do, having used all fair
Means, I must discover my Friend to be an Enemy indeed; and do with the Child,
as the Parents did with their Stubborn Child, Deuteronomy. 21. 18. bring him out unto
the Elders; for I do all as in the sight of GOD.

And now we come to the main Point, the very Center of Reformation, Self, a
man's own heart and life; there is the great Point indeed; all the Lines that
have been drawn, [and they have been drawn with the greatest exactness, all
the Prudence that we can imagine to be in Man, with Reference still, and
directest tendency to the only Rule and end, The glory of God, and man's
eternal good:] All these Lines must be Centered now in my heart and life, all
ends in a personal Reformation, for that is all in all to him, that has
lifted-up his hand now.

We must observe here, first, the wickedness of some, not a few, Doctors and
Proctors for the Church of Rome. 2. The weakness, for I will not call it
wickedness of others very many. 1. See the wickedness of this man, he is a
Legion, I will speak of him single; He cannot take the Covenant, he could not
take the former,, nor the latter, nor this now; Indeed he cannot take it, nay,
he will Swear to, and not Sin; he has done and can do strange matters, and yet
no sin in all he does to his Conscience: He could proclaim an Heathenish
Liberty to profane The Lords Day, in The Lords House, and yet not sin; he
strained not at that Camel, but swallowed it. He could bend before Altars, and
set-up Images, and not Sin: Twenty things more, the grossest abominations that
can be named, he can do, and not Sin; keep two Livings, three for failing, and
attend neither, and not Sin; spill the blood of Souls, and not Sin: But a
Covenant he cannot take, and not Sin; That, like a Bone sticks in his Throat,
he cannot swallow that, and not Sin. This bruitsh man must not be spared, such
a Notorious -- Person, we must never cease wishing, that he were cut off, who
so troubles us; That this vile Person, (for you heard what abominations he
does, yet says he does not Sin; and what he will not do, lest he sin: That
this so Vile a Person (a Docter, a Teacher of Lies) may be set apart, as was
the Leper, (for he is as Infectious) left he infect others, I will assure the
Reader, what that is which makes this man sly from a Covenant; He is not so
Brutish, blind, or Seared, (though all this he is) as not to allow of this
Covenant. Why does he not take it then? As sure as we live, I can tell why?
because it ends in a Personal Reformation of all that is amiss; he will never
take it, for he is amiss, and besides his Rule in all he does: and if he enter
into Covenant now, he swears to oversee himeslf; himself first, then others,
Wife, Children, and servants; his own House, then the Act. 20. 28. ^ Tun. 3 4.
4. 16. Tit. 2. 7.
House of God. But this is not all, though he never did any of all this, if he
enters into Covenant, he must shut his Ears from Hearing Blood, and he has shed
the Blood of Souls, with no more Regret than he swallows Wine, wherewith many
times he is swallowed up: he must shake his Lap at unjust gain, but he cannot
shake hands with his two Livings; He must, but I forbear: I have said enough
Isa. 28. 7,
to declare his wickedness, and because he is a Doctor (a Teacher of others) I
will say but this, he is another Mountebanke, he can stab his body for gain; so
this Doctor, his Soul, and not Sin. See their wickedness! We have sworn to do
our utmost that these may be cut off, who have taken Peace from the Earth.

2. See the weakness of others, very many, their ignorance rather, and pity
it: They will read the Covenant, then raise Questions and make Doubts about it,
which Momus himself would scarce do, who had an Art, and made it his trade to
make faults where he found none, They will, I say, make questions about the
beginning, or midst, or thereabouts, and quickly receive satitfaction to all
their doubts; and then they enter into it, never questioning the last point,
that great point, touching Personal and household Reformation; They never made
question there for Conscience sake: I mean, not touching the lawfulness of it,
for there can be no question, but touching the performance at this point,
standing to that they have so solemnly Covenanted to perform; They had not one
serious thought upon this matter: It is their ignorance. Blessed be God, there
shall be a course taken to thrust out this vile Parson, their Doctor, and to
put in a precious Person in his Room, who will make it his work to instruct and
teach their poor people touching this last point, Personal Reformation, which
is the Bottom and Center of all we have sworn unto, even every Mothers Child,
which is to bring home all this to himself, there To Center all, in his own
heart and life; This is the work indeed, this is the labor, This Personal
Reformation, the Centering of it in a Man's self, and showing it forth in a man's
life and conversation: And were it not that with God all things are possible,
and he requires no more of a People, but that they be a people of
willingnesses, (and he makes them so) were it not for P^a^. 110. 3.
this, the best man amongst us would flie-back from this work, or faint before
it, considering the mighty opposition he must meet with now; the potent
Adversaries he must contend against; The Devils in Hell, and those in the Air,
and all his Servants on earth. The Devil will give him good leave to lift up
the hand for company to all the forementioned; To contend for Religion, to
fight for Religion, to be all (in show) for Religion; but when Religion (it
contains all) comes to be bottomed, and Centered in a man's heart and life, thou
must be all this, Religious and Faithful, and not for thy self only, but for
all thy household, all under thy charge, and over sight: when it comes to settle
here, as upon the true Basis and proper place, then what stirs are here! What
an opposition!

I can more then guess now what are the Wiles, Depths, Devices, workings of
Satan this way with every good man; These are the turnings and windings of the
crooked Serpent: Thou have vowed to serve God; serve Him; But for the matter of
worship, as God has prescribed: And manner, with the whole heart, as God has
commanded, There is the opposition. The main Brunt will be on the Lords Day,
touching that Solemnity on that day, and the Services proper to the day. The
man will perceive how subtle the Adversary is, as much against the Due
observing of The Lords Day, as against The Lord Himself. What needs all this
strictness? The Sabbath is made for Man, not you for the Sabbath: Sit out thy
hour at Church in the Morning, and as long at Evening, and then recreate thy
self; God says, He will have mercy; Better, and wiser then thy self say so,
and do so, Archbishops, and Bishops with their Curates; and give thee fair
allowance so to do, in like manner as they do, and teach. Fool as thou art, and
slow to understanding, what is Christian liberty! Thou art now repeating the
Sermon, when thou might, [with less danger of an Earthly Prison, when time
was] be elsewhere, in the fields [walking and doing after the Pleasure of thine
own Eye.]

Reader, do not think slightly of this, how ever it seems; be confident, the
Devil works strongly, and prevails mightily by precedents; presenting before
common Eyes, the example of Bishops, how they have or do walk before the People.

It is true, there are examples of Gods Judgments, which might be presented
here in visible Characters, and as terrible as was the writing on the Wall,
upon Dan 5.
those that have done as the Devil has persuaded them, and as the example of
Bishops have led-on; for has not The Lord Remembered all those abominations,
the Breach of His only Holy Day? Has he not remembered all this, and required
it of the Bishops, and those, that have practiced according to these
abominations, The Bishops allowance and Rule? But we go-on, The Bishops
carried it, and their examples are snares at this day, and their words eat as a
Gangrene; for which we ought, and so we lift-up the hands to be humbled, for
what our own hearts have done, and what the Bishops have done: and, because we
were so well content to have it so. I did not value the Everlasting Gospel; If
I had so done, I had contended for it, and more set my self, against my self,
and those Men, and their Doctrines. But I return where I digressed, how the
Devil works with this Man, now he has lifted up his hand to the living God;
The Devil tells him, If thou will be strict, be strict for thy self; be not so
for thy Household, Children and Servants there; they may take the Recreations,
as is allowed them by the Bishops, who are not so precise, [No, their houses
were the Tabernacles of Robbers, and as the Mountains of Prey; Wilder Folk then
Satyr's danced there; Therefore, though their house be not yet made a Dunghill,
as that infamous Lords-House was; 2 Kings 10. 27.
yet, Blessed be God, they are Prisons to hold those, who are almost as bad as
themselves, and made so bad by their Bishops example.

Thou will Pardon me Reader, if I am confused here; when I look off my own
heart, as too often I do, then I look upon Archbishops, Bishops, and their
Curates, all the Brutish Pastors in the Land, as upon the fomentors of these
Divisions; Causers of these Distractions; Authors of these Confusions in our
Land: Therefore I shall never mention them, or any of these, but as Jeroboam is
mentioned in the Sacred Records, Archbishops, and Bishops, etc. That made
Israel to sin; Profaning The Lords Day by a Law; stopping the Mouths of
Ministers; thrusting them aside, to hang like an Instrument, whose strings are
letdown; or thrust-up into a corner, as if of no more worth then themselves;
like a Vessel wherein is no Pleasure. We Vow to be humbled for all these
Blasphemies, Impieties, Iniquities, for all that our own beguiled hearts have
done here; and all that these men have done, by their examples: We Vow also to
be avenged of them; and to reform every man himself, there to Center
Reformation; And thus the good Soldier (A Christian indeed, maintaining his
Militia) Resolved for his own part (the Subject of the next Treatise) and so by
the good hand of God with him, he confounds his Adversarys, and lives above
example, according to the Rule, and Tenor of the Curse and Oath he has entered
into; and to follow no man now, but as he follows Christ; Who is given a Leader
and Commander to His People: And so to take care, special care of his family
also entrusted to his care by The Lord Himself as (in another Case, and in a
figure that Man 1 King. 20. 39.
was,) See unto them, thy Children, thy Servants there, they have the like
precious Soul, all one at that point of Cure, Children, and Servants all one,
their Souls as precious, as thine, bought with the same Price; Heirs to the
same Inheritance; precious Souls as thine; Thine and Theirs more precious then
a World, then all earthly things there, more ex^elling then the San, when it
shines in his strength; These Souls are thy charge, look to them, if they
miscarry, if th^se perish by thy means, and default, they dye in their sins,
but their blood shall be required at thy hands, life for life, though not in
exchange, yet both shall perish together. Therefore this man considering the
terror of the Lord, walks wisely in the midst of his house; he keeps a day to
The Lord himself, so shall his house too, all the persons within his gates; To
be short in so clear a matter, so fully charged upon the Governers (for Souls
know no sex,) Abraham will command his children Gen 18. 1^.
. As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord Josh. 24. 15.
, I and my Maidens Este^. 4 16
; feared God with all his House Act. 10. 2.
: Reformation is Personal; it is centered and bottomed in self, self
Reformation, in the heart and life; He has lifted-up the hand To all this, he
has subscribed his Name unto it. We must now observe, in the second place, the
solemnity of these Actions, and then we shall the better see every man his own
engagement.

II. He lifts up his hand, he subscribes his name: His hand next week may be
asleep in the dust, but he has subscribed his Name; That lives, when the Man is
dead. But the least is in that, though that tells it to posterity; ce^tainly
there was never such a thing, so done in our Israel.

A. Yes, you will say, we protested and entered into Covenant, twice in all the
Peoples sight.


^. True, but we did not lift up the hand. I do not doubt, but every honest man
lifte^-up the heart, those other times, To that solemn Work, Vow, and Covenant
formerly entered into.


A, That is the better P^s^^^e of the two, is it not?


B. No, for two Reasons, and a third which is chief of all. First, it is not so
suitable to the Work of the Day: I Covenant now in all the Peoples sight;
Therefore the greatest Reason in the World. That they should see what I do.


A. Well, but I lift-up my heart.


B. Very well, but how can the People tell that?


A. A Pharisee! He will be seen of men.


B. Yes, at such a solemn time, as this is, he must not creep into a corner. In
these Cases, and at such Solemnities, he must confess his God before Men, else
he knows what follows Matthew. 10 33. Lake 12. 9.
. I hope I shall never forget what the Martyrs did in Ancient times; if they
would have offered a grain of Incense to the Idol, they might have kept their
skins upon their flesh, and their flesh sound and whole; but, because they
would not do so much, their skin was torn from their Shoulders, and their
flesh from their Bones. "But this is it, which I intend, The Adversary was more
weary in tormenting, then Christians were in suffering their torments; So the
Adversary tried them with gentle persuasions; saying, ye shall not offer unto
our (Idol) god, no not so much as a grain of Incense: Ye shall but make an
offer only, a semblance and no more, and I will satisfy My Master the
Emperor, and the People too; For I will say ye have offered. And so the
Adversary said in the face of the Assembly, The Christians have offered to our
god. Now mark: No said the Christians, lifting-up their hands and their voices.
No, we are Christians, These hands have not offered, no not a grain; nor will
we offer; No, we will suffer our skin to be pulled over our heads, and our
flesh from our bones, rather then we will offer so much as one grain to a
strange god; We did not do it, we will never do it, no, never, never; See
there! There is much more, a most Notable Eusebius. l 8. H. 1. Tr^p. l. 6. Eut. c.
1^.
History, you must gather in up, here and there, These witnessed a good
confession before men. And now! But I forbear, though it is hard to take off my
hand from this work. This is the example, and it is to our purpose, when God
calls us forth to confess Him, as now He does, to Covenant with Him, we must
do it after this manner, in all the Peoples sight. In such cases (I say again)
and at such solemnities, I must do, as I may be seen; That is one Reason, why I
am commanded to lift-up my hand, and it is a mighty Reason, There is another as
good.


2. I lift-up my hand, I subscribe my name, so giving a clear attestation
before all the People; That I lift-up my heart to the work. viz. All, that I
have lifted-up my hand unto, I will, by Gods grace, endeavor to perform. It
is my full purpose so; I will center and bottom all, contained there, in my
own heart. I have vowed with my Mouth, By Gods help (and without that I can do
nothing, but sin against Him) but by His help, what my tongue protested, my
hand shall fulfill, and my hand shall subscribe unto it too, which makes the
obligations stronger: I cannot withdraw back now and prosper; Pilate will
reprove me if so I do; I have subscribed to all this, and what I have written,
I have written: It is the full purpose of my heart, not to alter now after this
Solemnity, whereof there is yet a third Reason, and that is Mighty, for, in so
doing, we do as God has done before us.

3. It is after the very manner of God Himself, when He swears to show Mercy,
or execute Judgment upon His People: What does He do then? Then, to assure His
People, who are very flow to believe, that He will very certainly perform with
them, as He has sworn; then we observe this Posture of the hands lift-up,
often in one Chapter, nay in one breath, I lifted up My hand, says Ezekiel. ^0.
The Lord, To the seed of Jacob. The gesture is according to the example of God
Himself, who speaks with His Mouth, and fulfils with His hand; And after the
same manner His servant Abraham, I lift up my hand unto The most high God: So
have we done, as The Lord does; as Abraham did, so have we done, every Man for
himself, lifted up the hand to The most high God, subscribed also with the same
hand unto The Lord, and surnamed every Man Himself, by the Name of Israel:
There is the center of Reformation, Self, Personal Reformation; So the true
Christian Soldier has Covenanted for himself, and with his God. And now what
his Lord has promised to do for all His Israel, I will purge out from among
you the Rebels Ezekiel. 20 28.
, the same will He do for this Man; He will do it in His own and best time, It
shall be done: In the mean time, The Rebels within the Man, for there they be,
shall be so mastered, subdued, overpowred, that they shall do the Man good
service; they shall try, and prove him; edge and purify his graces: And all
the Rebels without, shall do him no hurt. Now that he is in Covenant with God,
knows This God, now he shall be strong, and do Dan. 11. 32.
. What shall he do? I cannot tell, For the original Hebrew does not tell me:
but do he shall, strange things, above reason, above hope, above his prayers
too: he shall put a legion of Devils to flight; he shall leap over a wall, and
skip over a mountain, for it shall be a plain before him, the Lion and the Bear
shall not hinder him in his way, nor discourage him; his way is made passable,
and every work to him possible. He can do; What? All things; And this is to do
exploites as we read it, for God is with him, his God, a God in Covenant with
him; he can do exploites. But this, with other things of infinite concernment
to Kingdoms, and every person there, will make a fuller Treatise, then this,
which I will conclude now, and shut-up; So I, so thou, as the Soldier before,
have entered into Covenant; how grave for the matter; how solemn for the
manner! The Lord give us grace to understand, that we may do accordingly. And
then no matter what the Adversary does against us; he does, as an adversary,
what mischief he can, according to the power in his hand: But no matter though
the gates of hell open upon us, and stand in defiance against us. Stand we to
our Covenant, with full purpose of heart to keep unto it, and close to our God;
What then? We can stand a^ defiance too, not fear their fear; not fear the
Devil, nor sin, nor death; for we may make Paul's challenge. We fear God, fear
only to displease him, are in Covenant with Him, by His good hand with us, we
are resolved, with full purpose of heart, to keep close to Him; and we are sure
He will stand by us, and then we have enough strength on our side. For God is
with us, and He is All, All sufficient. Amen, even so Amen.

FINIS.

