Certain AFFIRMATIONS In defense of the pulling down of Communion Rails, by
diverse rash and misguided people, judiciously and religiously answered,

By a Gentleman of worth.

LONDON Printed for Richard Lowndes, 1641.

Reader,
I Know thou art not ignorant of the too foul and irreligious tumults lately
committed in the House of God, in too many places of this Kingdom. Among the
rest, this, that was the cause of this discourse, was one of the chiefest, and
had his full weight of disobedience and contempt; and I cannot but believe the
primary proceedings of others, where strong motives to whet on those rash and
misled youths to the enacting of this outrage, admit it were done without
Abettors, whereof more may be hereafter discovered.

Now what these motives were I shall take liberty to relate; not only from my
opinion and fancy, but encouraged by the Judgment of many of great wisdom and
virtue; the first whereof is, That free liberty has been given to all (by our
Ministers) to receive the holy Eucharist, in what posture the receiver had a
desire, though quite repugnant to the former constitutions of Acts of
Parliament; Secondly, the other Sacrament of Baptism performed without the
sign of the Cross, with the omission of some of the words and prayers;
Thirdly, upon that solemn day of general Humilation, and zealously commanded
by both Houses of Parliament, the prayers appointed for the morning were not
half read; and in the afternoon, not one word of the Prayers for that day
read unto us; yet such venerable esteem they gave to their own inspired
Petitions, and extemporie additions, that they lasted-full three hours before
their Sermons, One of whom was a Minister that for many years before, for his
disobedience to Ecclesiastical government, was suspended by authority;
Fourthly, the Service instituted to be read on the Lords day, has been too
much slighted, and too often cut off by halfes; again the aforesaid service
commanded to be published and attended on upon the weekly days, is grown
almost contemptible, in so much, that upon those days there is a great
assembly, if there be one person to forty pews; but to the institution of a
weekly Lecture, ordained by a private Minister, thereto will resort a very
large congregation, which I heartily desire greater; yet, under correction, I
conceive the other duty ought to have (if not more) an equal reverence; in
regard of the most honorable institution and institutors, The House of God
being termed by his Son the House of Prayer; fifthly, it is too manifest,
That the Surplice formerly enjoined to be worn, has been altogether left in
all the ordinances of the Church before a general restraint, a habit used from
the infancy of Religion, and prescribed by God himself, yet reputed a relike of
popery by the single soul'd opinions of too to many in this our irreverent
age; Lastly, it is well known, That by a prescribed command, the Bishops were
to be remembered in their Prayers before their Sermons, either as a duty of
obedience, charity, or piety, but now omitted as unnecessary and impertinent;
but in their Sermons they are remembered (with a vengeance) and so strangely
charactered, as if their persons were altogether cut out of the Beast, or the
order worthy of all scandal and contempt; more I might add, but I conceive
this will exasperate sufficiently the pious inclinations of all that are the
dutiful Sons of their mother, against all refractary spirits; for conclusion
of this information, I hope I shall without offense infer, That if the sacred
Conventions, and zealous Edicts, of our Godly and wise Ancestors, may be thus
slighted, by the perverse will, and addle opinion of distempered and stubborn
people (without an account) it may argue their Injunctions unwarrantable, or
(if just and pious) a disesteeme of their blessed and holy Ordinances, to their
great dishonor, or, our larger reproach.

But I am comforted with this confidence, That those faithful Stewards of the
State, the true distributers of Justice, the provident overseers, and judicious
undertakers of our good, and the zealous advancers of Gods glory in all Piety,
will at the last require a Red rationem from all mishap^e Sectaries of their
unparraleld proceedings, and unheard of stubborn disobedience, whose humble
Beads-man I am, and shall not fail in the strength of all my devotio^s to
defire a prosperous progression to this their beginning, and a glorious
conclusion to both, in the fullness of all duty, committing them all, and all
their sacred consultations, into the hands of Heaven, and into their hands all
malevolent disturbers of Truth and Peace.

To his worthy Friend the Author.
SIR,
I Must ingenuously confess, that my importunity only brought this Child of
yours into the World; And I was the more pressing, because of the foulness of
the Art, and the too many unlick'd Lumps that the Press has too lately spued
forth; and that these your welpolish'd endeavors should employ the Printer; who
otherwise might (in regard of the too insapid heads and busy brains of these
times) have sent out more of his old Rubbish.

Many, of good judgment, to whom I showed this in a Manuscript, did much
applaud your labor and pious ends herein. And although the occasion which
induced you to this work was full fraught with unparalleld impiety, and a
great grief to all true-hearted Spirits, yet there have been too many who have
not been sparing to commend the Actors, and to judge the Action meritorious;
and, in the foulest way of aspersion, to brand all those who have disliked, or
Authority has commanded to make inquiry of their proceedings; but let them
take heed lest the stone they throw return not upon their own heads; and their
foul vomiting into their own bosoms; heartily wishing them as much zeal as
they want knowledge; lowly looks, unpartiall ears, true tongues, purer hearts,
cleaner hands, bended knees, and feet to march with a sober pace. Thus
recommending your ingenuous Discourse to the judicious Reader, confessing my
self, (with many thanks) your debtor; because you were pleased to give me
liberty to publish this your labor; which otherwise had been confined to the
narrow limits of your own Library; my desires being yours, in wishing to be
known to none but your self.

A Discourse, or an Answer to some Affirmations concerning the pulling down of
the Communion Rails on the Visitation day, when the Chancellor was opposed his
keeping Court.
Affir. I. That the Rails about the Communion Table were intended to Popery and
Superstition.
Ans.

LEt it be granted they were (although in charity according to the use of them
we ought to judge better) We know that our Church in this town, and most of
our Churches in England, with the means belonging unto them, were popishly or
superstitiously erected and dedicated, and employed to Idolatry and
Superstition for a long time together: Yet we Protestants of the Reformed
Religion do not think it unlawful to serve the true God in them, and do
possess and enjoy the means belonging unto them without any scruple of
conscience. Moreoever, the Nation it self wherein we live was not inhabited
at first with Protestants, yet God forbid, that any should be so simple
therefore to forsake the Land, or pull down the Churches. For the abuse ought
not to take away the right use of any thing.

2 The Rails were not lawfully set up.
Ans. The authority of subordinate Governors of the Church for the necessary
repair, ornament, and uniformitie of reverent and decent behaviors will
hereafter more manifestly appear. For as there is but one God and one Truth,
so there ought to be amongst us but one way, one common union. But suppose they
were set up without that authority which you call l^wfull? They ought therefore
to be taken down by a more lawful authority. For as a lawful thing may be
done unlawfully, so what is unlawfully done may likewise be undone far more
unlawfully.

3 London, and all other places have pulled them down in the like manner.
Ans. It is a question whether they have done the like or not. The whole is not
to be blamed for part unless all were actors or consenters. Yet if it were so,
the actions of others will not justify ours before God or Man, we must not
follow a multitude to do evil, nor do evil that good may come thereon.

4 It is just with God they should be so pulled down.
Ans. That which is just with God, and according to his secret Will, may be
unjust in Man, being done contrary to his revealed Will. As in the Death of
Traitors and the like Offenders against the Commonwealth; It is just with God
and Man they should be cut off by them, Yet it is unjust and unanswerable to
God and Man, for any to take away their lives, before justice has ordained the
Execution, and the Executioner also.

5 There are none that truly fear God that oppose the pulling of them down, or
are offended with them who pulled them down.
Ans. This is a rash and self-conceited censure, too common amongst Christians
wedded to their own opinions. He that serves God truly, ought to serve him
rightly according to his Word, But Gods Word does not allow or countenance
Mutinies, unlawful Assemblies, or Rebellions against Government, pulling the
Sword of Justice out of the Magistrates hand, and using, or rather abusing it
as we please, according to our perverse wills and affections, Therefore
consequently those that do so, do not fear God truly.

Nor are offended, etc.
It is not the Matter so much as the Manner that gives the occasion of the
offense, and not the persons so much as their offenses. And as there were
probably several sorts of people that were at the pulling of them down for
several ends and intents, most of them for sinister ends and by respects; Yet
some who were simple, honest, and well meaning people, only misinformed, and
misled: So likewise all that are offended thereat, have not the like
affections, yet most I believe are justly offended to see the Protestant
Religion, and Covenant, so much dishonored and abused, Authority and
Government contemned, the bonds of Duty and Unity broken, the Governors,
Officers, and Town, like to be prejudiced, and the actors themselves like to be
mischieved.

6 We are bound by the last Protestation against Innovations, This being an
Innovation we ought to pull it down.
Ans. This manifests simplicity, ignorance, or worse. It is true that we are
bound to maintain and defend the Protestant Religion contained in the Doctrine
of the Church of England, against all popery, and popish innovations, contrary
to the said Doctrine. But what is that to any necessary or decent ornament of
the Church? besides we are bound to maintain the protestant Religion no
further then we may lawfully do it (that is by petition, solicitation,
information, affirmation, to those who have authority to reform) Not by
unlawful assemblies and tumultuous riots, (especially in times of reformaon)
to be our own Judges, Juries, and Executioners. Moreover we must remember
that by the said Protestation we are bound according to the duty of our
allegiance to maintain the Kings royal person, honor, and estate. Now all
Royal and lawful authority and honor is derived and given even from GOD
Almighty to the King, and from him to all his subordinate Ministers. He then
that offends this lawful authority, though in the meanest Minister, offends
and dishonors the highest authority from whence it came. Again we are
bound by the said Protestation to maintain and defend the power and privileges
of Parlaments. In both which certainly are included the Laws and Acts of
Parlaments which concerns either of them. Furthermore we are bound in all
just and honorable ways, to endeavor to preserve the Union between the Kings
three Dominions, undoubtedly then we are not to neglect our own, For Unity as
well as Charity is to begin at home.

7 We ought to maintain the cause of Religion, and not to discover the faylings
of the Professors thereof.
Ans. We are to maintain the cause of Religion, Religiously, and lawfully,
and not otherwise. True Religion needs not errors to maintain it, it is able
by sound truths and sollid reasons to maintain it self. That which is contrary
to it is not from God, but rather from the delusions of the Devil, who is the
author of all Rebellions, Seditions, and discords, And certainly such courses
are dishonorable and offensive to God and our governors, and can we suppose
less then that we prejudice our cause, and dishonor them also, when we
unlawfully and furiously anticipate their intentions? when we endeavor to do
that by our wills and perverse affections, which they intend by lawful
authority and sound reason to grant us?

And not to discover the faylings, etc.
It were to be wished that those that make so much profession of Religion,
would make conscience also of the discovery of the faylings, imperfections,
and infirmities of others, but much more, how they do backbite, slander, and
bear false witness, as they too often use to do. But such acts in Professors
or others that are openly committed, offensive, scandalous, concerns our late
Protestation, and are of dangerous consequence, tending to the subversion of
the fundamental Maxims both of God and Man for Government, ought to be
discovered and disclosed, by those who make conscience to fear God, honor and
obey the King.

8 Many meddle and talk more in these matters then they need.
Ans. It is true indeed, there are too many, vain, idle, and unjustifiable
speeches, which have no warrant or lawful Calling thereunto, so likewise there
are more then ought to be that meddle too little. For the truth is at all times
to be mayntained, the ways and end being good and lawful, the time and place
seasonable, and the persons considerable. But if we were not Protestants, yet
as we are Christians, we are to mayntaine unity, prevent imminent dangers
which we see, counsel and inform the ignorant and blind, and other works of
Mercy belonging both to soul and body.

And it many times falls out happily, that such Christian offices prevent much
danger and mischief. And those that have public spirits aim more at the
public good, then at their own private or sinister ends, and often do good
to the public, though they prejudice themselves in so doing.

9 That which is done will be mayntained. There are none called in question for
doing the like. And ye see there is like to come good of it.
Ans. The maintenance of an evil action justifies and aggravates the offense.
Do we think it is no offense? to make Combinations, Conspiracies, Riots, and
tumultuous oppositions against authority, the public breach of our
Protestation, with opprobrious and disgraceful words against the Ministers of
Gods Word, and others in authority, and that after a Sermon, and other
Advertisements in the House of God?

There are none as yet called in question, etc.
Ans. Peradventure the Superior Magistrate expects the duty and office of the
Inferior, And it is probable that there are matters of greater consequence in
hand. But we know forbearance is no acquittance.

And there is like to come good of it.
That may seem to be which is not, and will not prove so in the end. If there
be any true good thereby, it is from the infinite mercy and goodness of God,
who is only able to turn all things to the best, to bring light out of
darkness, good out of evil, and a remedy out of a malady, but we have no
warrant to do evil that good may come of it. Neither are we to forget the
clemency and goodness of our Governors, who peradventure forbear the
inflicting of the due punishment for the good opinion they have of the
simplicity, weakness, and good intentions of some of the offenders therein.

10 But there are honest and good Christians who have a hand therein.
Ans. They are the more to be pitied and commiserated, for good and honest
Christians too, are a great honor to Religion, and God grant that all
Protestants may endeavor to adorn their profession with so rare companions, the
want of which makes Religion very evil spoken of. But suppose they were the
best Christians, We are to know that the best of Gods Saints and dearest
children in all ages have been subject to, and have committed great errors and
offenses, but neither they nor any that truly fear God will justify and
mayntaine them, but rather acknowledge them, be sorry for them, and forsake
them. Especially if they be publicly committed, offensive and scandalous to
Religion, and this is the only way to give satisfaction both to God and Man.
And the acknowledgment of errors has found favor and remission, when the
mayntaining of them has procured the greater and severer punishments.

11 Our endeavors are but for Reformation.
Ans. The best endeavors of the multitude will be prayers to God, and obedience
to their Governors, till by lawful authority they are called to do
otherwise. For if they might have the handling and managing of it, they would
quickly pull an old house about their heads, and instead of Reformation bring
all to confusion. Their judgments are too weak for such great undertakings:
They are too apt to co^demn the right use of any thing for the abuse sake. They
would have no Luurgie or Letany used in the Church of England, because (as they
are informed) it came from Rome, and the Papists use it. As if because the Pope
makes use of the Lords Prayer, we Protestants therefore are to renounce it. Or
because the Devil and evil men pervert and make a bad use of the Scriptures,
we should forbear to make the right use of them. When it comes to a moderate
and judicial trial, it will be found, that the Liturgy and Letany and other
the like which are now by many abhorred, being corrected as authority shall
think fit, that they will not only be convenient but necessary in the Church of
England, for the due and decent service of God.

Again, the multitude are apt to hate the person for the vice. Rome was once a
true Church, Witness Saint Paul his works to the Romans. Now it is full of
Corruptions and Errors.

It is dangerous to suffer a sword in a mad man's hands. Peradventure they may
think the best way to cure them of their corruptions is to cut their throats.

If we are bound in charity to pray for the conversion of the Jews, Turks,
Heathens, and Infidels, certainly, we are not to neglect the praying for the
conversion of Papists who are Christians. As God so godly men do not delight
in the death, but rather in the conversion of sinners. And it may please God to
make England as happy an instrument of converting and reforming Rome, and such
that belong to them, as it pleased him to raise instruments from Rome for
Englands conversion to the Christian Religion, Which God in his due time grant,
and I hope every charitable Protestant will say, Amen.

12 There are Wisemen that publish incitations to oppositions, etc.
Ans. There are many that are wise only in their own conceits. But if they
were the wisest of men, yet they may err. No man is wise in all things or at
all times. Wisdom is always accompained with reason, There are many things
that are accounted for wise actions which will not hold the touch of common
sense and reason. It were to be wished (and it would prove happy for the peace
and tranquillity both of the Church and Commonwealth) that there were a
restraint that none should publish any thing to the public against the
established laws of the Kingdom, much less that they should presume to utter
factious words and put forth libellous and seditious pamphlets without their
names to them, to the great dishonor of government, and the breach of peace.
He that is offended at any thing contained in the Laws for either the Church
or commonwealth, and that he can neither by Prayer or conference receive nor
give his conscience Satisfaction, Let him then in all humility present his
arguments with his reasons annexed, to those who have power to reform, to this
I conceive he is called, and bound in conscience to do, and with this obedient
Sacrifice God and the Country too would be well pleased. The want of which
course has caused much distraction and confusion, and whereby many simple
honest people are misled, and misinformed. They little consider of the
policy of the Devil, who makes them instruments of breaking the peace of the
State. Neither do they well ponder the dangerous consequences that attend
consciences misguided and distracted, producing manifold miseries and
calamities, besides the loss of many men's lives. They may repent to late when
they cannot repair the injury they do thereby. Let them therefore consider
well hereof, how they are the authors of miseries, and afflictions to others,
for there is a woe pronounced against them by whom they come.

The Law of God in his Word commands and exhorts as follows.
In the fifth Commandment.
Honor thy Father, etc.
IN the Word Father is comprehended Magistrates and Governors, both in the
Church and Commonwealth: our duty to them is in Romans 13.1. Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers
that be are ordained of God.

2 Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

3 For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou then
not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same.

4 For he is the Minister of God to thee for good; but if thou do that which
is evil be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain, for he is the
Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

5 Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

6 For this cause pay you also tribute, for they are Gods Ministers, attending
continually upon this very thing.

7 Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom
to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor, etc.

Matthew. 22.21. Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's.

1 Pet. 2.17. Fear God, honor the King.

Prove. 24.21. My son, Fear the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them
that are seditious.

Prove. 18.15. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice.

Prove. 21.1. The hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, he rules them
as the Rivers of waters, etc.

Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods (or Judges) nor curse the Ruler of
thy people.

Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, nor the rich in thy
bedchamber, for the fowls of the air shall descry it.

1 Timothy 2.2. Saint Paul wills to pray for those that are in authority, that we
may live a godly life under them with all peace and quietness.

Tit. 3.1. Put them in remembrance that they be subject to principalities and
powers, and that they be obedient to Magistrates, etc.

1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every ordinan^e of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are
sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well, for so is the will of God, etc.

Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, etc.

1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Now, I beseech you brethren, know them that labor among you,
and that are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, that you have them in
singular love for their works sake.

1 Timothy 6.1. Saint Paul advises also the servants to count their Masters
worthy of all honor, that the name of God and his Doctrine may not be evil
spoken of.

From these and the like places may be collected the duty of the Inferiors to
the Superiors, and that the Gospel does not abolish the precepts of the Law,
but rather confirm them, and that Christ has not made laws to overthrow
policies and States, but for the better ruling and establishing of them.

Examples of Obedience and Submission.
Dan. 3. The three children did not pull down the Idolatrous image which they
were commanded to worship, but they submitted themselves to Nebuchadnezzars
decree to be cast into the fiery Furnesse.

Daniell Also did patiently obey the Kings pleasure, and was content to be put
into the Lions Den. Hest. 4. the Jews submitted themselves to Ahasuerus his
Decree on Hamans plot against their lives, and betook themselves to fasting
and prayer. And we may read of the fruits and efects of these submissions.
Christian Soldiers served under the command of Iu^^an the Apostate, who
threatened the utter extinction of Christianity, their arms and oppositions
were only tears and prayers. The Saints and holy Martyrs in all ages have
yielded themselves to death without resistance.

Saint Paul and Saint Peter in their Epistles exhorted to be subject to those
that were then in authority. Claudius was Emperor in those times, and he was
an Ethnic, a Heathen, a Tyrant, etc.

1 Samuel 24.7. David (though the heir to the Kingdom, and Saul a persecuting
Tyrant) yet says, The Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my Master the
Lords anointed, to lay my hands on him, for he is the anointed of the Lord.
Even our blessed Savior yielded himself as a sheep to the slaughter, though
he could have commanded Millions of Angels to have aided and rescued him.

The sixth Commandment.
Thou shall not kill.
1 John 3.5. He that hates his brother in his heart is a manslayer.

Gone. 6.9. Thou shall not shed man's blood, for he was made the Image of God.

Romans 12.9. Vengeance is mine and I will repay it.

In the affirmative part of this Commandment,
We are bound to defend the oppressed. Thus Job 29.16, 17.

Prove. 24.11. Deliver them that are drawn to death, and will thou not deliver
them that are led to be slain? If thou say behold I knew it not, He that
ponders the heart, does not he understand it, and he that keeps thy soul,
knows he it not? Will he not recompense also every man according to his works?

The omission of the duty to the soul brings Superiors into breach of that
Commandment. As Ministers, Ezekiel. 33.8. If he tell not the people of their
sins, they shall die in them, but their blood shall be required at his hands.

Acts 20.27. Saint Paul says, I have told you all the counsel of God, and
kept nothing back; therefore accounts himself innocent of the blood of all men.

The eighth Commandment.
Thou shall not steal.
Malac. 3.8. Ye robbed me of my Tithes and Offerings. By Offerings may be
understood whatsoever is appointed to religious uses.

Prove. 20.25. It is an abomination to the Lord, to devour things sanctified,
that is, things ordained to holy uses.

The ninth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness, etc.
We are not therefore causelessly to suspect any, Matthew. 7.1. Judge not and ye
shall not be judged, for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and
with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

James 3.17. True wisdom which is from above, is without judging, without
Hypocrisy.

Gestures and speeches tending to mock and vilify are in this Commandment
comprehended and forbidden, thus the gestures of those that mocked Christ are
noted, Psalm. 22.7. They nodded their heads at him, and made mowes.

False witnesses also are hereby condemned, Prove. 19.9. A false witness shall
not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall not escape. Prove. 21.28. A
false witness shall perish. Prove. 6.19. The Lord does hate and abhor a false
witness that speaks lies.

Slander and backbiting are also included as a great breach wounding three at
one time.

First, it wounds the soul of the slanderer.

Secondly, wounds the reputation of him that is slandered.

Thirdly, poisons the heart of him who receives the report, with an
uncharitable conceit.

Defense also of bad and ill causes not excluded.

Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
they both are an abomination to the Lord.

Prove. 14.24. He that pray seth the wicked, the people shall curse him.

The Law of the Land, grounded on the Law of God, provides to prevent all
appearances and occasions of shedding of blood, of disobeying authority, and of
prejudice to others. And because the enormities of unlawful Assemblies, Riots,
Routs, and the like, have been such that they have endangered the Kingdom,
and peace thereof, and put in hazard the very form of government, care has
been taken to prevent, even words, menaces, or any other appearances of
discontent, the Kingdom having formerly been sensible that from small sparks
great fires have been kindled: As namely that Riot at Dartmouth in Kent in
Richard the Second his Reign, began first but between a Tyler and his Wife,
and a Collector of a Subsidy for one groat demanded. It put in hazard the
Kings life, the burning of the City of London, the ruin of the Nobility,
Gentry, and Kingdom also. So likewise in Henry the Sixth his time, a small
occasion, a falling out between one of the Yeomen of the Kings Guard, and one
of the then Earl of Warwick his men, came to a Riot of such a high nature,
that it was the root of many woeful and fatal Tragedies, even the loss of
Richard Plantaginet Duke of York, and after him King Henry the Sixth, and
Prince Edward his son, with many of the Peers, Nobility, and Gentry, and
many thousands of the Kingdom likewise.

Therefore Menacers shall be imprisoned, St. 2. Ed. 3.

Neither shall there be any Barrettors or Maintayners of Quarrels. West. 1.3.
Ed. 1.32.

There are also provisions made and punishments ordained, against the enormitie
of privy defaming and libelling, invented to defame and tread the honor and
estimation of a man in the dust, to make him derided and despised amongst his
Neigbours.

Scandala Magnatum, Scandals of Peers or Governors provided against in St. 3.
Ed. 1.34. 2. R. 2.12. R 2.41.

There shall be no disturbance of a Preacher in his Sermon. 1. M. 3.

There shall be no chiding or smiting in a Church or Churchyard. St. 5. and
6. Ed. 6.

There shall be no assaulting of a Judge or Juror. 22. Ed. 3.13.

There shall be no Riots, etc. therefore for the punishment of them, the Court
of Star Chamber was ordained. St. 3. H. 7.1. St. 21. H. 8.22.

Not disclosing a Commotion or unlawful assembly, when one is moved thereunto,
within 24 hours to a Justice of Peace, a Sheriff, Bailiffe, etc. is
imprisonment for three months. 1. M. 12.

Procuring others to offend 1. M. 12. are to suffer imprisonment for three
months also.

Juries ordained to enquire of Riots. St. 13. H. 4.

There shall be no Maintenance by Combination or Conspiracy. St. 33. E. 1. 1.
R. 2.7.

There shall be no Maintenance by Embracery, that is, by coming to the Bar
with the offendour, and speaking in the matter, or threatening, or procuring of
a Jury. St. 33. E. 1.

There shall be no Maintenance by Jurors, that is, when they corruptly take any
reward directly or indirectly of the offender Plantiffe or Defendant to give
his verdict. St. 34. Ed. 3. Ed. 3.38.

Therefore a Riot not found by the Jury, by reason of Maintenance or Embracery,
is to be punished. St. 19. H. 7.13.

There shall not be any Maintenance by great men in authority by speaking of
words, whereby to frighten the Jurie, or to make them to incline to his desire,
and therefore also none but such as are in the Commission shall sit with the
Justices of Assize. 20. R. 2. 22. H. 6.5. 13. H. 4.19.

A Riot is when three persons or above, assemble themselves to the intent to
beat or maym a man, to pull down a house, fence, or the like, or to do any
unlawful act with force and violence, against the peace. St. 5. R. 2.7. Three
or four entering into Lands with force upon the possession of another, though
the entry be lawful, yet it is accounted a Riot. And an assembly lawfully
begun, does many times end riotously.

An unlawful Assembly is when above three do assemble themselves with intent
to beat, or do as aforesaid, though nothing be acted by them, yet it is an
unlawful assembly.

A Rout is when above three do assemble to revenge themselves, to pull down,
etc. or to beat a man that has done some offense to them all, or show by
gesture, or speech, that they mean to do any violence, or do fear any of the
Kings people, It is accounted in the Law a Rout, though nothing be done. 17.
Ed. 4.4.

The Doctrine of the Church of England, confirmed by the Law, in the twentieth
Article concerning the authority of the Church, says, that the Church has
power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and authority in controversy of faith,
being not contrary to the written Word of God, Article 37. conterning the
Civil Magistrates, says, that they are to have that Prerogative which was
given to all godly Princes in holy Scripture, by God himself, that is, that
they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the
stubborn and evil doers, etc.

These and the like may be collected from the Law of God and Man, for our duty
to our Governors, and the preservation of the peace; they may be applyable,
and may serve to convince the offenses that have been done contrary to them,
and may be a preservative or remedy to prevent the doing of the like again.

To conclude, It is manifest, that the Laws of the Land concerning the duty to
the Civil Magistrate and our Governors, and the Maintenance of the Peace,
cannot be broken but with great violence and opposition to the Law of God.

Those then that labor against conformity to them, do little less then
endeavor to dissolve the bonds of Government and Unity established by God and
Man, and so consequently all would fall to confusion. Such are dangerous and
pernicious to the tranquillity and prosperity of a Kingdom. The Law of the
Land has made provisions, and ordained severe punishments for the offense done
to the Majesty of Government, and the peace of the Land, calling it Treason,
or Crimen Laesae Majestatis: for the preservation of the Supremacy thereof,
there is an Oath enjoined, St. 1. El. 1.5. El. 1. and those that refuse it, the
second time, are thereby made guilty of high Treason. And, me thinks, there is
great reason that authority and government should be carefully preserved. For
it is as the Head, Eye, or Soul is to the body; Take away the life and the
senses, and what remayns but a useless and senseless carcass? or as the Sun
is to all things under it; We know that by the benefit of the Sun, and the
properties belonging thereunto, all subsolarie bodies and creatures are
enlivened and bettered; but when it is ecclipsed though never so little they
are much the worse; so while the bright and radiant beams of Sovereigne
authority and lawful Government, have there due and proper influence upon the
inferior subjects, they grow and flourish in peace and plenty, but when it is
ecclipsed, by the interposition of the inferior Orbs, What malignant
calamities and pestiferous effects are always produced? The body politic
suffers no less then the natural body, by the obstruction of the animal and
vital spirits.

These I have thought fit (as a private Christian called thereunto) to commit
to paper for the information of those who are ignorant, My particular calling
will not permit me otherwise, or farther to express or enlarge my self. I
seriously protest I have no sinister end herein, nor is it done out of any
malice, hatred, or evil affection to any, but in discharge of the late
Protestation, and as I verily believe I am bound in conscience and duty to God
and Man, to maintain the truth, peace, and due government of the Church and
Commonweal. Peruse it therefore the more charitably, and labor to be
informed of the truth how mean clothed so ever you find it, and take heed how
you persist in a known error. And as you have been an example of evil unto
others, who are too ready to take pattern of disobedience thereby, so you
ought to be an example of good to them in your obedience, in your acknowledging
and amending your errors. Thus Paul exhorts Titus to preach, Titus 3.3. For
we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating
one another. In the 1 Timothy 6.11. His dehortation is, But thou o man of God fly
these things, (with his exhortation) and follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, and meekness. To this ye were exhorted by
the same text at the visitation Sermon, the very hour before your disorder.
You may see what it is to take Gods name into your mouths and ears, and to
scorn to be reformed, What inconveniences you might have prevented by
observing it and other advertisements given you at that time, What dangers you
have run your selves into by contemning them. Therefore sin no more lest a
worse thing happen, and according to Salomons advice, Prove. 21. Fear the Lord
and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to Sedition. Love the
Truth, and Peace, is the Prophet Zachary his counsel, Zach. 8.19. Seek them,
follow them, and contend for them, as far as lawfully thou may, for thou will
find the contraries of them full of miseries and calamities, and so the God of
Truth and Peace guide you, and bless you with (what I heartily wish you)
external, internal, and eternal peace.

I. W.

FINIS.

