Mr. Wallers SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, On TUESDAY the fourth of July,
1643.

Being brought to the Bar, and having leave given him by the SPEAKER, to say
what he could for himself, before they proceeded to expel him the HOUSE.

July 14. 1643.
Imprimatur,

John White.



LONDON, Printed by G. Dexter. Anne Dom. 1643.

MR. WALLERS SPEECH IN THE HOUSE of COMMONS On Tuesday the 4th of July, 1643.
Mr. SPEAKER.
I Acknowledge it a great mercy of God, and a great favor from you, that I am
once more suffered to behold this Honorable Assembly, I mean not to make use
of it to say any thing in my own defense by Justification or denial of what I
have done, I have already confessed enough to make me appear, worthy not only
to be put out of this House, but out of the World too. All my humble request to
you is that, if I seem to you as unworthy to live, as I do to my self, I may
have the Honor to receive my death from your own hands, and not be exposed
to a Trial by the Counsel of War: what ever you shall think me worthy to
suffer in a Parliamentary way, is not like to find stop any where else.

This (Sir) I hope you will be pleased for your own sakes to grant me, who am
already so miserable, that nothing can be added to my calamity, but to be made
the occasion of creating a President to your own disadvantage; besides the
right I may have to this, consider I beseech you that the eyes of the world are
upon you, you govern in Chief, and of you should expose your own members to
the punishment of others, it will be thought that you either want Power, or
leisure to chastise them your selves; nor ltt any man despise the ill
consequence of such a President as this will be, because he sees not
presently the inconveniences which may ensue: you have many Armies on Foot,
and it is uncertain how long you may have occasion to use them. Soldiers and
Commanders (though I know well they of the Parliaments Army, excel no lesle
in modesty then they do in Courage) are generally of a Nature ready to pretend
to the utmost power of this kind, which they conceive to be due to them, and
may be too apt upon any occasion of discontent to make use of such a President
as this. In this very Parliament you have not bin without some taste of the
experience hereof; it is now somewhat more than two years since you had an
Army in the North paid and directed by your selves, and yet you may be pleased
to remember they was a considerable number of Officers in that Army, which
joined in a Petition or Remonstrance to his House taking notice of what some of
the Members had said as they supposed to their disadvantage and did little
less than require them of you; it is true, there had bin some tampering with
them, but what has happened at one time may wisely be thought posible to fall
out again at another.

Sir, I presume but to point you out the danger; if it be not just, I know you
will not do me the wrong to expose me to this trial; if it be just your Army
may another time require the same justice of you, in their own behalf,
against some other Member, who perhaps you would be less willing to part with.
Necessity has of late forced you into untrodden paths; and in such a case as
this where you have no president of your own, you may not do amiss to look
abroad upon others States and Senates, which exercises the Supreme Power, as
you now do here.

I dare confidently say you shall find none either Ancient or Modern, which
ever exposed any of their own order to be tried for his life by the Officers
of their Armies abroad. for what he did, while he resided among them in the
Senate.

Among the Romans the Practice was so contrary, that some inferior Officers in
their Army far from the City, having been sentenced by their General or
Commanderm chief, as deserving death by their Discipline of nevertheless
(because they were Senators) appealed thither, and the cause has received a new
hearing in the Senate. Not to use more words to persuade you to take heed that
you wound not your selves thorough my sides in violating the Privileges
belonging to your own persons, I shall humbly desire you to consider likewise
the nature of my offense. (not but that I should be much ashamed to say any
thing in diminution thereof; God knows it is horrid enough for the evil it
might have occasioned) but if you look near it, it may perhaps appear to be
rather a Civil then a Martial crime* and so to have Title to a Trial at the
Common Law of the Land, there may justly be some difference put between me and
others in this business.

I have had nothing to do with the other Army or any intention to begin the
offer of violence to any body, It was only a civil pretense to that which I
then foolishly conceived to he the right of the subject, I humbly refer it to
your considerations, and to your consciences. I know you: will take care not to
shed the blood of War in Peace, that blood by the law of War which has a
right to be tried by the Law of Peace. For so much as concerns my self and my
part in this business, (If I were worthy to have any thing spoken or patiently
heard in my behalf) this might truly be said, that I made not this business,
but found it, it was in other men's hands long before it was brought to me, and
when it came I extended it not but restrained it. For the Propositions of
lecting in part of the Kings Army, or offering violence to the Members of this
House, I ever disallowed and utterly rejected them.

What it was that moved me to entertain discourse of this business so far
as I did, I will tell you ingeniously and that rather as a warning for others,
than that it make any thing For my self; it was only impatience of the
inconveniences of the present War, looking on things with a carnal eye, and
not minding that which chiefly (if not only) ought to have been considered,
the inestimable value of the Cause you have in hand, the Cause of God and of
Religion, and the necessities you are forced on for the maintenance of the
same; as a just punishment for this neglect, it pleased God to desert and
suffer me with a fatal blindness, to be led on and engaged in such Counsels
as were wholly disproportioned to the rest of my life; These (Sir) my own
Conscience tells me was the cause of my life; These (Sir) my own Conscience
tells me was the cause of my failing, and not malice, or any ill habit of
mind, or disposition toward the Commonwealth, or to the Parliament: for from
whence should I have it? If you look on my Birth you will not find it in my
blood: I am of a Stock which has borne you better fruit if you look on my
education, it has been almost from my childhood in this House, and among the
best sort of men; and for the whole practice of my life till this time, if an
other were to speak for me, he might reasonably say, that neither my actions
out of Parliament, nor my expressions in it, have savoured of distrust, or
malice to the Liberties of the People, or Privileges of Parliament.

Thus Sir I have set before your eyes, both my person and my case, wherein I
shall make no such defense by denying, or extenuating any thing, I have done,
as ordinary Delinquents do, my address to you, and all my Plea shall only be
such as Children use to their Parents, I have offended, I confesle it, I never
did any thing like it before; it is a passage unsuitable to the whole course of
my life beside and for the time to come, as God that can bring light out of
darkness, and has made this business in the event useful to you, so also
has he to me: you have by it made an happy discovery of your Enemies, and God
of my self, and the evil principles I walk by; so that if you look either
on what I have been heretofore, or what I now am, and by Gods grace assisting
me, shall always continue to be, you may perhaps think me fit to be an
example of your compassion and clemency.

Sir, I shall no sooner leave you, but my life will depend on your breath, and
not that alone, but the subsistence of some that are more innocent. I might
therefore show you my Children, whom the rigor of your Justice would make
complete Orphans, being already Motherlesse. I might show you a Family, wherein
there are some unworthy to have their share in that mark of Infamy which now
threaten us: But something there is, which if I could show you, would move you
more then all this, it is my Heart, which abhorres what I have done more, and
is more severe to it self, then the severest Judge can be. A heart (Mr.
Speaker) so awakened by this affliction, and so entirely devoted to the Cause
you maintain, that I earnestly desire of God to incline you, so to dispose of
me, whether for life or for death, as may most conduce to the advancement
thereof.

Sir, not to trouble you any longer, if I dye, I shall dye praying for you; if
I live, I shall live serving you, and render you back the use and employment
of all those days you shall add to my life.

After this having withdrawn himself, he was called in again, and (being by
the Speaker required thereto) gave them an exact account how he came first to
the knowledge of this business; as also what Lords were acquainted therewith,
or had engaged themselves therein.

FINIS.

