Due Correction FOR MR HOBBES. OR School Discipline, for not saying his
Lessons right. In Answer To His Six Lessons, directed to the Professors of
Mathematics. By the Professor of GEOMETRY.

Hobs Leviathan part. 1. chap. 5. page 21. Who is so stupid, as both to mistake
in Geometry, and also to persist in it, when another detects his error to him?
OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University for Tho:
Robinson. 1656.

TO THE Right Honorable HENRY Lord Marquess of Dorchester, Earl of Kingston,
Vicount Newark, Lord Pierrepoint, and Manvers, etc.
MY LORD,
YOUR Honor may perhaps think it strange that a person so wholly a stranger as
I, should tender you such a piece as this: Yet will, I doubt not, acquit me of
rudeness and incivility in so doing; when you consider, That the adverse
party, whom it takes to task, has made his appeal hither; and finding
himself foiled in Latin, has here put in his English Bill for some relief:
And it is but reason that Bill and Answer be filed in the same Court. He had
the confidence, to tender his book first to another honorable Person the Earl
of Devonshire, with this presumption, That though things were not so fully
demonstrated as to satisfy every Reader, yet 'twas good enough to satisfy his
Lordship, he did not doubt. Which presumption of his was then the more
tolerable, because he then thought his demonst^a^io^s good. But when he had
been so fully convinced what weak stuff it was; that now the utmost of his
hopes is (for so I understand from his friends) that though he be mistaken in
the Mathematics, yet he hopes to prove himself an honest man, (which yet is
more I suppose than, by his principles, he need to be:) To make the world
believe, that your Lordship does approve of his Principles, Method, and Manners
in those writing; and, that this is the only cause of the favors you have
expressed toward him; is so high an affront, as had he not a great confidence
of your Lorships Magnanimity, to despise it, or Clemency, to pardon it, he
would not have offered to a person of so much honor and worth.

Since therefore he has brought it before you as a controversy, wherein he
desires your Lordship to consider and judge, whether he have said his six
Lessons aright: I shall not at all demurre to the jurisdiction of the court;
but as readily admit his Umpar, as allow him the choice of his own Weapon; and
so tender your Lordship an English Answer to his English Appeal from my Latin
Confutation of his treatise in Latin: That when in the judgment of this own
Umpar, he sees himself foiled at his own weapons; he may hereafter make choice
of French or Dutch, or some other Language, which he may hope to be more
favorable to him, than Latin or English has yet been.

He tells your Lordship, what great feats he has done in his book; and your
Lordship knows as well, by this and my former answer, how they have been
defeated.

And then he reckons up certain positions (some of them absurd enough) and
would have you believe them to be our Principles at Oxford: But does not tell
your Lordship where they are to be found in any writings of ours.

Now, (that your Lordship may not seek them there in vain, where they are not
to be found,) I shall briefly show where the rise of all these accusations
lie; in his own writings, not in ours.

First, He had taught us Cap. 13.. 16. Si ratio detur minoris ad majus,
rationesque aliquot addantur ipso aequales non multiplicari proprie, sed
submultiplicari dicitur: itaque quando additur primae rationi altera, ratio
primae quantitatis ad tertiam, ^emissis est rationis primae ad secundam. That
is, in plain English, If there be any proportion assigned of a less quantity
to a greater, and to that proportion be added another proportion equal to it;
that proportion that does result by this addition, is not the double, but the
half of that assigned proportion. Now, because this is very absurd, and I had
told him so; He would have your Lordship believe, that it was I had said (not
he,) that Two equal proportions, are not double to one of the same
proportions. Which is his first Charge.

Secondly; He had said farther, in the same place, Cap. 13.. 16. Ratio 2 ad 1
vocatur dupla, and 3 ad 1 tripla, etc. (and he says true.) But then
(forgetting that these were his own words) he would have it thought (Less. 5.
p. 42.) absurd to say that the proportion of two to one is double; and asks, is
not every double proportion, the double of some proportion? And does here
intepret that phrase (of his own) the proportion of two to one is called
double, to be all one as to say, That a proportion is double, triple etc. of a
number, but not of a proportion. Which is his second charge.

Thirdly he had Cap. 8.. 13, 14. (without any necessity) laid ^he whole stresse
of Geometry, upon this supposition. That, It is not possible for the same body
to possess at one time a greater, at another time a lesser place. (For, if
this be possible, the same body is, by his definition, at the same time equal
to a bigger, and to a less body than it self: as I there showed by a
consequence so clear that he cannot himself deny it.) Which he there first,
attempts to prove, (as simply as a man would wish,) but then presently flies
off again, and say^ that a thing in it self so manifest needs no
demonstration. But said I, (without declaring my own opinion in the case, which
what it is he known not) An assertion of such huge consequence to his doctrine
as this is, and being (as he well knows) generally denied (whatever he or I
think of it) by all those who maintain Condensation and Rarification in a
proper sense, (without either vacuum, or the admission and extrusion of a
foreign body;) ought to be well proved, by him that builds so much upon it,
and not be assumed gratis. Now because of this it is, that he tells you in his
third charge, That it is one of our principles, That the same body without
adding to it, or taking from it, is sometimes greater and sometimes less. So
heinous a matter is it, to require a proof from him, of what he does affirm
though of never so great consequence.

Fourthly, He tells us Cap. 14.. 19. (and it is true enough) that an Hyperbolick
line, and its Asymptote, do still come nearer and nearer till they approach to
a distance less then any assignable quantity: And consequently if infinitely
produced, must be supposed to meet, or to have no distance at all; (and so the
distance of that hyperbola so produced, from a line parallel to the Asymptote,
to be the same with the distance of that Asymptote from the said parallel;
that i^, equal to a given quantity.) And that this is a good inference, we are
taught Less. 5.. 43. as standing on the same ground with the demonstrations of
all such Geometricians, Ancient and Modern, as have inferred any thing in the
manner following, [viz. If it be not greater nor less, then it is equal. But
it is neither greater nor less. Therefore etc. If it be greater, say by how
much. By so much. It Is not greater by so much: Therefore it is not greater. If
it be less, say by now much etc.] which, being good demonstrations are
together with this overthrown, if this inference be not good; that is, if
things which differ less than any assignable quantity may not be reputed
equal, But now, to say thus, That the distance of an Hyperbole, from a
straight line drawn beyond its asymptote and the parallel thereunto, does
continually decrease, so as, if it be supposed infinitely produced, it must be
supposed to be at length the same with that of the Asymptote from the said
parallel, because neither greater nor less by any assignable quantity; (which
is but the result of his own assertion) is all one as to say, That a quantity
may grow less and less eternally, so as at last to be equal to another
quantity; or which is all one, says he, that there is a last in Eternity*
which is his fourth charge: and, what absurdity is in it, falls upon himself.
Just as, when having told us Cap. 16.. 20. Punctum inter quantitates nihil est,
ut inter numeros Cyphra: And Cap. 14.. 16. Punctum ad lineam neque rationem
habet, neque quantitatem ullam: He railes upon me, twenty times over, as if I
had somewhere said A point is nothing; only because I say with Euclide, (...).

Fifthly it is his usual language, in designing an angle, to say, it is
contained or comprehended by or between the two sides: As for example Cap. 14..
9. (three times in two lines) idem angulus est qui comprehenditur inter AB and
AC, cum eo qui comprehenditur inter AE and AF, vel inter AB and AF, And. 15.
cor. 1. angul^s comprehensos a duabus rectis. And. 16. angulus qui continetur
inter AB and eandem AB etc. (And it is well enough so to speak.) But now,
forgeting that it was himself that said so, he delivers it as a principle of
ours, That the nature of an angle consists in that which lies between the lines
which comprehend it; that is, says he, An angle is a superficies.

Sixthly; when he had said (absurdly enough,) Cap. 11. 5. Consistit ratio
antecedentis ad consequens, in Differentia, hoc est, in ea Part majoris qua
minus ab eo superatur; sive in majoris (dempto minore) Residuo, etc And again,
Ratio binarii ad quinarium est ternarius, etc. And Cap. 12. 8. Ratio
inaequalium (linearum) OF, IG, consistit in differentia GF, (and the like
elsewhere.) which is all one as to say, that the nature of proportion consists
in a number, a line, an absolute quantity etc; (which how absurd it was I had
let him know;) He has then the impudence to say (as though it had been I, not
he, had so spoken) that, I make Proportion to be a Quotient, a number, an
Absolute quantity, etc. or, as he here speaks in his sixth charge, that the
Quotient is the proportion of the Division to the Dividend, (as pure nonsense
as a body need to read;) Only because I affirm Rationis (Geometricae)
aestimationem esse, not penes residuum, but penes quotum: that Geometrical
proportion is to be estimated, not according to the Remainder, but according to
the Quotient (which himself now knows, though he did not then, to be true
enough; for he has now learned to say so too, Less. 2. p. 16. As the Quotient
gives us a measure of the Proportion of the Dividend to the Divisor in
Geometrical Proportion; so also the Remainder after Substraction is the
measure of Proportion Arithmeticall.) And by these means he goes about to prove
himself an honest man: Just like the honest man, who when he had cut a purse,
put it slyly into another man's pocket (after he had taken out the money) that so
this other might be hanged for it. And I hope, by that time Your Lordship has
perused the piece which I now tender, you will be able to judge, whether M.
Hobs be not as well a good Mathematician, as an Honest Man; much alike.

Your Lordship has now the case fair before you; if you shall think it worth
the while to take cognizance of it. I shall leave it here, and permit it to
your Lordships judgment, whether to peruse and consider it, (which by reason
of your good accomplishment in these, as well as in other parts of Learning,
you are well able to do,) or to lay it by for those that will: as being
unwilling, by any importune solicitation, to trespass upon your Lordships
leisure, or divert your thoughts, from matters of more concernment, to consider
of such toys as these. Desiring mean while your Lordships favor so far, as to
give me leave to honor you, and (though I have not hitherto had the honor to
be known to you) to subscribe my self,

MY LORD, Your Honors Most Humble Servant, John Wallis.
Oxford. Oct. 15. 1656.
DVE CORRECTION for Mr HOBS.
SECT. I. Concerning his Rhetoric and good Languge.
IT seems, M. Hobs, (by the fag end of your Book of Body in English) that you
have a mind to say your lesson; and that the Mathematick Professors of Oxford
should hear you. Truth is, it is scarce worth the while either for you or us.
Yet we could be contented, for once, to hear you; (if we thought you would say
any thing that were worth hearing) But to make a constant practice of it, or to
entertain you as one of our Scholars, I have n^ mind at all. Because, I fear,
you are to old to learn, (though you have as much need as those that be
younger;) and yet will think much to be whipped, when you do not sa^ your Lesson
right.

But, before we go further, I should ask you; what moved you to say your
Lessons in English, when as the Books, against which you do chiefly intend
them, were written in Latin? But I foresee a fair answer that you might
possibly make; (and therefore do nor much wonder at it.) There be many grave
and weighty reasons that might move you thereunto.

As first, because you do presume, that there may be found diverse persons, who
may understand railing in English, that yet do not understand Mathematics in
Latin: and those being the persons on whom you have greatest hope of doing
good, you ought to have a special regard to them, and apply your self to
their capacities.

Secondly, because in case you should have attempted an Answer in Latin; you
had lost your labor as to the whole design: For then those who should read
your answer, would be able also to read that against which you write: and,
comparing both together, would presently see to how little purpose all is that
you have said. Whereas now your English Readers must be feign to take upon
trust what you please to tell them. (Whereby you gain clearly, as to them, the
opportunity of misrepresenting at pleasure what you see good.) And for this
Reason, if you shall think fit to make any reply to this; I would advise you to
do it in Latin; that so Forrainers, who understand not English, may take upon
trust what you shall please to tell them.

But thirdly, and principally (which is the reason of greatest weight) because
that when ever you have thought it convenient to repair to Billingsgate, to
lean the art of Well-speaking, for the perfecting of your natural Rhetoric;
you have not found that any of the Oister-women could teach you to rail in
Latin, and therefore it was requisite to apply your self to such lauguage as
they could teach you.

But prithee tell me, in good earnest, (for I cannot think you so simple as you
would seem to be,) Whether you do indeed believe (though you thought good to
set a good face upon it, and talk big,) that all that you have said is worth a
straw, either as to the defending of your Reputation, or the impairing of ours?

As to the Rhetoric and good language of it, (with which I shall first begin)
that you can upon all occasions, or without occasion, give the titles of Fool,
Beast, Ass, D^gge, etc. (which I take to be but barking,) with the rest of
your course complements: You may take them, perhaps, to be admirable in their
kind; yet are they no better then a man might have at Billingsgate for a box
o'th ear. And of no better alloy are those other garnishes; That we understand
not what is Quantity, Line, Superficies, Angle, and Proportion: (and truly
that is a sad case:) That neither of us understand any thing either in
Philosophy or in Geometry; (A lack a day!) That you do verily believe (it is
pity you cannot persuade some body else to be of your faith,) that since the
beginning of the World there has not been (and who doubts but you are a good
Historian,) nor ever shall be, (and you hope your Prognostics may be believed,
for you would have us think you have been taken for a Conjurer,) so much
absurdity written in Geometry, as is to be found in these books of mine, (you
should always except your own Learned Works, which doubtless are, in this
kind, incomparable pieces. But the truth is, you are not altogether out here;
for in my Elenchus, which is one of the Books you mention, you may see that
there has been match absurdity written in Geometry, and, they that read it, may
know by whom.) But you have confuted them wholly and clearly (it seems you make
clear work where you come) in two or three leaves, (a quick riddance!) That,
the negligences of your own you need not be ashamed of, (because you are
ashamed of nothing;) That you verily believe there was never seen worse
reasoning, then in that Philos^phicall Essay, (and that is all the confutation
of it:) nor worse Principles then these in our Books of Geometry; (and that is
another Article of your Faith) That, by the use of Symbols, and the way of
Analysis by squares and cubes, etc. you never saw any thing added to the
Science of Geometry; (by which a man may see what a good Geometer you are like
to prove;) That the Scab of Symbols, or Gambols, (your tongue is your own, you
may call them what you please,) or the Symbolick tongue is harder to understand
then Welsh or Irish, (no marvel then, you never saw any thing thereby added
to Geometry.) That, to confute your Learned labors, is but to take wing like
Beetles, from your egestions; (it seems it was but a shitten piece we had to
deal with.) That, what you like not, is worthy to be gilded, but you do not
mean with gold; That Symbols are pior unhandsome scaf, folds of Demonstration;
and ought no more to appear in public, then the most deformed necessary
business which you do in your Chamber; (one would think, by such stuff as
this, together with the ribauldry in your obscene Poem De Mirabilibus Pecci,
that you had not learned all your Rhetoric at Billingsgate, but had gone to
Turn-ball-street for part of it.) That, your faults are not attended with
shame, (It Is no commendations, to be past shame;) That, you shall without our
leaves be bold to say, (who ever doubted but that you be bold enough?) that
your self are the first that has made the grounds of Geometry firm and
coherent, (as if Geometry were no less beholden to you, then Civil Philosophy;
which, you say, is not ancienter then your Book de Cive.) That you have reason
to blash (not for any of your own faults doubtless, but) considering the
opinion men will have beyond Sea, of the Geometry taugh' in Oxford, (no doubt
but the University of Oxford, if men knew all; are much beholden to you for
your tender care of them;) yet withal, that the third definition of the fifth
of Euclide, is as bad as any thing was ever said in Geometry by D. Wallis,
(And, if so, then doubtless D. Wallis need not be much dismayed; for Euclide
has not been accounted hitherto a despicable Author.) But such bumbast as
this, and a great deal more of the same kind, I suppose, you do not take to
be Mathematical demonstrations; nor to prove any thing, but the Forehead and
Fury of him that speaks it.

But because the stresse of all this lies only upon what you verily believe,
and what you never saw, and what you fear men will think of us beyond Sea:
etc. To ease you of this fcar, I think it will not be amiss to let you hear
the opinion of others both concerning your self and us, and the business of
Symbols (with which I see no reason why you should be so angry, save that you
do not understand them.) that you may see* whether others haze the same belief
with you. I need not tell you what Morinus and Tacquet think of the business.
For those you have heard already. I shall only give you an extract of two or
three Letters, which I have received from Persons whose face^ I never saw; nor
were they otherwise engaged to deliver an opinion in the case, then that they
met with my books abroad: And yet no Clergy men, He assure you.

The first is from a Noble Gentleman of good worth, who has deserved better of
the Mathematics then ever M. Hobs is like to do; and whom, I hear, you use
to commend. His words are these.

Eodem ibi tempore [Paristis] a Viro Nobili pagella vestra de Circuli
Quadratura, Londino mittebatur; simulque Hobbii Philosolosophia Nova. Quam ubi
primum examinare concessum est, continuo Paralogismum eum animadverti, quo
Parabolicae lineae rectam aequare contendit, calculoque refutavi. Deinde alia
quoque notavi, quae nihilo saniora erant, authoremque ingenio minime defaecato
praeferebant. Miror te hunc dignum judicasse quem tam prolixe refelleres. Etsi
non sine voluptate Elenchum tuum pervolvi, doctum equidem atque acutum.

You see he has no great opinion of you: He finds you full of Paralogismes: He
takes you to be a man of a muddy brain; and wonders only that I thought it
worth while to foul my fingers about ^uch a piece as yours.

The other is a public Professor of Mathematics, of known abilities, and
beyond exception; and he speaks yet somewhat fuller to the whole business.

Cum aestate praeterita in manus inciderit Thomae Hobbes Elementorum
Philosophiae Sectio prima; abs^inere non potui quin tractatum istum leviter
evolverim. Instigabat me ad hoc, tum Authoris hujus celebritas, tum etiam quod
plura in eadem tractatu offen debam Geometrica, quae si Philosophiam non
excelerent, saltem ut quam maxim illustratura forent, opinabar. Sed me illum
perlustrante, cum talia ibi invenerim ejus de Algebra sive Ana^ys^ judicia,
equibus mihi facile fuit colligere, quod Author hic in eadem Art parum deberet
esse versatus; (quandoquidem haec ill^ Ars existit, ut si liber suus in
Geometria egregii ac ardui quid contineret, qualia se passim invenisse
praetendere mihi videhatur, id ipsum huic Arti, judicio meo, in totum deberet;)
Cumque adhuc in perlustrando dum p^rgebam, non nulla de rectae ac curvae
aequalitate, aliaque complura animadvertebam quorum cognitionem nunquam mihi
pollicebar, ac inter seponenda not abam, vel certe si spos aliqua inveniendi
illa mihi superesset, quin Algebram in parts vocarem non dubitabam: Aliam
exinde de ipso ^pinionem concepi, credens quod illa quae illu^ ante e^proprio
penu deprompsisse autumabam, non nisi aliorum inventa esse, sed in alium sensum
ab eo traducta aut correpta: Ideoque siquid boni in eo comprehenderetur, id
quam maxim esse ventilandum ac excutiendum; ac proinde illius examen, si vel
utile aut necessum judicarem, in commodius tempus mihi esse differendum.
Quemadmodum autem haec ita conceperam, ita quoque evenit ut amicus, cui me eo
tempore invisenti dictum tractatum exhibueram, falsitatem plurium illius
propositionum haud long post invenerit, illasque uno folio coram omnibus
exponere decreverit. Qui edere ista utiliter rotus, ubi se ad hoc accinxerat,
tuum interim, vir* Clarissime, Elenchum in lucent proditum vidit, ac postquam
te isto munere optime defunctum deprehendit, a proposito suo destitit. Egregie
autem te eum, Vir Clarissime, sed pro merito tamen excepisse ibidem agnovi, ita
ut credam eum in posterum a te prudentiorem doctioremque factum, licet ille
tibi nullas gratias (judicio meo) pro beneficio isto sit habiturus, Inter illa
quae in Elencho tuo offendi, nihil expectationem majorem mihi excitavit, quam
Arithmetica tua Infinitorum, de qua subinde mentionem facis: Quam novissime in
lucem proditam, quamprimum cum caeteris tuis tractatibus vidi, mihi comparavi,
ac multa praeclara and ingeniosa inventa, qualia mihi proposueram, continere
deprehendi. Perpl^^ et autem quod tum in Arithmetica tua Infinitorum, tum in
Sectionibus tuis Conicis pertractandis, calculum Geometricum ubique adhibueris,
tum propter brevitatem, tum quod is (ut ipse mones) demonstrationum omnium fons
existat, atque demonstrationes omnes, solenni modo factae, certa art ex illo
confi^i possint. Id quod prae aliis Clarissimus D. des Carts in
Demonstrationibus suis est molitus, qui neglecta Theorematum ac Lemmatum longa
serie, quibus alias in demonstrando difficulter carere liceret, calculo omnia
constare voluit; atque in eum finem passim aequationes investigat, quibus rei
veritas, ac quomodo illa cognosci possit, absque verborum involueris, breviter
atque perspicue ob oculos ponatur. Quae autem de Circuli quadratura tradis,
utrum scilicet rem acu tetigeris necne nondum examinare mihi contigit:
subtilissime autem cum illam prosecutus mihi videaris, atque etiam calculo
ipsam inquisiveris, non dubito quin omnium saltem proxime atque accuratissime
ad scopum collimaveris.

You see what he thinks of you, and me, and Symbols. He discerns presently by
your judgment of Algebra, what a Geometer you are like to prove; that it must
needs be one who understood it not, that rants at that rate; and will yet talk
of squaring a Circle, and find a straight line equal to a crooked, and other
fine things, without the help of Algebra. He sees by a little what the rest is
like to prove; either little worth, or not your own. And therefore, though at
first he made have to get it, yet when he sees what is in it, he thinks your
book may well be thrown aside, or at least be examined at leisure. He tells you
of another, that, had not my Elenchus prevented him, meant to have been upon
the bones of you. He tells you, that my Elen^hus, as sharp as it is, is no more
then you had deserved. He supposed withal (though therein it seems he was
deceived) that you would have learned from thence, more Mathematics, and more
discretion for the future; and yet did believe (as well he might) (...) you
would scarce thank me for that favor. He is well enough satisfied also with my
other Pieces, (what ever you think of them,) and likes them never the worse for
that Scab of Symbols (as you call it) but much the better; (because, though you
understand them not, he does.) And much more to that purpose.

And by this time, I hope, you be pretty well eased of your fear, least the
University of Oxford should suffer in the opinion of Learned men beyond Sea, by
reason of the Mathematics that we have written. (Nor have you reason to think,
that Malmesbury, will be much the more renowned for your skill in that kind.)
And, that you may not despise their Testimonies, the persons are very well
known to the World, by what Works they have extant in Print, to be no
contemptible Mathematicians.

Beside these, I shall, for the satisfaction of your English Readers (who
perhaps may not so well understand the words of the Authors above mentioned,)
add an extract of one Letter more; from a noble Gentleman, whom as yet (to my
knowledge) I never saw, nor had formerly any the lest intercourse with him by
letter or otherwise, though I had before heard of his worth and skill, both in
Mathematics and other learning: And which is more, he is neither of the
Clergy; nor any great Admirer of them, beyond other persons of equal worth and
Learning. He was pleased, though wholly a stranger to me, upon view of my
Elenchus, to intimate to me by a Letter directed to a third person, That D.
Wallis had unhappily guessed, that those propositions which M. Hobs had
concerning the measure of Parab^lasters, were not his own, but borrowed from
some body else without acknowledging his Author: and signified withal, that
they were to be found demonstrated in an exercitation of Cavallerius, De usu
Indivisibilium in Potestatibus Cossicis; (a piece which I then had never read:)
And that M. Hobs, endeavoring to demonstrate them anew, had missed in it. For
which civility from a person of Quality, to me a mere stranger, I could do no
less then return him a civil answer of thanks for that favor. In reply to
which (having in the mean time seen and perused my Arithmetica Infinitorum) he
was pleased to honor me farther with this.

I had not so long deferred etc. but that etc. And I beseech you receive it now
from a Person, who much honors your eminent Learning and Humanity, and would
egerly embrace an occasion to give you most ample testimony of the esteem he
has for you. I had not, (before etc.) seen your Arithmetica Infinitorum, which
alone, although your other labors were not taken in to make up the value, may
equal you with the best deservers in the Mathematics. I was before acquainted
with many excellent Propositions therein by you demonstrated (as you partly
know,) but admired them, there, as wholly new, not because you had demonstrated
them only another way, but by a general method, so little touched at by
others, so in effect wholly new, and of so rare consequence for entering into
the secrets and Soul of Geometry (if my judgment may pass for any thing) as
truly I believe the Art may reckon it among the most confiderable advances
given it. Sir, I wish all prosperity to your deservings, and humbly thank you
for the fair admittance you have given me to your acquaintance and friendship,
which I shall preserve with a tenderness due to a thing so estimable; and
believe, Sir, you have Power at your own measure in Yours etc.

This is English, and therefore needs no exposition; your English Reader,
whether Mathematician or not, may understand it without help. You see all are
not of your opinion concerning my scurvy book of Arithmetica Infinitorum.

I will not trouble your patience with reciting more testimonies in this kind;
(though, the truth is, very many persons of Honor and Worth, and eminent for
their skill in these studies, have been forward of their own accord to put more
honor upon me in this kind, then were fit in modesty for me to own.) These you
have heard already, are more, I presume, then you take any great content in;
and the lest of them, were abundantly sufficient to outway your verily believe;
upon the strength of which, you have the confidence to utter all those
reproaches which in your scurrilous piece you endeavor to cast upon us; but
find them to fall back, and foul your self. And you see withal, both how
little reason we have to fear the opinion that men will have beyond Sea, of the
Geometry taught at Oxford; and with how much vanity it is that you tell us
according to your Rhetoric, that when you think, how dejected we will be for
the future; and how the grief of so much time irrecoverably lost, and the
consideration of how much our friends will be ashamed of us, will accompany us
for the rest of our life, you have more compassion for us then we have
deserved. No doubt Sir, but you are a very pitiful man! (who have so much
compassion for us:) And we are much bound to behold you. But since your
compassion of us, is not only more then you think we deserve, but, likewise,
more then we think we stand in need of; we are loath your good nature should be
injurious to your self. And therefore, knowing how much your self at present
nay need compassion, we desire you to suffer that charity to begin at home, and
not to be too lavish of that commodity upon us, of which at present we have so
little need and you so much. But, that there may be no love lost between us;
know, that we have the like compassion for you, upon the same account. You have
but prevented us; and taught us, by your extreme civility, what might have
better beseemed us to say. You tell us somewhere, the reason, why the Ladies at
Billingsgate, amongst all their complements, have none readier then that of
Whore, because, forsooth, when they remember themselves, they think that
likeliest to be true of others. And truly, we have reason to believe, that the
anguish of such considerations as those you mention, being so frequently
present to your own thoughts, makes you so apt to think that others may be
tormented in the like manner. (For who are more compassionate to those that
feel the toothach, then those that are most tormented with it themselves?)
For, as your words are elsewhere, A man of a tender forehead, after so much
insolence, and so much contumelious language as yours, grounded upon arrogance
and ignorance, would hardly endure to outlive it.

As for our selves; I do not find, that our friends do yet disowne us; or, that
we need to fear, in this contest, the fury of our foes. And, whatever diseases
you may believe my Conick, Sections, and Arithmetica Infinitorum, to be
infected with: I do not see, that wiser Physicians can yet discern, either the
one to be troubled with the Scab, or the other with the Scurvy.

But you tell us, (and that may serve for answer to the Testimonies but now
recited) Though the Beasts, that think our railing to he roaring, have for a
time admired us; yet, now that you have showed them your ears, they will be
less affrighted. Sir, those Persons (as they needed not the sight of your
ears, but could tell by the voice what kind of creature brayed in your books:
so they) do not deserve such language at your hands: And, you would not have
said it to their faces. I know your Apology will be, that you say it provoked;
and that by Vespasians law, when a man is provoked, it is not uncivil to give
ill language. And that we may know you have been provoked, you tell us, how
heinous and hazardous a thing it is, to speak against some sorts of men,
whether that which is said in disgrace be true or false; And by all men of
understanding it is taken (not only for a provocation, but for a defiance, and
a challenge to open War. And truly, so far as that may pass for Law, I
cannot deny but that you have been provoked; for sure it is, that much has
been said against you, and that, as is supposed, to your disgrace, and, I
believe, the provocation has been the greater, because that which has been
said, is true. But is this such a provocation as may warrant you, by Vespasians
Law, to rave at the next man you meet with? and to revenge your self upon him
that comes next? Is it such a provocation of M. Hobs, for any man to admire us,
that he may thenceforth, without incivility, be called a Beast, or what you
please? Is it not enough for you to involve the two Professors in the same
crime, and consider us every where as one Author, and therefore both
responsible, jointly and severally, for what is said by either, because
forsooth, we approve, you say, of one another doctrine: but must all that do
but admire us be under the same condemnation? It Is possible that some of them
may admire our folly; (you see, one of them wonders at my discretion, that I
would foul my fingers with you, or think you worth the Answering:) must they
be called Beasts also? It seems it is a dangerous business for a man to admire
any who do not admire you.

But I have done with the Rhetoric and good Language. We have had a taste of
it; and that is enough unless 'twere better. They that desire to have more of
it, may either read over your book, or go to Billingsgate, whether they please.

But when men shall hear you rant it after this rate, and talk high; surely
they must needs think, that you have very good ground for it, must they not? A
shallow foundation would never bear a confidence of such a towering hight. One
would hardly believe me, if I should say, That notwithstanding these
Braggadocian words, there is not any one assertion of mine, that you have
either overthrown or shaken; nor any one of your own (which I charge to be
false,) that you have defended; Yet that is the case. A great cry, and a little
wool! (as the man said when he shore his hoggs.)

Parturiunt Montes. -- And that is it we have next to show.

SECT. II. Concerning his Grammar, and Critics.
I Shall therefore next after the Rhetoric, consider the Grammar, you will say,
that Grammar should have gone first. It may be so. But it is no great matter for
method, when a man deals with you; for you are not so accurate in your own,
that you need find fault with another.

There be six or seven places (and, I think no more) where you would play the
Critic.

First, you tell me page 11. that [Punctum est Corpus, quod non consideratur
esse Corpus] is not Latin, nor the version of it [a Point is a body, which is
not considered to be a body] English. If you had said, it had not been good
sense, I would have agreed with you. But why not that, Latin? or this, English?
(Nay stay there; you are not to give a reason for what you say. It Is enough
that you say so.) Quod esse videmus, id videtur esse. Quod esse sentimus, id
sentitur esse. Quod esse putamus, putatur esse. Quod esse cognoscimus,
cognoscitur esse. Quod esse dicimus, dicitur esse. And why not as well, Quod
esse consideramus, consideratur esse? But what should it have been, if not so?
Why thus, Punctum est corpus quod non consideratur ut corpus. Very good! Bur
Sir, It Is one thing, to consider a thing as a body, or as if it were a body,
(either of which the words ut corpus may bear;) another thing, to consider
that it is a body, which was the notion I had to express, and therefore your
word would not so well serve my turn, but rather the other. And when we have
this to express, That though it be a body, and we know it to be a body, yet do
not at present actually consider it so to be; (which I take to be neither
Irish, nor Welsh, nor, which is worse then either, the Symbolick tongue; but
good English;) it is better rendered in Latin by esse, then by ut.

Secondly, you tell me page 44. I might have left out [Tu vero] to seek an [Ego
quidem.] (As though vero might never be used where there is not a quidem to
answer it.) And is not this a worthy objection? But however, to satisfy you,
look again and you may see a quidem which answers directly to this vero. My
words are these Articulo quarto (cap. 17.) curvilineorum illorum descriptionem
aggrederis per puncta. Quae quidem res est non ita magnae difficultatis, ut
tanto apparatu, tantisque ambagibus opus sit. Exempli gratia. etc. Tu vero,
quasi per planorum Geometriam id fieri non possit, statim imperas mediorum
quotlibet Geometricorum inventionem. Do you see the quidem now? Very good!

But before I leave this, (to save my self that labor anon,) I must let your
English Reader see, how notoriously you do here abuse him, (him, I say; for
the abusing of me in it, is a matter of nothing) My words were these; In the
4th Article (of your 17 Chap.) you attempt the describing of those curve lines
by points, (that is, the finding out as many points as a man pleases, by which
the said curve lines are to pass, through which, with a steady hand, those
lines may be drawn, not Mathematically, but by aim,) which is a matter of no
great difficulty, and may be performed without so much ado as you make, and so
much going about the bush. As for example, etc. (and so I go on to show how
those points may be easily found Mathematically, by the Geometry of Plains,
that is, by the Rule and Compass, or by straight lines and circles, without
the use of Conick Sections, or other more compounded lines. And, having showed
that, I proceed thus) But you, as though this work (the finding of those
points) could not be done by the Geometry of Plains, (as I had showed it
might,) require presently the finding of as many mean proportionals as you
please (viz. more or fewer according as the nature of those lines shall be;)
between two lines assigned: (which by the Geometry of Plains cannot be done:)
And so, of a Plain Problem, you make a Solid and lineary Problem. Which how
unbeseeming it is for a Geometrician to do, you may learn from those words
which your self cite out of Pappus, page 181. (in the English, page 233.)
Videtur autem non parvum peccatum esse apud Geometras, cum Problema Planum per
Conica aut Linearia ab aliquo invenitur. It Is judged by Geometers no small
fault, for the finding out of a Plain Problem, (as this is,) to have recourse
(as you here) to Solid or Lineary Problems. Now these words, one would think,
were plain enough for a man of a moderate capacity to understand. And is it not
well owl'd of you, to persuade your English Reader that I had here taught, that
a man may find as many mean-proportionalls, as one will, by the Geometry of
Plains? (where I said only that the work before spoken of, might be done by
the Geometry of Plains, and therefore needed not the finding of such
Mean-proportionals?) And then (because you do not know whether or no, as many
mean proportionals as one will, may be found by the Geometry of Plains,) you
tell us, that you never said it was impossible; (truly if you had said so, I
should not have blamed you for it;) but that the way to do it was not yet
found, (you might have added, nor ever will be,) and therefore it might prove a
Solid Problem for any thing I know. Nay truly, Sir, I know very well (though it
seems you do not,) that it is at lest a Solid Problem, or rather Lineary; and
that the way to do it, Mathematically, by the Geometry of Plains, is neither
yet found, nor ever will be. For those Problems which depend upon the
resolution of a Cubick or Superior Aequation, not reducible to a Quadratick,
(which is the case in hand) can never be resolved by the Geometry of Plains.
Which, if, instead of scorning, you had endeavored to understand, the
Analyticks, you might have known too. But this by the way; to save my self the
labor anon. I return to your Critics again.

Thirdly, whereas it is said c. 16. art. 18. Longitudine^ percursam cum impetu
u^ique ipsi BD aequali; I said the word cum were better out, unless you would
have Impetus to be only a Companion and not a cause. For where a causality is
imported, though we may use with in English, yet not cum in Latin. To kill with
a sword (importing this to have an isntrumental or causall influence, and not
only that it hangs by the man's side, while some other weapon is made use of) is
not in Latin Occidere cum gladio, but gladio occidere. So ebrius vino; pallidus
ira; incurvus senectute, or, if you will, prae ir^, ob^iram, etc. not cum vino,
cum ira, etc. You say, it is better in (though for the most part your self
leave it out in that construction;) let the Reader judge; for it is not worth
contending for. All that you say in defense, is that Impetus is the Ablative of
the Manner. What then? the question remains, as it was before, whether this
Modus do not here import a causall influence? And it is evident it does; for the
effect here spoken (that such space be dispatched) does equally depend upon two
causes; the one, that the motion be uniforme; the other, that the Impetus be so
great. And therefore (since you please to insist upon it, which I did but give
a touch at by the way, as in many other places where you take it Patiently,)
cum not proper in either place; but either an Ablative without a Preposition;
or, if you would needs have a preposition, per, prae, pro, propter, ob, or some
other which do import a Causality; not cum, which imports only a Concomitancy.

Fourthly, you say, page 61. That you think, I did mistake [praetendit scire]
for an Anglicisme. Your words were these at first, (as that Paragraph was first
printed, page 176.) tamen quia tu id nescis, nec praetendis scire praeter quam
ex auditu, etc. as appears in the torn papers. And then, (after you had new
modeld that whole Paragraph, as it now is page 174.) tamen quid id nescit, nec
praetendit scire etc. This I did and do still take (not mistake) for an
Anglicisme And you cannot deny but that it is so. Where is the mistake then?
You say it is a fault in the Impression. Yes that it is; and that twice for
failing. But was it not a fault in the Copy first? you say it should have been,
praetendit se scire. That, I confess, helps the matter a little. But why was
it not so? The Printer left out se (^es, at both places.) And why? but, because
the Author had not put it in? In like manner page 222. Tractatus huius partis
tertiae, in qua motus and magnitud^ per se and abstracte consideravimus,
terminum hic statuo. This was the Printers fault too, was it not? or, at least,
a fault in the Impression? (Beside much more of the like language up and down)
And if you think it worth while to make a catalogue of such phrases; tell me
against next time, and I shall be able to furnish you with good store.

There be two places more (to make up the half dozen) wherein you would feign
play the Critic: of which, I heard from diverse persons, you made much boast,
long before your book came out; that you had D. Wallis upon the hip; etc. The
one was that adducere malleum was no good Latin, because that duco and adduco
were words not used but of Animals, and signified only to guide or lead, not
to bring or carry. The other was, that I had absurdly derived Empusa from (...)
and (...). It Is true, those charges, notwithstanding your first confidences,
are not now laid in these words; but the former extenuated, and the latter
vanished. Yet some nibling there is at both.

The former of these, (which I make the fifth in order) is page 51. where you
tell me, that Adducis malleum, ut occidas muscam, is not good Latin? But why?
when we speak of bodies Animate, Ducere and Adducere, you say, are good. It Is
very true. Did any body deny it? But are they not good also, of Bodies
inanimate? or other things? (I exspected, that in order to the confutation of
my phrase you should have told us, in what cases they had not been good, and
that this was one of those; not, in what other cases they are good, as well as
this; for that hurts not me.) May they not be applied as well to a Hammer, as
to a Tree? Though this be Animate; not that? You were, I hear, of opinion,
when you first made braggs of this notion, (or else your friends belie you)
that they were not to be used but of bodies Animate: But, that being
notoriously false, some body it seems had rectified that mistake, and informed
you better, and therefore you dare not say so now.

But why, now, is not adducis malleum good Latin? Because, forsooth, Ducere and
Adducere, when used of bodies Animate, signify to guide or lead; (and sometimes
they do so.) Now though a ninny may lead a ninny, yet not a hammer. Very
witty? But I am of opinion, that he who leads M. Hobs, leads both. Or however,
if a man may not lead a hammer; yet, I hope, he that hits the nail at head
(which M. Hobs seldom does) may be said to guide his hammer: may he not? The
phrase therefore is good, even by your own law. But hark you, man; to lead,
you told us, is the signification of the word, when it is used of Animates; why
then do you talk of leading a hammer? do you take the hammer to be animate? or
would have us take you to be the ninny?

But farther; they singify you say to guide or lead. What then? did I say they
do not? Prithee tell me, what they do not signify; not, what they do; if you
mean to overthrow my use of the word. It Is true, sometimes they signify to
guide, or lead; viz. with the parties consent, (Fata ^^lentem, du^unt,
nolentemtrahunt:) yet sometimes the quite contrary; as ducere captivum, Claud.
Cic. to take a man Prisoner, or carry him captive, against his will: so ducere
in carcerem; ducere ad supplicium, and deducere, Cic. to bring or carry a man
to Prison, to execution, etc. (which for the most part is against his will.)
Filia vi abducta, Ter. my daughter was carried away by force. And so,
frequently. But suppose they do, sometimes, signify to guide, sometimes to
lead; what then? do they signify nothing else? Is Ducere lineam, Plin. to
guide a line, or to lead a line? and not rather to draw a line? Ducere ux^rem,
Cic. to guide a wife? or to lead a wife? (though perhaps you will cavil at
that phrase) and not rather to take a wife? But you say, Of bodies inanimate
Adducere, is good for Attrahere, which is, to draw to. Very good! But what is
it not good for? is it good for nothing else? Ducere somnos, soporem, somnium,
Virg. Hor. Insomnem ducere noctem. Virg. Ducere somno diem, noctem ludo; sic
horam, horas, tempus, aestatem, aevum, adolescentiam, senectutem, vitam,
aetatem, coenam, convivium, etc. ducere, producere, traducere, Hor. Virg.
Claud. Propert. Ovid. Cic. Sen. Plin. Live. etc. Do they signify, to lead, to
guide, to dran? and not rather, to spend, to continue, to pass over, to pass
away, etc.

Well! but however* (whatever they may signify else,) Duco, adduco, etc (with
the rest of its com^ounds,) you would have us believe, (for that is it you drive
at, though you dare not speak it out, or be confident to affirm it,) do not
signify to take, carry, fetch, or bring, (which you suppose to be the sense
(aim at) unless when used of bodies animate. But that is as false as can be.
Adducere fehrem Hor. Adducere Sitim, Virg. Adducere vini taedium. Plin etc. do
they signify to lead a fever? or to guide a fever? or to draw a fever, (with
cart-ropes, or a team of horses?) and not rather to bring a fever, etc. In my
Dictionary, duco and adduco, signify to bring, as well as to draw. The truth
is, duco, with its compounds, is a word of as great variety and latitude of
signification, as almost any the Latin tongue affords. And, amongst the rest,
to bring, fetch, carry, take, (to, from, about, away, before, together,
asunder, etc. according as the praeposition wherewith it is compounded does
require) is so exceeding frequent in all Authors (Plautus, Terence, Tully,
Caesar, Tacitus, Livy, Pliny, Seneca, Virgil, Ovid, Horace, Claudian, etc.)
that he must needs be either maliciously blind, or a very great stranger to the
Latin tongue, that does not know it, or can have the face to deny it. Rem huc
deduxi. Cic. Res eo adducta est, (deducta perducta,) in eum locum, in eum
statum, in dabium, in certamen, in controversiam, in periculum, in maximum
discrimen, etc. Cic. Live. Caesar. Plancus ad Cic. etc. Add^cta vita in
extremum. Tacit. Adducta res in fastidium, Plaut. in judicium, Cic. rem ad
mucrones and manus adducere, Tacit. Contracta res est and adducta in augustiam.
Cic. Rem co producere. Cic. Ad exitum, ad culmen, ad summum, ad umbilicam, ad
extremum casum, etc. Cic. Caesar. Live. Hor. etc. That is, The matter is brought
to that pass, etc. So, Sive enim res ad concerdiam adduci potest, sive ad
bonorum victoriam etc. Cic. So, ex inordinato in ordinem adduxit, (speaking of
Gods bringing the World out of the first Chaos,) and again, Eas primum
confusas, postea in ordinem adductas mente divina. Cic. So, aquae ductus,
aquarum deductio, rivorum a fontibus deductio, aquam ad utilitatem agri
deducere, Cic. Aquam ex aliquo loco perducere, Plin. In urbem induxit, idem. To
bring water from place to place. (not to draw it, attrahere.) Thus adducere
febres, to bring fevers.

Officiosaque sedulitas, and opella forensis
Adducit febres and testamenta resignat.
Hor. So, Ova noctuae, etc. tadium vini adducunt.
Hor. Addua^ere sitim tempora, Virgi^i, [sc. aestiva)
Hor. In like manner, febres deducere, to take them away.

Non domus and fundus, non aeris acervus and auri,
Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febres,
Non animo curas. --
Hor. So, deducere fastidium. Plin And then Febrimque reducit, Hor. to bring
back again. So, Frondosa reducitur aestas. Virg.

Luctus fortuna reduxit. Claud. Reducere exemplum, libertatem, morem, etc.
Plin. Aurora diem reduxit. Virg.

Collectasque fugat nubes solemque reducit. Virg. that is, restores. So,
Reducere somnum, Hor. Spem mentibus anxiis reducere Idem. In memoriam reducere,
Plin. Cic. Now it would be hard to say, that in all these places Adduco,
Deduco, Reduco, etc. are put for Attrabo, Detraho, Retraho, etc. Attrahere
febres, attrahere taedium, etc. So Abduxi ^lavem, Plaut. I took or brought away
the key (as had every whit, as adducere malleum, to bring a hammer.) So Navis a
praedonibus abducta, Cic. Ter. The ship taken at Sea by Pirates, and carried
away.

Visaque confugiens somnos abduxit imago. Ovid.

So (speaking of Hercules loosing the chains whereby Prometheus was chained to
the rock)

Vincula prensa manu saxis abduxerat imis Val. Flac. Quidsi de vestro quippiam
orem abducere? Plaut. What if I should desire to carry away somewhat of yours?

Coeperat intendens, abductis montibus, unda Far ratem. Val. Flac. Abducti
montes, id est, semoti. -- abductaque flumina ponto. Idem.

Quod ibidem recte custodire poterunt, id ibidem custodiant; quod non poterunt,
id auferre atque abducere licebit. CIC. Where abducere, all along, is no more
then auserre. In like manner, conducere is often times the same with confer,
congerere. As Veteres quidem scriptores hujus artis, unum in locum conduxit
Aristoteles. Cic. Parts conducere in unum, Lucret. (i. e. in unum corpus
componere.) So deducere, to carry forth. Ducere, deducere, producere, funus,
exequias. Plin. Virg. Stat. Lucan. Deducunt socii naves, Virg. And to take
away, (the same with tollere, demere, auferre,) as in deducere febrem, deducere
fastidium, as before. Thus deductio and subtractio for as you use to call it
both in English and Latin, Substractio, as if it came from sub and straho) is
contrary to Additio, and signifies all kind of Ablation or taking away.
Addendo, deducendoque, videre quae reliqui summa fiat. Cic. Vt, deducta part
tertia, deos reli^ua reddatur Africanus de pactis dotalibus. Vt centum nummi
deducerentur. Cic. Sibi deducant drachmam, reddant caetera. Cic. ut beneficia
integra perveniant, sine ulla deductione. Sen. So, deducere cibum. Ter. to
abate, diminish, or take away; as also, Cibum subducere, Cic. Subducere vires,
Ovid.

^t succus ^ecori and lac subducitur agnis.
Virg. Jam mihi subduci facies humana videtur.
Ovid. Ignem subdito; ubi ebullabit vinum, ignem subducito. Cato de re rust.
Aurum subducitur rerrae. Ovid. So, Annulum subduco. Plant. Subducere pallium,
Mart. to take or steal away. Deducere vela, deducere carbasa, Ovid. Luc.

-- primaque ab origin mundi,
Ad mea perpetuum deducite tempora carmen.
Ovid. That is, To bring down from the beginning of the World to his own times.

-- a pectore postquam Deduxit vestes. Ovid. Deducere sibi galerum, vel
pileolum, Sueton. to putt off, or take off.

Et cum frigida mors anima subduxerat artus.
Virg. -- Seductae ex aethere terrae.
Ovid. Where seducere, is no more but separare. So, diducta Britannia mundo.
Claud. Ante se fossam ducere and jacere vallum, Live. Vallum ducere, Idem.
fossam, vallum, praeducere, Tacit. Sen. perducere, Caes. to cast up a wall, a
bank, a trench before them. Murum in altitudinem pedum sexdecim perduxit. duas
fossas ea altitudine perduxit. munitio de castello in castellum perducta.
Caesar. So, ducere muros, Virg. to raise up: and educere turrim. aramque
educere coelo certant. sub astra educere. molemque educere coelo. idem. to
raise up as high as heaven. Thus, educere foetum, Cic. Claud. Plin. Educere,
producere, faetum, partus, liberos, sobolem, fructus, etc. Si^ius. Plaut. Hor.
etc. To bring forth, So, Educere cirneam vini. Plaut, to bring out a flagon of
wine, (as bad, I trow, as adducere malleum.) Educere naves ex portu; and in
terram subducere, Caesar.

Vn^que conspecta livorem ducit ab uva.
Hor. -- arborea frigus ducebat ab umbra.
Ovid. Animum ducere (to take courage) Live. Ab ipso Ducit opes animumque ferro,
Hor. Argumenta ducere, Quintil. Ducere conjecturam, similitudinem, etc. Cic.
Initium, principium, exordium ducere. Cic. Ortum, originem ducere, Cic. Quint.
Hor. (i. e. sumee,) Producere exemplum, Juvenal. Ducere cicatricem. Colum. Live.
Ovid. Cicatricem, crustam, rubiginem, callum, obducere. Plin. Cic. Obducere
velum, torporem, tenebras, Plin. Cic. Quintil. Inducere, introducere,
consuetudinem, morem, ambitionem, seditionem, discordiam, novos mores, Cic.
Stat Plin. Qua ratione haec inducis, e^de^ illa possunt esse quae tollis. Cic.
Inducere formam membris, Ovid. Cuti nitorem, Plin. Tenebras, nubes, noctem,
Ovid. Senectus inducit rugas, Tibul. Tentorium vetus deletum sit, novum
inductum, Cic. Introducere, quod and in medium afferre, dicitur. Bud. Cic.
Obliviae poenae ducere. Val. Flac. Sollicitae vitae, Hor. Nec podagri^us, nec
articularius est, quem rus ducunt pedes, Plaut. (whose feet can carry him, not
lead, guide, or draw him.) Transducere arbores, (to transplant or remove from
place to place,) Colum. Quod ex Italia adduxerat. Caes. And if these
Authorities be not enough; it were easy to produce a hundred more, (to justify
my use of the word, and bring your new notion to nothing;) wherein Duco (both
in it self and its compounds) signifies to take, bring, fetch, carry, etc.
without any regard had at all to your notion of guiding, leading, or (...),
that we may see what a deal of impudence and ignorance you discover, when you
undertake to play the Critic. And when you have done the best you can, you
will not be able to find better words then Adducere malleum, and Reducere, to
signify the two contrary motions of the (...); the one when you strike with it,
the other when you take it back to fetch another stroke.

To all these examples I might, if need were, add your own which though it
would be but as anser inter olores; nor would it at all increase the reputation
of the phrase, to say (...) you use it: Yet it may serve to show, that it is
not out of i^dgement, (because you think so;) but out of malice and a design
of revenge (that you might seem to say somewhat, though to little purpose,)
that you thus cavil without a cause. For duco, adduco, circumduco, and the
rest of the compounds, are frequently used by your self, in the same ^^nse and
construction which you blame in me. Lineam ^^cere, producere, etc. a puncto,
ad punctum, per punctum, etc. are phrases used by your self forty and forty
times. If (...) do not seem to come home to the business; that of
^um-effectum, rem a^i^uam etc. producere, (to produce, ^ring forth, bring to
pass,) comes somewhat nearer; which (...) at lest twenty times in one page. p.
74. and within three leaves, (cap 9 and 10,) above fifty times: and elsewhere
frequently. So, actus educi poterit, p. 78. parts flui^^^ educi ^osse. p. 258.
deduci hinc potest. (i. e. inferri) p. 23. (...) inde deducere non possum. p.
248. fluviorum origines (...) possunt. p. 278. ratio quaevis ad rationem
linearum reduci (...). p. 96. linea in se reducta p. 190. quibus and reduci
cogi^^^ nes praeteritae possint. p. 8. copulatio cogitationem inducit. p 20.
n^men aliquod idoneum inducat. p. 52. phantasma finis (...) thantasmata
mediorum. p. 229. in animum inducere non (...) p. 24^. Parallelismus ob eam rem
introductus est. p. 246. (...) instantia adduci potest. p. 82. And particularly
of (...)dies, in flectione laminae (lege, flexione) capita ejus addu^^^ur. p.
2^5. flexio est, manente eadem linea, adductio extre^^^^ ^unctorum, vel
diductio, p. 196. terminis diductis, ibid. (...) adductio extremaru^ linearum.
p. 197. cujus puncta ext^ema diduci non possunt. p. 106. adductio vel diductio
terminorum, ibid. and so again five or six times in that and the next page. So
ex cujuspiam corporis circumductione. p. 4. corpus circumductum, ibid. si
corpus aliquod circumducatur, ibid. in^elligi potest planum circumduci, p. 109.
si planum circumducat^^, ibid. punctum ambientis quodlibet ab ipso
circumducitur, p. 18^. and the like elsewhere. In all which places, by your
law, it should have been circumlatio, circumlatus, circumfer^^^, circumferri,
circumfertur, etc. as it is, p 50. p. 108. and (...) some other places. Now if
circumdaci and circumferri, (...) be used promiscuously, and so circumductio
and circum^^^, etc. why not as well in the same cases adducere and (...) etc.?
And if corpus quodpiam, may, without absurdity, be (...) circumduci, why not as
well adduci? In like manner, (...) sum est conduci mobile (i. e. simul ferri)
ad E ad A, concu^^^ duorum motuum etc. p. 193. and moti per certam and design
(...) viam conductio facilis, p. 200. with many the like phras^ which are every
whit as bad as adducere malleum. And therefore, you had very little reason to
quarrel at that phrase; save that there was nothing else to find fault with,
and somewhat you were resolved to say.

And the like is to be said of that other phrase, next before, quod non
consideratur esse corpus, which, though it be (...) Latin, when I speak it;
yet, with you the same construction comes over and over again, as least a
hundred times (...) simulachrum hominis negatur esse verus homo, p. 23. qu^
(...) gantur esse verae. p. 26. singulae parts singulas lineas conficere
^^telligantur, p 68. si corpus intelligatur moveri, -- redigi -- (...) escere,
ibid. several times intelligitur quiescere, -- (...) 70. agens intelligitur
producere effectum, p. 73. du^ (...) intelliguntur transire, p. 87 ostenderetur
ratio esse (...) p. 100. lineae extendi intelligautur, p. 108. intelligatur
radius ^^veri, p. 111. si parts fractae intelligantur esse minim^, p* 11^*
supponatur longitudo esse, p. 131, altitudo ponitur esse in (...) basium
triplicata, p. 153. sphaera intelligatur moveri, p. (...) haesio illa
supponatur tolli, p. 188. intelligatur radius (...) materia dura, ibid. vis
magnetica invenietur esse motus, p* (...)* And so punctum, corpus, res aliqua,
ponitur, supponitur, inte^^^gitur, ostenditur, etc. esse, quiescere, movere,
circum (...) etc. p. 62, 64, 68, 75. 85, 106, 112, 115, 110, (...) 141, 142,
147, 155, 171, 182, 183, 184, 188, (...) 239. and many other places: which are
every whit (...) as consideratur esse. Yea and consideratur also is by your
(...) so used p. 87. Eaedem duae lineae -- prout considerantur pro ipsis
magnitudinibus -- poni. etc. So that 'twas not judgment, but revenge, that put
you upon blaming this phrase also. And you care not, all along, how much you
bespatter your self, (for, you think, you cannot look much fouler then you do
already,) if you have but hopes to be a little revenged on us. And truly you
have that good hap all the way, that there is scarce any thing (right or wrong)
that you blame in us, but the same is to be found in your self also with much
advantage.

But this fault (adducis malleum) you should not, you say, (though it had been
one,) have taken notice of in an English man; but that you find me in some
places nibling at your Latin. Yes; I thought, that was the matter. You had a
mind to be revenged. And ha'nt you done it handsomely? Was there nothing else
to fasten upon with more advantage then these poor harmless phrases? It Is very
well. It seems my Latin (though as carelessely written as need to be; for
'twas never twice written, and scarce once read, before it was printed,) did
not much lie open to exception; for if it had, I perceive I should have heard
of it with both ears.

But you are offended, it seems, that I should offer to nibble at your Latin.
And truly, if that were a fault, I know not how to help it now. I must needs
confess, I did some times (when I stumbled upon them, but never went out of my
way to seek them; for, if so, I might have found enough) correct some phrases,
as I went along, (sometime to make sense, where the sentence was lame;
sometimes to make it Latin, where the phrase was incongruous or barbarous;)
because I did not know, that your being an English man, had given you a
peculiar privilege above others to speak barbarously without control. Such as
these, nescit, nec pratendit scire praeterquam ex auditu. p. 174. or as it was
first printed. p. 176. nescis, ne^p praetendis, etc. And accipiat lector
tanquam Problematice dicta. p. 181. And Placuit quoque ea stare quae merito
pertinent ad vindicem, ibid. So p. 143. (at lest in my book) progressio stabit
hoc modo, 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. etc. And diverse other places, which I do not now
remember. But you know there be many more, which, had they come in my way, I
might have found fault with, as well as these; As that p. 37. falsae sunt, --
and multa istiusmodi (propositiones.) And p. 116. definiemus lineam curvam esse
eam cujus termini diduci posse intelligimus. And p. 111. quantitas anguli ex
quantitate arcus cum perimetri totius quantitate compaeratione aestimatur. (for
ex quantitatis -- comparatione, or ex quantitate -- co^parata^ p. 115. ducatur
a'termino primae, ad terminos caeterarum, rectae lineae. And p. 222.
partitertiae, in qua motus and magnitudo consideravimus, terminum hic statuo.
And p. 224. Ex quo intelligitur esse ea (phantasmata) corporis sentientis
mutatio aliqua. So p. 269. Exeuns, for exiens. and p. 3. exemplicatum esse, for
exemplo explicatum, aut comprobatum. and p. 51. exemplicativum; and many more
of the same stamp (as barbarous every whit, as those of the Schoolmen, which
you blame as such, p. 22* non sunt itaque eae voces Essentia, Entitas, omnisque
illa Barbaries, ad l'hilosophiam necessarius non est.) I might add that of p.
20. tanquam diceremus, (as if we should say,) and p. 22. tanquam possent, and
elsewhere, instead of quasi, acsi, (or some such word) or tanquam si, which is
Tullies phrase, (tanquam si tua res agatur. tanquam si Consul esset. tanquam si
clausa esset Asia etc.) for tanquam without si* signifies but as, not as if:
But because I know you are not the first, that have so used it, of modern
writers; and that even of the ancients, some of them do sometimes leave out
si, (as in other cases they do ut;) I shall allow you the same liberty, and
pass this by without blame (as passable, though not so accurate.) To these we
may add those elegances p. 32. (syllogismus) stabit sic. p. 49. sed haec dicta
sint pro exemplo tantum, and So, p. 269. Ventus aliud non est quam pulsi aeris
motus rectus; qui tamen potest esse circularis, vel quomodocunque curvus. And a
multitude more of such passages, (which, were it worth while to collect them,
might be added as an appendix to Epistolae obscurorum virorum,) of which some
are incongruous, some barbarous, some bald enough, and some manifest
contradictions, or otherwise ridiculous But these are but negligences, as you
call them, and therefore not attended with shame: for we doubt not but that, if
you had particularly considered them, you could have mended them. Only, me
thinks, he that is so frequent in such language, need not have quarrelled with
such harmless phrases as adducere malleum, or consideratur esse. But I go on.

The other place (which makes up the half dozen) you talked much of it at
first, yet before it comes to be printed, it is dwindled to nothing. It was,
that I had derived your Athenian Empusa, from (...) and (...); and said it was
a kind of Hob goblin that hopped upon one leg, (which you take to be a
clinch, forsooth, because your name is Hobs;) and hence it was that the Boys
play, now a days in use, (fox come out of thy hole,) comes to be called
Empusa. This derivation you did, at first, cry out upon as very absurd; and you
meant to pay me for it: Till you were informed, as I hear, by some of your
friends, that the Scholiast of Aristophanes (as good a Critic as M. Hobs) had
the same* (and so have Eustathius, Erasinus, Caelius Rhodiginus, S^ephanus,
Scapula, Calepine, and others:) and therefore you were advised not to quarrel
with it. Whereupon waving your main charge, you only tell me (page ult.) that
it does not become my gravity, to tell you that Empusa, your Daem^nium
Atheniense, was a kind of Hob-goblin, that hopped upon one leg; and that
thence a boys play, now in use, comes to be called Ludus Empusae. And withal,
pray me to tell you, where it was that I read the word Empusa, for the Boys
play I spoke of? To the Question, I answer, that I read it so used in Junius's
Nomenclator; Riders, and Thomas's Dictionary; sufficient Authors for such a
business. And then as for the Clinch you talk of, in Hobs and Hob-goblins, and
the jest you suspect in Hobbius, and Hobbi, which you say, is lost to them
beyond sea; I hope that loss will never undo me: and when you can help me to
a better English word for your Daemoniu^, the^ Hob-goblin; or a better Latin
word for Hobbes then Hobbius (whose vocative case, in good earnest, is Hobbi,)
I shall be content, without any regret, to part with the jest, and the clinch
too, to do you a pleasure; Who tell us presently after, that you meant to try
your Wit, to do something in that kind. And then show your self as great a
Wit, as hitherto a Critic.

There is yet a Seventh passage, p. 14. which may be referred also to this
place. The words Mathematical definition do not please you Those terms or
words, which do most properly belong to Mathematics, we commonly call
Mathematical terms, and the definitions of such terms, in Mathematics,
Mathematical definitions. And is it not lawful so to do? No, you tell us. But
why? Because it does bewray another kind of Ignorance. What ignorance? An
inexcusable ignorance. How does it bewray it? It is a mark of ignorance; of
ignorance inexcusable. Ignorance of what? Ignorance of what are the proper
works of the several parts of Philosophy. And, I pray, why so? Because it
seems by this, that all this while, I think it is a piece of the Geometry of
Euclide, no less to make the Definitions he uses, then to infer from them
the Theorems he demonstrates. A great crime, doubtless! But how does it
appear, that I think so? May not a man recommend Hellebor to you, as a good
Physical drug, (because used in Physic, and proper for some diseases,)
unless he think, it is the Physicians work to make it, as well as to make use
of it? But suppose I do; what then? do you believe no body thinks so, but I? or
do you believe, that any body thinks otherwise but you? Is it not proper for
words of Art, (voces artis,) to be defined and explained in that art to which
they belong? is it not proper for a Grammarian to define Gender, Number,
Person, Case, Declension, Conjugation etc. in the sense wherein they are used
in Grammar? And for a Logician to define Genus, Species, Universal,
Individuum, Argumentum, Syllogisinus, etc. in the sense wherein they are used
in Logic? And may not those be called Grammatical, and these Logical
definitions? And for a Mathematitian, to define or tell what is a Triangle, a
Cone, a Parabolaster, what is Multiplication, Division, Extraction of roots,
what is Binomium, Apotome, Potens duo media, etc. And may not these definitions
be called Mathematical? No, by no means, you tell us, to call a Definition
Mathematical, Physical etc. is a mark of ignorance, of unexcusable
ignorance. (And do you not think then, that Gorraeus was a wise man, to write
a large Volumne in folio, entitled Definitiones Medicae?) But why a mark of
ignorance? Because a Mathematitian, in his definitions teach you but his
language (not his art) but teaching language is not Mathematick, nor Logic,
nor Physic, nor any other Science, (but some Art perhaps, which men call
Grammar.) some men would have thought that to Define, had belonged to Logic;
but let it pass for Grammar at present. Do you think, nothing, is
Mathematical, wherein a man makes use of Grammar? Can a man teach
Mathematics, in any language, without Grammar? (unless, perhaps, in the
Symbolick Language, which is worse then Welsh or Irish.) But you say, He that
will understand Geometry must understand the terms before he begin: (because a
man ought not to go into the water, before he can swim.) Well, But if not his
Definitions, what then is it, in Euclide, that is Mathematical? it is, you
tell us, his inferring from them the Theorems he demonstrats. (And why not the
solution of Problems also; as well as the inferring of Theorems?) But to infer
and to demonstradte, are, I suppose as much the work of Logic; as, to define,
is the work of Gra^mar. And therefore, by the same reason for which you will
not allow the Definitions to be Mathematical, because to teach a language is
the work of Grammar, you must also exclude the Propositions and Demonstrations,
because to infer and demonstrate, is the work of Logic. And so, nothing in
Euclide will be Mathematical. 'Twill be Grammar and Logic, all of it. And are
not these pure Criticismes; think you? Do not these woeful notions of yours,
and the language that does accompany them, show handsomely together? But enough
of this.

SECT. III. Concerning Euclide: and the Principles of Geometry.
WE have seen your Elegances already, in the first Section, and then your
Critsicismes in the second. It Is time now to look upon your Geometry. And I
should here begin with your first Lesson; but that, by what we heard even now,
you will not allow me to call it Geometrical, or any piece of Geometry,
consisting, as it does, of Definitions. And yet, what ever the matter is, me
thinks you come pretty near it: for you call them Principles of Geometry. But
you will say, perhaps, they be Principles of Geometry, but not Geometrical
Principles, (for to call any Definitions Geometrical, were as bad as to call
them Mathematical, which were a mark of ignorance unexcusable.) Acutely
resolved!

But, whatever else they be, Principles they are without doubt. For, as you
define p. 4. A Principle, is, the beginning of something: And no man can deny,
but that the first Lesson is a beginning of something: And therefore, a
Principle. Now contra principia, we know, non est disputandum. I must take heed
therefore, what I say here.

In this Lesson, you take Euclide to task, and give him his Iurry: (And when
you have lesson'd him, it is to be hoped, we will not think much to be
lesson'd by you:) And withal intermingle some Principles of your own, for his
and our correction and instruction: such as these,

That (...) can have no place in solid bodies. p. 2. (because you know not how
to distinguish between a Mechanical and a Mathematical (...), as knowing no
other way of measuring but by the Yard and the Bushel, or at least by the
Pound. p. 4. and 13.) And yet you tell us by and by. p. 3. that there may be in
bodies, a Coincidence in all points (which coincidence, had it been Greek,
would have been as hard a word as (...),) and that this may properly be called
(...): and yet presently p. 4. you tell us again, that (...) has no place in
solids; nay more, nor in circular, or other crooked lines; (as though you did
not know, that two equal arches of the same circumference, would (...).)

That the length of T^me, is the length of a Body. p. 2. (As though he had not
spoken absurdly, that said, Profecto vide, bam fartum, tam Diu, pointing to the
length of his arm.)

That an Angle has quantity, though it he not the Subject of quantity. p. 3.
(for there be octo modi habendi.)

That the quantity of an Angle, is the quantity of an Arch. p. 3. (And why not
as well of a Sector, since Sectors, as well as Archs, in the same circle, be
proportional to their correspondent Angles.)

That it is a wonder to you, that Euclide has not any where defined, what are
Equals, at least, what are equal Bodies. p. 4. (As though every body did not,
without a definition, know what the word means. Any Clown can tell you, that
those bodies are Equal, which are both of the same bigness.)

That Homogeneous quantities are those which may be compared by (...), or
application of their measures to one another. p. 4. (And consequently, two
solids cannot be Homogeneous; because, you say, (...) has no place in solids
p. 2. and 4. And also, that incommensurable quantities, cannot be homogeneous;
because by 1 d 10* they have no common measure.)

That the quantity of Time, and Line are Homogeneous, p. 4. Because Time is to
be measured by the Yard; (or, in your own words, because the quantity of Time,
is measured by application of a line to a line;) But why not, by the Pint? For
you know Time may be measured by the Hour-glasse, as well as by the Clock. And
though the Hand of a Clock or Dial, determine a Line, yet the sand of an
Hour-glasse fills a vessel.

That, Line and Angle have their quantity homogeneous, because their measure is
an Arch or Arches of a Circle applicable in every point to one another. p 4.
(As though you had forgot, that you told us but now, that (...), or
application, has no place in circular or crooked lines.)

And All hitherto, you say p. 5. is so plain and easy to be understood that we
cannot without discovering our ignorance to all men of reason, though no
Geometricians, deny it. Nay more, It Is new, It Is necessary, and It Is yours.
very good! Now have at Euclide.

Euclid's first definition, (...), etc. A Mark is that of which there is no
part; is, you say, to be heartily construed, for his meaning is, that it has
parts, and that a good many. For a mark, or as some put instead of it, (...),
which is a mark with a hot iron, is Visible; if visible then it has quantity;
and consequently may be divided into parts innumerable p. 5. (A witty argument!
It Is visible, therefore it is divisible, But could you not as well have said,
That A Mark consists of two Nobles? For that is as much to the business, as a
mark with a hot iron.) Nay more Euclids definition, you say is the same with
yours, which is, A point is that Body whose quantity is not considered. Lay
them both together and look else. A mark is that of which there is no part. A
point is that Body, whose quantity is not considered. Just the same to a cow's
thumb. They begin both with the letter. As like, as an Apple and a Oyster.

But by the way, how comes a Point on a sudden to be a Body? you told us just
before, in the same page, p. 5. that a Point is neither Substance, nor Quality,
and therefore it must be Quantity or else it is Nothing. If it be no Substance,
how can it be a Body in your language?

But we have not done yet. Prithee tell me, good Tho. (before we leave this
point) who it was told thee, that (...) was a mark with a hot iron? for it is a
notion I never heard till now, (and do not believe it yet.) Never believe him
again, that told thee that lie; for, as sure as can be, he did it to abuse
thee. (...) signifies a distinctive point in writing, made with a pen or quill,
not a mark made with a hot Iron, such as they used to brand Rogues and Slaves
with; (And accordingly (...), distinguo, interstinguo, inter^ung^, etc. are often
so used;) It is also used of a Mathematical Point; or somewhat else that is
very small: As (...), a moment, or point of time, and the like. What should
come in your cap, to make you think, that (...) signifies a mark or brand with
a hot iron? I perceive where the business lies. 'Twas (...) run in your mind,
when you talked of (...), and, because the words are somewhat alike, you
jumbled them b^^h together, according to your usual care and accuratenes^
(...) as if they had been the same. (Just as when, in Euclide (...) you would
have us believe that (...) and (...) (...) is but one word.) Do you not think
now, that a boy (...) Westminster School would have been soundly whipped for
such a fault? Me thinks I hear his Master ranting it at this rate; How now
Sirrah! Is (...) and (...), all one with you? I Will show you a difference
presently. Take him up Boys. I Will show you how (...) may be made without a hot
Iron, I warrant you. And after a lash or two, thus goes on: (...), is a Point
made with a Pen, quoth he (with a lash) will you remember that? It Is (...), is
a mark with a hot Iron, (lashing again,) think upon that too. Henceforth, quoth
he, (setting him down,) Remember the difference between (...) and (...).

The second definition. A line is length which has no breadth; you would have
to be heartily interpreted also. If a man, you say, have any ingenuity, he will
understand it thus, A line is a body etc. very likely!

The Fourth definition, is this, A straight line is that which lies evenly
between its own points. p. 6. Well; how is this to be understood? Nay, this
definition is inexcusable. Say you so? let it pass then, and shift for its
self as well as it can. It has made a pretty good shift hitherto; perhaps it
may outlive this brunt also. But, because you are willing to lend it a helping
hand, you say, He meant, perhaps, to call a straight line, that which is all
the way from one extreme to another, equally distant from any two or more such
lines, as being like and equal have the same extremes. It may be so. Many
strange things are possible. But it would have been a great while before I
should have thought this to be the meaning of those words.

The seventh definition, you say has the same faults. Then let that pass too;
and answer for it self as well as it can.

The eighth, is the Definition of a plain Angle. Against which you object only
this of your own, That by this Definition, two right angles taken together are
no Angle. And it is granted. Euclide did not intend to call an aggregate of two
right angles, by the name of an Angle: And therefore gave such a definition of
an (...), as would not take that in. Where Is the fault then?

The thirteenth definit^^^, A Term or Bound, is that which is the extreme of
any thin^ (...) you say, is exact, (very good?) But, that it makes against
(...) doctrine. What doctrine of mine? viz. that a point is nothing. Who told
you, that this is my doctrine? I have said, perhaps, that a Point has no
highness; or, that a Point has no parts, (and so said Euclide in his first
definition,) but when or where did I say, it is nothing? But how do you prove
hence, that a point has parts? Because, you say, The extremes of a line are
Points. True. What then? A point therefore, you say, is a part. It does not
follow. How prove you this consequence, If an extreme, then a part? But, say
you, what in a line is the extreme, but the first or last part? I answer; A
Point, which is no part. Have you any more to say? -- If you have no more to
say, then hear me. A point is the extreme of a line: Therefore it has no
parts. I prove it thus; because, if that point have parts; then, either all its
parts are extreme, and bound the line, or some one, or more: Not all: For they
cannot be all utmost; but one must stand beyond another: if only some, or one;
then not the Point, but some part of it, bounds the line, which is contrary to
the supposition. You see, therefore, the Definition does not make against my
doctrine.

The fourteenth Definition of Euclide, you would have abbreviated thus. A
figure is quantity every way determined, and then tell us, it is in your
opinion as exact a definition of a Figure as can possibly be given. But I am
not of your opinion; For by this Definition of yours, a straight line (of a
determinate length) must as well be a Figure, as a circle. For such a line,
having no other dimension but length, if its length be determined, it is every
way determined; that is, according to all the dimensions it has. (If you
object, that it has no determinate breadth; I answer, the breadth of a
straight line is as much determined, as the thickness of a Circle, or other
plain figure.) And, by the same reason, A Pound, a Pint, a Hundred, an Hour,
etc. must be Figures, because they are Quantities every way determined, viz.
according to all the dimensions that those words import. This Definition of
Euclide, -- (stay a while, the Definition mentioned is not Euclides, nor
equivalent to it His (...), imports more then your determined. (...). should be
rendered A figure, is that which is every way encompassed by some bound, or
bounds. Which can be only in such a quantity as has local extension; and
that, finite.) But The Definition, you say, (whose soever it be) cannot
possibly be embraced by us who carry double, namely Mathematics and Theology;)
but by you it seems, it may, who carry simple, and care not how destructive
your principles are to Theology.) Your Definition, we (whether Theologers or
Mathematicians) cannot admit; for the reason by us already assigned. But it
seems you have a farther reach in it: Lets hear what it is. For this
determination, say you, is the same thing with circumscription. A local
determination, intended by Euclide, is so. But what then? And whatsoever is any
where (ubicunque) Definitive, is there also Circumscriptive. How do you prove
this? or how does this follow from the other? -- You cannot but know this is
generally denied. Have you any thing to offer by way of proof? -- Not a word.
Well; but what is it you drive at? You offer nothing of proof, for what you
affirm (by your own confession) against all Divines, or as you call them
Theologers. But lets see what you would gather from it. By this means, you say,
the distinction is lost, by which Theologers, when they deny God to be in any
place, save themselves from being accused of saying he is nowhere; for that
which is nowhere is nothing. It Is true, that Divines do ^ay, (and I hope you will
say so too) that God is not bounded, or circumscribed, within the limits of any
place; because they say, and do believe, there is no place where he is not. And
he that says the latter, must needs say the former. For to say that God, who
is every where, and fills all places; is yet bounded within certain limits;
were a contradiction. For, to be concluded within certain limits, is to be
excluded from all places without those limits; And therefore not to be every
where. And if this be not your opinion too, speak out, if you can for shame,
that the world may see what you are. Do you believe, that what thing soever is
at all any where, (not excepting God himself) must needs be circumscribed
within some certain bounds, so as not to be without or beyond them? And that
whatsoever is not, in any place so circumscribed, is no where, and therefore
nothing? If so; then whether of the two do you affirm? That God is so
circumscribed or concluded within certain limits, and excluded from all others
at the same time? Or, That he is not so concluded, and therefore no where, and
so nothing? If you say the first, you deny God to be Infinite: If the second
you deny him to be. And, either way, you may without injury be affirmed to
maintain horrid opinions concerning God. As for that distinction of Definitive
and Circumscriptive, with which you say the Theologers think to save
themselves: You are wholly out in the business: Theologers use not that
distinction in this case. It Is true, that, in the case of Angels, and the
Souls of men, there are that affirm them to be in loco definitive, but not
circumscriptive: because though they be not bodies, and so locally extended per
positionem partis extra partem; yet neither are they infinite, or every where,
but have a definite, determinate existence, as to be here, and not at the same
time elsewhere. But as to God, we neither affirm him to be circumscribed, nor
to be confined within any bounds; but to be Infinite and every where. And if
any be so absurd as to affirm that God is determined within some place, so as
not to be at the same time without or beyond it, whether by Circumscription or
Definition, we shall without scruple, (notwithstanding that we carry double,)
reject the distinction so applied, and your opinion with it, without fear of
being cast out from the society of all Divines.

But in the mean while, I wonder how this Definition of Euclide comes to have
any thing to do with this business. A Figure, says Euclide, is that which is
encompassed within some bound or bounds. Well, what then? Will you assume But
God is a figure? and then conclude, That, if God be at all any where, he must
be so concluded within bounds? If you do, you argue profanely enough, and
deserve as bad Epithites as any have been yet bestowed upon you. We should
rather, admitting Euclides definition, argue thus, A figure is concluded within
certain bounds; But God is not so concluded, (as being infinite, and so without
bounds;) Therefore God is not a Figure: And be neither in danger of being cast
out of the Mathematick Schools, nor yet, from the Society of Schoole-Divines.

The Fifteenth Definition, which is, of a Circle, you grant to be true.

And skip over the rest to the five and twentieth, which is, of Parallel
straight lines. This Definition you think to be less accurate, and think your
own to be better: But of this it will be time enough, if need be, to consider
in its proper place.

After this, you let all the Definitions pass untouched, till the third of the
Fifth Book. Saving that you touch by the way, on the Fourth of the Third Book,
which you grant to be true: and the first of the Fifth Book, which, you say, may
pass for a Definition of an Aliquot part, as was by Euclide intended.

But, the Third Definition of the Fifth Book (the Definition of (...), Ratio,)
you say, is intolerable. Yea it is as bad as any thing was ever said in
Geometry by D. Wallis. (Because forsooth, you can make nothing of it, but this,
that Proportion is a what-shall-I call it asnesse or sonesse of two magnitudes
etc.) Yet this definition has hitherto been permitted to pass, and may do
still. And when you understand it a little better, perhaps you may think so
too. But of this I have discoursed more at large, in a peculiar Treatise
against Meibomius: and shall therefore forbear to examine it here.

Against the fourth definition, you object nothing, but that the sixth might be
spared.

The Fourteenth, you say is good. And tell us farther, that the composition
here defined, is not the same composition which he defines in the fourth def.
before the sixth book. And you say true; for this is a composition by Addition,
and that is composition by Multiplication. And therefore do not think much if
hereafter I shall say, that there be two compositions of proportion.

To the rest of his definitions you give a general approbation. His Postulata
you allow also: and so give over Lessoning of Euclide: But tell us before you
part, that A man may easily perceive, that Euclide did not intend, That a point
should be (without parts, which you call) nothing; or a line, without latitude;
or a Superficies, without thickness: though it be evident that he has defined
them so to be. But why must we not think, he meant as he says? (Because, say
you, Lines are not drawn but by Motion, and Motion is of Body only. A pretty
argument, and worth Marking! like that above, of (...), a Mark or brand with a
hot Iron.

SECT. IV. Concerning the Angle of Contact.
HAving door Schooling of Euclide; in your second Lesson you fall upon us.

Four pieces of mine, you take to task. p. 10. (My Elenchus of your Geometry;
my Treatise concerning the Angle of Contact; and that of Conick Sections; and
my Arithmetica Infinitorum.) Yet have not been able to find, either one false
Proposition, or so much as a false Demonstration; in any one of them. Yet, that
you may seem to say something, you will blunder on, though you break your shinnes
for it. And you would have it thought, that you have wholly and clearly confuted
them Ep. Ded. (for you use to make clear work where you go,) and that I have
performed nothing in any of my books. p. 10

This is the charge. Let Us see how you can make it good.

We Will begin with that of the Angle of Contact; which you undertake in your
third Lesson. p. 26.

The subject of that treatise, is, a controversy between Clavius and
Peletarius. Clavius is of opinion, that the Angle of a Semicircle EAC (Fig. 1.)
is less then the rectilineal Right Angle PAC; because that is but a part of
this; the other part EAP, the Angle of contact, (which with that of the
Semicircle makes the right Angle PAC,) being, as he supposes, an angle of some
bigness. Peletarius is of opinion, that the Angle EAC, is equal to PAC; and
not a part of it, but the whole; the supposed Angle PAE being, as he thinks, no
Angle, or an angle of no bigness.

This being the state of the controversy: I take Peletarius his part. And my
first argument is from the nature of a Plain angle, which Euclide defines to be
the mutual inclination of two lines etc. And therefore the lines EA, PA, in
the point of concurse A, not being at all inclined each to other; but in the
same coincident position without inclination; they do not contain an angle. The
tendency of the circumference EAN, before it comes at the point A, is toward
the tangent PT; when it is past that point, the tendency is from it; but in the
point A, it does neither tend toward it, nor from it, nor cross it; and
therefore must be either in parallel position, or coincident. And this
argument is managed in the 3 and 4 Chapters.

You tell us to this, that Peletarius did not well -- Clavius did not well --
Euclide did not well -- That is, You think so. And it is like, You think, I have
done worst of all. But I do not much stand upon your thoughts.

You say particularly, p. 26. That I am more obscure then Euclide. (It may be
so.) That I am contrary to him, (That you are to prove.) That I make two lines
when they ly upon one another, to lie (...), without inclination: I do so. Show
me if you can, where Euclide says the contrary. Tell me, where lines, either
in the same or in parallel positions, are by Euclide said to incline or be
inclined each to other? to thwart, or cross each other? According to Euclide,
you say, an angle equal to two right angles should be the greatest
inclination, and so the greatest angle, where as, by this (...), it should be
the least that can be, or rather no angle. Show me where ever Euclide does
acknowledge any angle to be equal to two right angles? or, which is all one,
that too contiguous parts of the same right line, are by Euclide said to be
inclined to each other, or to contain an angle? Nay he says the quite contrary.
For in his definition of a plain angle, he makes it one qualification, that the
lines containing it, must be such as are non indirectum positae. And therefore
two straight lines in directum positae (such as those must needs be, which are
to contain your supposed angle equal to two right angles) cannot, by Euclides
definition, contain an Angle. We do not therefore in this disagree.

You add farther, (as giving this for lost, Though it be granted (as it must
needs be) that there be no inclination of the circumference to the tangent (and
consequently no Angle; by that definition of Euclide.) yet it does not follow
that they form no kind of Angle. And why does it not follow? Because say you,
Euclide there defines but one of the kinds of a plain angle. That Euclide does
not there define, an angle in general or all kinds of angles, is very true; for
there be many other both superficial and solid angles, which are not plain
angles: But that he does there define a plain angle in general, and therefore
all kinds of plain angles is evident from his words. For in the eighth
Definition he defines a plain Angle, (as the genus) A plain Angle, says he, is
the mutual inclination of two lines, etc. and then in the next definition,
defines a right lined plain angle, (as one species of it) viz. when both these
lines be right lines. It Is manifest therefore that he intended in the former
definition to define a plain angle in general; whether the lines containing it
be straight or crooked. And therefore since the angle of contact falls not
within that definition, it is not to be reputed a plain angle. And so my first
Argument stands good.

The second, is an Argument of Peletarius, drawn from the first Proposition of
the tenth of Euclide; (and enforced likewise by me, from the second proposition
of the first of Archimedes de sphaera and cylindro:) To which Clavius rejoyns,
that the proposition is to be understood only of Homogeneous quantities; and;
of such, grants the argument to proceed. And you; supposing these to be
Heterogeneous, say, it is like as to seek for the Focus of the Parabola of
Dives and Lazarus. To your scoff at Scripture, I reply only this, that the
Focus of that Parabola is a bad place to be in, and wish you to take heed of
it. With Clavius, we join issue; granting the propositions cited not to be
understood of Heterogeneous quantities; and prove these not to be such; by this
argument: If any thing make the angle of Contact PAE, to be heterogeneous to a
rectilineal angle; it must be the crookedness of the side AE. (for if that
side were straight; the angle were rectilineall;) But that hinders not, (for I
prove the angles CAE, and SAE, notwithstanding the same side AE, are
homogeneous to right lined angles; as you grant, and Clavius could not deny:)
Therefore nothing hinders. And this is done in my fifth Chapter.

What Clavius had brought to prove the contrary, is answered in the sixth
Chapter. And if you had not thought his arguments to be all answered, you
should have done well to have undertaken the managing of some one of them. That
you mention, does only, upon supposition that it is a quantity, prove it to be
heterogeneall; because not Homogeneall. Which is to beg the question. For we,
as well as he, deny it to be a Homogeneall quantity; and therefore conclude it
to be no quantity; for heterogeneous it is not. His argument amounts but to
this, It Is not a quantity Homogeneous, (by 5 d 5) therefore it is a quantity
Heterogeneous. I grant his Antecedent, but deny the Consequence (which proceeds
only upon supposition that it is a Quantity, which is the thing in question.)
He should first have proved it to be a Quantity; which Peletarius and I deny.

In the seventh Chapter I prove, by other arguments, that if the angle of
Contact be an angle, it must be homogeneous to rectilineal angles.

1. That which may be added to, or subtracted from, a right lined angle, is
homogeneous to it: Because Heterogeneous quantities are not capable of
addition, or subduction. (And this you grant.) But so here; For PAE if an
angle, may be added to the angle SAP, making the angle SAE; (which therefore,
says Clavius, is bigger then SAP;) and taken from the angle PAC, leaving the
angle EAC, (which therefore, says Clavius, is less then PAC;) Therefore, if
an angle, it is homogeneous You grant the major; and deny the minor: that is,
you deny the only foundation upon which Clavius builds his opinion; and so
yield the cause. For he does upon no other ground maintain the angle of the
semicircle EAC, to be less then the right angle PAC, but because the angle of
Contact PAE, is a part of it, and therefore the other part EAC, must be less
then the whole.

2. Those which are to each other as Greater and Less, have proportion each to
other; and are consequently homogeneous; by the third def. of the fifth of
Euclide. (and this you grant.) But, the angle of Contact PAE, is less then the
angle SAP; by the 16 of the third of Euclide; (for his words are, that it is
less then any right lined angle.) And this Clavius would not deny, but often
affirms it. Therefore they be homogeneous. All that you have to say is, that
though Euclide say it is less, yet (to your understanding) he does not mean
so. But does he not, to your understanding prove, that the least right lined
Angle is bigger th^n it? and if so, supposing it to be angle, must it not be
Homogeneous? even by your own concession.

To the third and fourth Arguments in that Chapter, You object nothing; and
therefore those, I suppose, you allow to conclude what is contended for. viz.
that the angle of Contact is not Heterogeneous to other plain angles: and
therefore, this being the only exception, my first main argument stands good.

The Eight Chapter you say, contains nothing but the Authority of Sir Henry
Savile. And you say true; for no more was intended.

The third main Argument is proposed in the ninth Chapter; Because the Angles
of semicircles (because like segments) are equal. Whence Peletarius infers,
that the Angle of Contact is no quantity. Clavius grants the consequence of the
Argument; but denies the Antecedent: affirming DAC (fig. 2,) to be less then
EAC, though both angles of Semicircles, this of the bigger, that of the less.
To this you say, that in my 9 and 10 Chapters I prove with much ado, that the
Angles of like segments are equal: (if I prove it, though with much ado, then
I carry the cause; for that was the only thing denied by Clavius. But you add)
as if that might not have been taken gratis by Peletarius, without
demonstration: (Implying thereby, that I need not have proved it.) And this is
like your self, who care not how you abuse your English Reader. The case is
thus. Peletarius had taken it gratis, as a thing that in reason should not have
been denied him. Yet it is denied by Clavius; and the whole issue of the cause
put upon it. Had I not reason then to prove it? Yet I prove it thus; First,
that Peletarius had reason to take it gratis, and that it was unreasonable in
Clavius to put him upon the proof; and this is done in the ninth Chapter. But
then, because he had denied it, how unreasonable soever it were so to do, and
withal put the whole issue of the cause upon it; therefore in the tenth
Chapter I undertake to prove it by argument. And you grant, I prove It. What
should I do more?

The 11th Chapter clears the same argument from a seeming difficulty. And you
say nothing to it, but that the objection was of no moment, and needed no
answer.

To the Arguments of the 12 and 13 Chapters, (and those are a pretty many, for
in one of them are contained six,) your answer is (and that is all) that they
are grounded all on this untruth, that an Angle, is that which is contained
between the lines that make it, that is to say, is a plain superficies. Which
is (I will not say a lie, though that also be your language, but) manifestly
false; and you could not but know it so to be. For there is not, in those
whole Chapters any such thing assumed for proof; nor does any one of those
arguments depend upon any such notion; but let your notion of Angle be what it
can, my arguments will hold their weight. This therefore is nothing but a
notorious untruth, wherewith (because you had nothing to say to the Arguments)
you meant to abuse your English Reader. But suppose I had said, (as it is like
I may sometimes) that an Angle is contained by, or between the two sides; is
this any more then to say that the two sides contain the Angle? And does not
every body say so as well as I? Are they not Euclide's own words, 9 d 1. When
the lines ((...)) containing or comprehending the angle be right lines, the
angle is called Rectilineall? Nay are they not your own words, cap. 14. 7.
Anguli qui rectis continentur lineis, rectilinei; qui curvis, anguli curvilinei
sunt; qui recta and curva continentur, misti? What a do then do you make for
nothing? Perhaps the word between troubles you. But is not by and between in
this case all one? It is to me; and if you do not like the one word take the
other; it is all one to me, (But, by the way, the phrase, contain between, is
not so much as once used in either of those Chapters: and therefore that cavil
is to no purpose at all, but to abuse your English Reader, who cannot
contradict you.) And does not Euclide's word (...) signify to contain between?
and (...), the lines which do comprehend, (or contain between them) the Angle?
Nay do not you your self use it again and again, cap. 14. 9. Ad quantitatem
anguli neque longitudo, neque aequalitas aut inaequalitas linearum quae angulum
comprehendunt, quicquam faciunt, idem enim angulus est qui comprehenditur inter
AB and AC, cum eo qui comprehenditur inter AE and AF, vel inter AB and AF. And
again cap. 14. parag. 16. Angulus qui cont^netur inter AB and eandem AB etc.
And soon after, angulus qui sit inter GB and BK, aequalis est angulo qui sit
inter GB and arcum BC. (which is also retained in the English.) And so
elsewhere. But say you, To say that an angle is contained between the lines
that make it, is as much as to say, that it is a plain superficies. And was it
so when you wrote those passages last cited? Were you then of opinion that the
Angle contained or comprehended between the lines AB and AC, (as you there
speak,) was a plain superficies? Or, if those words do not import so much when
you speak them, why should you think they do when I speak them? But, it seems,
having nothing else to cavil at, you thought fit to tell your English Reader,
who must take it upon trust from you, That I affirm a plain angle, to be a
plain superficies, because, forsooth, I say (as Euclide and all others do, and
your self among the rest,) that it is contained between two lines. You might,
with much better Logic, have concluded the contrary For though Euclide, as I
do, said that two straight lines may comprehend an angle, 9 d 1. yet he
affirms, that two straight lines cannot comprehend a superficies, 10 ax 1. And
therefore, when I affirm that an angle may be comprehended between two
straight lines, you might (at least a sober-man might) have concluded, that I
did not take it for a superficies, because that cannot be comprehended by fewer
straight lines then three. But enough of this. And, if this be all you have to
say against the Arguments of the 12 and 13 Chapters, I hope they may pass for
current: and be judged to conclude the cause.

To that of the last chapters (as you speak) where I prove the same from a
proposition of Vitellio: (which proposition of his I do also vindicate from an
exception of Cabbaeus:) You object nothing, but that I defend Vitellio without
need (and yet I had there told you, that Cabbaeus denies his argument:) for say
you there is no doubt but whatsoever c^ooked line be touched by a straight
line, the angle of contingeuce will neither add any thing to, nor take any
thing from a Rectilineall Right Angle; That is, there is no doubt but that
Clavius was in the wrong, and I in the right, all the way: for this was the
very thing that was in controversy betwixt us. And so you have brought your
confutation to a good Catastrophe. And thus much for the Angle of Contact.

SECT. V. Arithmetica Infinitorum, Vindicated.
Let Us see now what you have to say against my Arithmetica Infinitorum. Five
propositions you there take to task; the first, the third, the fifth, the
nineteenth, and the thirty ninth.

The first you, you say, is this Lemma; In a series of quantities
arithmetically proportional, beginning with a point or cyphar, (as for example
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.) to find the proportion of the Aggregate of them all, to
the Aggregate of so many times the greatest as there are terms. Very true,
this is the first proposition; what then? This you say, is to be done by
multiplying the greatest into half the number of terms. What is to be done
thus? finding the proportion? No such matter. That Is the way to find the sum,
(upon supposition that the proportion is already known to be, as 1 to 2,) not
to find out what is the Proportion, (supposing it yet unknown,) which the Lemma
proposes to be inquired, and finds it to be as 1 to 2. But it is well however
that you can at length tell how to gather the sum of such a proportion (after
I had taught you in my Elenchus,) for you were, it seems, of an other opinion,
when you said Cap. 16. parag. 20. In hujusmodi progressione (0. 1. 2. 3. 4.
etc.) summa numerorum omnium simul sumptorum, aequalis est semissi ejus numeri
qui fit a maximo termino ducto in minimum, id est, hoc loco in ciphram. Which
you now confess page 41. to be a great error.

You go on, and say, The Demonstration is easy. But how, say you, do I
demonstrate it? You should have asked rather, How I find it, (then how I
demonstrate it:) for that was it the Lemma proposed. But you are so well
acquainted with the Analyticks, that you know not how to distinguish between
the (...), and the (...). by the first we find out the solution of a Problem;
by the second we prove it. Now if you can find a more natural (...), or way of
finding out the solution of this and the other Problems (for I was here showing
a general method for this and others that follow,) pray let us know it in your
next, and I shall thank you for it. But do not talk of Demonstrating, when I
propose the finding out; for, if you do, I shall say, that is nothing to the
purpose.

You tell us next, that an Induction, without a Numeration of all the
particulars is not sufficient to infer a Conclusion. Yes, Sir, if after the
Enumeration of some particulars, there comes a general clause, and the like in
other cases, (as here it does) this may pass for a proof, till there be a
possiblity of giving some instance to the contrary; which, here, you will never
be able to do. And if such an induction may not pass for proof, there is
never a proposition in Euclide demonstrated. For all along he takes no other
course then such, (or at least grounds his Demonstrations on propositions no
otherwise demonstrated.) As for instance; he proposes it in general 1 e 1. to
make an Equilater triangle on a line given. And then shows you how to do it
upon the line (...) which he there shows you: and leaves you to supply, and the
same by the like means, may be done upon any other straight line; and then
inferres his general conclusion. Yet I have not heard any man object, that the
induction was not sufficient, because he did not actually perform it in all
lines possible.

You then ask, whether it be not also true in these numbers, 0, 2, 4, 6, etc.
or 0, 7, 14, 21, etc? Yes, and in these also (which perhaps you would little
think) 0, 2, 8, 18, 32, 50, etc. But why, say you, do I then limit it to the
numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc? I should rather wonder why you think I do. No wise
man would have thought it; when he sees that I speak in general of any series
in continued Arithmeticall progression, that begins with a point or ciphar. And
there had been no color, for you to ask such a question, if, in reciting my
proposition, you had not in stead of saying as, for example, said only as. For
doubtless those are continued. Arithmeticall progressions beginning with a
Ciphar; and they are also juxta naturalem numerorum consecutionem, that is,
like progressions to those of the natural numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, etc.

You ask then (very wisely) whether it will hold in 0, 1, 3, 5, 7. I answer,
no. (nor is any such thing affirmed.) because 0, 1, 3, are not Arithmetically
proportional.

And when you have done Catechizing us, you then conclude, well, the Lemma is
true: (in good time!) that is as much as to say, you were willing to show your
teeth though you cannot bite. What Is next?

The first Theorem that I draw from it, is, you say, that a Triangle to a
Parallelogram of Equal base and Altitude, is as one to two. Well; and what of
this? The conclusion you say is true. Very good, Then two of the five have
escaped already. But you do not like of the Demonstration, because of the words
as it were (and the like exception you took before, at the word scarce,) which
you say, is no phrase of a Geometrician. Yes Sir; a very good phrase, if the
Geometrician do determine precisely (as I have done) how much by that quasi he
intends to limit the accurate. For I do not suffer either the scarce, or the
as it were, to run at random without bounds. I tell you that by quasi linea,
or vix aliud quam linea, I do not mean precisely a Line, but a
Parallologramme whose breadth is very small, viz. an aliquot part of the whole
figures altitude, denominated by the number of Parallelogramms. (Which is a
determination Geometrically precise.) And by triangulum constat quasi, etc. I
tell you that I mean, that a Figure, consisting of such Parallelogramms,
inscribed in a Triangle, whose difference in bigness from that Triangle is
less then any assignable quantity, is so constituted. As you may see precisely
determined in the place to which this Demonstration referres. The words
therefore vix and quasi, being thus determined, are here very good Geometrical
words; and your cavills come to nothing.

My fifth Proposition is, you say, The Spirall line is equal to half the circle
of the first Revolution. But, in saying so, you say not true. For that is not
my proposition; but one of your own, patched together, after your fashion, out
of my fifth and sixth put together. And, as it stands, I cannot own it. The
words of the first revolution, should have been adjoined to the Spirall line,
not to the word circle: to show how much of the Spirall line is intended. And,
instead of half the circle, you should have said, half the circumference of
the first circle; for I did not compare the Spirall line with the Circle (that
is, a line, with a Figure,) but that Spirall line with the circumference, (viz.
as 1 to 2,) and the Spirall Figure, with the Circle, (viz. as 1 to 3) And the
circle you intend, is not by me, or by Archimedes, called the circle of the
first revolution, but the first circle; which is conterminate with the first
revolution of that Spirall line. But if you will needs have my fifth and sixth
Propositions put together, pray let it be thus, That so much of the Spirall
line, in the sense of the proposition, as belongs to the first revolution, is
equal to half the circumference of the first circle. Now in what sense I take
the words Spirall line, in these propositions, is so clearly defined in the
Scholium of page 10. that it is not possible for any man, unless wilfully, to
mistake me. viz. That I do not intend the true spirall of Archimedes, but the
aggregate of the arches of infinite like Sectors, constituting a figure
inscribed within that Spirall of Archimedes. And thus, both those and the other
Propositions are true. Nor can you deny them.

But now because you have nothing to say against the Proposition in the true
sense of it: you will needs persuade me, (because you know what I meant better
then my self.) that I did not so mean, nor would be understood, so, as I said,
I meant and desired to be understood; but that I meant somewhat else. And you
have this ground for it; Because in the sense wherein I said I would have it
understood, the proposition is true; but you have a desire that it should be
false; and therefore it must be understood in some other sense. Let Us see
therefore what it is, that I may at length know what it was I meant. What
Spirall is meant, you say, we shall understand by the construction. Yes, if you
take in the whole construction; but not by a piece of it. My construction
begins thus, Let a straight line MA, turned about the center M, be supposed, by
a uniforme motion, to describe, with its point A, the circumference AOA;
whilst a point in the same line, so carried about, is supposed to describe a
Spirall line MTA. This is the first part of the construction; (and from hence I
infer, by the way, that the straight lines MT will be proportional to the
angles AMT, and the Archs AO.) This therefore, say you, is the Spirall of
Archimedes. Very true: and it was intended so to be. But let us go on and hear
the rest of the construction, (for hitherto we have had but a part of it.)
Which if you may be believed, is this; inscribing in the Circle an infinite
multitude of Equal angles, and consequently an infinite number of Sectors,
whose Archs will therefore be in Arithmeticall proportion; (which, you say, is
true;) and the aggregate of those archs equal to half the circumference AOA.
Which, you say, is true also. But, if I had said so, I had lied; for I know it
to be false: (in you it was only an Error, or, as you use to call it, a
Negligence; because you thought it had been true.) For this is neither my
construction, nor are those things true which you affirm. For, if in a circle,
there be a number of Sectors inscribed (whether finite or infinite) both those
Sectors, and the Archs of them, are proportional to their Angles; and
therefore, the Angles being equal, the Archs will be equal also, and not
Arithmetically proportional: And the Aggregate of those archs, will not be
equal to half the circumference AOA, but, to that whole circumference. But my
construction was this; Within the Spirall line, described as above, supposing
an infinite multitude of Sectors continually inscribed on equal angles, their
Radii AT will be Arithmetically proportional, viz. as 0, 1, 2, 3, and
consequently their archs will be so too. And this, I suppose, is that which you
intended to grant as true; Being the result of the second part of my
construction. Then follows the third part of the construction (which has the
nature of a Definition; which, till thus much of the construction was past,
could not conveniently be expressed,) The Spirall line (intended in the
proposition, not that of Archimedes) is supposed therefore to be made up, of
the archs of those infinite Sectors, arithmetically proportional (for so they
are already proved to be) beginning with a point or o. (And then goes on the
Demonstration.) But the circumference consists of so many archs equal to the
biggest of them; as is evident. Therefore (by the second Prop.) that to this,
is as one to two. Which is the thing to be proved.

Now this, to some capacities, though not to M. Hobs, would have been easy
enough to understand. Yet that it might not lie open to any cavil, or
misunderstanding; I thought fit in a particular Scholium, to express my
meaning so fully, as that there might be no possibility of mistaking what I
intended. (And, the truth is, I would have had that Scholium Printed next after
the Fifth Proposition. But finding, that, through some neglect, the Printer had
there left it out, I gave him order to put it in, at the next convenient place;
which was, in the next sheet, at the end of the 12 Proposition: a place proper
enough for it.) And you cannot deny, but that my words there, be plain enough
to be understood, and not capable of any distortion to any other sense. And
that the Proposition in this sense is true, you cannot deny; and so much ( I
suppose) you intended to grant, when you said, That the aggregate of those
archs is equal to half the circumference AOA, is true also. Three therefore
of the five are already found to be true.

My 19. Prop. you say, is this Lemma. In a series of Quantities, beginning from
a point or ciphar, and proceeding according to the order of square numbers, (as
for example 0, 1, 4, 9, 16, etc.) to find what proportion the whole series
has, to so many times the greatest. It Is true; this is my 19 Proposition. What
then? I conclude, you say, the proportion is that of 1 to 3. No Sir, I do not
conclude it to be so. I conclude it to greater then that of one to three. My
words are these, Ratio proveniens est ubique major quam subtripla Excessus
autem perpetuo decrescit prout numerus terminorum augetur, etc. ut sit rationis
provenientis excessus supra subtriplam, ea quam habet unitas ad sextuplum
numeri terminorum p^st o. That is in plain English thus. The series so
increasing, is always more then a third part of so many times the greatest.
For it contains evermore, a third part thereof, and moreover, an aliquot part
denominated by six times the number of terms following the o. And is not this
true? can you have the face to deny it? We Will try if you please; take your own
instances. Let the series be of three terms 0, 1, 4, the aggregate is 5: the
greatest so many times taken, that is 3 times 4, is 12. I say 5 contains of 12,
a third part (viz. 4 = x 12.) and moreover a part denominated by 6 times 2,
(for there are two terms besides o.) that is a twelfth part of the number 12.
(viz. 1 = 1/12; x 12.) And is not this true? is not 5 = 4 x 1? Again, let the
terms be four, viz, 0, 1, 4, 9. = 14. and the greatest so many times taken 9,
9, 9, 9. = 36. I say that 14 contains of 36, (that is 12,) and moreover,
(because 3 x 6 = 18) 1/18 of 36, (that is 2.) And is it not true, that 14 is
equal to 12 + 2? I think it is. Again, let the terms be five, viz. 0, 1, 4,
9, 16, = 30. and therefore so many times the greatest is 16, 16, 16, 16, 16, =
80. I say that 30 contains, of 80, that is 26 2/1 and moreover 2 of 80;
(because 4 x 6 = 24) that is 3 1/^. And is it not so? is not 26 + 3 = 30? you
may try it farther if you please. My skill for yours, 'twill hold. (And that's
fair odds in a wager.) The Proposition therefore is true thus far.

Well but I said farther; That though the Proposition be still more then the
subtriple; yet the excess does still decrease. Do you not think that true
too? if not, let us try. if the terms be three, you see the proportion is as 5
to 12, that is as + 1 to 1. if four, the proportion is as 14 to 36, that is + 1
to 1. if five, then as + 1/24 to 1. etc. As we have seen already. But the
proportion of + 1 1^ to 1, is more then of + 1 to 1, and yet this more then +
1/24 to 1. and so forward. But you forsooth would feign persuade us, that as
the number of terms increase, so the proportion increases. As if the
proportion of + 1/24 to 1, were greater then that of + 1/18 to one. and yet
would pretend to understand proportions, and tell us what M. Oughtreds meaning
is etc. as if we did not understand M. Oughtred, and his meaning too, better
then you. But, by the way, I wonder how you durst touch M. Oughtred for fear of
catching the Scab. For, doubtless, his book is as much covered over with the
Scah of Symbolls, as any of mine. Which makes me think, you understand his and
mine much alike.

I add farther, (though not in this proportion,) that the proportion does so
decrease, as that (though it be never less then a subtriple, yet) the excess
above the subtriple, will by degrees vanish, as the number of terms
increases, till it grow less then any assignable quantity. and it is proved
thus: Because the second fraction, which with makes up the antecedent of the
proportion, whose consequent is 1; does proportionally decrease, as the number
of terms does increase. And therefore, as the number of terms may increase
beyond any assignable number: so may the excess decrease below any assignable
quantity. And, if the number of terms be supposed infinite, the proportion
will be infinitely near to the subtriple.

But you tell us upon this, (and wittily doubtless, as you suppose, by a sly
transition from the phrase infinitely near, to that of eternally nearer,) you
tell us, I say, that if the proportions come eternally nearer and nearer to the
subtriple, (supposing them at first bigger then it, which you should have
added, for else the case alters,) they must also come eternally nearer and
nearer to the subquadruple, and so to the subquintuple, etc. I grant it. But
what then? it does not follow, that if it come eternally nearer to the
subquadruple, then it will come infinitely near, or nearer then any assignable
difference; for it can never, upon that supposition, come nearer to it then the
subtriple. Like as the Hyperbole, does eternally come nearer and nearer to its
Asymptote, and consequently, will eternally come nearer also to a parallel
that lies beyond it; but not infinitely near; for, since that it never pas^es
the Asymptote, though it do eternally approach, yet it never comes nearer to
that Parallel, then the Asymptote does. And indeed if it should, it could not
eternally approach to the Asymptote, but so soon as it is passed it, it would
then grow farther and farther from the Asymptote, while it does approach to the
parallel beyond it. And, in the present case, this proportion which does
eternally approach, and may come infinitely near to the subtriple, does indeed
eternally approach, but not come infinitely near, to the subquadruple. For it
never comes nearer to it, then is the subtriple. And I would not have you think
us such weak Mathematicians, or such young birds, as to be caught with such
chafe, or not see through so weak a fallacy as that is. And therefore when you
infer, that we may as well conclude thence, that the proportion, is as one to
four, or one to five, etc. (supposing the number of terms infinite) as to
conclude, it is as one to three: We suppose that you would have us think
withal, either that you do not speak in good earnest, or else that you are
not well in your wits: For otherwise, doubtless you cannot be so simple as to
believe it.

There is but one Proposition more that you undertake to deal with. Which is
the 39, viz. this Lemma, In a series of quantities beginning with a point or
cipher, and proceeding according to the series of Cubick Numbers, (as for
example 0, 1, 8, 27, 64, etc.) to find what proportion the whole series has to
so many times the greatest. And you deal with this, just as you did with the
last. First you mis-recite it, and then say it is false. I conclude, you say,
that they have the proportion of 1 to 4. Which is false, I do not so conclude;
but that it is more then so; viz. it contains a fourth part, and moreover
another aliquot part, denominable by four times the number of terms following
the cipher. That is, if the terms be three, the proportion is as + 1/8 to 1.
if four, it is as + 1/12 to 1. if five, it is as + 1/16 to 1. And so forward.
And if you make trial, you shall find it so to be. (For 0 + 1 + 8 = 9; and 8 +
8 + 8 = 24. Now 9 is equal to + 1/8 of 24, viz. to 6 + 3. So 0 + 1 + 8 + 27 =
36. and 27 + 27 + 27 + 27 = 108. Now 36 is equal to + 1/12 of 108, viz. to 27
+ 9. So 0 + 1 + 8 + 27 + 64 = 100; and 64 + 64 + 64 + 64 + 64 = 320. Now 100 is
equal to 1 (...) + 1/16 of 320, viz. to 80 + 20. And so of the rest.) If you
think it to be otherwise; show, if you can, one instance to the contrary. The
Proposition therefore is true; but you had not the honesty to report it right.
(or else your wits were at wooll-gathering.) And so of all those five
propositions which you have taken to task, there is not any one faulty.

And I should now have done with this business, but that I discern, upon these
two last Propositions, your reason why you are so much out of charity with the
Symbolick tongue. It Is very hard, you have told us diverse times; yet here, it
seems, you mean to try what you could do at it. And it is to be hoped, you may,
in time, learn the language; for you be come to great A already. (But truly
were it not that you must defend your reputation, you tell us, you should not
have done so much.) But such pitiful work do thou make with poor great A,
and to so little purpose, that if there were no better use to be made of
Symbols, then so, it is pity they should ever be used at all. And truly, were I
great A, before I would be willing to be so abused, I should wish my self
little a, an hundred times. Yet thus much, I confess you have done: You have
clearly convinced me, that you have reason not to be much in love with Symbols.
For to what purpose? since you can neither use, nor understand them. And truly,
upon this very account, I am apt to think, that much of your 13 chapter, is
none of your own.

Well; Arithmetica Infinitorum is come off clear. We Will see next what you have
to say to Conick Sections.

SECT. VI. My Treatise of Conick Sections vindicated.
AS for my Treatise of Conick Sections, you say, it is so covered over with the
Scab of Symbols, that you had not the patience to examine whether it be well or
ill demonstrated. A very fine way of confutation; and with much case. You have
not the patience to examine it, (that is, in plain English, you do not
understand it,) Ergo I have performed nothing in any of my Books (for that is
the inference in the same page, p. 49.) (...). But, Sir, must I be bound to
tell you a tale, and find you ears too? Is it not lawful for me to write
Symbols, till you can understand them? Sir, they were not written for you to
read, but for them that can.

However, whether you understand it or not, yet somewhat you observe, you say,
(though you have not the patience to examine whether it be well or ill.) Pray
lets hear your Observations; (for they be like to be wise ones.)

You observe, you say, that I find a Tangent to a point given in a Section, by
a Diameter given: (very good; There Is no hurt in that, I hope, is there?) and
in the next Chapter, I teach the finding of a Diameter. You should have done
well to have told us, where to find those Chapters. For I do not remember, that
that Treatise is at all divided into Chapters. Well! but suppose I had in one
Chapter, by the help of Diam^ter given, found a Tangent; in another Chapter, by
the help of a Tangent, found a Diameter: Had there been any hurt in all this?

You observe also, you say, that I call the Parameter an Imaginary line, as if
the place thereof were less determined then the Diameter it self. (But did
you observe, whether I did well or ill, so to call it?) And then, you say, I
take a mean propoirtionall between the intercepted Diameter, and its contiguous
ordinate line, to find it. Pray tell me where you observed that. For, had I
observed it, I should have observed it as a great fault; and not said as you
do, And it is true, I find it. For, believe me, that is not the way to find a
Parameter. Nor do I give you any such direction. You may (in a Parabola) find
the Parameter by taking a third Proportional, but not by taking a Mean
Proportional, to those two lines. You say, The Parameter has a determined
quantity. Yes doubtless. And, in some Writers, it has a determined Position
too (viz. in the Tangent of the vertex:) But because I make no use of any such
position, I give you leave either to draw it where you will, or not to draw it
at all. For by a Parameter, I mean only, a line of such a length, where ever it
be; whether at Rome, or Naples, or in M. Hobs his brain. They that make use of
the Parameters position, as inferring any thing from it, must assign it a
certain place. I make use only of its bigness, and therefore care not where it
stand.

Lastly you observe, you say, that I do not show how to find the Focus. (nor
was) bound to do.) And that is all.

And is not this a worthy confutation? Yes doubtless; worthy of you; For how
could you else infer, That I have performed nothing in any of my Books; if
you had not confuted them all.

And thus much of those three Treatises. Which, you see are come off safe and
sound, without the loss of leg or limb. And with this advantage, (if M. Hobs
his testimony, in point of skill, were worth any thing,) that they have
obtained from him as ample a Testimony as he is able to give. viz. That when as
he has employed the utmost both of his skill and malice, to find what faults
he could, he has not been able to discover any one: (which Testimony, from a
considerable adversary, would have been worth something; but, from M. Hobs, J
confess, it signifies little:) and all the attempts he has made to that
purpose, have not been so strong, but that a Butter-fly might have broken
through them.

SECT. VII. Concerning the Eighth Chapter in M. Hobs his Book of Body.
HItherto we have tried your skill and valor in point of Assault: And found,
that, though you charge as furiously as if you meant to look us dead; yet you
come off as poorly as a man could wish. J am apt to think, that your weapons
were not well made, and that your Musket was of a bad bore, (for it has done
no execution, save only in the recoile;) or else you held it by the wrong end,
(like the Jack-an-Ape that peeped in the gunns mouth to see the bullet come
out,) for though it made a great noise, yet it has hurt no body but your
self. My Colleague and I, are both of us alive, and live-like; and Euclide
sleeps as securely as he did before.

We Will try now, how good you are in point of Defense; and see how you can
defend your Corpus against my Elenchus. Perhaps you may have better luck at
that.

But, me thinks, it begins unluckyly. Before you fall to work with Elenchus;
you traverse your ground, that you may take it to the best advantage: and
distinguish, between faults of Ignorance, and faults of Negligence, (page 9.)
you tell us that from right Principles to draw false Conclusions (which you are
very good at) are but faults of negligence and humane frailty, and such as are
not attended with shame, etc. That it is only as being less awake, etc. (and
yet think much to be told, that you discourse as if you were half a sleep:)
And much more your preface to that purpose. As if the first consideration to be
had, in the choice of your ground, were, whence you might with best advantage
run away; (a business of ill Omen in the beginning of a Combat;) that when
you shall be forced to quit your ground, you may, at least, show a fair pair of
heels.

My Elenchus, as I then told you, begins at first with some lighter skirmishes,
showing how unhandsome some of your Definitions and Distributions are, giving
instance in a few; which though faults had enough, yet are but small ones in
comparison of those greater which follow, in false Propositions and
Demonstrations.

I begin with that of Chap. 8. 12. Where you define a line, a length, a point,
in this manner. If when a Body is moved, its magnitude (though it always have
some) be not all considered, the way it makes is called a Line, or one single
dimension; the space through which it passes is called Length; and the Body it
self a Point. But what if a Body be not moved? i^ there then neither Point,
nor Line, nor Length? A Point there may be, which is not a Body, much less A
Body moved: and a Line, or Length, through which no body passes: And therefore
the definitions are not good, because not reciprocal. The Axis of the Earth,
is a Line, and that line has its Length; yet do I not believe that any Body
does, or ever did, pass directly from the one to the other Pole, to describe
that Line. The notion therefore of Motion or Body moved, I then said, was
wholly extrinsecall and accidental to the notion of Line, or Length, or of a
Point; no ways essential or necessary to it, or to the understanding of it:
and that therefore it was not convenient, to clog the definitions of these,
with the notion of that.

To this you answer, (having waved first, what you attempted, as from the
example of Euclide,) That, how ever it may be to others, it was fit for you to
define a Line by Motion. And I do acquiesse in that Answer. For, though it
would not become any man else so to define it; yet it becomes M. Hobs very
well; as well agreeing with his accuratenesse in other things.

I said farther, That the distance of two points though resting, was a Length,
as well as the measure of a passage, (and therefore the notion of a body moved,
not necessary to the definition of Length.) To which you answer, that the
distance of the two ends of a thread wound up into a Clew, is not the length of
the thread. Much to the purpose.

I asked, Whoever defined a Line to be a Body? And you tell me, you take it
for an honor to be the first that do so. And you may, for ought I know, have
also the honor to be the last. And as to that long rant against Euclide; That
if a Point have no parts, and so no magnitude; A Line can have no breadth, nor
can be drawn (mechanically you mean;) and then there is not in Euclide one
Proposition demonstrated, or demonstrable. We do not think, that your
asseveration a sufficient argument, more than we take a word of your mouth to
be a slander; but desire some better proof of that consequence before we
assent to it. You tell us else where, that A Point is to Magnitude, as a ciphar
is to Number (cap. 16 art. 20.) And yet I suppose you will not say that,
unless a Ciphar have some multitude, as well as a Point some Magnitude, there
is not in Euclide any one Proposition demonstrated. And to the same purpose is
that Cap. 14. 16. An angle of contingence, if compared with an angle simply so
called how little so ever, has such proportion to it, as a point to a Line,
that is, (neque rationem, neque quantitatem ullam,) no proportion, nor any
quantity at all. Which how well it agrees with your other doctrines, it
concerns you to see to, (for if a Point to a Line, have no proportion nor any
quantity at all, then is it not a Part thereof;) and how little this comes
short of what you so often rant at, as making a Point to be nothing.

Again, whereas in the place cited (both in Latin and English) you thus
define; The Way (of the Body so moved) is called a Line, or one single
Dimension; and the Space through which it passes, is called Length. I argued,
that Length, doubtless, was one single dimension; and therefore, if one single
dimension, as in your definition, be the same with Line; then Length will be a
Line, and not therefore need a second definition. Now, to help the matter, in
your Lessons; you define thus, The Way is called a Line; and the space gone
over by that motion, Length or one single dimension. Whence my argument is yet
farther enforced, If one single dimension signify the same with Line, (as in
your Book;) and also the same with Length, (as in your Lesson;) then Line and
Length signify with you the same thing; and therefore with you, should not have
had two distinct and different definitions. Which I take to be ad hominem, a
good argument. You answer, that to say Line is Length, proceeds from want of
understanding English. It may be so. But what is this to the clearing of your
Definitions? where those two words are made equivalent. Yet farther, chap. 12.
parag. 1. there are, say you, three dimensions, Line (or Length,) Superficies,
and Solid. where again Line and Length are made the same. Now whether or no
Line be Length, or whether it be for want of understanding English that you
affirm it, it concerns you to clear; for it is you, not I, that affirm it so
to be.

Your next definition is of Equal Bodies; which you thus define, Equal
Bodies, are those which may possess the same place. Against which definition J
objected, That you should rather define a thing, by what it is, then by what it
may be: That the notion of Place, was wholly extrinsecall to the notion of
Equality; for Time, Tone, Numbers, Proportions, and many other quantities are
capable of Equality, without any connotation of Place; and the notion of
Equality in them, is the same notion with that of Equality in Bodies; (else how
can you say, that two Equal Numbers, and two Equal Bodies, are in the same
Proportion;) And therefore, That one good definition of Equality, or Equals,
in general; had been much better, then so many particulars, of Equal Bodies,
Equal Magnitudes, Equal Motions, Equal Times, Equal Swiftness, etc. as you
here bring; and yet, when you have all done, there be a great many more
Equals, which you leave undefined: (And your bare assertion, That there is no
Subject of Quantity, or of Equality, or of any other Accident, but Body, does
not help the matter at all; for we are not bound to take your word for it:)
That, if you would needs mention place, you should rather have defined them by
the place they have, then what they may have; and so, defined those bodies to
be Equal, which do possess Equal places, rather then, which may possess the
same place: That a Pyramid, remaining a Pyramid, may be Equal to a Cube; yet
cannot, remaining a Pyramid, possess the place of that Cube: Or, if you will,
That a Pyramidall Atome, though so Adamantine as to be incapable of any
transmutation, (as those who teach the doctrine of Atoms do maintain,) may
yet be equal to a Cubicall Atome, though not possess the place thereof: That
you might as well have defined a Man, to be one who may be Prince of
Transylvania, as to define Equal Bodies, to be those which May possess the
same place. (with much more, of which you take no notice.)

To that last particular, you answer, that it is wittily objected, as I count
wit, but impertinently. And why impertinently? Is not that definition of a
Man; as good as yours of Bodies Equal? You think not, Because if so, J must be
of opinion, That the possibility of being Prince of Transylvania, is no less
essential to a Man; then the possibility of being in the same Place, is
essential to Equal Bodies. And truly J am of that opinion. J think it every
way as Possible for for any man living, to be Prince of Transylvania; as for
the Arctick and Antartick Circles, (or the Segments of the Sphere which they
cut off,) be they never so Equal, to possess the same place. Nor is that
possibility less essential, than this.

You add, That there is no man (beside such Egregious Geometricians as we are)
that inquires the Equality of two bodies, but by measure: And, as for liquid
bodies, etc. by putting them one after another into the same vessel, that is
to say, into the same place; And, as for hard bodies, they inquire their
Equality ^y weight. To which I shall reply nothing at all; because you speak
therein so like a Geometrician.

I objected farther, That it is not yet agreed amongst Philosophers (and your
authority will not decide the controversy,) whether or no, the same body may
not, by Rarefaction and Condensation, (words understood by other men, though
you understand them not,) sometimes possess a bigger, some times a lesser
place. We see, that the same Air in the head of a weather-glasse, does
sometimes possess a bigger, sometimes a lesser part of the glass, according
as the Weather is cold or hot, and you cannot deny, (what ever others may) but
that both are filled; for you do not allow any Vacuum at all. We know, that
into a Wind-gun, though it were full (you say) before, yet much more Air may be
forced in. And into the Artificial Fountain, (which you mention Cap. 26. fig
2.) though full of Air, may be forced also a great quantity of Water. Now how
to salve these Phenomenon, (with many others of the like kind) without either
allowing Vacuum, which you deny; or Condensation, which you laugh at; (one of
which others use to assign) because you find it too hard a task for you to
undertake, (as well you may,) you leave to a m^lius inquirendum p. 144. l. 27.
(or in the English, p. 316. l. 34.) Now if it be true, that the same body does,
or possible, that it may, possess, some time a bigger, sometime a less space,
(as those who deny Vacuum do generally affirm,) then, by your definition, the
same body (I do not say may possibly become, but) at present is both bigger,
and less, and equal to it self: Because it has at present a possibility of
possessing hereafter both a larger place, by Rarefaction, and a lesser place,
by condensation, than now it does. And so you, by determining the equality or
inequality of Bodies, not by the place they have, but by such place as possibly
they may have (upon any supposed metamorphosis or transmutation,) do confound
Bigger, and Less, and Equal, and so take away the whole foundation of
Mathematics: For if there be no difference between Bigger, Less, and Equal,
there is no room either for Mathematics or Measure. But, whether that opinion
of Rarefaction and Condensation be true or not: yet since you cannot deny, but
that it is at least a considerable controversy, and, by men as wise, and as
good Philosophers as M. Hobs, maintained against you; yea and a Controversy not
belonging to Mathematics but Physics, or Natural Philosophy, and there to be
determined; it was not wisdom to hang the whole weight of Mathematics, upon
so slender a thread, as the decision of that controversy in Natural
Philosophy, which whether way it be determined, is wholly impertinent to a
Mathematical Definition.

To which you reply only this, (which is easy to say) that Rarefying and
Condensing, are but empty words; and that (of which we have spoken already)
Mathematical Definition, is not a good phrase.

To that definition you had annexed this also; Eadem ratione, magnitudo
magnitudini, etc. Upon the same account one Magnitude is equal, or greater, or
lesser, then another, when the bodies whose they are, are greater, equal, or
less. These words, I said, must bear one of these two ^enses, either, that
Equal Bodies, or Bodies equally great, are of equal greatness, (which is no
very profound notion:) or else, that the magnitudes, towlt the lines,
superficies, etc. or at least, the length, breadth, etc. of Equal bodies, is
Equal, (taking the words for a definition of Equal Lines, Equal Superficies,
etc) and this, I said, was manifestly false: for no bodies may be equal, whose
length, breadth, superficies, etc. are unequal. You say now, that you meant
the former, (and I cannot contradict it, for you know your own meaning best,
yet you must give me leave to think:) and so leave us without any definition of
Equal Lines, Plains, or Superficies Which yet, considering how often you are
afterward to. make use of, might have been as worthy of a definition, as some
of those equals that you have defined.

In the next Paragraph, Cap. 8. parag. 14. you undertake to prove, that one and
the same Body, is always of one and the same magnitude, and not bigger at one
time then another, or at one time fill a bigger place, than it does at another
time. Let Us hear how you prove it (for, by what we heard but now, you are much
concerned to make good proof of it, because if there be a possibility of
possessing at any time a bigger or less place than now it does, than it is, by
your definition, at present bigger or less than it self.) Your proof is in
these words, For seeing a Body, and the Magnitude, and the Place thereof,
cannot be comprehended in the mind otherwise than as they are coincident,
(observe therefore, that this argument does no more prove, that a Body cannot
change its Magnitude, than that it cannot change its Place, for you make Place
as much coincident with Body, as you do Magnitude, and the argument proceeds
equally of both:) if any Body be understood to be at rest, that is, to remain
in the same place during some time, and the Magnitude thereof be in one part of
the time greater, and in another part less, that Bodies place, which is one
and the same, will be coincident sometime with greater, sometime with less
magnitude, that is, the same Place will be greater and less than it self,
which is impossible. This is your whole proof to a word. Now this, I told you,
is no sufficient proof, because it proves only that a Body does not change its
quantity so long as it is at rest, and does precisely keep the same place;
(which no body does affirm.) And, pray look upon the Argument once again: does
it prove any more than so? But that which you undertook to prove was, that it
does never change its magnitude, but has always the same, as well when its
place is altered, as when it remains in the same place: (for, J suppose, you
will not deny, but that a Body may change its place.) Those that hold the
contrary opinion, do not say that a body does change its greatness while it
does precisely keep the same place; but that, with change of place, it may
change its dimensions too: And to this, if you would have said any thing, you
should have applied your argument. And is not this then a just exception to
your argument? Will this argument hold, think you, Because a Body does not
change its magnitude so long as it keeps precisely the same place: Therefore,
it never changes its magnitude, but has always the same? This argument has
no appearance of consequence, but only upon this supposition, that a Body does
always keep precisely the same place. And, then, I confess, the Argument
looks like an Argument, in this form, So long as a body keeps precisely one
and the same place, it has precisely one and the same Magnitude: But a Body
does always keep precisely one and the same Place: Therefore it has always
one and the same Magnitude. And if this be your argument, we allow the form,
but deny the matter of it, and say, the Minor ought to be proved. For we are of
opinion, that it is possible, for the same Body, not to be always in the same
place. If you think otherwise, pray prove it. For 'till that be proved, your
present argument is to no purpose.

Sed rem ita per se manifestam, demonstrare opus non esset, etc. But, say you,
a thing of it self so manifest, would need no Demonstration at all, (a fine
facile way of Demonstration, that which you know not how to prove needs no
demonstration.) but that you see there are some, whose opinion concerning
Bodies and their magnitude, is, that Body may exist separated from its
magnitude, (no not so, but that it may change its magnitude, For they do no
more believe that it can exsist without Magnitude, than that it can exsist
without a Figure: It cannot be but that a finite Body must have always some
figure, though not always the same: and so always some Magnitude, but whether
always the same or no, you should have proved if you could:) and have greater
or less magnitude bestowed upon it; (as well as different figures:) Making use
of this principle for the explication of the nature of Rarum, and Densum. Since
therefore you know there are that do so; why did not you, (at least in your
English Editition, after you had notice of the weakness of your Latin
Argument) bring some good Argument to overthrow that opinion; and not content
your self to say that it is so manifest of it self, as that it needed no
demonstration. Especially, (as I then told you) since you do not allow that
Euclide may assume to himself gratis without demonstration, That the whole is
greater than its part; (those were my words, though you recite them a little
otherwise.)

But you say, I know this to be untrue, that is, I lie: My words were these;
Non interim Euclidi permittis, ut citra demonstrationem hoc sibi gratis
assumat, Totum esse majus sua part: that is, You do not allow it Euclide, that
he may without Demonstration assume to himself, or challenge, That the whole
is greater then its part. Now let your own words be judge, who is the liar, you
or I. Cap. 6. artic. 12, 13. The whole method of Demonstration, you say, is
Syntheticall, -- beginning with Principles, or primary Propositions. Now such
Principles are nothing but Definitions, -- And, Besides Definitions, there is
no other Proposition that ought to be called Primary or (si paulo severius
agere volumus) be received into the number of Principles. For those Axioms of
Euclide, seeing they may be demonstrated, are no Principles of Demonstration.
And accordingly art. 16. you define Demonstration, to be a syllogism, or
series of syllegismes, derived and continued from the Definitions of names, to
the last conclusion. And parag. 17. You require to a Demonstration, That, the
premises of all Syllogismes be demonstrated from the first Definitions. (And
the like cap. 20. parag. 6. diverse times.) So that these Axioms, being no
Definitions, nor any Principles of Demonstration, no Demonstration can take
rise from them, nor can they be otherwise assumed in demonstration, than as
they are themselves deduced or demonstrated from Definitions. And does not this
come home to what I said? And cap. 8. parag. 25. Of which Axioms (omitting the
rest) I will only (say you) demonstrate this one, The whole is greater then any
part thereof. To the end that the Reader may know, that those Axioms are not
indemonstrable, and therefore not Principles of Demonstration. And yet again
Less. 1. p. 4. As for the commonly received third sort of Principles, called
Common Notions, they are Principles only by permission of him that is a
Disciple; who being ingenuous, and coming not to cavil but to learn, is
content to receive them (though demonstrable) without their demonstration. And
again page 9. you exclude those common notions called Axioms, from the number
of Principles, as being demonstrable from the definitions of their terms,
acknowledging no other Principles, but Definitions, and Postulata, (those the
only principles of Demonstration; these of Construction.) If therefore they be
no Principles of Demonstration; if only principles by permission of the
Disciple, and only in curtesy; then, though your self possibly may he so
gracious or liberal, as to admit of them without their demonstration; Yet the
Teacher cannot, without this favor, assume to himself, or require them to be
granted, as he may do Principles, without Demonstration. 'Twas not I therefore
was the liar, when I said, You do not allow that Euclide may assume to
himself gratis, or require to be granted, without demonstration, That the
whole is greater than its part. For it is but in courtesy, if you grant it him,
as you may any other true Proposition, and only upon supposition that it may be
demonstrated: upon which supposition, you may also allow all the Propositions
in Euclide, for they may be all demonstrated.

And thus much concerning your eight Chapter.

SECT. VIII. Concerning his 11, and 13 Chapters.
WE shall next consider what you have to say in defense of your 11 and 13
Chapters, concerning Proportion.

And here after a freak; and then a rant against Euclide; you have a large
discourse about Proportion; p. 15, 16. The sum of which, so far as is to
the purpose, is this, That there betwo kinds of Proportion, (as the word is now
adays taken;) the one of which is called Arithmeticall Proportion; the other,
Geometrical Proportion: And as the Quotient gives us a measure of the
Proportion of the Dividend to the Divisor, in Geometrical Proportion; so the
Remainder, after subtraction, is the measure of Proportion Arithmeticall. Page
16. And thus much is both true and clear, and to the purpose. And had you but
thus delivered your doctrine of Proportions, in your Book de Corpore, I should
never have found fault with it. But you, not knowing (till you learned it out
of my Elenchus,) that the Quotient did as well determine Geometrical
Proportion, (and give name to it) as the Remainder does Proportion
Arithmeticall, were fain to blunder on as well as you could, without it: and
put your self upon a great many unhandsome shifts, and which will not hold
water, to give account, even of Geometrical Proportion, from the Remainder or
difference, which was not to be done otherwise then by the Quotient, as you
here clearly confess; For the Measure, you say, of Geometrical progression,
is (not the Remainder, whether absolutely or comparatively considered, but) the
Quotient.

But before you come thus far; you tell us by the way, That I say, that you
make proportion to consist in the Remainder, and that I make it consist in the
Quotient. As to the former of these, I did not then say, that you make
proportion to consist in the Remainder; though if I had said so, I had said
true enough, for you do so, more than once. Cap. 11. parag. 7. In ratione
inaequalium, say you, ratio minoris ad majus, Defectus; ratio majoris ad minus
Excessus dicitur. And again par. 5. Consistit ratio antecedentis ad consequens
in differentia, etc. sive in majoris (dempto minore) Refiduo. And. soon after,
Ratio binarii ad quinarium est ternarius, etc. You cannot deny but that these
are your words, and that I blamed you for them, as a piece of non sense; all
that you have to say is, that it was too hastily put: and therefore you labor
in the English a little to disguise it. So cap. 12. art. 8. Cum Ratio
inaequalium, per cap. praeced. art. 5. consistit in differe^tia ipsarum, etc.
and again, Ratio inaequalium, EG, OF, consistit in differentia OF, quae est
quantitas, (yes, quantitas absoluta, for it is a line.) And these, because I did
not particularly tell you of them, are yet uncorrected in your English; seeing
(by the fifth Article of the precedent Chapter,) the proportion of two unequal
magnitudes consists in their difference, etc. And again, the Proportion of
unequalls EG, OF, is quantity; for the difference GF, in which it consists is
quantity. Now when, you say in express words, as in the places cited, The
proportion of the antecedent to the consequent consists in the Difference, or
the Remainder; it had been no wrong if I had said, as you say I do, that you
make Proportion to consist in the Remainder; and that absurdly enough. And
then, J pray, to whom belong those reproaches, that are so often in your mouth,
as if somebody did affirm, that Proportion is a Number, an Absolute quantity,
etc? is it not your self that affirm it so to be? And does any body so beside
your self? And is not then, that (by your own law p. 10,) in your self
intolerable, which you cannot tolerate in another?

But you add farther, that I say, that I make it to consist in the Quotient.
And is not this abominably false? J neither say so, nor do so, nor did J give
any ground at all for any man (that is in his wits) to believe J did. My words
were these, Videmus igitur Rationis aestimationem esse (secundum Te) penes
Residuum, non penes Quotum, and Subductione, non Divisione quaerendam esse.
(And what reason J had to say so, they that consult the place will see.) Now
could any man (who had not a great confidence that his English Reader
understands no Latin) be so impudent as to say, that in those words, I say,
you make Proportion to consist in the Remainder; and I, in the Quotient? Can
any man, that understands, though but a little Latin, (if he be not either out
of his wits, or half a sleep,) think that these words Rationis aestimatio est
penes Quotum, (that is, the Proportion is to be estimated according to the
Quotient, or, to use your own words, the quotient gives us the measure of the
proportion,) could be thus Englished, proportion consists in the quotient? And
that then you should rail at us, quite through your Book, for saying that
Proportion is a certain quotient, that it is a number, that it is an absolute
quantity, etc. as if we had been so ridiculous as to speak like you. For, that
you have so spoken you cannot deny, (and therefore the absurdity what ever it
be, lights upon your self:) But, to say, that I said so, or any thing to that
purpose, till you can show where I said it, J take to be, (so far as a word
of your mouth can be) a manifest slander. J neither say so, nor think so.

Now some men perhaps may wonder, there should be so great a cry and so little
wool; they would think perhaps, by what you say, that J had somewhere said in
express terms, that Proportion is a Quotient, or that it consists in the
Quotient, or that it is a number, or an absolute quantity, or that the quotient
is the proportion, or that a Proportion is the double of a Number, but not of a
proportion, or somewhat that sounds like somewhat of these, when they hear me
thus charged, again and again, many a time, and often; and not that the whole
ground of the accusation had been but this, that I said, The proportion is to
be estimated by the quotient. And truly it is somewhat hard to give a good
account of it: yet we will try what may be done.

J was told, some years a go, of a man that had told a lie so often, and with
so much confidence, that at length he began to believe it himself. And J am
almost of opinion, that M. ^obs having now said it so often over, does, by this
time, begin to think, that J had indeed said, somewhere, that the quotient was
the proportion. And truly there is some reason why he should: For if he had
heard any other man so often and so confidently affirm it, he would no doubt
have believed him: and why should he not as well believe himself.

But moreover; It did perhaps run in his mind, that he had somewhere read
some such words as these, Consistit autem Ratio antecedentis ad consequens, in
Differentia, hoc est in ea part majoris qua minus ab eo superatur; sive in
majoris (dempto minore) Residuo. Or such as these, Ratio binarii ad quinarium
est ternarius. Or else this, Ratio minoris ad majus, Defectus; ratio majoris ad
minus, Excessus dicitur. (And well it might: for they are all his own words,
Cap 11. parag. 3. and 5. and Cap. 12. parag. 8.) And he might think, that to
say thus, was all one, as to affirm Proportion to be a Number, or an Absolute
quantity: (And truly I think so too.) And that therefore the expression was
very absurd; (For so I had intimated to him in my Elenchus, upon this
occasion.) And therefore (forgetting, perhaps, that they were his own words,
and not mine.) he does (like the Woman that called her daughter Bastard, not
minding that in so doing she called her self Whore,) exclaim against his own
words, as most ridiculous nonsense. And who might do it better?

Or else, to use his own comparison, like Women of poor and evil education,
when they scold; amongst whom the readiest disgraceful word is Whore; because,
when they remember themselves, they think that reproach the likeliest to be
true; at least, if they be called Whore themselves, though never so truly, they
will be sure to call Whore again at all adventures, hit or miss. So M. Hobbs,
finding himself to have been so absurd, as to make Proportion a Number, or
Absolute quantity, and that I had blamed him for it; thought, perhaps, it was
possible I might, sometime or other, have been as careless in my language: and
therefore, however, he will say so, ('it is easy to say it) and let me disprove it.

If any man, notwithstanding all this, be not satisfied that M. Hobs had reason
to say as he does; truly I cannot help it; he must speak for himself: These
were the best reasons I could think of* And so we will go on.

In your 11 Chap. parag. 3. you gave us in the Latin, (for in the English
there be some things altered,) this definition of Proportion; Proportion is
nothing else but the aequality or in equality of the Antecedent, compared with
the consequent, according to magnitude. With this Explication, As for example,
the proportion of Three to Two, is nothing else, but, that Three, is greater
then Two, by One: and the proportion of Two to Five, is nothing else, but that
Two, is less than Five by Three: And therefore in the proportion of Vnequalls,
the proportion of the Less to the Greater is called the Defect; and that of
the Greater to the Less, the Excess. And this is your general definition of
Proportion, with the Explication of it; and nor a particular definition of
Arithmeticall Proportions, (nor is it at all by you pretended so to be.) And
therefore should have been so ordered, as at least to take in Geometrical
Proportion; For Geometrical proportion, and simply proportion, are by your
self made equivalent terms (Less. 2. p. 16. l. 25.) and this, you say, is
only taken notice of by the name of Proportion: And, so the word is constantly
used in Euclide, and elsewhere: (And therefore you need not wonder as you do
p. 18. l. 7, that J should say, If Arithmeticall Proportion, ought to be called
Proportion; implying that though now that phrase be common, yet that it is a
departing from the former use of the word; and that, according to Euclides use
of the word Proportion, Arithmeticall Proportion cannot be so called.) Now your
Definition and Explication of Proportion, does wholly leave out Geometrical
Proportion altogether, (which yet is, if not the only, yet the more principal
kind of Proportion.) For it takes no cognizance of the Quotient at all, but
only of the Difference, the excess or defect. And according to your doctrine
the Proportion of 3 to 2, is + 1, the excess of 1; and of 2 to 5, is -3, the
defect of three.

From this I inferred, that if the proportion of one quantity to another, be
nothing else, but the excess or defect of this to that, (as you teach,) then
where ever the excess or defect is the same, there the proportion is the same;
and so 3 to 2, must have the same proportion that 5 has to 4; (You say, p. 17.
True, the same Arithmeticall Proportion Very good: But J added farther, of
which you did not think fit to take notice,) and on the contrary, where there
is not the same defect or the same excess there is not the same proportion,
and consequently, there is not the same proportion of 3 to 2 and of 6 to 4. To
this you have nothing to say, and therefore say nothing, (but recite half my
sentence, and leave out the other half:) For though, there be not the same
Arithmeticall Proportion (as you speak) of 3 to 2, and of 6 to 4; (that is, not
the same excess,) yet there is the same Geometrical Proportion; and that you
cannot deny to be Proportion, though it do not come, within your definition.

Now it is true, (but that is another fault, not an excuse) that you do not hold
to this sense always, for in the same page art. 5. (in the Latin, I mean) you
do clearly contradict what you had but now said in art. 3. The proportion, say
you, of the Antecedent to the consequent consists in the Difference, or
Remainder, not simply (yes simply, if that be true which you said before; for
if it be nothing else but the difference, that is it the difference simply: But
if not simply; how then?) but as compared with one of the terms related, etc.
For though there be the same difference between 2 and 5, that there is between
9 and 12, yet not the same Proportion. And why not? as well as the same
proportion between 3 and 2, and between 4 and 5? as we heard you reply but now.
May not we as well say here, as you there, (Les. 2. p. 17.) Is there not the
same Arithmeticall Proportion? And is not Arithmeticall proportion, proportion?
But it seems, by this time, you had forgotten your former exposition, whereby
in the same page, your definition of Proportion must be so understood, as will
agree to none but Arithmeticall proportion; now it must bear such a sense as
can agree to none but Geometrical.

In the English, I confess, your Translator has a little mended the matter,
and but a little, ('it is but Cobblers work at the best;) But however, it is good
to hear folks mend, though it be but a little: it may come to something in time.

But now of those two senses, which you have given, of the Definition of
Proportion, (opposite enough in conscience one to another, though, I suppose,
you did not intend therein to contradict your self,) neither of them will
serve your turn. For the Proportion here defined, and so explicated as we have
heard, is a Genus, which is, in the beginning of your 13 Chapter, to be
distributed into its two Species; Proportion Arithmeticall, and Proportion
Geometrical. Now take your definition of Proportion in general, according to
which of your two expositions you please, it cannot be thus distributed. For if
Propor^^on (as you say chap. 11, ^art. 3.) be nothing else but the excess or
defect, etc. as 3 is less then 2 by 1; then it cannot agree to Geometrical
proportion, for that is somewhat else. If it be such a comparative difference,
as you mention cap. 11. art. 3. it will not agree to Arithmeticall proportion;
for according to that sense, you say, 2 to 5, and 9 to 12, are not in the same
proportion. I say therefore, that neither of those two expositions, do agree to
that general notion of Proportion, which shall be common to both Arithmeticall
and Geometrical. And when I ask, which of the two expositions you are willing
to stand to. Whether that of Cap. 11. art. 3. or that of Cap, 11. art. 5.
(showing withal that neither of them will serve your turn, for neither of
them will take in both Arithmeticall and Geometrical Progression,) you fall a
raving in the beginning of your third Lesson, something at Euclide, and
something at us, but nothing to the purpose. And then tell us, that when you
say the Difference is the Proportion, by Difference, we might if we would, have
understood, the act of Differing. That is, we might understand, as madly as
you speak. Your words were these, Cap. 11. art. 5. Consistit autem Ratio in
Differentia, sive Residuo, etc. ita ratio binarii ad quinarium est ternarius,
etc. Would you have us understand Residuum, and Ternarius, to be the Act of
Differing? And C. 12. art. 8. Ratio inaequaliu^ (EG, OF) consistit in
differentia GF. Would you have us understand that line GF, to be the act of
differing? You say, we might if we would. But you would think us very simple if we
should. To as good purpose is it, that you tell your English Reader (for you
think you may tell him any thing,) that ^ say, that (thus much of) your
Definition, Chapter 11. Art. 1. [Proportion is the Comparison of two Magnitudes one
to another,] agrees neither with Arithmeticall nor Geometrical proportion. For
I said nothing of any such words, good or bad. And 'twere much if I should: for
I can find no such words there.

At the second Article (chap. 13.) I note, you say, for a fault in method, that
after you had used the words, Antecedent, and Consequent of a Proportion, in
the precedent Chapters, you now define them. It Is true, I did take notice of
it, but I said withal, that this was but a small fault in comparison of many
others. But what if I did? You do not believe, you say that I spoke this
against my knowledge. No; why should you for you know it is true. Have you not
used the words many times before in the precedent chapters? And do you not
define them here? And is not this a fault in Method? Do Mathematicians use,
when they have taken a Term for two or three chapters together, to be of a
known signification, and sufficiently understood, come at length to define it?
you say, you had before defined it chap. 11. art. 3. It Is true you had there
defined the Antecedent and Consequent of Correlatives; (which definitions might
have served well enough for the Antecedent and consequent in Proportions too,
for those are Correlatives, and you need not have brought any new ones.) But
where was my oversight? Did I deny this? I did not blame you for using the
words before you had defined them, (nor would I have blamed you, if they had
not been defined at all;) But for defining them after you had thus long used
them. For, if they had now, ever since the beginning of the 11 Chapter, been
taken for words of a known signification, and as such frequently used, (which
you do not deny, and your definitions at that place do but aggravate, not
extenuate, this charge,) then, I say, it was immethodicall and superfluous to
define them in the 13 chapter. Nor was it my oversight to say so. And the like
impertinent answer you give p. 51. where I blamed you (not for omitting in the
19 chapter, but) for defining in the 24 chapter, those terms which were of
frequent use in the 19 chapter. But we go on.

You tell us, Chap. 13. art. 3. That the proportion of Inequality is Quantity,
but that of Equality is not. Which I said was very absurd; and that the one did
no more belong to the Praedicament of Quantity than the other; and that it is
to be, of both equally, either denied or affirmed: And that your argument for
it, (That One equality is not greater or less then another; but of proportions
of inequality, one may be more or less unequal:) might as well conclude that
Oblique angles, be quantities, but not Right angles, for these be all equal,
and equally Right; but not those. For answer to this, you fall a ranting at
Aristotle, at Praedicaments, and the L^gick Schools, etc. And then you tell us
the Greater and Lesser cannot be attributed to Right Angles, because a Right
Angle is a Quantity determined, (as though the quantity of the Proportion of
Equality were not so too.) What you allege out of Mersennus, was but his
mistake. Composition of Proportion is a work of Multiplication, not of
Addition, as appears by the definition of it 5 d 6. and to argue, that
Proportion of equality is as Nothing, because in composition of Proportions it
does not increase or diminish another proportion; is but as to conclude that,
1, a Unity, is Nothing, because in Multiplication it does neither increase nor
diminish the quantity multiplied thereby. But of this mistake of Mersennus, I
have spoken already in the end of another Treatise, already Printed, against
Meibomius; and vindicated Clavius sufficiently from what both Mersennus and
Meibomius allege against him.

To the fourth Article, where you define Greater and Lesser Proportion; I said
nothing (because it were endless to note all the faults I see) though those
definitions are liable enough to censure. Greater Proportion, you say, is the
proportion of a greater Antecedent to the same Consequent, or of the same
Antecedent to a less Consequent. And Less Proportion, is the proportion of a
less Antecedent to the same Consequent, or of the same Antecedent to a greater
consequent. Yet we know, that the proportion of an Ell to a Yard, is less then
that of a Pottle to a Pint, (and this therefore greater then that,) though
neither the Antecedents nor the Consequents, be either the same, or Equal, or
Homogeneous.

To the 5 and 6 Articles, where you define the same Proportion. I said First,
that, had Proportion been well defined before, you might have spared these
definitions of the same proportion. For having before defined (as well as you
could) what is Proportion (both Arithmeticall, and Geometrical;) and withal
told us, art. 4. that by the same proportion was meant Equal proportions; and
having also defined before (after your fashion) what are Equals chap. 8. and
what is the Same chap. 11. Why should you think (if those definitions were such
as they should have been) that we needed another definition of the Same, or
Equal Proportions? But, since you were resolved to do works of
Supererogation; I ask why, having defined the same Arithmeticall proportion,
art: 5. by the Equality of the Differences; you did not also define the same
Geometrical Proportion, art. 6, by the Equality of the Quotients? For by the
Same, you say, you mean Equal, art. 4. Now universally all quantities are
Equal, that are measured by the same number of the same Measures (Less: 1 p:
4.) and therefore those are the same or equal Proportions, which have the same
or equal Measures: And you know now (though perhaps you did not then) that as
the Quotient gives us a measure of the Proportion in Geometrical Proportion,
so the Remainder is the Measure of Proportion Arithmeticall. (Les: 2. p. 16.)
And therefore, as, in the one, you define the same or equal proportion, by the
Equality of the Remainder; so you should in the other, by the equality of the
Quotient, (that is, in both places by the equality of its measure:) And not
have brought us such an imbrangled definition as this. viz: One Geometrical
progression is the same with another, when a cause in equal times troducing
equal effects, determining the proportion, may be assigned the same in both,
or as your English has it, when the same cause producing equal effects in
equal times, determines both the proportions. So that, to prove, that 4 to 2,
and 6 to 3, are in the same Geometrical proportion, we must call in the help
of Time, and Motion, and Velocity, and Uniformity, etc. which are wholly
extrinsecall to it; and why, but because, forsooth, there is no effect in
Nature which is not produced in Time by Motion, (as though some Motion, in some
Time or other, had made this to be a true Proposition, that 4 is the double of
2: and therefore if we cannot find what motion did make it so, we must imagine
some that might have made it.) I need not tell you, that, if this be a good
reason, you should upon the same account, have found out as bad a definition
for the same Arithmeticall proportion: (for that 8 to 6, and 12 to 10, are in
the same Arithmeticall proportion, is, doubtless, as much as that other of
Geometrical proportion, an effect which nature has at some Time or other
produced by Motion.) But, since you have waved this consideration of nature in
the definition of the same Arithmeticall proportion, which you define by the
equality of the Remainders; I said, it might have been expected, that you might
have done so in the definition of the same Geometrical proportion^, and
accordingly defined it, by the Equality of the Quotients. But you are very
angry with me, for saying, It might have been expected. And truly I could
almost find in my heart to confess that this was a fault. For though it might
have been expected from another man; yet it was not to be expected from M.
Hobs; for his wit is not like the wit of other men, He is the First (he tells
us) that has made the grounds of Geometry firm and coherent. But why was it
not to be exspected? Because, you say, It is impossible to define
(Geometrical) proportion universally by comparing Quotients. (Impossible, I
confess, is a hard word; but yet, I hope, it may be.) But why is it
impossible? more than it is impossible to define Arithmeticall proportion
universally by comparing of Remainders? Because, forsooth, In quantities
incommensurable there may be the same proportion, where nevertheless there is
no Quotient: (Very good! But why no quotient?) for quotient there is none but
in Aliquot parts. (Gooder, and gooder!) But, I pray, is not A / B as good a
Quotient, as A-B is a Remainder? whether the quantities be commensurable, or
Incommensurable? No, you say; For setting their Symbols one above another with
a line between, does not make a Quotient. But why not? as well, as setting
their Symbols one after another, with a line between, makes a Remainder? For,
if the quantities be inco^mensurable, the Remainder is no more explicable in
Rational numbers, then is the quotient. If from 3 you subduct 2, the Remainder
is but 3 - ^2. If you divide 3 by 2, the quotient is 3/2;. And is not his as
much a Quotient, as that a Remainder? and as well designed? Yet this is all you
have to say to the business: The rest is but Ranting, or vapouring. But,
however, we are much deceived, you tell us, if we think, with pricking of
Bladders to let out their vapor; for we see, you say, we make them swell more
then ever. What? till they bu^st? I hope not so. (Crepent licet, modo non
Rumpantur.) I have heard, I confess, that a Toad would swell the more for
being pricked; but I never knew that a Bladder would, till now.

The next thing that troubles you, is, that I said, that the Corollaries of
these two Articles taught us nothing new. (There be as I recon five and nine;
fourteen in all.) Yes, you say, the ninth Corollary of the sixth Article is
new: (No; it is not. We are taught the same by the second of the fifth of
Euclid; and by the converse of the eleventh prop. of the sixth chapter of M.
Oughtred's Clavis;) and the rest were never before exactly demonstrated. What?
none of them? That Is much. You mean, I suppose not all. And that I am content
to believe: For they are not all true. As for example; The second Corollary of
the fifth Article, is thus delivered Universally, If there be never so many
magnitudes Arithmetically proportional, (whether in continual or interrupted
proportion; for you do not limit it to either, more then you had done that
next before it, which you cannot deny to be understood of both) the sum of
them all will be equal to the product of half number of Terms, multiplied by
the sum of the extremes. And then that we may be sure it is not intended only
of continual proportion, you give instance in proportion discontinued, For (say
you) if A. BC. DE. F. be Arithmetically proportional (though but discontinued,
for so your Symbols import, both in the Latin and the English, least we might
think it had been the Printers fault, and not the Authors;) the couples A + F,
B + E, C + D, (you say) will be equal to one an other. This, though it be true
of continued Arithmeticall proportion, yet of discont^nued proportion, as you
here affirm it, it is notoriously false. For how does it appear, that C+D, is
equal to A + F. For instance, let the terms be these 2. 1 20. 19 3. 2. in
arithmeticall proportion. is 20+19, equal to 2 + 2? or to 1 + 3? It Is no
marvel then that this was never before exactly demonstrated. But we are taught
nothing new by this. For though this be new and be years, yet we cannot learn
it. We Will go on therefore: and see what you say next of the thirteenth Article.

We began, as I said, with slighter skirmishings; about Definitions etc. The
skirmish now grows hotter; when I charge you with false propositions and
demonstrations; and that you be touched to the quick, we may guess by the loud
outcry; In objecting against the thirteenth, and sixteenth Articles, we do at
once bewray both the greatest Ignorance, and the greatest Malice, etc (and so
on, for a whole leaf or more;) Now this Ignorance h^wrayd, was your own, viz.
that you had given us false demonstrations etc. and then is it not spightfully
done of us to discover them? Well; let us see what it is that makes you cry out
so fiercely.

The proposition is this, Of three quantities that have proportion to one
another, (suppose AB, AC, AD; or 6, 3, 1;) the proportion of the first to the
second, and of the second to the third taken together, are equal to the
proportion of the first to the third. That is, said I, The propertion
compounded of that of the first to the second, (suppose 6 to 3. which is
double,) and that of the second to the third (viz. 3 to 1, which is treble,) is
equal to that of the first to the third, (viz. 6 to 1, which is sextuple.) And
was not this your meaning? (I am su^e it is either thus or worse) This
composition, I said, was such as Euclide defines 5 d 6; which is done by
multiplying the quantities of the proportions: viz. 6/3 x 3/1 = 6/1, (not by
adding them; for so 6/3 + 3/1 = 2/1 + 3/1 = 5/1.) Did I not explain your
meaning right? I^meant no hurt in saying this was your meaning; for the meaning
was a good meaning; and the proporsion so meant, is a good proporsion; (but, if
you mean otherwise, the proposition is false:) and, doubtless, 'twas a good
meaning too, when you meant to demonstrate it; (all the mischief was, you
could not do what, you meant to do.) If this be your meaning (as J am sure it
is or should be,) what is it that troubles you? You do not like the word
Composition: that is one thing. Well then let it be called Addition for once, J
told you then, J would not content for the name; (but you know it is such an
Additon of Proportions, as is made by multiplying of the quantities; as
appears by the very words of the definition 5 d 6) Then you do not like that
J should say the proportion of 6 to 3. is double; and that of 3 to 1, treble.
Tell me (say you) egregious Professors, How is 6 to 3 double proportion? The
answer is easy, (though perhaps you will not like it;) The proportion of 6 to
3, or 2 to 1, is that which is commonly called Double; and that of 3 to 1, is
is commonly called Treble; And if you will not believe me, pray believe your
own words, Corp. page 110. l. 5, 6. Ratio 2 ad 1. vocatur Dupla; et 3 ad 1
Tripla. You tell us then, We may observe that Euclide never distinguishes
between Double and Duplicate (no more then other Greek writers do between (...)
and (...).) one word (you say, serves him every where for either. You might as
well bid us put out our eyes; or else believe that (...) and (...)* are the
same words. Perhaps you thought so when you wrote your book in Latin; but,
since that time you have been better instructed, and have learned at length to
distinguish between Double and Duplicate, as we shall hear anon. But let us go
on. All this hitherto has been but scuffling, and little to the purpose,
though there you make the greatest out cry, (like a lapwhing, when she is
furthest off her nest.) we are now coming to a close grapple. (and it is like
to prove as had as a Cornish hug.) Your demonstration, I said, was false (and
that greeves you.) The strength of it, as I told you, lies in this, The
difference of AB, AC, (be they Lines or Times, choose you whether, for by
construction the times and lines are made proportional,) together with the
difference of AC, AD, taken together, are equal to the difference of AB, AD;
therefore the proportion of AB, to AC, and of AC, to AD, taken together is
equal to that of AB to AD. That this is the strength of your demonstration you
do not deny. Now that consequence I denied; affirming that from that equality
of the difference, you could not infer the equality of Geometrical
proportion; (and, of Arithmeticall, the question is not; nor is pretended to
be.) And J gave this instance to the contrary, to show the weakness of your
Argument; Taking between A and B, any point at pleasure suppose a; you may as
well conclude the proportion of aB to aD, aS of AB to AD. to be compounded of
that of AB to AC, and of AC to AD. For, (in your own words.) the difference of
AB, AC, with that of AC, AD, are equal to the difference (not only of AB, AD,
but even of) aB, aD; and therefore the proportions of those, to that of these.
Now all that you have to say against it, (for I do suppose, as you would have
me, the motion to be equally swift all the way,) is this, The difference of AB,
AC, cannot be the same with the difference of aB, aC, except AB and aB are
equal. And here we join issue. The difference of AB, AC, say I, is BC; and
the difference of aB, aC, is the same BC; though AB, aB, are not equal. The
case is ripe for a verdict. Let the Jury judge. And now you may, if you will,
go on to rant at Ignorance and Malice, at Symbols and Gambols, at double and
duplicate, at asses and ears, at Cla^ius, Orontius, and too learned men, or
whom you will; haeret lateri lethalis arundo. But thus it is, when men will
needs have Geometrical proportion, to be estimated by Differences, and not by
Quotients.

(I told you moreover that your demonstration was but Petitio principii, and
showed wherein, with some other faults which you take no notice of, because you
had nothing to say to them. And showed you how your 13, 14, and 15, articles
with all their Corollaries, (which fill up a matter of 4 pages.) might have
been to better purpose delivered in so many lines. But this is no great fault
with you, who think the farthest way about, the nearest way home.)

At the 16 Article the case is as bad or worse. The cry goes on still. This is
all Ignorance and Malice too. And a huge out cry against Quotients, and
Symbols, and a loud On^ethmus as you call it. But not a word to the purpose of
what was objected; (except only one clause wherein you tell us how absurd you
mean to be by and by.) The business is this, Euclide (10 d 5) defines
Duplicate, and Triplicate proportion, etc. in this manner, If three magnitudes
be in continual proportion, the first to the last has duplicate proportion of
what it has to the second; if four, triplicate; etc. (and that indifferently
whether the first or last be the bigger.) Now you (that you might show your
self wiser then Euclide, and be the first that ever made the grounds of
Geometry firm and coherent,) thought it was to be limited to this case only,
when the first quantity is the greatest. And therefore thus define, The
proportion of a greater quantity to a less (very warily) is said to be
multiplied by a number, when other proportions equal to it, be added. And
therefore if the quantities (continued in the same proportion) be three; the
proportion of the first to the last is Double, of what it has to the second;
if four, Treble, etc. (which most men, you say, call duplicate, triplicate,
etc.) But if the proportion be of the less to the greater (of which Euclide,
it seems, was not aware) and there be an addition of more proportions equal to
it, it is not properly said to be multiplied, but submultiplied (that is,
divided; which yet you tell us, by and by, is to be done by taking mean
proportionalls.) So that of three quantities (so continued) the proportion of
the first to the last, is half of what it has to the second; if four, a third
part, etc. which are commonly called subduplicate, subtriplicate, etc. Now
this, I told you, was foul great mistake, and such a one as should not have
proceeded from a Reformer of the Mathematics. And, to use your own distinction
(Less. 2. p. 9.) it is a fault not of Negligence, but of Ignorance, or want of
understanding principles: and therefore an ill favored fault, and, by your own
rule, to be attended with shame. I showed you there (and you believe me now)
that in the numbers 1, 3, 9, 27, etc. the proportion of 1 to 9, though less,
was not subduplicate to that of 1 to 3, but duplicate, as truly as the
proportion of 9 to 1 is duplicate to that of 3 to 1; and that of 1 to 27 was
triplicate, not subtriplicate, of that of 1 to 3; Of which I gave you this
demonstration, (though it seems, you did not understand it, and therefore say,
I bring no Argument.) Because 1/9 = x, and 1/27 = x x, as well as 9^ = 2/1 x
3/1, add 27/1 = 3/1 x 3/1 x 3/1. And the subduplicate of 1 to 3, is not, as you
suppose, that of 1 to 9, but of 1 to 3. Now this was so unlucky a mistake, or
Ignorance, in a thing so fundamental, that (as I then told you, and you have
since found to be true) an hundred to one, but it would do you a deal of
mischief all along. And it was the touching upon this fore place, that gawled
you so much but now, and put you beside your patience.

But let us see now how you behave your self. A loud rant we have, as if it
were grievous doctrine I had taught, and your own had been much better. But not
a word to the purpose save only this It Is absurd to say, that taking the same
quantity twice, should make it less. But though you say so, you do not think
so. For when you have done your rant, you go slyly, (without saying a word of
it, or acknowledging any error,) and put out that whole sixteenth Article,
which we had in the Latin, giving us in the English another instead of it,
quite of another tenor, and quite contrary to what you had before. And now a
proportion of the less to the greater, (as well as of the greater to the
less,) being twice taken, shall be duplicate, (not subduplicate as before;)
and thrice taken, (not subtriplicate, but) triplicate. Now (because you say
it,) it is not absurd to say, that taking the same quantity twice, should make
it less; (though when I said it, it was absurd.) Now A proportion is said to
be multiplied by number, not submultiplyed, when it is so often taken as there
be unities in that number. (Whether it be of the greater to the less, or of
the less to the greater;) And if the proportion be the greater to the less,
then shall also the quantity of the proportion be increased by the
multiplication; but when the proportion is of the less to the greater, then as
the number increases, the quantity of the proportion diminishes; For it is no
absurdity now, to say that taking the same quantity twice makes it less. And
truly now, methinks, thou say thy lesson pretty well; I could find in my
heart to spit in thy mouth and make much of thee, had thou not railed at him
that taught thee; which is but a trick of an ungrateful scholar: But let us
go on, and see whether this good fit will hold? As in these numbers, 4, 2, 1.
the proportion of 4 to 1, is not only the duplicate of 4 to 2, but also twice
as great. (Nay that is good again; he has learned that there is a difference
between Duplicate and twice as great. Surely this is not he, (or else the
world's well amended with him,) that laughed at the distinction of Duplicate
and Double. Well, let us hear some more of it.) But, inverting the order of
those numbers thus, 1, 2, 4, the proportion of 1 to 2, is greater than that of
1 to 4; and therefore though the proportion of 1 to 4, be the duplicate of 1 to
2, yet it is not twice so great as that of 1 to 2, but contrarily the half of
it. In good truth; a pretty apt Scholar: for one of his inches; He says just as
I bid him. Well, well! the world's well amended with T. H. The^'s hopes he may
come to good. Ye see he learnes apace. He may be a Mathematician in time;
though I say it that should not say it. I confess he has his faults still, as
well as other men, (you must not think he can mend all at once,) The whole
article is not so good throughout, at this bit at the beginning. He has got a
naughty trick of saying The proportion of equality is no quantity, (but he has
been whipped for already;) He makes it stand for a Cyphar, (but that is a thing of
nothing: It should have been but 1, and that is not much more.) And he tells us
that the proportion of 9 to 4 is not only duplicate, of 9 to 6, but also the
Double, or twice as great. And again, that the proportion of -- 4 to -- 6, is
double to the proportion of -- 4 to -- 9, etc. which would have deserved
whipping at another time; but because he said the rest so well, I Will spare him
for this once. He does, it seems, believe there is a difference between double
and duplicate, though he do not yet know what it is; he will learn against
next time. And to the like purpose is that which follows; If there be more
quantities then three (it is no matter how many) as A, B, C, D, in continued
proportion, what ever the proportion be, so that A be the least; it may be made
appear that the proportion of A to B, is triple magnitude, though subtriple in
multitude, to the proportion of A to D. But however he shall be spared for this
bout; because I said so; and I will be as good as my word.

We have but one touch more, and I have done with this Chapter. It Is at the
Corollary of the 28 Article. Here you find fault first with the word aliquot;
and ask whether I think that parts aliquot can be numero infinitae? And I
think they may. Where there are more then one, there be at least aliquot,
whether few or many. What I objected against that Corollary, was not against
the truth of it, for it is obvious and facile; but that it needed not so much a
do, as to be ushered in with three teadious Propositions, art: 26. 27. 28.
Which, I said, (and you do not deny it,) seems to be put in only in order to
this Corollary. In Art 28. you were come thus far, If from a line (AB) be cut
off a part (suppose AC) and between that and the whole, be taken two means,
the one Geometrical, the other Arithmeticall (AD, AE;) the greater the part is
that is cut off AC (and consequently the remainder CB, the less,) the less
will be the difference between those two means (AD, AE.) Hence at length you
come to this Corollary, That if the line (AB) be divided into equal parts
infinite in number, (and so the part remaining CB, one of them, infinitely
small,) the difference between the Arithmeticall and Geometrical means, will
be infinitely little. This I said might be proved universally, not only of
these two, the Arithmeticall and Geometrical Means, but of any two Means
whatsoever. For supposing any two lines AD, AE, which are each of them greater
then AC, but less then AB, (as all means must be) your points DE, (whether D,
or E, stand first, it matters not) must needs fall between C and B: And
therefore the difference DE, cannot be bigger than CB, but rather a part
thereof, and so less. Now the whole CB is supposed infinitely little, and
therefore its part DE cannot be bigger. And is not this as well proved as if I
had premised in order to it, three whole Articles, and spent three pages about
it? You say, (and that is all you object against it) that I do not prove, that
BE the Arithmeticall difference is less than BD the Geometrical difference.
No; Nor ought I so to do. For the thing to be proved was not which of the two
is greatest, but that (whether soever were the greater) the difference between
the two is infinitely small: which is done sufficiently without that other. And
are not you then a wise Mathematician to make such an objection?

SECT. IX. Concerning his 14. and 15 Chapters.
IN Your 14 Chapter, Art: 2. I found fault with your definition of a Plain, to
be that which is described by a straight line so moved as that every point of
it describe a straight line. I told you, it is not necessary, much less
essential, to be so described, (and you confess it;) and many plains there
are which are not so described. The definition therefore is not good.

Again. You had said in the first Article: Two straight lines cannot include a
superficies. (Right,) And then Art: 2. Two plain superficies cannot include a
solid. No, said I, nor yet Three. 'Twas simply done then to name but two. And
you confess it to be a fault; but not a fault to be ashamed of.

Again, you had said Art: 1. That a straight line and a crooked, cannot be
coincident, no not in the least part. And then Art: 3. You tell us of some
crooked lines which have parts that are not crooked. This I noted for a
contradiction; because with those parts not crooked, a straight line may be
coincident. And you cannot deny it. Therefore in the English, instead of
crooked, in the former place, you put perpetually crooked; which though it be
but a botch, helps the matter a little.

In the fourth Art. In the description of a circle, by carrying round a Radius;
you define the Center to be that point which is not moved. Now a Point you had
before defined cap. 8. art. 12. to be a Body moved etc. So that to say, the
Point which is not moved, is as much as to say, the Body moved etc. which is
not moved. Which seems to me a contradictiction. To this objection, you say
only that which I must say to your answer, viz: It is foolish.

Art: 6. you say, If two straight lines touch one another in any one point,
they will be contiguous through their whole length. No, nor always; The
straight lines AB, BD, touch in one point B, and in that only. And the straight
lines AC, BD, are contiguous only in their common part BC, not through their
whole length. Yet are they such contiguous lines as your proposition means,
viz. such as meeting in some one point, will not cut one other though never so
much produced.

You said farther, Crooked incongruous lines cannot touch each other, save only
in one point. Yes, said I, a Circle may touch a Parabola in two points. And you
confess it. But say, you meant that each contact is not in a line, but only in
one point. Perhaps you meant so, (though yet I question whether you did then
think of more contacts then one:) but why then did you not say so? (I mean, in
the Latin? for in the English, upon this notice it is a little mended) But I
reply, Yes, if those incongruous curve lines, have but some parts which are not
crooked, (as even now you told us,) they may touch in a line. Yea and
incongruous lines continually crooked, may in some pasts of them agree, though
not congruous all the way, and therefore touch in a line. And therefore even
yet, it is not accurate.

But you will say (as page 10.) Such faults as these, are not attended with shame,
unless they be very frequent. What you mean by very frequent, I cannot tell;
but, me thinks, it is very ugly to have them come thus thick.

Art 7. you divide a superficial Angle, into an Angle simply so called, and an
Angle of contingence. Which you define in this manner; Two straight lines
applied to each other, and contiguous in their whole length, being separated or
pulled open in such manner, that their concurrence in one point remains; If it
be by way of circular motion, whose center is the point of concurrence, and the
lines retain their straightness; the quantity of this divergence is an angle
simply so called: If by continual flexion in every imaginable point; an angle
of contingence* I asked; to which of these two you refer the angle made by a
right line cutting a circle? or whether you do (...) take that to be a
superficial angle. You say, to an angle (...) so called, that is, as we heard
but now, to an angle made by two lines which retain their straightness,
(though one (...) them be crooked.) And then, you tell us that Rectilin^^^ and
Curvilincall has nothing to do with the nature of an angle simply so called:
When yet your definition requires, that the lines retain their straightness. I
will ask, you say, (yes I do ask; and do you give a wise answer if you can;)
How can that angle which is generated by the divergence of two streigh lines,
[whose straightness remains,] be other then Rectilineall? You say, A house may
remain a house, though the carriage of the timber cease. Much to the purpose!
How do you apply the similitude? Even so, the lines retain their straightness,
though they be crooked, is that it? Or is it thus, Even so, the Angle remains
an angle made by lines retaining their straightness, when they be crooked?
Perhaps you mean thus, The Angle being once made by the divergence of straight
lines, remains an Angle though one or both of those lines be afterward made
crooked. Very good! but does it remain the same Angle? the same quantity of
divergence? (for so you define an angle,) does not (in your account,) the
bowing of one of the lines (the other remaining as it was) alter the quantity
of divergence, (measurable by the Arch of a circle, as you determine) from what
it was before such bowing? though yet that very bowing alone, by your doctrine,
be enough to make an Angle of it self? Well, let it be so for once, (though it
should not be so, by your principles.) But however, though this should be
allowed, yet at least, so long as the Angle is in making, the lines must be
straight. Tell me then, J prithee, how a Sphericall Angle comes to be an Angle
simply so called. Is a sphericall Angle made by the divergence of straight
lines or of cooked? Can it be made a sphericall Angle so long as the lines
retain their straightness? It seems so: for an Angle properly so called, that
is, an Angle made by the divergence of straight lines, whose straightness
remains, is distributed into Plain and others, (as though all Right lined
angles, were not Plain Angles;) and then again into Rectilineall, Curvilineall,
and mixed; as though these were, species of Rightlined Angles. Do you think it
possible to make an Angle Sphericall, Curvilineall, or mixed, so long as the
lines retain their straightness? do you think these things will ever hold
together? or is this to make the principles of Geometry firm and coherent? You
were better say, as the truth is, that when you formed that definition of an
Angle simply so called, you had your eye only upon a Rightlined Angle, and
fitted your definition thereunto; but when afterward, under the same name, you
took in curvilineall and mixed angles, you should have altered the definition,
but neglected it: And then apply your ordinary apology* That it was indeed a
fault, but not such an one as you need be ashamed of. But, to go about to
defend it, is more ridiculous then the thing it self.

At the ninth Article, I had showed how simply you defined the quantity of an
Angle, your definition as you call it, is this: The quantity of an Angle, is an
Arch of a circle determined by its proportion to the whole perimeter. An Angle
was before defined to be the Quantity of Divergence; That which you define now
is the quantity of an angle, that is, the quantity of the quantity of
divergence. Very handsomely! Then in stead of, the quantity of an Angle is
measured by an Arch; you say, the quantity of an Angle is an Arch. Again, it
is, you say the Arch of a circle: But what Arch? and of what circle? for you
determine neither. You mean, I suppose, that Circle whose center is the Angular
point; but you do not say so: and, you mean also, the Arch of that circle
intercepted between the two straight lines containing the angle; But then you
should have said so, as well as meant so. For, as the definition now runs,
neither Arch, nor circle, is determined. Next you say, that this quantity is to
be determined (for so the words must be construed to make sense of them) by the
proportion of that Arch to the whole Perimeter: That is, what proportion that
intercepted Arch has to the whole perimeter; such proportion has that Angle
to -- what? you do not tell us, to what. As for instance, suppose the Arch be a
quadrant or quarter of the whole perimeter; the Angle is then a quarter of --
somewhat no doubt; but you do not tell us of what, Is it a quarter of an
Angle? or a quarter of an Arch? or a quarter of a Circle? No; it is a quarter of
four right Angles. It Is that, you should have said. Now are not these faults
enough for one poor definition? They are but Negligences, you will say: but they
be scurvy ones; and there be enough of them, for less then two lines. But
whether to commit so many negligences, in less then two lines, be so very
frequent, as that they be attended with shame, I leave for others to judge. You
should have said thus, as I then told you, (but I see you are not always
willing to learn;) The quantity of a Rectilineall angle, in proportion to four
Right angles, is determined by the proportion of an Arch of a Circle (whose
center is the Angular point) intercepted between the two straight lines
containing that angle, to the whole circumference. But, it seems, you had
rather keep your own definition, with all its faults, then seem to be taught by
me: Though yet you have nothing to say in defense of any one of them; and
therefore (as you use to do in such cases) take no notice of them in your
answer at all; as if no such exceptions had been made.

The like exceptions, I said, ly against the 18 Article. And you take the like
care neither to mend them, nor to take notice of them.

At the 12 Art. I showed, what a pitiful definition you had brought of
Parallells; and that the Consectary from it was false, and the Demonstration
thereof a sad one. You confess all: But are not pleased that I should triumph.

Your emendation which you intimate, by inserting the same way; will do some
good in the consectary, but will not make good the definition. Your new
definition in the English, is little better then that of the Latin. The
consectary, as it is now mended in the English, is true; but the demo^stration
of it has many of the same faults, though not all, that I noted in the Latin:
and does not at all conclude the truth of the consectary, from that definition.
As appears by what I objected formerly. What you attempt to prove of two lines,
you should have proved universally of any two; for so much your definition
requires.

At the 13 Art. you bring a sorry argument to prove The Perimeters of Circles
to be proportionable to their Semidiameters. The strength of the argument lies
in this, The bigness of the Perimeter is determined by its distance from the
center; and the length of the Semidiameter is determined likewise by the same
distance; therefore, since the same cause determines both effects, the
Perimeters are proportional to their Semidiameters. This consequence I deny;
because, not only the bigness of the Perimeter, but of the circle also is
determined by the same cause; as also the superficies and the solid content of
a sphere. For that distance of the circumference and Center, determines the
greatness of all these. And therefore, by your argument, circles, and
spheres, etc. must be proportional to their semidiameters: which is absurd.
To which retort, because you can answer nothing; you d^e, according to your
usual Rhetoric, fall to ranting.

At the 14 Article, I said, that your argument was but petitio principii. You
say, There was a fault in the figure, (that it was not exactly drawn) which is
now amended. True; but there is a worse fault in the demonstration, which is
not amended yet. For though you have altered your Figure, and your
demonstration too; yet the fault remains. And 'twas this, not the figure,
which I found fault with. For you do not prove that BH, BY, BC, (fig. 6.) are
proportional to AF, AD, AB, but upon supposition that FG, DE, BC, were so:
which was the thing at first to be proved. You say, that AF, FD, DE, are equal
by construction. (True.) And, that FG, DK, BH, KE, HI, IC, are equal by
Parallelism. But this is not true. The Parallelism proves that FG, DK, BH, are
equal; and that KE, HI, are also equal; but not that either of these two, are
equal to either of those three, (or to IC:) unless you first suppose that DE,
is the double of DK, or FG, as AD is the double of AF, which is the very thing
to be proved.

You tell me; There was another fault (yes, three or four for failing) which I
might have excepted against. But the weight of the demonstration did not ly
there; and I did not intend to trouble the Reader with every petty fault; (for
then I should never have done:) especially in this and the next Article; where
I did not then repeat your Figure at all; and therefore did briefly intimate
where the fault lay: which had been direction enough for an intelligent man to
have ^ound it out: But because J did not point with a festcue to every letter,
you had not the wit to understand it.

In like manner Art. 15. when I told you the third Corollary was false, and
showed you briefly the ground of your mistake; because J did not, with a
festcue point from letter to letter, you were not able to spell out the
meaning; but, as being less awake, thought it had been a dream. You had told
us, that (in your 7 figure) the angles KBC, GCD, HDE, etc. were as 1, 2, 3,
etc. And it is true. Thence you undertake in your third Corollary to give
account of the bending of a straight line into the circumference of a circle;
namely, by its fraction continually increasing according to the said numbers 1,
2, 3, etc. But how so? For, say you, the straight line KB being broken at B
according to any angle, as that of KBC, and again at C according to the double
of that Angle, and at D according to the treble etc. 'twill contain a
rectilineall figure; But if the parts so broken be considered as the least that
can be, that is, as so many points, 'twill be a circumference. This, I said was
false, and that the ground of your mistake was, that for the Angle BDE and its
Remainder HDE, you took CDE and its remainder.

And J need not say more; verbum sapienti a word for a wise man, had been
enough; but, for you it seems, it was not. You, like a man half a sleep, took
it to be a dream. Therefore, if you please to rub up your eyes a little, and
take a festcue I will, for your better noddification, point to the letters as
we go along, and teach you to spell it out. The tangent line BK, continued
indefinitely both ways, being broken at B, according to the Angle KBC, will lie
in BCG: Now this line BCG being broken at C, according to the Angle GCD which
is the double of KBC, its part CG, will lie in CD continued, CDd And hitherto
you be right. But this continuation of CD, is not DH, as you seem to suppose,
but Dd which will fall between DH, DE. When therefore this line CDd comes to be
broken again at D, that its continuation may lie in DE, the faction will not
be according to the Angle HDE (which indeed is the triple of KBC) but according
to the angle dDE: which will be less then HDE, because it is evident that CD
cuts BH, And indeed the very same Angle of fraction with that at C; For seeing
the angle CDE, is equal to BCD, by construction, the subtenses being taken
equal; the adjacent angles (anguli (...)) must be equal also, that is dDE =
GCD And therefore the angle of fraction at D, precisely equal with that at C;
not as 3 to 2, as you suppose. And by the same reason the angle of fraction at
E must be equal to that at D; not as 4 to 3, as you suppose. And so the Angles
of fraction at C, D, E etc are not as 2, 3, 4, etc. but are all equal. You see
therefore, if you be yet awake, that it was not a dream of mine, but a real
mistake of yours, to take HDE for the angle of fraction of CD. And consequently
that your proposition was false. And this fas^ho^d was the occasion of another
falsehood in the 20. Article of the 16. Chapter. (which since you have blotted
out.) for there you cite this proposition as the foundation of that: And
whereas you say, You cannot guess what that proposition was, (and yet are very
sure that it was true,) for that you have no copy of that article either
printed or written. If you have not, J am sure you may have, for there be
enough that have. For your book sold in sheets unbound, had commonly that
article amongst the rest, and by that means it came to me. And, rather then
you should be far to seek for it, I have recited that whole article verbatim,
yea to a letter, in its due place in my Elenchus; and proved it to be false.

Against your opinion concerning the Angle of Contact, (in the 16. Article,) J
said little; because J think it needs no refutation. Your opinion is this, That
the angle PAD, (Fig. 2. Sect. 3) is bigger then the angle PAE, as being divided
by the line AE. But the angle EAC, is not bigger then the angle DAC, nor is
divided by the line DA, but both of them equal as well to each other, as to
the angle PAC, and also to the angle GAC. That this is your opinion, is
evident. They that like it may embrace it, for all me: And I hope, they that
like it not may leave it.

The rest of what concerns this business, is considered before in its proper
place.

At the 18. Art beside what is common to this and the seventh, J noted for a
fault, and you do not deny it so to be, that you deliver it as Euclide's
opinion, that a Solid angle is but an Aggregate of plain Angles. It may be your
opinion; but surely 'twas none of Euclide's. If you had thought it had; you
should have here if you could, produced somewhat out of Euclide where he
declares such an opinion.

At the 19. Article All the ways by which two lines respect one an other, or
all the variety of their position, seem, you said, to be comprised under four
kinds; For they are etiher Parallells; or (if produced at least) make an angle;
or (if big enough) be Contingents; or lastly are asymptotes. By Asymptots you
mean (not all such as never meet, for then Prallells would fall under this
kind; but) such as will come always nearer and nearer together, but never touch
one another (you might have added this other character; that they do so
approach each other, as that at length their distance will be less than any
assignable quantity. But it seems you allow your Asymptotes a greater latitude:
And do in your English, determine your meaning so to be: And that, I suppose,
because you had neglected to put in, that limitation, in the latin; and
therefore were not willing upon my intimation to mend it in the English. For
none else that I knew, speak of any other lines under the name of Asymptotes,
but such as do not only eternally approach, but do approach also infinitely
near, And, I have reason to believe, from your simple objection Less. 5. p.
48. l. 23. that you thought those two must needs go together, viz. that
whatsoever quantities do eternally approach, must needs at last come
infinitely near. But however we will be content, if you would have it so, to
take Asymptotes at what latitude you will give it them.) You say now, that I am
offended at the word it seems. No, Sir, no offense at all. I am not at all
angry, that, to you, it should seem so. I said but, that to me, it seemed
otherwise; (And, I hope you are not offended that all things did not seem to
me, as they did to you: For I perceive, that by this time, it seems otherwise
to you also. Which has made you in the English, to give us this Article new
molded.) I showed you then, many other positions of lines, which do not agree
to any of your four kinds. And you confess it. And some of them such, as will
not be salved with your new botch. As they that please to compare them will
soon find.

J touched at some other faults; as, That the definition of points alike
situate, (art. 31.) seemed very uncouth.

That the word Figure, which is defined art. 22. had been often used long before
it was defined; (which though it be, with you a small fault, yet a fault it
is.) And you confess it.

That by your definition a solid sphere, and a sphere made hollow within, is
the same figure. (For your definition takes notice of no superficies, but that
within which they are included: your words are, intra quam solidum includitur.
You say, It is my shall^wnesse, to think, those points which are in the concave
superficies of a hallowed sphere not to be contiguous to any thing without it,
because that whole concave superficies is within the whole sphere. It may be
my shallowness perhaps; but it is I confess, my opinion, that this concave
superficies being, as you say all within a sphere, (and therefore may be
contiguous to somewhat within the sphere,) is not contiguous to any thing
without it, (if it be, tell me to what? and how it can be contiguous when the
whole thickness of the sphere is between? unless you think it can touch at a
distance:) Nor, is that superficies intra quam sphaera includitur: For if, as
you say, that whole superficies be within the whole sphere, how can the sphere
be within that superficies? You should rather have confessed, as the truth is,
that you did not think of a solides being contained by two or more superficies,
not contiguous to one an another: and (...), had not provided for that case.

I excepted likewise against your definition of Like t^^ngs, cited here out of
Cap. 9. art. 2. Those things, you de^ine to be Like, which differ only in
magitude. They do not, I say, always differ in this; for it is possible like
things may be equal (And therefore if they differ in nothing else, they differ
not ut all.) And sometimes again they may differ in somewhat else; at least in
position. Else what needs your next definion, of similia similiter posita? if
it were not possible for similia to be dissimiliter posita? To which exception
(because you had nothing to say) you say nothing

So your definition of like figures alike placed, I said was false: you
confess it is so, (and therefore amend it in the English.) You confess you
say, there wants something which should have been added; but call we Fool for
taking notice of it: Or else, you call your self Fool, for not supplying it;
For you say, that it might easily be supplied by any student in Geometry, that
is not otherwise a Fool. But, rather then fall out for it, we will divide the
Fool between us; and cry Ambo. 'Twas I, like a fool, took notice of that to
be wanting, which you like a Fool, omitted, when you should have supplied it.

The 15. Chapter, because it contained but little Mathematical, I did but
touch at; leaving that for my worthy Colleague to take to task, with the rest
of your Philosophy. Which he has done to purpose. Yet some few things J noted
as a rast of the rest.

J noted that (contrary to others who define Time to be the measure of motion)
you determine Motion to be the measure of time; And yet (contrary to your own
determination) you do frequently make Time the measure of motion; measuring
both motion, and its affections (swiftness, slownesse, uniformity, etc.) by
Time. You confess it to be so: But rail at us for minding Books, more than
Clocks and hour-glasses. And then (contrary to both) you tell us, that time and
motion have but one dimension which is a line. And at last would persuade your
English Reader, that I would have you measure swiftness and slownesse, by
longer and shorter motion: But they that understand Latin, can find nothing to
that purpose: I only told you what you did, (and how absurd that was,) not,
what I would have you do*

Then, because it still runs into you mind, that I had some where said, That
a point is nothing (though no body can tell where;) you fall again upon that.
For my part, though I often affirm that a Mathematical point, has no parts* yet
J never denied it to stand for as much at least, as a cyphar does in numbers;
and you allow it noe more, (c. 16; art. 20.) your words are these Punctum inter
quantitates nihil est, ut inter numeros cyphra. Is it then J, or you? that say
a point is nothing?

You told us soon after, that All endeavor (for even that is motion) whether
strong or weak, is propogated to infinite distance. As if (said J) the sk^pping
of a Flea did propagate a motion as far as the Indies. You ask, how we know
it? If you mean, How we know that it is so; Truly, J do not know that at
all. If you mean, how we know that it follows from what you affirm; It is so
evident a consequence from the words alleged, that you need not ask; Or, if
those words be not enough those that follow be yet fuller, Procedit ergo omnis
conatus, sive in Va^uo, sive in plano, non modo ad distantiam quantamvis, sed
etiam in tempore quantulocunque, id^est, in instanti. That ^s, All endeavor of
motion whether the space be Full or Emty, is continued, not only to as great a
distance as is imaginable, but in as little a time, that is, in an instant. But
if your meaning be, what do I say to the contrary? Truly I say nothing to the
contrary. They that have a mind to believe it, may.

Then you go on to catechize us; What is your name? Are you Philosophers? or
Geometricians? or Logicians? etc. (Nay, never ask that question, we know you
are good at giving names, without asking) I hope, the next question will be,
Who gave you that name? And truly as to many of the names you give us, a man
might easily believe, yourself were the Godfather, you call us so often by your
own names.

Lastly, Of two things moving with equal swiftness, that, say you, strikes
hardest which is bigness. No, say I, but that which is heaviest. A bullet of
Lead, though but with equal speed, strikes harder then a blown Bladder. If any
man think otherwise let him try.

SECT. X. Concerning his 16 Chapter.
IN the 16 Chapter, I said, there were 20 Articles; you say, but 19. It Is
easily reconciled. There be twenty in my book; and there were 20 in yours too,
before the last was cut or torn out: now, it seems, in yours there are but
nineteen.

Well; but, be they twenty, or be they nineteen; twenty to one but the greatest
number of them be naught. I do confidently affirm, you say, that all but three
are false. Nay, that is false, to begin with. I said, that, all but three were
unsound. Some of them be nonsense, or absurd; some be false; some
undemonstrated; all unsound; at least, within three: And I have already proved
them so to be. But you (you say) do affirm, that they are all true, and truly
demonstrated. And that is answer enough to all my arguments. What need you say
any more? If that be true, doubtless you have the better on it. But let us try
a little, if we cannot find one unsound amongst them.

Your first Proposition as it stands yet in the Latin, you say, is this, The
velocity of any Body moved, during any Time, is so much, as is the product of
the Impetus in one point of Time, multiplied into the whole Time. Well, I hope
at least the first is sound, is it not? In one Point, you say; but which one?
Is it any one? or some one? Nay it is but some one, not any one; but, which one,
you tell us not. What say you to this? Is it sound? This, you confess, without
supplying what is wanting, is not intelligible. Very good! Habemus confitentem
rerum. To the first^ Article as it is uncorrected in the Latin, ^ object, you
say, That meaning by Impetus, some middle impetus, and assigning none, you
determine nothing* Well what say you to that? you say, it is true. And then you
rant at us for not mending it, (as though we were bound to mend your faults)
yet look again, and you will find J did. J told you what you should have said; as
well as what you said amiss. But enough of this. Here Is one fault confessed.

In the same Article; you would have the Impetus applied ordinately to any
straight line, making an angle with it. J asked, How an impetus can be
ordinately applied to a Line? or make an Angle with it? Absurdly, you say; and
that is the answer. And J told you how this should have been mended too.

You tell me that Archimedes and others say, Let such a line be the Time, and
again p. 36. l. 16. Let the line AB be the Time. Very likely! just as when we
say, Let the Time be A. That is, Let it be so designed; or, Let the Line AB, or
the letter A, be the Symbol of the Time. What then? Does it therefore follow,
that either Lines or Letters be homogeneous to Time? No such matter. Their
Symbols may be Homogeneous though the Things be not. You say farther, in the
same Article: If the Impetus increase uniformely, the whole velocity of the
motion shall be represented by a Triangle, one side whereof is the whole Time,
and the other the greatest Impetus, (Well! and what shall be the third side? or
what angle shall these contain? Do you think that the assigning of two sides,
without an Angle, will sufficiently determine the bigness of a triangle? But
lets go on.)

Or else etc. Or lastly by a Parallelogramme having for one side a mean
proportional between the greatest Impetus and the half thereof. Well, but
what for the other side? And, what Angle? Is a Parallelogramme, said J,
sufficiently determined, be the assignement of but one side, and never an
angle? what think you? is this sound? It was indeed a very great oversight, you
confess, to design a Parallelogram by one only side. And is not all this
sufficient to prove the first Article unsound? if it be not, we will go on, for
there be more faults yet.

For, say you, these two parallelograms are equal both each to other, and to
the (fore mentioned) Triangle (without having any consideration of Angles at
all) as is demonstrated in the Elements of Geometry. This, I say, is
notoriously false: For a Triangle of which nothing is determined but two sides:
and a Parallelogramme, of which the sides only are determined, but nothing
concerning the Angles: can never by any Geometry, be demonstrated to be equal.
This therefore is not only unsound, but false. And all this J told you before.
What an impudence then is it, when you knew all this, to affirm, that they be,
all true and all truly demonstrated, when the very first of them is thus
notoriously faulty! But we have not done yet.

It might be hoped, that this confessed oversight is, at lest mended in the
English: (especially since you tell us that one from beyond sea has taught you
how to mend it) No such matter. For the Amendment is as bad or worse then what
we had before. For now it runs thus. The whole velocity shall be represented by
a Triangle etc. (as before) or else by a Parallelogram, one of whose sides is
the whole Time of motion; and the other, half the greatest Impetus: Or lastly,
by a Parallelogram, having for one si^e a mean proportional between the whole
Time and the half of that Time; and for the other side the half of the
greatest impetus. For both these Parallelograms are equal to one another, and
severally equal to the Triangle which is made of the whole line of Time, and
the greatest acquired impetus. As is demonstrated in the Elements of Geometry.
Now this, you shall see, is pitifully faise. Let the time be T; and the
greatest impetus, I: and let the Angles be supposed all Right Angles (for such
your Figures represent, though your text says nothing of them.) The Altitude
therefore of the triangle, is T, (the whole time:) the Basis I, (the greatest
impet^s:) and consequently the Area thereof is one half of T x I: that is IT.
Again the Altitude of the former Parallelogram, T, (the whole time,) its Basis,
^, (half the greatest impetus,) and therefore the area T x I, or IT; equal to
that of the Triangle Lets see now whether the last Parallelogram be equal to
either of these, as you affirm. The Altitude you will have to be a mean
proportional between the whole Time and its half: that is, between Tand T; It
is therefore the root of T x T, that is the root of Tq, that is Tq, or T: The
Basis you will have to be one half of the greatest Impetus, that is I: And
consequently, the Area must be I x Tq, or I x T, or IT. But IT is not equal to
IT: Therefore this Parallelogram is not equal either to the former, or to the
Triangle. It Is false therefore which you affirmed. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Now what do you think of the business? is not the matter well amended? 'Twas
bad before, now it is worse. When you told us but of one side, and left us to
guess the other, 'twas at our peril if we did not guess right, and 'twas to
be hoped, you meant well, though you forgot to set it down. But, now you tell
us, what you meant, we find that you neither said well, nor meant well: For
what you now say is clearly false. The two Parallelograms which you affirm to
be equal, are no more equal then the Side and the Diagonall of a Square; but
just in the same proportion; viz. as to 1. Nay was it not a pure piece of
wisdom in you, that, when you had been taught from beyond Sea, as you tell us,
how it should have been mended, you had not yet the wisdom to take good
counsel; but, trusting to your own little wit, have made it worse than it was?
it falls out very unluckily, you see, that when you affirmed so confidently,
that they are all true, and all truly demonstrated, the very first of them
should be so wretchedly faulty. But enough of this. We Will try whether the next
will prove better.

In the second Article you give us this Proposition. In every uniform motion,
the lengths passed over are to one another, as the product of the ones Impetus
multiplied into its time, to the product of the others Impetus multiplied into
its time. And why not, said J, (without any more ado) as the time to the time?
Which needed no other demonstration than to cite the definition of Uniform
motion, (viz. which does in equal or proportional times, dispatch equal or
proportional lengths.) What need had you to cumber the Proposition with
Impetus and Multiplication, and Products, when they might as well be spared?
and then put your self to the trouble of a long and needless demonstration,
when the bare citing of a definition would have served the turn? You answer,
That the product of the Time and ^mpetus, to the product of the Time and
Impetus, is also as the Time to the Time. and therefore the Proposition is
true. Yes doubtless; and therefore I did not find fault with it, as false; but
as foolish, to make such a busle to no purpose. For, by your own confession,
the proportion of the lengths dispatched, is as well designed by the terms
alone, as by those multiplications and products.

But there is another fault which J f^^^ with your proposition; ^ told you
that, instead of, in every uniforme motion, you should have said, (and, that
you might have said it safely, as the rest of the wordsly,) in all uniform
motions; for you make use of this proposition afterward, not only in comparing
diverse parts of any the same uniforme motion, but in comparing diverse motions
one with another. But at this you are highly offended, that J should understand
to what purpose this Proposition is brought, better than your self; and that J
should presume to tell you, what you ought to have said. (And, on the other
hand, when J do not do so, you blame me, that J do not to my reprehension add
a correction: So that, it seems, you are neither well, full nor fasting: J must
neither do it, nor let it alone.) And then you go on to rant, after your
fashion, at Wit and Mystery, and times and ways, and steady brains, at reading
thoughts, and noise of words, at step and stumble, etc. And yet, for all the
anger, (when the heats over) you think best to take my counsel; and therefore
say in the English, just as J said it should have been in the Latin.

The proposition then being thus to be understood, (though at first, ill
worded,) the demonstration, I said, would not hold. For though it will do well
enough (yea more then enough; for you might have spared half of it;) in
comparing several parts of the same motion, and in comparing several motions
of the same swiftness; yet for the comparing of uniforme motions in general,
it will not serve by no means; for you do assume at the first dash, that the
motions compared have the same Impetus. Now this must not be allowed. For it is
very possible (as you now know, since, J told you, though before you seemed to
be ignorant of it, as J then convinced you;) that two motions may be both
uniforme; and yet not have both the same Impetus. Your proposition therefore
(as it was to be understood) was not truly demonstrated.

Now, because this was very evident, and not to be denied; therefore you
thought it best to make no words of it, but mend it as well as you could. And
so, in the English, you have mended the proposition, as J bid you; and given us
a new demonstration, which is pretty good; But not yet without fault. For in
stead of the length AF (fig. 1.) you should have said, the length DG: for the
length should have been taken in the line DE, which, according to your
construction, is the line of Lengths; not in the line AB, which is, by
construction, the line of Times. So impossible a thing is it, for you to mend
one fault and not to make another.

But if all these faults be not enough to make this Article unsound, there is
yet another, before we leave. Since therefore you say, in uniforme motion, the
Lengths dispatched are to one another, as the Times in which they are
dispatched; it will also be, by permutation, as time to length, so time to
length. This consequence I denied; because Permutation of proportion has place
only in Homogenealls, no^ in Heterogenealls; (and referred you for farther
instruction concerning it, to what Clavious has on the 16. Prop. of the 15. of
Euclide.) You tell me, that I think, line and time are Heterogeneous. Yes, and
you think so to if you be not a fool. If not, pray tell me how many yards long
is an hour? Or, How much line will make a day?

Well, lets try a third Article. (For the two first you see be naught, that is a
bad beginning.)

Art. 3. In motion uniformely accelerated from rest, (that is, when the Impetus
increases in proportion to the times) the length run over in one time, is to
the length run over in an other time. (In the English for Impetus, you have put
mean Impetus, and so in some other propositions; but that neither mends nor
mars the business.)

To this, first you dream of an objection, and then think of an answer to it. I
object you say, that the Lengths run over, are in that proportion which the
Impetus has to the Impetus. Prithee tell me, where I made that objection to
this article; and i will confess 'twas simply done. But 'till then, i will say
it is done like your self, to say so however. (For it is lawful with you to say
any thing, true or false) Your English Reader, perhaps, may think it is true.

Next, You ask, you say, where it is that you say or dream, that the lengths
run over are in proportion of the Impetus to the Times? But prithee, why do
thou ask me such a question? Am I bound to give an account of all thy dreams?
Perhaps you dreamed that I had charged you with such a saying; But, look again,
and you will find that is but a dream as well as the rest.

That which I said was this, The parallel line FH, BY, (fig. 1.) do show what
proportion the Impetus at F has to the Impetus at B; to wit, the same with the
time AF, to the time AB: (And is not this your meaning, when you say the
Impetus increases in proportion to the times?) But, though those (and other
parallel lines) do define what proportion the several Impetus have to each
other; yet they do not design (by permutation of proportion, as you fancied in
the Corollary of the precedent article) what proportion the several Impetus
have to the Times; because they be Heterogeneous, and do not admit of that
permutation. And these are the words, which gave occasion to those your two
dreams. And then (as if between sleeping and waking) you ask, if it be you or
^ that dream? Had you been well awake, you needed not have asked the question.

The objections that I made to it, were these.

First, that in stead of motu accelerato, (accelerate motion,) you should have
said, motibus acceleratis (accelerate motions,) because you speak of more than
one. You say, there is no such matter: and bid me give an instance. J will so,
and that without going farther then your present (...). Let AB (say you)
represent a Time etc. Again, let AF represent another time etc. And in each of
these times you suppose a Motion, which motions this proposition compares.
Therefore, say I, there must be at least two Motions, because two Times;
unless you will say, that one and the same motion may be now, and anon too.

I objected farther, that the demonstration does nor prove the proportion;
except only in one case, to which you do not restrain it. For the whose
stresse of your demonstration, (in the Latin) lies upon this, that the
triangles ABI, AFK, be like triangles (where you infer, that the space
dispatched in the latter time AK, is to that of the former time AB, as the
triangle ABI, to the triangle AFK, that is in the duplicate proportion of the
times AB, AF.) Which supposes that the second motion in the time AF, does
acquire the same Impetus which the first motion had acquired in equal time.
Whereas it is possible, that, of two motions, each of them uniformly
accelerated, the one of them may in half the time acquire as great a
swiftness, as the other does in the whole time; If therefore the latter motion
in the same AF, do acquire a swiftness equal to that of the former in the
time AB, (which may very well be, for the words uniformly accelerated, do
imply only the manner of acceleration, not the degree of celerity; as your
self now discern, though then you did not,) the triangles will be, not ABI,
AFK, but ABI, AFH; which are not like triangles, but unlike; and so the
demonstration falls. You should have provided in your proposition, not only
that the two motions, (the one in the time AB, the other in the time AF,) be
each of them uniformly accelerated, but that they be both equally swift. Which
when you have neglected to take care of, you affirm that universally, which
will hold only in one case.

But the truth is, it is evident enough, by this and diverse other Articles, that
you took the manner of acceleration, (viz. if in the same, in the duplicate, or
triplicate, etc. proportion to the times,) had sufficiently determined the
speed also. And therefore took it for granted, that the motion in the time AF,
if uniformly accelerated, must needs attain precisely the same degree of the
celerity, that the other motion in the time AB, uniformly also accelerated, had
attained in equal time. (Which to be a very great mistake, you now do
apprehend.) Otherwise you would not have let these Articles ly so naked without
such provision; nor would you, (as in the 13 Article, and those that follow,)
undertake, by the manner of acceleration, and the last acquired Impetus, to
determine the time of motion. Whereas, in the same manner of acceleration
(whether uniformly, or in the duplicate, or triplicate, or quadruplicate
proportion;) any assignable impetus or degree of celerity, may be attained in
any assignable time whatever.

I objected farther, that because, as has been showed, the Triangle AFK, or
AFH, is not necessarily like to the triangle ABI, therefore it does not follow
that the length passed over, will be in duplicate proportion to the time. For
unless the triangles be alike, the proportion of them will not be duplicate to
that of their homologous sides.

Now these two Objections were clear and full, (and did destroy your whole
demonstration;) and this you discerned well enough, though you did not think
fit to make any reply or confession; (but invent some other objections, which I
never made, that you might seem to answer to somewhat.) And therefore in the
English, without making any words of it, you mend it. And instead of those
words in the Latin, As the triangle ABI, to the triangle AFK, that is, in
duplicate proportion of the time AB to AF: you say in the English. As the
triangle ABI, to the triangle AFK, that is, if the triangles be like in the
duplicate proportion of the time AB, to the time AF; but, if unlike in the
proportion compounded etc. (which is a clear confession of all those
objections. But let us go on. Compounded of what?) of AB, to By, and of AK, to
AF. No such matter; of AF to FK, (that is it you would have said:) not, of AK to
AF. There Is one fault therefore; but that's not all. Of AB to AF, and of BY to
FK; that's it you should have said: for AB to BY, the Time to the Impetus, has
no proportion at all; but are Heterogeneous, as I have often told you. There Is
a second fault therefore in your emendation. And is not this Tinker-like, to
mend one hole and make two? Nay there is a third yet, which is the worst of all.

In the mending of this fault, (though you had not missed in it,) you have
discovered another, which you did your endeavor, but now, to hide. I said in
the proposition for motion, you should have said motions; because it was
intended of more than one compared. You tell me, there is no such matter;
meaning, I suppose, the latter motion in the time AF, was but part of that
former motion in the time AB: But if, as you now confess, the triangle AFK, be
not necessarily alike triangle to ABI, (but that the point K may fall either
within or without the line AI,) then must this be not only another, but an
unlike motion to the former: viz. either faster or slower, though uniformly
accelerated as that was. Do not you know that old rule; Oportet esse memorem.
But this it is, when men will commit faults, and then deny them. And yet
presently after, by going about to mend them, betray themselves.

Much such luck you have in mending the Corollary. You had said in the Latin,
In motion uniformly accelerated, the lengths transmitted are in the duplicate
proportion of their times. This, I said, was true in one case, (viz. in equal
celerities,) but not universally. Therefore you, to mend the matter, in the
English make it worse; In motion uniformly accelerated, say you, the proportion
of the lengths transmitted, to that of their Times, (No, but the proportion of
the length transmitted, one to the other,) is compounded of the proportions of
the Times to the Times, and Impetus to Impetus.

There be more faults in this Article; but I am weary of the business; let us
go to the next.

The fourth Article has all the faults that the third has, (which are enough
as we have seen already,) and some more.

First, for motu accelerato, you should have said motibus acceleratis; because
you compare more motions then one.

Secondly, the Motion performed in the time AF, (Fig. 2.) though accelerate
according to the duplicate proportion of the times, as well as that in the time
AB; yet may that be either swifter or slower than this; (because as we have
often said, the manner of acceleration does not determine the degree of
celerity;) And therefore the point K which determines its greatest Impetus,
does not necessarily fall in the Parabolicall line, but may fall either within
or without it: according as the celerity is less or more.

Thirdly, And therefore it does not follow, that the Lengths dispatched by such
motion, are in triplicate proportion to their Times. For this only depends upon
supposition that the point K in the second motion, must needs fall in the
Parabola AI, designed by the first motion.

Now these two latter faults, in the former Article, you did endeavor to amend
in the English: But because, it seems, here it was harder to do, you have left
them as they were before. That these were faults, you were clearly convinced
of; and do as good as confess, by your attempt to mend them in the third
Article. But because you saw it was impossible for one of your capacity to
think of mending all; you resolve to give over mending, and (which is the
easier of the two) resolve to try the strength of your brow.

But, as if there were a necessity of growing worse and worse; beside those,
common to this and the third article, here is an addition of more faults, as
foul as any of them.

In your demonstration; your stresse lies upon this argument, Seeing the
proportion of FK to BY, is supposed duplicate to that of AE to AB, (which yet
is a false supposition; for the ordinate lines in a Parabola are not in
duplicate, but in subduplicate proportion to the diameters: But, suppose it
true, what then?) that of AB to AF, will be duplicate to that of BY to FK. That
is, Because the Ordinate lines in a Parabola, are in duplicate proportion to
the Diameters; therefore those Diameters are in duplicate proportion to those
Ordinate lines. Which if it be not absurd enough, I would it were. First, the
proportion of the Ordinates, must be duplicate to that of the Diameters,
(because M. Hobs will have it so;) and then (by the virtue of Hocus Pocus) this
must be duplicate to that.

To this you make no reply: but inslead thereof, disguise the matter in your
Lesson, by putting double for duplicate, as if they were all one; (though yet
Chap. 13. art. 16. we have, in the English, a long harangue of your own to
show the difference between them;) and then rail at those that first brought
up the distinction; and tell us, (which is notoriously false) that Euclide
never used but one word for Double and Duplicate; (that is (...), and (...),
are with M. Hobs but one and the same word.) But what is all this to the raking
off that absurdity with which you are here charged?

Next I showed you, that your whole argument was grounded upon a false
supposition; viz. that the velocity of the motion in hand, was to be designed
by the Semiparabola AKB; and that the ordinate lines in that Semiparabola, (by
which you would have the increasing Impetus to be designed) did increase in
duplicate proportion to their Diameters (by which you design the Times*) both
which are false. For, these ordinate lines, are well known (to all but M. Hobs)
to increase in the Subduplicate (not the Duplicate) proportion of the
Diameters: And consequently that Semiparabola can never express the Aggregate
of the Impetus thus increasing.

I did farther demonstrate, that the point K, ought to fall within the Triangle
ABI, not without it; and therefore not in the Parabolicall line by you
designed. The demonstration was easy. For if the time AF be one half of AB,
that is, as 1 to 2: the Impetus increasing in duplicate proportion to the
times, must be as 1 to 4; and therefore FK will be but a quarter of BY. But
because AF is half of AB, therefore FN will be half of BY. And consequently
FK (a quarter) will be less then FN, which is the half of BY. Which because
you saw too evident to be contradicted* you thought it best (as your usual
custom is in such cases,) to raise at it in stead of answering it.

I showed you farther, that the Aggregate of all the Impetus in a motion thus
accelerated, or the whole Velocity, was not of the Parallelogram AI, but only
of it. For this aggregate is not to be designed by a Semiparabola, but by the
complement of a Semiparabola. And many other mistakes* consequent thereunto.
And indeed so many, as that dispairing of mending them all, you resolved to let
them stand as they were.

Yet I showed you withal the chief ground of all these mistakes, and how they
might have been mended. But it appears you had not the wit to understand it,
and therefore durst not venture upon it. But have left this whole article such
an Hodge podge of errors, as would turn a quea^ie stomach, but to examine it.

And your Corollarys are false also.

In the first Corollary, It Is false which you affirm, that the proportion of
the parabola ABI to the parabola AFK, is triplicate to the proportion of the
times, AB to AF, (as it is in the English.) or of the Impetus BY to FK, (as it
is in the Latin.) This exception you confess to be just, yet leave it
uncorrected in the English; because you know not how to mend it; without giving
your self the ly in the rest. For as badde as it is, it follows, with the rest
of your doctrine. It must all stand or fall together.

The second Corollary, (at least, if understood of the Parabola,) is also
false; for the segments of a parabola (of equal height) successively from the
Vertex, are not as the numbers 7, 19, 37, etc. the difference of the Cubes 1.
8, 27, 64, etc. but us the differences of these surd numbers 1, 8, 27, 24. etc.
That which you allege to justify your self; that the parts of the Parabola
cut off are as the cubes of their bases; is but a repetition of the same error.
They are not as the Cubes of their Bases, but as the square roots of such Cubes.

The third Corrollary is wholly false, A motion so accelerated does not dispach
two thirds; but one third, of what a uniform motion would have done, with an
Impetus equal to the greatest of those so increasing. You say, I give no
demonstration of it. (It may be so; and it is all one to me, whether you believe
it to be true or no. You may think, if you please, that the Corollary is true
still; it will not hurt me.) Yet if you considered what had been said before,
you should have seen the reason: viz. because the aggregate of the Impetus did
not constitute a semiparabole, but the complement of a semiparabola, which is
not but of the Parallelogram.

The fifth article has the same faults with the fourth; and runs all upon the
same mistakes.

The main foundation of all these continued errors, was, I told you, the
ignorance of what is proportion duplicate, triplicate, subduplicate,
subtriplicate, etc. Of three numbers in continual proportion, if the first be
the lest, the proportion of the first to the second is duplicate, of what it
has to the third, not subduplicate: That was your opinion Cap. 13. 16. of the
Latin. In the English, you have retracted that error in part; yet retain all
the ill consequences that followed from it.

Next, you suppose the Aggregates of the Impetus increasing in the duplicate,
triplicate etc. proportion of the times, to be designed by the Parabola, and
Parabolasters, (as if their ordinates did increase in the duplicate,
triplicate, etc. proportion of their Diameters; cujus contrarium verum est;)
whereas you should have designed them by the complements of those figures, But
you ask me what line that (complement) is? No Line, good Sir, but a Figure,
which with the figure of the Semiparabola etc. does compleare the
Parallelogram. You ought therefore (as I then told you, but you understood it
not,) to have described your Parabola the other way; that the unequal (not the
concave) of the parabolicall line should have been toward the line of times
AB. so should the point K have fallen between N and F; and the unequal of the
Parabola with AT (the tangent) and BY (a parallel of the Diameter,) have
contained the complement of that parabola, whose diameter therefore must have
been AC, and its Ordinate CI.

Next, in pursuance of this error, you make the whole velocity, in these
accelerations (in duplicate, triplicate etc. proportion of the times) to be,,
etc. of the velocity of an uniforme motion with the greatest acquired Impetus,
(because the Parabola and Parabolasters, have such proportion to their Para
^lelograms) whereas they are indeed but,, etc. thereof; for such is the
proportion of the complements of those figures, to their Parallelograms. Now
upon these false principles, with many more consonant hereunto, you ground not
only the doctrine of the fourth and fifth Articles, but also most of those that
follow; especially the thirteenth and thenceforth to the end of the Chapter:
which are all therefore of as little worth as these.

But enough of this. The first five Articles therefore are found to be unsound;
and many ways faulty.

The sixth, seventh and eighth Articles, I did let pass for sound: And you
quarrel with me for so doing. But I said withal, you might have delivered as
much to better purpose in three lines, as there you did in five pages. (Beside
such petty errors all along as it were endless every where to take notice of)
which gives you a new occasion to rail at Symbols.

After these three, there is not one sound Article to the end of the Chapter,
and what those were before, we have heard already.

The ninth article is this, If a thing be moved by two Movents at once,
concurring in what angle soever, of which the one is moved uniformely, the
other with motion uniformely acceleeated from rest, till it acqu^e an Impetus
equal to that of the Uniform motion; the line in which the thing moved is
carried, will be the crooked line of a semiparabola. Very good! but of what
semiparabola? (for hitherto, we have nothing but a proporsion of Galilaeo's
transcribed.) You tell us, ^t shall be that Semiparabola, whose Busis is the
Impetus last acquired; And this is the whole designation of your Parabola.

To this designation I objected many things.

First, that the Basis of a Semiparabala is not an Impetus but a Line: and
therefore it is absurd to talk of a Semiparabola whose Basis is an Impetus.

Secondly, if it be said that an Impetus may be designed by a line; I grant it;
(a line may be the Symbol of an Impetus, as well as a Letter*) but this line,
is what line you please; (for any Impetus may be designed by any line at
pleasure:) and so, to say that It is a Semiparabola, whose basis is that line
which designs the Impetus: is all one as to say, it is a Semiparabola, whose
basis is what line you please. So that we have not so much as the Basis of this
Semiparabola determined.

Thirdly, suppose that the Base had been determined, (as it is not) yet it is a
simple thing to think that determining the basis, does determine the Parabola.
For there may be infinite Parabola's described upon the same Base. You do not
tell us what Altitude, what Diameter, nor what Inclination this Parabola is to
have.

Now to this you keep a bawling; but say nothing to the business. You tell us,
that you had said, what angle soever. That is, you supposed your Mevents to
concur in what angle ^soever; but you said nothing of what was to be the
angle of inclination in the Parabola. You might have said indeed, it was to be
the same with that of the Movents: But you did not; and therefore I blamed you
for omitting it.

Then, as to the Diameter, you might have said (but you did not) that the line
of the acccelerate motion, would be the diameter. 'Twas another fault therefore
not to say so; for that had been requisite, to the determining of the Parabola.

But when you had so said; this had but determined the Position of the
diameter, not its magnitude: it may be long or short, at pleasure
notwithstanding this.

Then as to the altitude of it; this remains as much undetermined as the rest.
You tell us neither where the Vertex is, nor how far it is supposed to be
distant from the Base. you might have said, (but you did not,) that the point
of Rest, where the two motions begun, was the vertex. (And it was your fault
you did not say so in the latin, as you have now done in the English.) But had
you so said, you had not thereby determined either the Altitude, or the
Diameters length.

You say, The vertex and Base being given, I had not the wit to see that the
altitude of the Parabola is determined. No truly; nor have I yet. But it seems
you had so little wit, as to think it was. Had the vertex and Base been,
positione data: I confess, it had been determined: (For then I had been told
how far off from the Base, the Vertex had been.) But when the Base is only
magnitudine data, there, is no such thing determined. For a base of such a
bigness, may be within an Inch, and it may be above an E^l from the Vertex,
according as the Parameter is greater or less. Now you do not pretend any
other designation of the Base, then that it be equal to such an Impetus; which
determines only the bigness of it, not the distance from the vertex. So that
the altit^de, notwithstanding this flamme, remains undetermined. (And must do
so, whatever you think, till you do determine the degree of celerity, which
answers to the Parameter of the Parabola; as well as the manner of
acceleration, which only determines that it is a Parabola, but not what
Parabola. The proposition therefore is extremely imperfect; nor does determine
that which it did undertake to determine.

The figure is yet worse. You suppose the line AB, (fig. 6.) by uniforme
motion, to have dispatched the length AC, or BD, and so ly in CD; in the same
time that the line AC, by motion uniformely accelerated, dispatcheth, the
length AB, or CD, to come and lie on CD. That is, (because AB, according to
your figure, it about twice the length of AC,) the motion accelerated does, in
the same time, dispatch about twice the length of what is dispatched by the
uniforme motion. But it is evident, the accelerate motion is all the way, to
the very last point, slower than the uniforme, (for by supposition, it does not
till the last point, attain to that Impetus or swiftness, with which the
uniform motion was carried all the way.) Therefore according to you, a slower
motion does, in the same time, dispatch a a greater length then the swifter,
Which is absurd enough: And to which you make no reply.

The demonstration also (saving what you have from Galileo) I then showed you
to be faulty; and you reply nothing in its vindication and therefore I need not
repeat it. You have in the English a little disguised the proposition, but to
little purpose. The Parabola which you undertake to determine, remains as
undetermined as it was before. And the figure the same with all its faults: And
the demonstration no whit mended. So much of this Article as yo^ took out of
Galileo was good, before you spoild it; but the next is all naught.

Your tenth Article does but repeat all the faults of the ninth, and you have
nothing more to say in the vindication of this then of that. The Parabolaster
here, remains as undetermined as the Porabola there; your Figure (fig. 6.)
makes the flower motion in the same time to dispatch the greater length; your
demonstration is faulty as that was. Nay you have not here, so much as
disguised it in your English, as you did the former; but left it as it was in
the Latin. So that this falls under the same condemnation with the former.

I hinted also, that we have here a great talk of Parabolasters which are not
to be defined till the next Chapter. But that is a small fault. Your English
helps it, by sending us thither for the definiton.

Your eleventh Article undertakes to give us a general rule, to find what kind
of line shall be made by the motion of a body carried by the concurse of any
two Movents, the one of them Uniformly, the other with acccleration, but in
such proportion of Spaces and Times as are explicable by Numbers, as Duplicate,
Triplicate etc. or such as may be designed by any broken number whatsoever.
Your rule for this, sends us to the Table of Chap, 17* art. 3. to seek there a
Fraction whose Denominator is to be the sum of the Exponents of Length and
Time; and its Numerator, the exponent of the Length. Upon this I proposed you a
case which falls within your proposition, but not within your Rule: (to show
that your Rule did not perform what you undertook to perform by it.) Let the
motions, said I, be, the one, uniforme; the other accelerate, so as that the
spaces be in subduplicate proportion to the Times; or, in your language, as 1
to 2. We are therefore, by your Rule, to seeek in the Table the fraction. But
there is no such fraction to be found (nor any less then.) Your rule therefore
does not serve the turn. Well* let us hear what you have to say for your
self. Did I not see (you ask) that the Table is only of those figures which
are described by the concourse of a motion Uniform, with a motion accelerated.
Yes I did, see that the table is only of such: Nay more, I saw (which is more
to your purpose) that the proposition is only of such; (though yet if need be,
I could show you how the same figures might be described by motion retarded as
well as motion accelerated,) and therefore I proposed such a case; viz. an
acceleration in the subduplicate proportion of the times, that is after the
rate 1* 2. 3. 4. etc. which is the subduplicate rate of 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. I had
no reason therefore, say you, to look for in thae Takle. That is, I had no
reason to expect, that your Rule should perform what you undertake. But why no
reason to expect it? For my case is of motion uniforme concurring with motion
retarded. No* such matter, (nor be you so simple to think so, whatever you here
pretend;) for 1. 2. 3. 4. etc. is no decreasing progression, but increasing:
for 2, is more then 1 and 3, and more then 2. and so on. But why should you
think it is not so? Because forsooth. I do not make the proportion of the
spaces to that of the times duplicate, but subduplicate. Very good (...) But if
times be proposed in a series increasing as 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. will not the
subduplicate rate be increasing also, as well as the duplicate? that is, do
not the Roots of these numbers continually increase, as well as their Squares?
Think again and you will see they do. Well, but however, though this table will
not serve the turn, yet the ^ase may be solved, you tell us, another way. No
doubt of it. I could have told you so before. (For though you knew not how to
resolve it; I did; and therefore directed* you to the 64. Prop of my
Arithmetica Infinitorum; where you have the case resolved more universally then
it is by you proposed; viz. where the exponent of the rate of acceleration is
not explicable by numbers; but even by surd ro^tes, or other irrational
quantities.) But what becomes of your rule in the mean while, which sent us to
that Table for solution? where, you now tell us, (for I had told you so before)
it is not to be hard? This eleventh Article therefore, is like the rest. Nor is
it at all amended in the English.

Your twelfth proposition, I said, was wretchedly false; And I say so, still.
But, you say, you have left it standing unaltered; (and yet that is false too;
for your English has a considerable alteration from what was in the Latin,
though not much for the better) Your words were these* If motion be made by the
concourse of two movents, whereof one is moved uniformely, the other with any
acceleration whatever (for which you say in the English, the other beginning
with Rest in the Angle of concurse, with any acceleration whatsoever) the
movent which is moved uniformely shall put forward the thing so moved, in the
several parallel spaces, less, than if both motions had been Uniform. I gave
instance to the contrary, (in fig. 5.) The straight line AND, may be described
by a compound of two uniforme motions; and the parabolick line AGD, by a motion
compounded of two, the one uniforme and the other accelerated, (neither of
which you can deny, for you affirm both, at art. 8, and 9.) But within the
Paralells AC, OF, the thing moved (contrary to your assertion) is more put
forward by this, than by that motion (for EG, is greater then EN,) The
p^oposition therefore, in this case is false. Yonr answer is, that other
Geometricians find no fault with it. It may be so. But is there any
Geometrician (who has well examined it) will say it is true? and that, in all
cases? In some cases I told you, it may happen to be true; and in in other
cases it will be certainly false: (And I told you also, when, and where.) And
I did in the case proposed prove it so to be; and you can say nothing to the
demonstration. You would indeed tell me of another case wherein, you think it
is true. But what is that to the purpose? When I give instance to the contrary
of a universal proposition, you must allow me to lay the case as I think good
(so as it be within the limits of that universal) and not as you would have
me. The proposition therefore is demonstrated to be false. And you have nothing
to say in vindication of it.

The thirteenth Article does propose a Problem as ridiculous as a man would
desire to read. It Is this Let AB (fig. 8.) be a Length transmitted with
uniforme motion in the Time AC: And let it be required to find another length
which shall be transmitted in the same time with motion uniformly accelerated,
so as the Impetus (or, as in the English, the line of the impetus) last
acquired be equal to the straight line AC. The Answer say J to this Problem,
is what length you please. (And you might as well have propounded, A quantity
being assigned which is equal to its four quarters; let it be required to
find another quantity which is equal to its two halves. Or thus A
parallelogram being proposed of a known Base and Altitude; let it be required
to find what may be the altitude of a triangle on the same base. Where, what
quantity you will, does serve for answer to the former: And, what altitude you
will for the latter. And, what length you will, is the answer to your Problem.)
For there is no length assignable, which may not, in any assignable Time, be
dispatched by a motion uniformly accelerated, whose last Impetus shall be what
you please. And it is but as if you should have asked; What may be the height of
that Parabola, or Triangle, whose Basis is equal to AC?

The Problem being thus ridiculous, it cannot be expected that the construction
or demonstration should be better. And truly it is pitiful stuff all of it:
as J then showed. And you do not so much as attempt any thing by way of answer,
to justify either your construction or demonstration.

You ask here, (for you have no more wit then to propose such a question,)
granting that a Parabola may be described upon a Base given; and yet have any
Altitude, or any Diameter one will: (which you say who doubts?) How it will
hence follow, that when a Parabolicall line is described (is to be described,
you should have said; for the Problem is of somewhat to be done, not, of
somewhat done already,) by two motions, the one uniform, the other uniformly
accelerated from rest; That the determining the Base, does not also determine
the whole Parabola? J answer. Because every Parabola may be so described;
(which if you did not know before, you may now learn of me:) And therefore,
since that, upon a Base given, a Parabola may be described of any altitude (as
you grant;) and that every Parabola may be so described: the determining of the
Base, does not determine the Altitude of a Parabola so to be described; more
then the Altitude of a Parabola simpliciter.

But if you would have done any thing to acquit your self of the charge in
this Article, (of proposing a Ridiculous, Nugatorious Problem:) You should have
assigned some Length, which by a motion so accelerated, and acquiring such an
Impetus, could not have been dispatched in a Time assigned. Till then; I say,
it may dispatch what length you please: And therefore your Problem is as
ridiculous as a man could wish.

There be diverse other petty faults, that J took notice of by the way; as that
those words, so as the Impetus acquired be equal to a Time (as if
heterogeneous things could be equal.) And, those words, as duplicate
proportion is to single proportion, so let the line AH be to the line AI.
(which is as pure nonsense as need to be:) As if there were one certain
Proportion of the Duplicate proportion, to the single Proportion. You tell us,
upon second thoughts, in your English, cap. 13. art. 16. that Duplicate
proportion is sometime greater then the single; and that it is sometimes less:
And yet you would here have us think that it is always as 2 to 1. The
proportion of 9 to 1, is duplicate of that of 3 to 1: And the proportion of 4
to 1, is duplicate of that of 2 to 1. But there is not the same proportion of
the proportion 2/1 to the propor^ion ^/1, that there is of the proportion 4/1
to the proportion 2/1* but that is triple this double: (for nine times as many,
is the triple of three times as many; and four times as many, is but the double
of twice as many.) But this you cannot understand, and therefore call for help
from somebody that is more ready in Symbols. It seems a man must speak to you
in words at length, and not in figures. And truly, all is little enough to make
you understand it.

The 14, 15, and 16 Articles are just like the 13: and as ridiculous as it.
What was there objected, you confess, may as well be objected to these. But
that has been proved to be ridiculous: and therefore so are these. Any length
being given, which, in a Time given, is dispatched with uniform motion; To find
out what length will be dispatched in the same time with motion so accelerated,
as that the Lengths dispatched be continually in triplicate proportion to that
of their times. (so Art. 14.) or quadruplicate, quintuplicate, etc. (ibidem.)
or as any number to any number. (so Art. 15. 16.) and the Impetus last acquired
equal to the Time given. That Is the Problem. The Solution should have been;
What length you please. Take where you will you cannot take amiss. If you say,
it is an Inch, you say true: If you say, it is an Ell, you say true: And if you
say it is a thousand miles, no body can contradict you. For it may be what you
please.

And is it not a wise thing of you then, for the designing of an Arbitrary
Quantity, a What-you-will, to bring a parcel of Constructions, and
Demonstrations, with finding of Mean Proportionalls, as many as one please; for
a matter of two leaves together? And, when you have done all, it is but, (as you
were,) What you will.

J noted farther that in all these Articles 13, 14, 15, 16, as in those before
Art. 9, 10, 11. and those following 17, 18, 19. You do every where make the
slower motion, in the same time, dispatch the greater length. Which I did
clearly demonstrate. To this you reply nothing to the purpose: But cavil, that
you might seem to say something. You say, I corrupt your Article by putting
Movens for Mobile. But there is no such matter; for in the place alleged (Art.
1.) Movens is your own word, not mine. You say, it is no matter whether AB or AC
(in the fifth figure) be the greater. Yes it is; it is impossible that AB,
according to your supposition, should be so big as AC; and yet, you have made
it almost twice as big. You say, you speak of the concurse of two movents; very
true. But each of those movents have their several pace assigned them; and
therefore you should not have made the slower movent to rid more ground. And
then you would tell me, what I think; and then talk of hard speculations, of
edge and wit and malice etc. But nothing to the purpose. For when you have all
done, its evident, and you cannot deny, that in your 5 and 6 and 11 Figures, AB
is made welnigh twice as long as AC; and so again in your 8, 9, and 10, Figures
AH much longer then AB; and yet these longer lines design the length,
dispatched by the slower motions in the same time. For the motion accelerate,
which does not till its last moment attain the swiftness, with which the
uniform motion proceeds all the way, must needs be slower then that uniform
motion. But this was a fault which I might safely have let pass; for these
Articles were ridiculous enough before.

In the 17 Article, I showed first, that the Proposition, as it was proposed,
was not perfect sense. Then, that, the sense being supplied, the Proposition
was false. And lastly, that your Demonstration had at lest fourteen faults, and
most of them such, as that any one was sufficient to overthrow the
Demonstration.

The Proposition was this, If in a time given, a Body run over two lengths, one
with Uniform, the other with accelerated motion, in any proportion of the
length to the time, And again in a part of that time, it run over parts of
those lengths with the same motions; the excess of the whole longitude above
the whole (to what?) is the same proportion with the excess of the part above
the part, to what? Is this good sense? No; you confess there was somewhat left
out in that Proposition, but say, it was absurdly done to reprehend it. Very
good! It seems you must have the liberty to speak nonsense without control.

Well; but how is the sense to be supplied? we made two or three essays the
last time, and found never a one would hold water, but which way soever we
turned it, the Proposition was false. We have two proportions designed only by
their Antecedents, and we are to guess at the consequents. The best conjecture
I could make was this; As the excess of the whole above the whole, is to one
of those wholes; so is the ex^esse^ of the part above the part, to one of those
parts, (respectively.) That is (calling the greatest whole G, and its part g:
and the lesser whole L, and its part l.) as G - L, to G; so g - l, to g. Or
secondly thus; as G - L, to L; so g - l, to l. But both these are found false.
My next conjecture was from the (...), (but there I was fain to leave my
proposition quite, and take up new Antecedents, as well as seek new
consequents,) and that directs me to such an Analogisme (p. 140. l. 39.) I say
that as AH to AB, so AB, to AI; but this is ambiguous, because, AB coming
twice, once as a whole, and another time as a part, sit does not appear which
is which; therefore here be two conjectures more; viz. a third thus, as the
whole to the whole, so the part to the part; (that is G. L g. l.) Or fourthly
thus, as the whole to its part, so the whole to its part. (that is G. g L. l.)
But these two are both false also. My next attempt was from the (...), (but
here also I must desert the proposition too, and seek new antecedents as well
as consequents,) where I find it thus (p. 141. l. 7, 9.) as AH to AB, so is the
excess of AH above AB, to the excess of AB above AI: which was to be
demonstrated. that sends me to a fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth analogisme
(because it does not appear which AB is the whole, and which the part;) the
fifth thus, as the whole to the whole, so the excess of the whole above the
whole, to the excess of the part above the part, (taking AB in the two first
places for the whole) that is G. L G - L. g - l. The sixth thus, as the whole
to the whole, so the excess of the whole above its part, to the excess of the
whole above its part (taking AB in the first and last place, for the whole,)
that is G. L G - g. L - l. The seventh thus, as the whole to its part, so the
excess of the whole above the whole, to the excess of the part above the
part, (taking AB in the first and last place for a part,) that is G. g G - L. g
- l. The eighth thus, as the whole is to its part, so the excess of the whole
above its part, to the excess of the other whole above its part, (taking AB in
the two first places, for the part,) that is G. g G - g. L - l. But these four
be all false likewise, as well as those before. Now all these eight conjectures
are of equal probability (though all false) it cannot be said which of them is
more like to be the sense intended than the other. And yet, forsooth, when, by
talking nonsense, you leave us at this uncertainty of conjecture, it is (you
say) absurdly done to reprehend it. I confess, if any one of these Analogismes
had been true, we might have guessed that to be your meaning: but when they be
all equally probable, and equally false, which should we take? Well, but it is
to be hoped, that now you will tell us. You tell us therefore (Less. p. 38.) it
should be thus, as the excess of the whole above its part, to the excess of
the other wh^le above its part, so that whole, to this whole: which affords us
a ninth analogisme, G - g. L - lG. L. which is coincident with my sixth
conjecture. And yet again (Less. p. 39.) you tell us, that the proposition is
now made (in the English) according to the demonstration (that is; both false,)
and there we find it thus, the whole to the whole, as the part to the part;
that is G. Lg. l. which also is coincident with our third conjecture. But
which soever of all these analogismes you take, the Proposition is false, and
therefore the demonstration must needs be so too.

Now to prove that this Proposition is false, which way soever you turn it,
(either as it was before, or as it is now,) I made use of the figure of your
first article, and proceeded to this purpose. Let the whole time (fig. 1.) be
AB, an hour, (that is, because I would not have you mistake me, as you do
Archimedes, let the line AB represent an hour, or, be the symboll of an hour;
for I would not have you think that I take a line to be an hour; but to
represent an hour; and the letters AB to represent that line, not to be that
line; like as at another time we take a letter, without a line, to represent an
hour:) and part of that time AF, half an hour. Let also the continued
Impetus of the Uniform motion (I mean the Symboll of it) be AC, or BY: which BY
also is to be (the Symbol of) the last acquired Impetus of the motion
accelerated. And this acceleration we will suppose at present (as your self do
in your (...)) to be uniform acceleration. The velocity therefore of the whole
uniform motion, will be represented by the Parallelogram ACIB; (by the first
article;) and of it is part, ACHF; (by the same article;) The velocity of the
whole uniformly accelerated motion, will be the Triangle AIB; and of its part,
AKF; (by the same article.) Since therefore the lengths dispatched be
proportional to those velocities; the whole length of uniform motion, to the
whole of the accelerate, will be as the Parallelogram ACIB, to the Triangle
AIB, that is, as 2 to 1. (viz. the length of the uniform motion, bigger than
that of the accelerate; whereas your figure and demonstration, do all the way
suppose the contrary;) so that if the uniform motion do in an hour dispatch 16
yards, the accelerate will in the same time dispatch 8 yards, (that is G = 16,
and L = 8.) Again, the length dispatched by the uniform motion in the whole
time; to that in half the time, is as the Parallelogram ACIB, to the
Parallelogram ACHF; that is, as 2 to 1; so that if G (as before) be 16, then is
g = 8. Lastly; the length dispatched by the accelerate motion in the whole
time, to that in half the time, is as the Triangle AIB, to the Triangle AKF;
that is as 4 to 1, (for the sides AB, to AF, being as 2 to 1, and the triangles
in duplicate proportion to their sides, the triangles will be as 4 to 1:) So
that if L (as before) be 8, then is l = 2. Now having thus found the measures
of these four lengths; (viz. G = 16. L = 8. g = 8. l = 2.) You shall see that
those Analogismes are all false; not one true amongst them. The first is this,
G - L. G g - l. g. that is 16 - 8 = 8. 16 8 - 2 = 6. 8. or 8. 16 6. 8. But this
is false. The second this, G - L. L g - l. l. that is 16 - 8. 8 8 - 2. 2. or 8.
8 6. 2. But this is false also The third this, G. L g. l. that is 16. 8 8. 2.
and this also is false. The fourth this, G. g L. l. that is 16. 8 8. 2. and
this is also as false as the other. The fifth is this, G. LG - L. g - l. that
is 16. 816 - 8. 8 - 2. or 16. 88. 6. which is also false. The sixth this, G. LG
- g. L - l. that is 16. 816 - 8. 8 - 2, or 16. 88. 6. which is like the rest.
The seventh is this G. gG - L. g - l. that is, 16. 816 - 8. 8 - 2 or 16. 88. 6.
false also. The eighth is this. G. g G - g. L - l. that is 16. 816 - 8. 8 - 2.
or 16. 88. 6. which is also false. The ninth is this, G - g. L - lG. L. that is
16 - 8. 8 - 216. 8. or 8. 616. 8. The tenth is like the third, G. Lg. l, that
is 16. 88. 2. all false. The proposition therefore, turn it which way you
will, is a false Proposition. And yet you have the Impudence to tell us (though
you knew this before, for I told it you last time, and brought the same
demonstration, to which you have not replied one word) that it is all true, and
truly demonstrated.

Do you think it is worth while after all this, to examine your demonstration?
It Is a sad one, I confess; but it is yours, and therefore it may perhaps be
beautiful in your eye. The last time we looked upon it, we found it had at
least fourteen gross faults: (and most of them such, as were singly enough to
destroy it:) enough in conscience for one poor demonstration. (And had you not
been good at it, a man would have wondered how you could have made so many ex
tempore.) Since that time, it is quite defunct. And there is a young one start
up in stead of it. But it is of the same breed, and it is not two pence to choose,
whether this or that. Your new demonstration runs it self out of breath at the
first dash. You had told us (Art. 3. Coroll. 3) In motion Uniformly accelerated
from rest, (such as is one of these) the length transmitted (as here AH, fig
8.) is to another length (viz. AB,) transmitted uniformly in the same time, but
with such Impetus as was acquired by the accclerated motion in the last point
of that time (just the case in hand) as a Triangle to a Parallelogram which
have their altitude and base common, that is, as 1 to 2, for the Parallelogram
is double of the Triangle. So that AH, in your figure, should be but just half
as big as AB; and you have made it almost twice as big. And upon this
foundation depends the whole demonstration. For if that fault were mended, your
whole construction comes to nothing. And is not this demonstration then well
amended? especially when you had fair warning of it the last time.

And then you send us to the demonstration of the 13 Article for confirmation
of this, whereas that Article has been cashiered long ago, and the
demonstration with it. But thus it is when men will not take warning.

At length you fall to raating, (as you use to do when you be vexed;) about
skill, and diligence, and too much trusting; about discretion, Hyperbole's, and
Sir H. Savile, etc. And tell us that when a beast (Joseph Scaliger) is slain by
a Lion (Clavius) it is easy for any of the fowls of the air (Sir H. S.) to
settle upon, and peck him. And Vespasian's law, no doubt, will bear you out in
all this. Only this I must tell you, that Sir H. Savile, had confuted Joseph
Scaliger's Cyclometry, as well as Clavius; and, I suppose, before him. Which if
you have not seen, I have.

In the 18 Article, we have this Proposition. If, in any Parallelogram,
(suppose ACDB, fig. 11.) two sides containing an angle be moved to the sides
opposite to them, (as AB to CD, and AC to BD,) one of them (AB) with uniform
motion, the other (AC) with motion uniformly accelerated: that side which is
moved uniformly (AB) will effect as much, with its concurse through the whole
length, as it would do if the other motion were also uniform, (or were not at
all. For what ever the other motion be, the motion of AB to CD, carries the
thing moved with it from side to side, and that is all. What point of the
opposite side it shall come to, depends upon the other transverse motion, not
upon this at all. And this is so easy that no body would deny it. If you mean
any thing more then this, that it shall carry it just to the opposite side and
no farther, your demonstration does not at all reach it* But you go on) and the
length transmitted by it in the same time, a mean proportional between the
whole and the half, of what? Till you tell us of what? I say, as I said
before, that these words have no sense.

The construction and demonstration of this proposition, I remember, we made
sad work with, the last time we had to do with them, as well as with those of
the former Article; which will be now too long to repeat. The whole weight of
the Demonstration lies, severally, upon at lest these three Pillars, of which
if any one do but fail, the whole demonstration falls. First, upon the strength
of the 13 Article, which we have destroyed long ago. Secondly upon the 12
Article, which we have also long since proved to be false. Thirdly, upon this
learned assertion, the straight line FB will be the excess by which the
(lesser) length transmitted by AC with motion uniformly accelerated, till it
acquire the impetus BD, will exceed the (greater) length transmitted by the
same AC in the same time with uniform motion, and with the Impetus every where
equal to BD. Which destroys it self. For if the accelerated motion, as is
supposed, do not till its last moment acquire that speed with which the
uniforme motion is moved all the way; then that must needs be slower than this;
and consequently dispatch a lesser length in the same time: whereas you
according to your discretion, make the length dispatched by that slower motion,
to be more then that of the swifter in the same time, and tell us the excess
is FB. And then to help the matter, when I press you with this absurdity, you
tell us you speak of motions in concurse: as though in concurse, the slower
motion did in the same time, caeteris paribus, dispatch a greater length than
the swifter, though out of concurse the swifter motion did dispatch a greater
length than the slower* Now either of these three, much more all of them, does
wholly destroy the strength of your demonstration. Yet they that desire to see
more may consult what I said before.

The ninteenth Article does not pretend to any other strength than that of the
eighteenth. And therefore falls with it.

The twentieth Article I did before prove to be false and frivolous. (it
depended upon Chap. 14. Art. 15. Corol. 3. which Corrollary I have there
consuted.) You say nothing by way of vindication of what I excepted against;
only pass your word for it, that it is true. Yet withal confess, there is a
great error; and that error say I, though there were nothing else, would make
that article unsound. But this article you say, was never published (yet it is
as good as most of those that were in this Chapter; for i will undertake for it,
there he above a dozen worse;) and therefore it was inhumanly done, you say, to
take notice of it. Truly, if the proposition were a good proposition, as you
say it was. J think J did you a courtesy to publish it for you, that you may
have the credit of it; yet J should not have done it, had it not been public
before. If you would not have it taken notice of, you should have taken care
not to send it abroad. For it has been commonly sold with the rest of your
book (to many more persons beside my self;) they that would, might tear it
out (as some did) and they that would, might keep it in, as J did.

Well, (be the number of articles 20, or be they 19,) before the sixth there
was none sound, (but either in whole or in part unsound,) and from the eighth
there has been none sound; therefore there have not been above three sound at
the most. Quod erat demonstrandum.

SECT. XI. Concerning his 17. Chapter.
THE Reader by this time may perhaps be weary, as well as J; and think it but
dull work to busy himself upon such an inquiry, where the result is but this,
That M. Hobbs his Geometry is nothing worth; which (if he had any himself) he
knew before. To save him therefore, and myself the labor, we will make quicker
work in what is behind.

In the 17. Chapter, some of the Propositions are true and good; (and truly I
wondered at first where you had them, but since I know:) But the demonstrations
are foolish and ridiculous. The Propositions therefore are your own (you know
where you stole them;) and the Demonstrations are of your own making; (for
there be scarce such to be found any where else.)

What you say to the first Article comes to this result; that I should say, It
is well known, that, in Proportion, Double is one thing, and Duplicate another.
And you ask, To whom it is known? (it seems it was not known to you:) And tell
us, that they are words that signify the same thing; and, that they differ (in
what subject soever) you never heard till now. It Is very possible that this may
be true; that you did never know the difference between those two words till I
taught you. (But this was your ignorance not my fault.) But now, you know there
is a difference. And therefore (contrary to what you had affirmed in the Latin)
you tell us in your English, Chap. 13. art. 16. p. 121. l. 7. etc. and p. 122.
l. 26. etc. that the proportion of 4 to 1, to that 4 to 2 etc. is not only
Duplicate, but also double or twice as great. But on the contrary, the
proportion of 1 to 4, to that of 1 to 2, etc. though it be duplicate, it is not
the double, or twice as great, but contrarily the half of it; and that of 1 to
2, to that of 1 to 4, etc. is Double you say, and yet not duplicate but
subduplicate. Now if you never heard of such a difference till you heard it
from me, then you are indebted to me for that piece of knowledge: and have no
reason to quarrel with me, as you use to do, for saying you did not
understand what was duplicate and subduplicate proportion; for you confess you
did not, but took it to be the same with double and subduple, and never heard
that they did differ till now.

In the second Article, because it is fundamental to those that follow, I took
the pains first to show how unhandsomely the proposition and (...) were
contrived; and then to shatter your demonstration all to pieces; and showed it
to be as simple a thing as ever was put together, (unless by you, or some such
like your self.)

As to the first, you tell us, that, to proceed which way you pleased was in
your own choice. And I take that for a sufficient answer. You did it, as well
as you could; and they that can do better may.

As to the Demonstration, you keep a vapouring (nothing to the purpose,) as if
it were a good demonstration. and not confuted. Yet, when you have done,
(because you knew it to be naught) you leave it quite out in the English, and
give us another (as bad) in stead of it. That is, you confess the charge. Your
fundamental Proposition was not demonstrated; and so this whole chapter comes
to nothing.

But however, it is to be hoped, that your new demonstration is a good one; is
it not? No, It Is as bad as the other. Only it is not so long: And of a bad
thing, (you know,) the less the better. It begins thus, The proportion of the
complement BEFCD, (fig. 1.) to the deficient figure ABEFC, is all the
proportions of DB to OE, and DB to QF, and of all the lines parallel to DB,
terminated in the line BEFC, to all the parallells to AB terminated in the same
points of the line BEFC. Now for this (besides that it is a piece of nonsense)
you send us for proof to the second Article of the 15. Chapter, where there is
nothing at all to that purpose. Then you go on. And seeing the proportion of DB
to OE, and of DB to QF, etc, are every where triplicate to the proportion of AB
to GE, and of AB to HF etc. the proportions of HF to AB, and of GE to AB, etc.
are triplicate (no, but subtriplicate) of the proportions of QF to DB, and of
OE to DB etc. Now this is but the same Bull that has been baited fo often.
viz. because the diameters (DB, OE, QF, etc. that is CA, CG, CH,) are in the
triplicate proportion of the Ordinates (AB, GE, HF,) therefore these Ordinates
are in the triplicate proportion of those diameters. You might as well have
said, seeing that 6 is the triple of two therefore 2 is the triple of 6. But
let us hear the rest, for there is not much behind.) And therefore the deficient
fig. ABEFC, which is the aggregate of all the lines HF, GE, AB, etc. is triple
to the complement BEFCD, made of all the lines QF, OE, DB, etc. A very good
consequence! Because the Ordinates are in triplicate proportion to the
diameters (yet that is false too, for they are in subtriplicate) therefore the
figure is triple to its complement? But how do you prove this consequence?
Nay, not a word of proof. We must take your word for it. Well then, of this
last Enthymem, (which was directly to have concluded the question,) the
Antecedent is false* and the consequence at lest not proved ( I might have said
false also, for so it is.) And this is your new demonstration.

The third article, I said, falls with the second; for having no other
foundation but that, (nor do you pretend to other) that being undemonstrated
(for your former demonstration your self have thrown away, and your new one we
have now shown to be nothing worth,) this must be undemonstrated too.

In the fourth Article, you attempt the drawing of these Curve lines, by point;
and to that purpose require the finding of as many mean proportionalls as one
will, (like as you had before done Cap. 16. 6. 16. for the finding out an
arbitrary line to be taken at pleasure: Which I told you was simply done,
because that without such mean proportionalls, (that is, without the effection
of solid and Lineary problems,) it might have been done by the Geometry of
Plains, that is with Rule and Compass. And I showed you how. To which you have
nothing to reply, but, that I made use of one of your figures (to save my self
the labor of cutting a new one,) that is, I made better use of your figure
then you could do.

The fifth proposition (beside that it is built upon the second, and therefore
falls with it,) is inferred only from the Corrollary of the 28. article of the
13. Chapter, (nor does your English produce any other proof,) where, said I,
there is not a word to that purpose. And you confess it.

The 6, 7, 8, and 9. Art. do not pretend to other foundation than the second;
and therefore till that be proved, fall with it.

The 10. Article is a sad one, as may be seen by what I did object against it,
as you say, for almost three leaves together. One fault amongst the rest you
take notice of, and you would have your Reader think that is all; though there
be above twenty more. It Is this, Because (in fig. 6.) B C is to BF for so your
words are, though your Lesson mis-recite them, in triplicate proportion of CD,
to FE; therefore, inverting, FE, to CD is in triplicate proportion of BF to CB.
And do you not take this to be a fault? No, you say, this I did object then
(Yes and do so still, as absurd enough:) But now, you say, you have taught me;
(what a hard hap have I, that I cannot learn;) That of three quantities, (you
should rather have taken four; but however three shall serve for this turn,)
beginning at the lest, (suppose 1, 2, 8,) if the third to the first (8 to 1) be
in triplicate proportion of the second to the first (of 2 to 1) also, by
conversion, the first to the second (1 to 2) shall be in triplicate proportion
of the first to the third, of 1 to 8. This is that you would have had me
learn. But, good Sir, you have forgotten that, since that time, you have
unlearned it your self. For your 16. artic. of Chap. 13. as it now stands
corrected in the English, teaches us another doctrine; viz. that if 1, 2, 4,
8, be continually proportional, 1 to 8 shall be as well triplicate (though
not bigger) of 1 to 2, (not this triplicate of that,) as 8 to 1 is of 2 to 1.
The case is now altered from what it was in the Latin. And therefore you are
quite in a wrong box, when, in your English, you cite Chapt. 13. Art. 16, to
patronize this absurdity. For in so doing you do but cut your own throat. You
must now learn to sing another song; called Palinodia. Well, this is one of
the faults of this article. They that have a mind to see the rest of them, may
consult what I said before; where I have noted a parcel of two dozen.

In the 11. Article, you do but undertake to demonstrate a proposition of
Archimedes. Your demonstration (besides that it depends upon the second Article
which is yet undemonstrated) is otherwise also faulty, as I then told you. And
therefore to say, that I allow this to be demonstrated, if your second bad been
demonstrated; is an untruth. For I told you then, that your manner of inferring
this from that, is very absurd.

The 12 Article (like all the rest, since the second, beside their other
faults,) depends upon the second; and therefore, till that be demonstrated,
this must fall with it.

In the 13. Art. you undertake to demonstrate this Proposition of Archimedes;
that the Superficies of any portion of a Sphere, is equal to that circle,
whose Radius is a straight line drawn from the pole of the portion to the
circumference of its base. Your demonstration, I said, was of no force; but
might as well be applied to a portion of any Conoeid, Parabolicall,
Hyperbolicall, Ellipticall, or any other, as to the portion of a sphere. By the
truth of this, say you, let any man judge of your and my Geometry. Content, It Is
but transcribing your demonstration; and inserting the words Conoeid, Vertex,
section by the Axis, etc. where you have Sphere, Pole, great Circle etc. which
terms: in the Conoeid, answer to those in the Sphere, and the work is done.

Let BAC, (in the seventh figure,) be a portion of a sphere, or Conoeid,
Parabolicall, Hyperbolicall, Ellipticall, etc. whose Axis is AE, and whose
basis is BC; and let AB be the straight line drawn from the Pole, or vertex, A,
to the base in B: and let AD, equal to AB, touch the Great circle, (or Section
made by a plain passing through the Axis of the Conoeid,) BAC, in the Pole, or
vertex, A. It is to be proved that a Circle made by the Radius AD, is equal to
the superficies of the portion BAC.

Let the plain AEBD be understood to make a revolution about the Axis AE. And
it is manifest, that, by the straight line AD, a circle will be described; and,
by the Arch, or Section, AB, the superficies of a Sphere, or Conoeid mentioned;
and lastly, by the subtense AB, the superficies of a right Cone.

Now, seeing both the straight line AB, and the Arch or Section AB, make one
and the same revolution; and both of them have the same extreme points A and B:
The cause why the Sphericall or Conoeidicall Superficies which is made by the
Arch or Section, is greater then the Conicall superficies which is made by the
subtense, is, that AB the Arch or Section, is greater then AB the subtense: And
the cause why it is greater, consists in this, that although they be both drawn
from A to B, yet the subtense is drawn straight, but the arch or Section
angularly; namely, according to that angle which the arch or Section makes with
the Subtense; which angle is equal to the angle DAB. For the Angle of Contact,
whether of Circles or other crooked lines, adds nothing to the angle at the
segment: as has been shown, as to Circles, in the 14 Chapter of the 16
article: and as to all other crooked lines, Lesson 3. page 28. lin. ult.
Wherefore the magnitude of the angle DAB, is the cause why the superficies of
the portion described by the Arch or Section AB, is greater than the
superficies of the right Cone described by the Subtense AB.

Again, the cause why the Circle described by the tangent AD, is greater then
the superficies of the right Cone described by the subtense AB,
(notwithstanding that the Tangent and Subtense are equal, and both moved round
in the same time,) is this, that AD stands at right angles to the axis, but AB
obliquely; which obliquity consists in the same angle: DAB.

Seeing therefore that the quantity of the angle DAB, is that which makes the
excess both of the Superficies of the Portion, and of the Circle made by the
Radius AD, above the superficies of the Right Cone described by the Subtense
AB: It follows, that both the Superficies of the Portion, and that of the
Circle, do equally exceed the Superficies of the Cone. Wherefore the Circle
made by AD or AB, and the Sphericall or Conoeidicall Superficies made by the
arch or Section AB, are equal to one another. Which was to be proved.

Show me now if you can, (for you have pawned all your Geometry, upon this one
issue,) where the Demonstration halts more on my part then it does on yours?
Or, where is it, that it does not as strongly proceed in the case of any
Conoeid, as of a Sphere? All that you can think of by way of exception (and you
have had time to think on it ever since I wrote last,) amounts to no more but
this (which yet is nothing to the purpose) you ask, In case the crooked line
AB, were not the arch of a Circle, whether do I think, that the angles which it
makes with the Subtense AB, at the points A and B, must needs be equal? I say,
that (its possible, that in some cases, it may be so; and J could for a need,
show you where; and therefore, at least as to those cases, you are clearly
gone; for you had nothing else to say for your self; but) this is nothing at
all to the purpose whether they be or no; For the angle at B, what ever it be,
comes not into consideration at all; nor is so much as once named in all the
demonstration; So that its equality or inequallity, with that at A, makes
nothing at all to the business. And therefore your exception is not worth a
straw. Think of a better against the next time; or else all your Geometry is
forfeited. And they are like to have a great purchase that get it, are they not?

At the 14. Article; (having before, Art. 4. undertook to teach the way of
drawing and continuing those curve lines, by points: and directed us (for the
word require does not please you) for that end to take mean proportionalls;)
you now tell us how that may be done; viz. by these curve lines first drawn. I
asked, whether this were not to commit a circle? You tell me, No. But mean
while take no notice of that which was the main objection; viz. That this
constructio^ of yours was but going about the bush; for, upon supposition that
we had those lines already drawn, the finding of mean proportionalls by them
might be performed with much more ease than the way you take. And I showed you,
How.

But that which sticks most in your stomach, is a clause in the close of this
Chap. I told you that some considerable Propositions of this Chapter (and I
could have told you which) were true, (though you had missed in your
demonstration,) however you came by them. But that I was confident they were
none of your own. (and you know, I guessed right.) And least you should think I
dealt unworthily to intimate that you had them elsewhere: unless I could show
you where: I told you, that I did no worse than those that a while before, had
hanged a man for stealing a horse from an unknown person. There was evidence
enough that the horse was stolen; though they did not know from whom. So,
though I knew not whence you had taken them, yet I have ground enough to judge
they were not your own. And since that time, (and before that book was fully
printed,) I found whence you had them; namely out of Mersennus, (as I told you
then page 132, 133, 134.) And to take them out of Mersennus, was all one as to
rob a Carrier; for there were at lest three men had right to the goods, (and
some of them if they had been asked, would scarce have given way that you
should publish their inventions in your own name,) Des Chartes, Fermat, and
Robervall: And perhaps a fourth had as much right as any one of these; and that
is Cavallerio, who (though, I then did not know it) has (contrary to what you
affirm, that they were never demonstrated by any but you self; and that as
wisely as one could wish:) demonstrated those propositions in a Tractate of his
De usu, Indivisibilium in potestatibus Cossicis. But though the thing be true
enough and you cannot deny it, yet you do not like the Comparison. And would
have me consider, who it was, was hanged upon Hamans Gallows? And truly J could
tell you that too, for a need. The first letter of his name was H. But enough
of this.

SECT. XII. Concerning his 18, 19, 20. Chapters.
WELL! We have made pretty quick work with the 17 Chapter. With the 18 we shall
be yet quicker.

The charge against this Chapter, was, that it was all false. And, you confess
it. Not one true Article in the whole.

But, you tell us, in the English it is all well. It is now so corrected in the
English as that I shall not be able (if I can sufficiently imagine motion, that
is, if I can be giddy enough,) to reprehend. Very well! ('It Is a good hearing
when men grow better.) They that have a mind to believe it, may: I am not bound
to undeceive them. We have had experience all along, that you have a special
knack at mending. (as sour Ale does in summer.) You grant that I have truly
demonstrated, what was before, to be all false. You would have me do so again,
would you? Very good! When I have nothing else to do I Will consider of it. They
that think it worth the while, may take the pains, to examine it a second time.
For my part, I think I have bestowed as much pains upon it already, as it
deserves, (and somewhat more:) And all the amendment that I find, is this* that
whereas before we had three false articles, now we have but two; and the
number of true ones, just as many as we had before, viz. never a one.

In the 19 Chapter there were faults enough in conscience (for a matter of no
greater difficulty than that was;) I noted some of them (and left the Reader to
pick up the rest:) Two or three of the lighter touches, (about method,) you
take notice of, and make a business to justify or excuse them; and the main
exceptions (as you use to do) you pass over with a light touch, and a way.

I told you, in the beginning of it, that your Chapters hang together like a
rope of sand. And it is true enough, for they have no connection at all. There
are so few hooked atoms, that a man cannot tell how to tacke them together.

Next, that having in your 24 Chapter undertaken to show us, what is the Angle
of Incidence; and, what, the Angle of Reflection; and, that the Angles of
Incidence and of Reflection are equal: you do, in pursuance of that assertion,
in this 19 chapter, show us the consequences thereof. Upon this I asked; why
not, either this after that; or that before this? You tell me, that (think I
what I will,) you think that method still the best; (to set the Cart before the
Horse.) Then you tell us, that I say, you define not here. (Nay that is false, I
did not say so; and it is not the first time that I have taken you tripping in
this kind;) but many Chapters after, (that I said, I do confess; and you know
it is true;) what an Angle of Incidence, and what an Angle of Reflection is. And
then, talk against have, and oversight. But if your self had not been over
hasty, (or rather wilfully perverted my words,) you might have seen (and you
know it well enough) that I blamed you here, and two or three times before, not
so much for using words, before you had defined them (for this fault, as J
remember, J mentioned but once; and there you took it patiently:) but for
defining words so long after you had used them. For when words, for two or
three chapters together, have been supposed, and frequently so used, as of
known signification, (whether they had been before defined, or not,) it is
ridiculous for a Mathen atician to come dropping in with definitions of them at
latter end, (as your fashion is,) like mustard after meat. For these
definitions should either have come in due time, or else not at all.

The two first Articles are very trivial. And yet (as if it were impossible
for you, be the way never so plain, not to stumble) there wants, at least in
the English, a determination in the second Corollary; and yet (as if that were
to make amends for the other) there is one too much. If upon any point (say you)
between B and D, fig. 2. (yes, or any where else upon the same straight line,
produced either way, though not between those points,) there fall (from the
point A, you should have said,) a straight line, as AC, whose reflected line is
CH, this also produced beyond C, will fall upon F. Here, I say, that limitation
between B and D, is redundant; and that from the point A, is wanting. For
though C. be taken at pleasure, yet A is not, And if it come not from A, its
reflex will not come at F.

The third, fourth, and fifth Articles, I told you were false. (viz. The
Propositions affirm that universally, which holds true but in some particular
case. And the demonstrations, proceed ex falsis suppositis, supposing that to
be, which is not; or is, in many cases, impossible.) And this you confess to
be true; but take it unkindly to be told of it. You have endeavored a little
to patch up the business in the English, but not so as to hold water. For they
are yet liable to diverse exceptions if it were worth the while to unravell them.

The eight Article was ridiculous enough. It makes a huge business to no
purpose. (You spend the best part of two pages to resolve a Problem which might
as well have been dispatched in two lines.) And you do as good as confess it
All you say against it, is but this, that Adduco is not Latin for to Bring.

The Twent^eth Chapter will be soon dispatched. This Chap. all but the two last
Art. is wholly new, as it is now in the English: that which you had before in
the Latin, being wholly routed and beat out the field* (and your Problematice
dictum into the bargain.) We had in your Latin three attempts for the squaring
of a circle; but they all came to naught, and are now vanished. In your Lesson,
you give us a fourth; endeavoring to new mould and rally one of the former,
which I had before routed; And pretend to vindicate it from the exceptions I
had made to it: But not an answer to any one of them; nor is this new attempt
better than the former, but retains most of the fundamental errors therein;
And when you have all done, you cashier it your self and dare not insist upon
it. Beside this, you have in your English, yet three attempts more; and much a
do there is with long and perplexed figures to no purpose. They are by your
own confession but Aggressions; and you do not your self believe them to be
exact. You do not, I suppose, think it worth the while for me to confute them,
(or if you do I do not;) for to what purpose? That you have attempted it,
(seven times over,) no man can deny; That your attempts come to nothing, your
self confess; Only, you think it convenient to let the Reader know what
pains you have taken to no purpose. For my part, J do not intend to follow
you in all your new freakes: nor think my self engaged to confute false
quadratures as often as you shall make them. I have done enough already, to let
the world see, how little it is that you understand in Geometry, and how much
they deceive them selves who expect any great matter from you.

Your two last Articles stand as they were, and so does my answer to them. Your
attempt of finding a straight line equal to a Spirall; is but an attempt, as
well as that of squaring a Circle. Your rant at Analyticks, with which you
conclude it, (like dogs barking at the Moon,) hurts no body but your self.
That Art will live when you be dead; and those that know it, will not think it
ever a whit the worse for your not understanding it, or railing at it.

The following Chapters I did let alone before, and so shall do now: not
because J like them better than those that went before, or think the matter
therein to be true; but because I have done enough already. I told you then,
that much of them was taken out of others, (and I told you from whence, and you
cannot deny it;) And that much was false. Now this, (because I did not think it
worth while to insist upon a particular confutation,) you say, is a Lie; yet,
you know that Tacquet has confuted much of it; and, to so good purpose, as
that beside other alterations, you have been fain, you tell us, to make the
twenty-fourth Chapter almost all new. But whether you have made it better or
no, than it was before, they that have a mind thereto, may, if they please,
take the pains to examine. SECT. IV. fig. 1. fig. 2.


SECT. V.

CAP: XIV fig. 6. fig. 7


Cap. XVI. fig. ^. fig. 2. fig^ 6. fig. 8. fig. 11.


CAP. XVII. fig. ^. fig. 6. fig. 7.


Place this at the end



SECT. XIII. Concerning his last Lesson.
YOur last Lesson, little concerns me; but is directed mainly against my
Reverend and Learned Colleague; Who has already answered to it as much as he
thinks it does deserve, yet a touch or two there is wherein I am concerned.

You had, in your Latin, a railing rant against Vindex, (and though you
thought fit to (...) of that, 20 Chapter, yet placuit ea stare quae pertinent
ad Vindicem. But in the English that is expunged also; And now he is left to
learn (...), out of your Lessons.) And in order to this, J (...) in my
Elenchus, (p. (...) 117. 122.) recited verbatim out of his Vindiciae, those
(...), which, it seems, stuck* so much in your stomach; concerning M. Warners
papers; that the Reader might see how small a matter would put you into a rage.
(Which you knew well enough, and can upon no pretense plead ignorance of it.
For it is the very same, which both the^^ (...) in your Lessons, you refer
to, and rant at.) But (...) forsooth, upon this, (according to your usual
honesty) you would have your Reader believe, that J had there related some
personal discourse, which Vindex, creeping into your company unknown, had
sometime had with you: and then rant at the incivility of such a carriage, and
(with a fling at Moranus into the bargain) rail a^ it for almost two whole
pages together, p. 57, 58, 59. Wherein, whether your Civility or Honesty, be
more com^^cuous, let the Reader judge.

In like manner, because J cited a passage concerning Rohervall, out of
Mersen^^, you suspect, p. 59. that somebody, you know not who, has most
magnanimously interpreted to me in (...) d^sgrace, what passed between you and
him in the Cloister of the Convent.

Which is a suspicion like to that of p. 57. that some of our Philosophers that
were at Paris at the same time with you, may perhaps have accused you to us of
bragging or ostentation. As though there were not ground enough in your
writings, to evidence that, to any man, without any such relation. But, mean
while, J wonder how you behaved your self at Paris, that you should be so
Jealous least somebody there should tell tales.

And all this is but a little to disguise the business, as if I had not by
what is extant in Print, in those places cited out of Mersennus (Hydraulic.
prop. 25 Cor. 2. Ballistic. prop. 32, Mechanic. praef. punct. 3. and 4. Reflex.
Physico-Math. cap. 1: art. 5.) made it evident, that all or most of what was
worth any thing in your Mathematics, was manifestly stolen from Gasilaeo,
Robervall, Cartesius, Fermat, etc And (...) them as I perceive by somewhat but
now come to (...) him, does not stick to call you (...), for so doing: and, if
some of (...) were (...) doubt* not but they would be ready enough to do the
like (...)*

Now this is all, ((...) what was sufficiently (...) at before) that in this
(...) concerns me. And, for what concerns my (...), you have already from
himself received sufficient (...).

I know now no exception remaining, unless like his, who putting a Bond in
suit when the Defendant made proof of Payment* replied, (...) the Condition of
the Obligation was that he should (...), Satisfy, and Pay; and therefore,
though the (...) all paid, yet forasmuch the Plaintiff was not (...) the Bond
was forfeit. Now J hope the Reader can bear witness, that you have been, by
this time, sufficiently Paid; and, J hope, Satisfied; But, if we must never
have done till you be Contented, I am afraid we shall dye in your debt.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 5. language, p. 2. l. 24. learn. p. 5. l. 32. dele quod. p. 6. l.
32. finding. p. 9. l. 13. suffer your. p. 17. l. 2^. Plin. p. 18. l 24. dos. p.
19. l. 24. sumere. p. 38. l 12. second. p. 45. l. ult. 13. p. 46. l. 31. 4 1.
p. 52. l, 35. not at all, p. 57. l. 22. for two. p. 61. l. 35. art. 3. p. 64.
l. 39. proportion. p. 66. l. 34. art. 5. p. 67. l. 1. proportion. ibid. l. 17.
art. 3. p. 68. l. 25. that Greater. p. 71, l. 33, half the. p. 72. l. 39.
proposition. p. 75, l. pen. and. p. 78, l. 23, the points. p. 80, l. 3. one
another. p. 92, l. 36., or. p. 95, l. 13. of the 5^ ibid. l. 22. add, as the
product of one Impetus into its Time, to the product of the other Impetus into
its Time. p. 97, l. 13. thought. ibid. l. 18. of celerity. p. 99, l. 13, it be.
p. 103. l. 32, proposition. p. 106, l. 2, the rest. p. 107, l. 6, that Table.
ibid. l. 13, and 3 is more. ibid. l. 32, not to be had*


