The Sermon of HENRY WALKER, IRONMONGER: Having been twice Apprehended, for
Writing seditious Pamphlets.

Being both times rescued out of the Hands of the Officers.

And now preaches up and down the City.

Matthew, cap. 7. ver. 13.14. Enter ye in at the strait Gate, for wide is the
Gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which
go in thereat.

Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads unto life, and
few there be that find it.

LONDON, Printed for I. C. 1642.

Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.


THe Question formerly examined, being conceived (as by some of judgment it
is) to be not only needlessely curious, but also impiously carping, and
captious; herein, as in a clear mirror, we may behold discovered the humors
that have ever been in all ages amongst the people of the World; and in
special how, This great and highest point of truth, touching the matter and
means of salvation, is entertained, eith with carping impiety, or with
dangerous curiosity.

For so, to show that this caviller, and his question, be not without fellows
as it is most certain, that no elder age of the World has wanted them, who, in
the pride of their rebellious and unbelieving hearts, have been bold to make a
mock, and to move cavil against the Sacred truth of God, in his Word
revealed, which easily might be instanced, even from the days of Adam,
downward until Christ: so, that we may not think such cavillers, by Christ's
coming, to be together with the Heathen Oracles, quite put to silence* Saint
Peter has not spared to forewarne us of the coming in the last days of such
mockers; who walking after their own lusts, shall ask, where is the promise of
the coming, and be ready to bring reason against it, as if there were no such
matter to be looked for.

And accordingly, how easy, alas, is it, now adays, to find, and that
amongst such as profess themselves worshippers of the true God in Christ, many
every where of captious, and contradicting spirits; who not only live the
life, but speak also the very language of Atheism, bewraying by rheir tongues,
their spite, and deep dislike against the truth of Christ, revealed in his
Word; specially in this very point of points, touching Man's salvation. Who if
they be called upon, according to the tenor of the Baptist, our Savior, and
his Apostles Doctrine, to repent, and believe the Gospel, to walk
circumspectly, as by a line, abandoning the fashions and courses of this
present World, and taking heed unto their ways, according to the Word, that so
they may be saved: what shall you hear from them straight, but questionings
and reasonings, such as this in our Text, uttering the foolishness of their
ignorantly profane hearts?

For (to give instance in some few of their cursed speakings) Then belike, will
they reply, there can none be saved but such as follow Sermons, which commonly
are not the most, and some of them as bad, as proud, covetous, and malicious,
as any whosoever. Or, what? if none can be saved, but such as will be so pure
forsooth, and holy, as your Preachers would have them; then God be merciful
unto us, for sure, but a few of many should be saved. And then; What then? why?
By this reckoning, you would make God not to be so strong, as the Devil: Or,
how can that be true, that God would have all men saved? For, though we be
sinners, yet, did not Christ die for all? Or, Is not God merciful, yea, his
mercy above all his works? Or, may we think that God made so many to condemn
them? Yea, and what? Predestined them of old unto it ere they were borne?
Indeed, says the Papisticall Atheist, Sir, I have heard Preachers preach of
Predestination; but me thinks, it is a very dangerous Doctrine, able to drive
men to despair. Or, What? can they tell who shall be saved, and who shall be
damned? Do they know Gods secrets? When, I marvel, were they in Heaven to
speak with God? Or, be not they men as well as others? And good, many of them,
no longer then whiles they are in the Pulpit? Well, we be sinners all, God
amend us; and then we shall, I doubt not, all at length come to Heaven.

I appeal herein, to the judgment of so many, as are able to discern, and
have had experience of any thing; whether these be not the questions and
reasonings, touching this maine point of salvation and damnation, of many of
all sorts, no better herein then very Atheists, who believing neither God, nor
his revealed Truth, would feign flatter themselves in a vain deluding hope;
that, Live how they list, and do what they please; Yet God is merciful; and
whenever a sinner shall repent, etc. and Christ dyed for all, and so for
them; and therefore, they doubt nothing but they shall be saved, as soon as the
best. Or, say, they be bad, yet they be not the worst in the World, there be as
bad as they; and, if the worst thereof befall them, that they do go to Hell,
yet they shall have fellows, and trust to make as good shift for themselves,
as shall some others.

But, (to leave these wretches, and their humors for a while may we not note
also another sort, not so impious, but of a more indifferent temper; who yet
through idle curiosity, are dangerously transported, from embracing the means
and way of salvation prescribed to make question how many, or what others shall
be saved? Yes verily; but who herein show themselves to be, what Saint Peter
would not have Christians to be, busy bodies or (or as the word originally
imports) as Bishops in another Diocese. As yet once, the same Saint Peter
seem to have been, when our Savior saying to him, Follow me; He replied
straight upon the sight of John with, Lord, what shall this man do? Right like
to whom in humor, may the most part of men be found, more curious in enquiring
what they need not, whether, or how many others shall be saved; then faithfully
careful, to do what God requires, that themselves may atttain salvation.

Nay herein how many are there, that agree in humor, with that Persian Prince;
who when by the French men, (...) government of Charles Martell, about the
year of Christ, 730. the Phrysians were compelled to embrace the Christian
faith, coming to be baptized, and having one foot in the water is recorded to
have turned about to the Bishop, desiring, first, to be resolved, whether more,
already departed, were in hell, or more in heaven; but receiving answer, that
the greater number were in hell, whither all must that would not be baptized,
and become Christians, refused thereupon to receive the Sacrament, pulling his
foot, out of the water, and professing that he would follow where the most were
gone before.

This you will perhaps say, was the desperate humor of an Infidel, that knew
not God: Howbeit, would God he had not left behind him, even amongst
Christians, many his fellows, all too kind hearted; good fellows in this
behalf; who though in words they will not for shame profess, yet prove by
their licentious life, and wicked deeds, that they had rather with the
multitude, though wandering along to hell, then with the lesser, but far wiser
company, to go straight to heaven, curiously enquiring, as here this companion,
touching the number of them thall be saved, how great or small it is; wishing
in heart, and hoping it will be great, that so they might shuffle in, amongst
the multitude; but not caring truly to learn, or when they are directed,
obediently to follow, and walk in that path, which will, though it be narrow,
lead them unto life.

The second main part: our Saviors Answer: And first what is -- employed that
but few, are to be saved.
THe bad Humors of the world mentioned, and in part met withal, being
hereafter farther to be censured; we may pass, from the consideration of the
Question and proceed to the Answer, which our blessed Savior, his Fathers
wisdom, has wisely, and to better puppose, framed, for direction, and
stirring up of so many, as seriously desire no enter into life: Strive to enter
in at the strait gate, for many, I say to you, will seek to enter in and shall
not be able.

Wherein we have two things to observe in general: First, is employed. viz. the
Resolution of the question moved touching the number of them that shall be
saved. Secondly what is expressed viz. an Exhortation, or counsel together
with a reason to enforce it, touching the manner of attaining unto salvation.

And first for the implying Resolution of the question, we may conceive our
Savior dealing here with this questioning companion, right, as Solomon
directs a wise man to deal with a fool; whiles he answers him not,
according to his foolishness, that is, not directly to his question as he
expected, lest so he might seem to approve it as a question pertinent, and
embolden him to further reply: and yet, according to his foolishness, he
answers him, that is, howsoever indirectly, yet fully to the point, that he
might not grow wise, as such Cock-brains will, if they be let alone, unanswered
in) his own conceit. For why? whiles here he gives warning, borh to him, and
all the rest, to strive and struggle and even sweat and wrestle as those do
that try Masteries (for from such violence is the word here borrowed) to enter
in, viz. into Heaven, by the strait and narrow gate, as the only door to
life, telling them, the more to stir them up to care, that Many will seek to
enter, if wishing, and willing would serve, who yet for want of earnest
violenec, shall be shut out: how does he not only imply an answer to the
question moved, that indeed, but a few, in comparison with the multitude, shall
be saved; but also to prevent all farther cavilling, yield withal a reason, to
the straitness of the gate, whereat therefore so many stick, why it it is so
few come to be saved.

From which resolution of the point, that which it has pleased our Savior to
reveal, we may be bold for our instruction to take notice of, touching the
counsel of Gods will in this particular, namely, that: -- They are but few,
the lesser number of mankind, that shall enter into heaven and be saved. --
For what in this answer Christ implies, we may see how elsewhere, he more
fully opens, making as it were, a comment upon this Text, in Math. 7.13.14.
Enter in at the strait gate: For it is the wide gate, and broad way, that
leads to destruction: and many there be that go in thereat: Because the gate
is strait, and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it.

FINIS.

