Brandy-Wine, IN THE HOLLANDERS INGRATITUDE.

BEING A serious Expostulation of an English Soldier with the Dutch: Wherein
he debateth with them of former kindness received from ENGLAND, And the Cause
of their base requital now, being so effascinated with Machivels Policies,
that they are foolishly charmed with the Magical Spells of MONARCHY, To
subvert their own fundamental Principles, that engage in a War against
England, to the ruin of her own Liberties.

By J. W. Musophilus and miles veritatis.

Bella per Aematheos plusquam Civilae camps,
Jusque datum sceleri, cammus Populu^^que potentem.
Lucan. Printed for T. F. M.D.C.LII.

Upon the DUTCH Quarrelling with ENGLAND.
What Hogen! what? In have thus all a-float?
Top, and Top-gallant, in thy Fishing-boat.
Me thinks, thy Quarrel, does not now arise
From Judgment, when both thine ears, and eyes,
Though have heard, and seen our English-armes, were spread
For thy defense, that when thou were even dead
With those fierce looks, Specke-Jan did cast at thee,
(Threatening to root up quite the Orange-tree.)
When with Mustachios starcht, he looked as big
As Don Quixot, and valued not a Fig
Thy Barnevelt, (had not our gallant VERE,
And most renowned SYDNEY, still been there
With thousands more brave English.) We still stood
Firm to thy Quarrel, sealing with our Blood
Thy vindication, when thou were so low,
In power and strength, that thou do chiefly owe
Thy State and fortunes, to those valiant hands,
That made thee Master of the Netherlands.
What alteration's this? That now thy Friends
Are odious grown? That had no other ends
Then make thee great, what is thy mind elate?
With Brandy-wine, since thou becam'st a State?
What is the cause, thou proudly do begin
To bristle thus against Us? Tell what sin,
What Trespass done against thee, have thou found
By the English now? Which makes thy rage abound
So much with rancour; that thy Boares awake
To fight against themselves, and parties take
With Monarchy, which long ere this had stretched
His bloody fingers ore thy back, and reached
Thy richest Jewel, had not our English Cross
Stood in his way, and forced him to his loss,
To leave his Plundering, that thy chiefest Town,
Had op't her gates, and to his glorious Crown
Given admittance, that with Dons would fill
Thy Garrisons, and scourge thee at his will.
And will thou prove such an ungrateful Friend
Thus to requite us basely now in the end?
J see thou will, and that the expense and Cost
Cast on a Dunghill, is consumed and lost.
And that that fabric sinkes, and cannot stand:
Whose weak foundation's reared upon the Sand.
Like to thy Friendship Hoghen! That never puts
More faith, then Spanto Croon, into thy guts.
If no more Faith, then Spanto Croon, is felt:
Then no more Fish, if thou deny'st thy Gelt.
To veil thy Top-sayle; thou disdain'st, but why?
Thou meanst to advance again the Progeny,
Of STVART'S Line, oh! that is brave J'le swear
To think that we should a dead Lion fear.
Or else for t'heare thy Belgic Lion rore:
By the English kept from him that sought to gore
His sides with sharpest Pikes, whose haughty rage,
Not all thy Wealth, nor Traffic, could assuage.
But that because DON's Spante Croon, might choke
Thee without Mustard, under the Spanish yoke,
He means to feed thee so, that thou may yield
Thy Freedoms up, and an His Palace at Madrid.
Escuriall build
At Ostend, or the Hague, when once his Grace
Should in thy Coasts, but deigne to show his face.
And grace thee with his Train of Spanish DONS:
Whose sight, would fright thee more then all his Guns.
When the English stood to back thee, who did bear
The stresse of Battle both in front and rear.
Sluice, Nuiport, Vtreight, and more Places too:
Can witness well, what the English there did do
For thine Advancement, when their ground did fail
T'afford them footing, yet they did not quail,
Nor did their Valor shrink, but fought it out,
Till their dispute was cleared of all the doubt.
The Blood we lost there, being of too great price;
Then for such Boares, to be a Sacrifice.
Thy ground too dull, and base, for to receive
Their Corpse, that did such brave Examples leave
Of Valor to the world, that thou can not
Ever forget (unless thou do turn Scot)
As now thou do express. We forward were
Upon thy Terms, all times t'engage, even there
Our richest Jewels, though thou be so base
To leave us in the same concluded Case.
What did thou mean then Hogen! Thus to brave
Us in our own Dominions? That but crave
A moderate Vicinitie, from thee:
That had our Blood, and Wealth to set thee free.
What means this new Quarrel, what debate
Can thou find out to vex our English State?
That thine is The Elder, count it so at home:
There Is no Succession, that shall give thee room
Upon our Seas, to dare us at our Doors,
And cut our Throats for kindness, on our shoares.
Wherefore durst roguish Trumpe, else once deny
To veil his Top? But that thou dare defy
Thine own security, t'awake their Spleen
That heretofore have thy preservers been,
To prove how thy Destroyers, when with Love
They courted thee, but all in vain to move
Thy Boarish Constitution; for thou know
No more Civility, then what thou owe
To thine own Gorge, on others still to feed,
Or else no Friendship keep, but hate the deed.
Of such persuasions, that might urge thee so;
To thine own good, and have per^akers too.
Durst Trumpe assume else Power to dispose
Thy Navy, but to prejudice thy Foes?
He durst not, unless Councels did Create
In him a Power, so to maintain thy State.
For sure his knavish head must either lie
At stake, or thou his doings justify.
What means thy Preparations? If so far
Thou be from wrong, to justify a War.
If this be like the kisses of a Friend,
J prithee tell, how shall embraces end?
Thou make thy Friends, thy Foes, that only be
But sufferers, and still involved with thee
In the same Cause, what is our Cross and Harp
Contemptible become? That thou so sharp,
And hot dispute, about the Sovereign Power
Over our Seas do urge, even to devour
Those Liberties, which with our Freedom's gained
With brandisht Swords so fiercely we maintained.
J know no reason for it, unless thou wilt take
Our Power from us, and for thine humor sake
Dispose of us at pleasure till we be
So recreant base to beg our State of thee.
What wrongs and injuries have we pall by,
That have been acted with thy Cruelty;
Evers to subvert our State and we forborne
To seek offense, although we justly scorn
Thine over-daring baseness, when w'espy
It over-ballanc't with base Peasantry.
Where is our Agent DORISLAVS? Now speak
But Truth, and then let all affection break:
Was he not basely Murdered, (for to increase
Thine Hatred) then when he was seeking Peace?
What was our ruin sought in him t'orethrow
Out Liberties? And with one private blow,
Through him to wound the body of our State,
That thou did prove his bold Assassinate.
J'm at a Stand to muse on it; but J see
Thy Brandy-wine, will make thee Snick and Snee.
Oh! What was then our guilt? When far remote
Thy ruder Boares; with Top-sayles all a-float,
Surpised our English Ships, and seized their goods,
Destroyed our Men, made havoc of their Bloods,
And this so sudden, that they did not know
Of an offense, nor whence thy spleen should grow?
How had we guilty been of so fierce rage
(Which lies unparralel'd through any Age)
When at Amboyna, (most inhumane part)
Thou kill'dst our Men, and kill'dst them too with Art?
With Rackes, and Tortures, thou did use them so:
That Innocent, they must be guilty too,
Of some foul Crime, nere thought on, oh! it is thus,
Thou durst be Cruel, yet not Conscious,
Of thine own Acts. But Hogen this will stick
Unto thy larded sides though, Phlegmatic.
And what revenge was sought? Our goodly King,
Would nere consent, in question once to bring
Those horrid Crimes, which yet aloud do cry
For Justice, on thy basest Treachery.
What do thou think to abuse us 'cause we sit
Patient, and suffer thine affronts, it is it
Makes thee so daring, and with surly brow
Confront our undertakings, or else how
Durst thou to deal so treacherously base,
As quarrel with us, in so known a Case?
To give us cause of an offense, and stand
Upon It, as though on the defensive hand.
Oh Hogen, Hogen! Have thou quite forgot
All former kindness, that remembrest not,
What homage thou have paid, when heretofore
Our Crosses still were welcome, to thy shore?
In any part of thy Dominions, when
They brought thee Succors and our Valiant men?
What friendship did thou show us, when our Foes
Found shelter in thy bosom, to disclose
Their horrid Plots, that else durst not been seen
Active therein, did not King CHARLES his Queen
Our Jewels pawn for Gelt, to buy those Arms;
Wherewith he wrought so great and manies harms?
On all occasions, still thy Towns have bin
As Sanctuaries, to take Traitors in.
What offices of Love, as heretofore
Were acted by thy base Ambassador
Betwixt the KING and PARLIAMENT, he will find,
That sees the Hogen of a Royal mind,
Inclined to Monarchy, but yet beware,
Thou do not put thy foot into a Snare.
Speck Jan insults, and turns his Whiskers up,
In hope thou wilt pledge him in a brim-full Cup
Of rich Canarie, laughs t'heare thy Train
Vive le Roy cry, PHILIP King of Spain,
Great Duke of Burgundy, till we shall take
Some of thy Towns, and such Intrenchments make,
That shall let in the Seas, and over-whelme
Thy Countries all, then who shall steer at Helm?
With a Cessation, he has dulled thy wit,
Which now has brought thee into a frantic fit,
For now thou mean, to Conjure on the Seas,
And play thy Prankes, thy Skippers all like Fleas,
Must in and out, and where it chances byte:
But yet for all their Skill, if BLAKE shoot right,
Let them beware their Bones, there are true Sons
Of valor in our Fleet, our English Gunnes
Will speak the truth, and Hogen thou may find
Such sport at Sea, that will perplex thy mind.
Recall thy Ships then, let thy surly Boares
Find other work, or seek out Foreign shoares,
Wait on Speck Jan, and on his Seaports keep
A careful Watch, or else he will fall a sleep.
Lay thy Design, his Plate-Fleet how to get:
For that will buy more Thread to mend thy Net.
And then, we will Farm thee out some Part oth'Seas;
That somewhat; may thy boiling Stomach ease:
But on such terms (good Hogen) that thou Pay
A Tribute, then be sure thou keep thy Day.
Else thou may fish for Flounders, or stand by
And see us Feast upon thine Herring Pie.
Go lard thy sides with Bacon, and then tell
If Boarre in thy Dish would not do well.
Say it is much good and then we will send thee Beer
To bouze, and frolic, with thy much good cheer.
Post-hac majora canemus. LVCANVS junior.

FJNJS.

