THE Royal Entertainment of the KING, by the ROYALISTS OF HUNTINGTON.

Being a true Relation of the great Joy of that Town at his coming, with their
bountiful Gifts to welcome him thither.

Also his tender care of them expressed by Proclamation to keep them free from
Plunder; and his extraordinary Favor and Mercy in setting all the Prisoners
Free.

Together with the great Lamentation of the Inhabitants at his departure.

Sent in a Letter by a person of Credit, to a Gentleman of worth in LONDON.

London, Printed by John Macock. 1645.

THE True Copy of a Letter Sent by one of Credit, to a Gentleman of worth in
LONDON.
Sir,
I Gave you an Account yesterday, of some passages of the Kings flying Army in
these parts, and of his Advance from Huntington occasioned so suddenly as we
conceive partly by the near approach of the Scots horse and some others, who
are now upon the pursuit of him, and are crossed the Country by Northampton to
head him before he goes too far Westward; there also joined from Warwick,
Stafford, Northamton, and Newport, the last night about 1000. horse, who were
in his Van and hope to halt him till the Scots come nearer; I came with some
other friends this Afternoon to Huntington, where we found the whole Town,
formerly notorious for malignancy, turned quite round in the space of three
days: In which I think good to give you likewise some further account.

His Majesty on Sabbath day about five a Clock in the Afternoon entered the
Town; and with much complementall hatting and bowing saluted all his good
friends as he rode through the streets, who was entertained by them with
reciprocal expessions of Joy, and such Acclamations and Whoopings, as have not
been heard in place.

The Mayor of Huntington, and two Bailiffes of Godmanchester a town thereunto
adjoining, and their brethren presently, as a further acknowledgement of their
delight to see him, taxed the said Towns at 5. shil. 10. shil. 15. shil. a
man, (mean men) and others at far higher rates, and presented his Majesty
therewith in Lump; which Mayor, Bailiffes, and 43. others of his brethren
[most Royalists] for their loving expression, are carried Prisoners along with
the Army; as also many others both Townsmen and others fetch out of the
Country, [and that known friends to them] to ransom themselves by money;
being set on their heads from 20. l. to 300. l. a piece. Presently after the K.
came in, proclamation was made: That on pain of death no Soldier should
plunder, and that full satisfaction should be made to any who complained of
such grievances; To put it to trial; no sooner was it made, but they fell to
plunder, carrying out of diverse shops and houses, 3. and 4. loads of goods and
wares a piece, amongst many, Mr. Fulwood an Apothecary, and the two M. Kings,
Woollen Drapers can witness it truth, not leaving them one bitt of
householdstuffe in their houses, or wares in their shops; all which they carry
along with them in their march. Every house was billited, though never so poor,
some 20, or 30. in a house, who was by special order to provide both horse
meat and man's meat, and XII pence a day to each Soldier to spend, which was
duly paid, though the poor creatures [by fearful oaths and God dammees to
be pistoled] presently were forced to borrow from house to house as many scores
did; and this was general through the town: our At the Angel in Godmanch.
Inkeeper that you know a strong Royalist where Major Mountain quarterd, made
provision for him and 40. more, of the best he could get, and that in plenty;
the first supper they drunk 3. l. in wine; his men fetching it out by
paile-fulls, and freely bidden so to do by the owner, and welcome all the
while; yet for two days together the poor Man walked in hourly danger of his
life, upon their pretense of not serviceablenesse enough to them; and at their
parting, after almost 6. score pound eaten and drunk by horse and man; forced
him to borrow 42. shil. to pay each Soldier XII. pence or else they would
carry him with them. Besides this he having but 10. sheep other soldiers fetch
in 8. of them, and eat them at other houses; the other 2. he was fain to give
2. of his own billiters 6. pence a piece to fetch them into his house to be
killed for them, [in reguard all his own people were busie] which they
accordingly did, but when brought, forced the Inkeeper to give them 10. shil.
for the sheep claiming them as there own, now they had them in possession,
and glad he was so to please them, and presently dressed them for them. In many
quarters the soldiers fetch in sheep of other-mens and made the Landlord pay
them 4. and 5. shil. a piece for them to dress them for their use, or else
swore they would spit their children.

Many houses plundered to nothing, so that Tables, stools, bedsteads and other
combustiable things lie broken in every room, after the bedding, linen,
pewte, and portable things carried out; very many people are not left worth one
penny, and of their best friends: At their parting they drove away both
Huntington and Godman-chester herds of Kine, about 6. or 700. and made them pay
13. shil. 4. pence, for every head before they had them again.

They have left scarce a horse in either Town, nor in any other they Marched
thorough or near: so that there is lamentable complaining in the Country not
knowing how to get in their Corn yet out, both men and women being very busy
in fetching in that which lies near the Town, on their backs.

After great sums have been taxed and paid in by several Towns, all their
horses have been fetched away, and many persons plundered. One very tyrannical
expression toward an honest man in Godmanchester, of 73. years of age, one
John Robince, a man far in debt, of whom they demanded 300. l. not being able
to pay it, they tied lighted Matches between all his fingers, and burnt him
exceedingly, then tied his neck and heels together and so let him lie all night
in his Barn, after that they had so crushed him that the blood sprung out of
his nose and mouth to his almost strangling, the next morning they hung him up
by the heels on a balke, put lighted Match behind his ears, to his cheeks,
and to his privities, which brought the old man almost senseless. Yet
notwithstanding all this have they carried him away with them in great
extremity of pain, taking mournful leave of his wife and six children at the
door, by praying God to bless her and them, and desiring her to bring them up
in the fear of God and the like: and so without expectation of ever seeing each
other they departed: this is most true: as by the Testimony of all his
Neighbors, many whereof were witnesses to all passages. So his poor wife with
much grief and tears declared it to my self. Some others they put ropes
about their necks threatening to hang, if they provided not so much money as
they imposed. It is marvelous to see how all Malignants are changed in
Judgment: saying, they expected to have found the King and his Army Saints,
who have so often protested to maintain Religion and their Liberties; but they
swear now they are more like devils that come out of hell, then any sort of
men, and vowing while they are worth a groat to join with the Parliament to
suppress them.

They have knocked off all the Irons of all the Fellons, and other prisoners in
Huntington Goal, which were very many, and condemned men in Law, for gross
Robberies and Murders; who have all taken up Arms for his Majesty. This is
maintenance of Law.

Colonel Gerard in the presence of many honest men did here openly profess,
That the Parliament go about to take the Crown and kingdom from the King, but
they would take such a course before they had done with it, that it should be
left scarce worth having; and farther wished, That the estate which he had in
England was all of a fire, for things would never be well till it came to that.

The King, to please the Country, after many thousand pounds worth of goods
sent away without any check, and many men undone, caused lots to be cast
between four, who had pillaged a poor Glover in the Town, (one Gimber) of
about 5. shillings, and one to be hanged therefore: And at his departure gave
the Town and Country great thanks for their kind entertainment of him, and
forwardness to show their readiness to serve him, [which they will not be so
forward to do the next time he comes.] One Providence is observable, That
diverse of the best affected to the Parliament, in and about Huntington, have
escaped with least loss, and many of the Kings best friends have suffered most
in their persons and estates. You may Recommend these Observations to as many
as you please, being all truths in every particular; so I remain

Your Loving Friend, etc. J. W.
Hunt. 27. Aug. 1645. We are pursuing the Reere with 1000. horse and Dragoones,
from Cambridge and the Association.

I think it not amiss if you put this letter into some better form, and being
made shorter it be Printed speedily, to satisfy some Malignants with you. It
being in every particular true, and in have written.



Let the Reader take notice the Printer has not varied one word from the
Letter, but only added the Title Page.

Published according to Order.


