THE VICTORIOVS AND FORTUNATE PROCEEDINGS of Sir William Waller and his Forces
in in Wales, and other Places since they left MALMSBURY.

With the true manner of his taking Highnam and 150 Commanders, and Gentlemen,
and 1444 common Prisoners, well armed: also how he beat up Prince Maurice his
Quarters, brake through his Army, and came safe to Gloucester, from whence he sent
Lieutenant Colonel Massey, to take Teuksbury, which he has since effected.

As it was sent in a Letter from Sir William Waller, and Sir Arthur H^slerig,
and read in both Houses of Parliament* April 15. 1643.

Die Sabbathi, 15 Aprilis, 1643.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this Letter
shall be^ forthwith Printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamento.



LONDON: April 17. Printed for John Wright, in the Old-Bailey, 1643.

A Letter from Sir William Waller to both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gent.
WE hear it is not well taken, that you heard not of the taking of the Welsh at
Highnam, nor of the loss of Malmsbury, upon our coming to Gloucester, we
immediately sent, it seems many of our Letters miscary; For Malmsbury we
committed it to Sir Edward Hungerford, we left him not without Commanders, he
had two Sergeant Majors, able men, and the Companies of his own Regiment, and a
Company of Dragoones, with Aminunition, and two hundr^d Muskets, to put into
the Countrymens hands, that offered themselves very freely: We conceived that
Sir Edward Hungerfords power in the Country, with that strength, would easily
have defended that place: But for reasons best known to himself, he quitted
it: It was not for us to have stood long there, nor for the advancement of your
Service, for us to Garrison Towns, unless it is intended we shall leave the
Field: from Malmsbury, marching day and night, we came to Framelet ferry, and
having our Boats from Gloucester ready, we passed our Army over Severne, and
forthwith to Huntley, and so to Highnam, where before the Enemy had any
notice, we fell upon their backs, and in a short time, without the loss of
above two, they rendered up the place upon quarter, where we had one thousand
four hundred forty four common prisoners well armed, Commanders and Gentlemen
about one hundred and fifty, many of the chief of Wales and Herefordshire: we
then marched for Wales, the Welsh left their Garrisons, they quitted Newnam,
Rossebridge, Monmouth, Chepstow, we entered those Towns, very weary of the
Welsh ways over the mountains, and sensible of their wants: And hearing
Prince Maurice was near us on the one side, and the Lord Herbert with his
contrasted Garrisons on the other, and not being able to overtake the Lord
Herberts Forces, without hazard of the Rocks, we resolved for Gloucester through
Prince Maurices Army: And upon Monday at night, being the tenth of this
instant, having sent away our Ordinance and Baggage, with our Foot to guard it
over Wye, to Aust, and so on the far side the River for Gloucester, we
marched from Chepstow all night, for Prince Maurices Quarters with our Horses
and Dragoones. He quartered at Little Deane, and his Forces at Newnam, Michaell
Deane, and Rosse, the right time for beating up a quarter was past, before we
gained Newnam, Upon the first, all Arm at Newnam, away they hasted to Little
Deane, there we found their Foot in a body and their Horse on a Hill upon the
other side of the Town, their Foot came toward us, and having given one
volley of short, they retired, and our Dragoones following in order entered the
Town, so we had full possession of the Princes quarters, we stood about three
hours expecting their charge, the report being, they had vowed we should
never return.

Our design at this time was only to make our way through their Army, so
leaving a forlorn hope of Horse and Dragoones to keep the passage in the
Town, we marched in their sight toward Gloucester, when they saw us gone, they
came down from the Hill and fell hotly on our forlorn hope, and some few they
killed, and some they took, we conceive their loss was as great, that they
lost as many men, and two of very good quality; Last night we, came to
Gloucester, and sent forth Lieutenant Colonel, Massey for to take Tewksbury,
which this morning he did: There were eight Commanders, but we missed Colonel
Slater, he being gone last night to give Information at Oxford, that all Sir
William Wallers Forces were routed. We, doubt not but you will hear strange
reports, believe this, God has bin good unto us beyond our thoughts, the
taking and keeping Tewksbury, is of great consequence to these parts, Prince
Maurices d^signe of taking us in the Forest is now spoiled; And so have we the
Bridge he passed over, but he makes have, we fear he will find another before
we can give a stop, if not, we hope he may taste a little of Wales as well
as we have done: We writ you a letter for some Arms and Ammunition, we
earnestly beg they may be sent, and two hundred Horsmens swords of Kennets
making at Hownslow. We desire your praises of God, and your prayers for.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your faithful Servants William Waller, Arthur
Haslerig.

Gloucester, this 12. Of April. 1643. We are now marching ^ow^rds Tewksbury.



FINIS.

