A PANEGYRIC TO My LORD PROTECTOR, OF The present Greatness and joint Interest
of His Highness, and this Nation.

By E. W. Esquire.



May. 31 LONDON, Printed for RICHARD LOWNDES at the White Lion in S. Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-dore. 1655.

A PANEGYRIC TO My LORD PROTECTOR, OF The present Greatness and joint Interest
of His Highness, and this Nation.
WHilst with a strong, and yet a gentle hand
You bridle faction, and our hearts command,
Protect us from our selves, and from the Foe,
Make us unite, and make us conquer too.
Let partial spirits still aloud complain
Think themselves injured that they cannot Reign,
And own no liberty but where they may
Without control upon their fellows prey.
Above the waves as Neptune showed his face
To chide the winds, and save the Trojan Race;
So has your Highness, raised above the rest
Storms of Ambition tossing us represt.
Your drooping Country torn with Civil Hate,
Restored by you is made a Glorious State,
The seat of Empire where the Irish come,
And the unwilling Scotch to fetch their doom.
The Sea's our own, and now all Nations greet
With bending sails each Vessel of our Fleet.
Your power extends as far as winds can blow,
Or swelling sails upon the Globe may go.
Heaven that has placed this Island to give Law
To balance Europe, and her States to awe,
In this conjunction does on Britain smile,
The greatest Leader, and the greatest Isle.
Whether this Portion of the world were rent
By the rude Ocean from the Continent,
Or thus created, it was sure designed
To be the sacred refuge of mankind.
Hither the oppressed shall henceforth resort
Justice to crave, and succor at your Court,
And then your Highness, not for ours alone,
But for the Worlds Protector shall be known.
Fame swifter than your winged Navy flies
Through every Land that near the Ocean lies,
Sounding your name, and telling dreadful news
To all that Pyracie, and rapine use.
With such a Chief the meanest Nation blessed,
Might hope to lift her head above the rest.
What may be thought impossible to do,
By us, embraced by the Seas, and you,
Lord of the Worlds great Wast, the Ocean? we
Whole Forests send to Reign upon the Sea,
And every Coast may trouble or relieve,
But none can visit us without your leave.
Angels and we have this Prerogative,
That none can at our happy Seas arrive,
While we descend at pleasure to invade
The Bad with Vengeance, and the Good to aid.
Our little World the Image of the great,
Like that amidst the boundless Ocean set,
Of her own growth has all that Nature craves,
And all that is rare, as Tribute from the Waves.
As Egypt does not on the Clouds rely,
But to the Nile owes more than to the sky,
So what our Earth and what our Heaven denies,
Our ever-constant friend the Sea supplies.
The taste of hot Arabia's spice we know,
Free from the scorching Sun that makes it grow;
Without the Worm in Persian-silks we shine,
And without planting drink of every Vine.
To dig for Wealth we weary not our limbs,
Gold (though the heaviest mettle) hither swims:
Ours is the Harvest where the Indians mow,
We plough the deep, and reap what others sow.
Things of the noblest kind our own soil breeds;
Stout are our men, and warlike are our steeds;
Rome (though her Eagle through the world had flown)
Could never make this Island all her own.
Here the third Edward, and the black Prince too,
France Conquering Henry, flourisht; and now you,
For whom we stayed, as did the Trojan State
Till Alexander came to urge their Fate.
When for more Worlds the Macedonian cried,
He wist not Thetys in her Lap did hide
Another yet, a World reserved for you,
To make more great than that he did subdue.
He safely might old Troops to Battle lead
Against the unwarlike Persians, and the Mede,
Whose hasty flight did from a bloodlesse field,
More spoil than honor to the Victor yield.
A Race unconquered, by their Clyme made bold,
The Calcedonians, armed with want and cold,
Have by a Fate indulgent to your Name
Been from all Ages kept for you to tame.
Whom the Old Roman-wall so ill confined,
With a new chain of Garrisons you bind:
Here foraign Gold no more shall make them come,
Our English iron holds them fast at home.
They that henceforth must be content to know
No warmer Region than their hills of snow,
May blame the Sun, but must extol your Grace,
Which in our Senate has allowed them place.
Preferred by Conquest happily overthrown,
Falling you rise to be with us made one:
So kind Dictators made, when they came home,
Their vanquished foes, free Citizens of Rome.
Like favor find the Irish, with like fate
Advanced to be a Portion of our State,
While by your valor and your bounteous mind
Nations divided by the Sea are joined.
Holland, to gain your friendship is content
To be our Out guard on the Continent:
She from her fellow Provinces would go,
Rather than hazard to have you her foe.
In our late Fight, when Canons did diffuse,
Preventing Posts, the terror, and the news,
Our neighbour-Princes trembled at their rore,
But our Conjunction makes them tremble more.
Your never-failing Sword made War to cease,
And now you heal us with the Acts of Peace:
Our minds with bounty, and with awe engage,
Invite Affection, and restrain our Rage.
Less pleasure take brave minds in Battails won,
Then in restoring such as are undone;
Tygres have courage, and the rugged Bear,
But Man alone can whom he Conquers, spare.
To pardon, willing; and to punish, loath;
You strike with one hand, but you heal with both
Lifting up all that prostrate lie, you grieve
You cannot make the dead again to live.
When Fate or Error had our Age misled,
And ore this Nation such confusion spread:
The only cure which could from Heaven come down,
Was so much power and piety in one.
One whose extraction's from an Ancient Line,
Gives hope again that well born men may shine:
The meanest in your nature mild and good,
The noble rest secured in your blood.
Often have we wondered how you hid in peace,
Amid proportioned to such things as these,
How such a Ruling spirit you could restrain,
And practice first over your self to Reign.
Your private life did a just Pattern give
How Fathers, Husbands, Pious Sons should live,
Born to command, your princely virtues slept,
Like humble David's, while the flock he kept.
But when your troubled Country called you forth,
Your flaming courage, and your matchless worth,
Dazeling the eyes of all that did pretend
To fierce contention, gave a prosperous end.
Still as you rise the State exalted too,
Finds no Distemper whilst it is changed by you;
Changed like the worlds great scene, when without noise
The rising-Sun nights vulgar lights destroys.
Had you some Ages past this Race of Glory
Run with amazement we should read your story,
But living Virtue all Achievements past
Meets Envy still to grapple with at last.
This Caesar found, and this ungrateful Age
With losing him, went back to blood and rage.
Mistaken Brutus thought to break their Yoke,
But cut the bond of Union with that stroke.
That Sun once set, a thousand meaner Stars
Gave a dim Light to Violence and Wars,
To such a Tempest as now threatens all,
Did not your mighty Arm prevent the fall.
If Rome's great Senate could not weild that sword
Which of the Conquered world had made them Lord,
What hope had ours while yet their power was new
To rule victorious Armies but by you?
You that had taught them to subdue their Foes,
Could Order teach, and their high spirits compose,
To every Duty could their minds engage,
Provoke their courage, and command their rage.
So when a Lion shakes her dreadful main,
And angry grows; if he that first took pain
To tame his youth, approach the haughty beast,
He bends to him, but frights away the rest.
As the vexed world to find repose at last
It self into Augustus Arms did cast:
So England now, does with like toil oppressed,
Her weary head upon your bosom rest.
Then let the Muses with such notes as these
Instruct us what belongs unto our Peace;
Your Battails they hereafter shall indite,
And draw the Image of our Mars in fight.
Tell of Towns stormed, of Armies overcome,
Of mighty Kingdoms by your Conduct won,
How while you thundered Clouds of dust did choke,
Contending Troops, and Seas lay hid in smoke.
Illustrious Acts high raptures do infuse,
And every Conqueror creats a Muse,
Here in low streyns your milder deeds we sing,
But there (My Lord) we will Bays and Olive bring:
To Crown your head while you in Triumph ride
Over vanquished Nations, and the Sea beside,
While all your neighbour-Princes unto you
Like Joseph's sheaves pay reverence, and bow.
The End.

