The Confession of a Papist Priest, Who was hanged drawn and quartred at
Tiburne, For seducing the Kings people, the 26. of July 1641. and had four
several names which are these, William Waler, alias Walker, alias Ward, and
alias Slater.
FIrst he confessed, that he had been a Papist Priest this twenty four
years, and presumptuously protested, that if he wear to live millions of
years, he would more and more persevere in his wickedness, and strive to
seduce the people toward this religion.

Secondly, he vowed and protested, that he was not at all sorrowful for his
own death, for his pardon was granted him from his Ghostly father the Pope; and
the last thing that stirred him up most to do it, was that he was sure to be
canonized for a Saint.

Thirdly, he openly protested, that all those whatsoever, which did not love
and adore the Religion, in which faith he died, were damned Heretics.

Fourthly, he confessed how that he had been banished this kingdom of
England, no less then three or four times, and still he returned again
gathering Souls for Rome, but at last he was hanged for his labor.

Fifthly, he gave away his ink horn to one Father Grizley entreating him by his
example to be constant to the sea of Rome, and employ it no worse then he had
done.

Sixthly, he gave his Beads to Master Crostly an Austine Friar, with the like
admonitions.

Seventhly, he bragged that he could spit defiance in the very face of death,
for he was assured that he should have what he had merited, viz. life
everlasting.

Eighthly, he threatened his adversaries (as he termed them) with the Popes Bull.

Ninthly, he invoked the Saints that they would now at this time assist him
with their aid, and pray to God for him.

Tenthly, he secretly repeated over to himself his Avemaries, his salve
Reginaes, with many more Popish, and damnable prayers.

Eleventhly, he fitted the halter as near as possibly he could to the bur of
his ear, that he might swing the easier.

Twelthly, and lastly, young Gregory drove away the Cart, and left him to the
mercy of the hemp.

Thus beloved Christians, may you see how desperately many men will run the
wrong way. I cannot see how this religion can stand with truth or reason, when
the greatest part of it is grounded upon murder and mischiefs; were it not
too late, I would bestow a charitable Lord Jesus receive his soul on him,
expect the last day, for most of our Saviors words are accomplished: one thing
in this man, for he gave us warning that we should not trust false Prophets,
for in these days they should come.

The manner of his execution: he was drawn upon an hurdle, with four horses,
from Newgate to Tiburne, and was hanged, half a quarter of an hour, then
taken down, and ripped up, and his members and bowels burnt in the fire, then
his body quartered, and put in a Basket, and brought to Newgate to be
parboyled. This was the manner of his execution.


