A LETTER From Sir William Waller, A Member of the House of Commons, To the
Right Honorable, ROBERT Earl of ESSEX his Excellency; OF A GREAT VICTORY he
obtained at Malmsbury, 23. Martii, in the County of WILTS:

With the Names of diverse of the Commanders in chief that he took, with 300
foot, a Troop of horse, and many Pieces of Ordnance.

Also a true Relation of Sergeant Major Burghells valor, who went into the
Enemies quarters at Sherston, routed them, took twenty five prisoners, one
Captain, two Lieutenants, one quartermaster, killed eight, and took forty or
fifty Horses and Arms, without the loss of one man.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cl. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
middle Temple. March 28. 1643.

A Letter from Sir William Waller, a Member of the House of Commons, to the
Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Essex his Excellency.
My most honored LORD;
I Have had the honor to receive two Letters from your Excellency; This met me
at Malmesbury, where I was engaged in a hot service for so long as it lasted. I
sat down before the place yesterday a little after Noon: At my first coming
their horse showed themselves in a bravado under the side of a VVood, about a
quarter of a mile from the town, but upon the first proffer of a charge they
retired hastily toward Cicester-way before we could come up to them; where
upon we fell to work with the Town, which is the strongest in land situation
that ever I saw: In the skirts of the outer Town there were Gardens waled in
with dry stone wall, from whence the enemy played upon us as we came on, but
with in half an hour we beat them out of those strengths, and entered the
outer or lower Town with our horse and foot and kept possesion of it, she enemy
withdrawing into the upper, where they had bin at, cost to fortify; We fell on
upon the the west Port, in which they had cast up a breast work, and planted a
piece of Ordnance: The street so narrow at the upper end next the work, that
not above four could march in breast; this business cost hot water: As we fell
on we advanced two Drakes, and under that favor our musketeers possessed
themselves of some houses near the Port, from whence we galled the enemy very
much; If our men had come out roundly we had then carried it, but the falling
of some cooled the rest; And so the first assault failed, after a fight of near
half an hour, whilst we were preparing to renew the assault, the enemy showed
himself near the Town, with seven, or (as some say) ten troops of horse;
vvhereupon Sir Arthur Hazelrig fell out upon them with eight troops, but upon
his approach they retired speedily. In the mean time before his return that
night, we gave on again upon the Town, and had a very hot fight, which after
an hours continuance at the least, we were fain to give over for want of
Ammunition, the main part whereof was unluckily stayed behind by a mischance
of the carriage, and could not come up till the next morning: I was in such
want of powder, and especialy ball: that if the enemy had falen out upon me, I
could have maintained a very small fight, and I had no notice here of from the
Officer, until I was reduced to this straight; VVhereupon I thought fit to
dravv off the Drakes that night, or rather morning, for it was near two of the
clock; The better to effect this, and to prevent the hazard of the Enemies
sally, I caused all the Drums to beat, and Trumpets to sound, drawing both
horse and foot out into the streets: As in preparation to an Assault, with all
the strength I had; which gave the Enemy such apprehension, that immediately
they sent out a Drum, and craved a Parley. They yielded upon quarter, and gave
me entrance about seven or eight of the clock that morning. They were about
three hundred foot, and a Troop of horse, but the horse I related formerly
shifted for themselves upon our first coming. We have prisoners, Colonel
Harbert Lunceford, Colonel Cook, Lieutenant Colonel Dabridgecourt, Sergeant
Major Finch, six Captains, six Lieutenants, six Ensigns, one Cornet, and four
quartermasters, besides ordinary Soldiers, part vvherof we mean to send to
Gloucester, the rest to Bristoll.

This morning, in the name of God, I purpose to march to Cicester, where there
are seven hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse and Dragoones.

I must not omit to represent. Major Burghells merit to your Excellency, who
on the 19. of this present, having information at Bath, that there was a party
of two hundred and forty Horse, Plundring Sir Edward Hungerfords house; drew
out a hundred Horse and marched thither but finding they were gone from thence
and quartered at Sherston a place about three miles from Malmesbury; he pursued
them thither, and about twelve of the clock that night, falling into their
quarters, Routed them, took twenty five Prisoners; whereof there was one
Captain, two Lievtenants, and one Quartermaster, six or eight slain upon the
plaee, and three dead since, between forty and fifty horses taken, with some
Arms, without the loss or hurt of any one man of our own. I shall upon all
occasions certainly advertise your Excellency of what passes here: I commit
your Excellency to Gods heavenly protection, and rest,

MY LORD, Your Excellencies d^ humble servant, WILLIAM WALLER.
MALMSBURY, 23 Martii, 1642
FINIS.

