None but CHRIST, Or A Plain and Familiar Treatise of the Knowledge of CHRIST,
exciting all men to study to know JESUS CHRIST and him crucified, with a
particular, Applicatory, and saving Knowledge, in diverse Sermons upon 1 Cor.
2. 2.

By JOHN WALL B. D. Preacher of the Word of God at Mich. Cornhill LONDON.

Christ is all in all. Col. 3. 11. Nullus animae suavior cibus. Lact. lib. 2.
c. 3. LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill
near the Royal Exchange. 1648.

I have perused this ensuing Treatise (entitled None but Christ) and finding
it very useful for all sorts of Christians, especially for weak Believers, I
allow it to be printed

OBADIAH SEDGWICK
May 12. 1648.
To the much honored and most worthy, Sr Herbottle Grimston Baronet J. Wall
wishes all present and future happiness.
RIght worshipful, Your religious stedfastness in these times of change,
adhering to your fixed principles, and not bending like a reed with every wind
(as many have done) makes your name deservedly honored of all that know you.

What you have suffered by false calumniations, God has in a great measure
already cleared; And I doubt not but in his due time your light shall break
forth (like the Sun out of a cloud) more glorious then ever before.

How great your love has been to Godly and Orthodox Ministers, your pains and
labors to help them out of their troubles, which in these broken times they
have fallen into, you have ample testimony.

Your indefatigable pains as a Member of the Honorable House of Commons, the
Kingdom cannot but take notice of.

And SIR, How much my self am obliged to you for your countenancing of, and
respect you bare to my Ministry, when I lived in Colchester; And your continued
favor and respect toward me ever since, I desire with all humble thankfulness
to acknowledge, and testify to the world.

And as a testimony of my gratitude I humbly dedicate this Treatise unto your
Patronage.

SIR, I observe in these erroneous, licentious, distracting and dividing times,
that men spend their thoughts and studies for the most part in needless
questions, tending only to strife and contention, but not to edification:
whereas our Lord Christ has taught us, there is but one thing especially
needful for us to busy our heads about, and that is, to know Jesus Christ and
him crucified; and to be able to say with Job I know that my redeemer lives.

If it shall please you, so far to honor this Treatise, as to grace it with
your favor, and to bestow the perusal of it; and if your noble spirit (and
the Church of God) shall thereby be the more inflamed with the love of Christ
and longings to in^oy him (As it has been my desire and endeavor, according
to my talent received, to set forth the riches and excellencies that are in
Christ, to draw the heart of his spouse to be sick of love to him) I shall
desire to give God the glory: And this shall be a sufficient refuge against the
captiousnesse and carping of the curious, the slanders and reproaches of the
malicious, and the sharpest censures of the Critical.

From my Study at Mich. Cornhill March 25. 1648. SIR, Your Worships in all
humble and respective observance JOHN WALL.

And to the virtuous and most worthy Lady, the Lady Mary Grimstone his wife,
Daughter of the ever honored, grave, judicious and religious Judge, SIR George
Crook now deceased. J. Wall wishes increase of true honor and happiness.
I Make bold likewise worthy Lady, to join you with your dear and much honored
Husband, craving your tuition of this Treatist of the knowledge of Christ
(being the first fruits of my weak endeavors) And that you would be pleased to
accept of so small a present, as a little monument of that great respect I
deservedly bear you.

And although I know ( Noble Lady) your holy and daily communion with God, your
humbleness of mind, and tender affections mourning under sin, your zealous
longing after, and delight in the word of God when most sincerely taught, your
heavenly communication and conversation do render you elect, holy, and beloved,
amongst all the Saints that know you, and your works praise you in the gates:
Yet good Madam, give me leave I humbly beseech you to stir up and warn your
pure mind, that you take heed of loosing your first love, and the things that
you have done, but that your works may be more at the last then at the first,
that you may shine as the Sun which shines more and more unto the perfect day,
that you may grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, that he may be your all in all, that so you may at last receive your
full reward.

The Lord grant this poor little Treatise of mine may kindle a fire within
you, to warm your heart with the love of Christ, and be as a means with the
blessing of God upon it, to increase your joy and comfort in him, to sweeten
your dissolution when God shall please to finish the period of your days, and
to fill your heart daily with more and more longings to be with Christ, which
is best of all, So prays

From my study at Mich. Cornhill March 25. 1648. MADAM, Your Ladyships most
humbly devoted JOHN WALL

Christian READER,
IT is the great unhappiness of our times, that the greatest part of men,
busy themselves most in that which least concerns them, whilst some
(Athenian-like) spend their time in hearing and telling news: others
(mole-like) are always rooting and digging in the earth, though gold can no
more fill their hearts, then grace their purses; others eagerly pursue the
worlds vanities, as children do painted butterflies, which after all their
pains they may miss, and if they chance to catch, its but a fly that
besmeares their hands; others bend all their studies and discourses, about
controversies tending little to edification; and (...)

READER, Thou shall find through the neglect of the Printer, or those that he
betrusted, many mistakes in the pointing of this Treatise, as also many
literal errors which I crave thy patience to pass over without censure; and
likewise not to be offended with other greater errors thou may meet withal,
but rather thus to amend them.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. margin, for Scholon read Schoolm. p. 19. for (o) r. (^) for wears r.
wore p. 33. l. 2. for cold r. called. p. 34. for three hours r. six hours, p.
37. for Vest. r. Dest. p. 43. dele first. for knows r knew. p. 53 for it heats
r. heat. p. 55. for stob r. stab. p. 59. for er. r. ae. p. 62. for (...) r.
(...) ^. p. 145. for Ps. r. Phil. p. 162. for ways r. wares p. 190. for other
any r. any other. p. 193. for 3* r. 2. p. ^^3. for insensus r. infensus p. 242.
for the r. her p. 257 l. penult. for after r. after him p. 262. l. penult. for
because r. but p 263, for mihi plausum r. sibi plausum p. 264. r. De Pad. p.
270. for fight r* light p. 272, for smoakes r. smothers p. 285. for wo^d r.
world p. 306. for Psalm. 6. r, 76. p. 308. r. and as Micha for Ps. 123. r. 132.

The Contents.
CHAP. I.
THe openining of the words of the Text. page 1. Doct. The great lesson that
every one ought to study and learn, is to know Jesus Christ. p. 4.
CHAP. II.
Of the Incarnation of Christ. 1. That Christ is the second person, and why? p.
6. 2. That Christ is the son of God, and how he is said to be his son. p. 7. 3.
That Christ is truly God. p. 10. 4. That Christ is truly man. p. 11. 5. That
Christ is God and man united together. p. 15.

CHAP. III.
A short view of the sufferings of Christ before he suffered upon the cross.
p. 17. In eleven particulars. In his 1. Conception, p. 17. 2. Birth, ibid. 3.
Circumcision, p. 20. 4. Temptation, ibid. 5. Private life, p 21. 6. Agony,
ibid. 7. Apprehension and betraying, p. 22. 8. Arraignment, p. 23. 9. Mocking,
ib^d. 10. Scourging, p. 25. 11. Condemnation. p. 27.

CHAP. IV.
A relation of the sufferings of Christ upon the Cross. p. 27. First in that
Christ dyed for us. ibid. Secondly, in that Christ did more then barely dye for
us in three respects. 1. First, In that he dyed a shameful death. p. 29. It
was shame full in five respects, because 1. They made him carry his own
Cross, p. 30. 2. They stripped him naked, ibid. 3. He was hanged, ibid. 4. He
was hanged in the midst between two thieves, p. 31. 5. He was insulted over in
his misery, ibid.
II. Secondly in that he dyed a bitter and painful death in two respects. p.
32. 1. In what he suffered from men in four particulars. ibid. 1. They gave
him Gall and Vinegar to drink. ibid. 2. They racked him. p 34. 3. They nailed
his hands and feet to the Cross. ibid. 4. He continued hanging about six
hours. ibid. 2. In what he suffered from God, even the heavy wrath of God due
to us for all our sins. p. 35.
III. Thirdly, In that he dyed for his enemies etc. p. 37.
CHAP. V.
Of the satisfaction of Christ. p. 38. 1. That there is salvation in no other.
p. 38. 2. That there is full and perfect salvation in Christ. p. 40.
CHAP: VI.
We must study to know Christ with particular application; That Christ is our
Savior, and that he dyed for us, and gave himself for us. p. 43. Obj. A man
may be saved without this knowledge? Answ. Affirmatively. p. 45. Negatively. p.
46.

Obj. No man can know Christ to be his in particular: with the Answer. p. 47.
48.
CHAP. VII.
We must study to know Christ with an affectionate knowledge. p. 49.
CHAP. VIII.
We must study to know Christ with a virtuall and operative knowledge. p. 54.
1. In Giving us power against the dominion of sin. p. 55. 2. In raising us up
to newnes of life. p. 57.

CHAP. IX.
Of the sweetness and excellency of the knowledge of Christ. p 58. 1. Because
it has the most excellent Revelation. p. 60. 2. Because the excellency of all
other knowledge is supereminently in Christ in five respects. p. 61. 1. The
excellency of the knowledge of God consists in the knowledge of Christ in
three respects. ibid. In regard of 1. His person. ibid. 2. The work of
Redemption. p. 62. 3. Our Relation to God. p. 63.

2. The excellency of the knowledge of the word of God consists in the
knowledge of Christ. p. 66 3. The knowledge of Christ is more excellent then
all other knowledge whatsoever. p. 68. 4. The excellency and honor of a man is
that he knows Jesus Christ. p. 70. 5. The excellency of all our works, is
from our knowledge of Christ. p. 73.
CHAP. X.
That the knowledge of Christ and him Crucified is the most profitable
knowledge. p. 75. 1. Reason, because Christ gives us better things then the
world can help us to. p. 76. As the grace of 1. Justification, p. 77, 78. p. 79.
2. Acceptance, 3. Sanctification, 4. Adoption, 5. Reconciliation, 6.
Cooperation, 7. Corroboration, 8. Co-agulation, 9. Preservation, 10.
Consolation, 11. Glorification.

2 Reason, because Christ gives that which contents and satisfies the soul of
man. p. 80. 3. Reason, because Christ gives more durable riches* then the
world. p. 81. 4. Reason, because Christ gives earthly things also into the
bargain. p. 82. Which appears in four particulars. 1. Certainty of provision.
p. 82. 2. Better right. p. 85. 3. With our fathers blessing. ibid. 4. As
pledges of future hopes. p. 86.


CHAP. XI.
That the knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified is the most comfortable
knowledge. p. 87. Especially in four conditions. of In time
1. Spiritual distres. 88. 2. Greatest persecution p. 89. 3 Greatest
afflictions. 92
Because they shall work for our good. ibid. A threefold good 1. Temporal. 2.
Spiritual. p. 39. For they, 1. Keep the heart tender, p 94. 2. Keep us from
backsliding. p. 94. 3. Make us fear to sin, ibid. 4. Make us grow in
holiness, ibid.
3. For our eternal good. p. 95.
4. The knowledge of Christ is most comfortable in the hour of death. p. 96.
Because, we are sure to dye, 1. Comfortably. ibid. 2. Blessedly. p. 98.

CHAP. XII.
Use 1. A reproof of those that know nothing of Jesus Christ, as Heathens,
Turks Jews, Papists, and ignorant persons. p* 101. Because 1. Their ignorance
is inexcusable. p. 105. 2. An ignorant heart is an evil heart. p. 106 3. All
their works are works of darkness. ibid. 4. They can have no Repentance ibid.
5. They are full of fear. p. 107 6. Such have no part in Christ. ibid.

Qu. What helps are there to get knowledge. p. 108 Ans. 1. To study a
Catechism. ibid. 2. The use of other means. p. 109 3. To practice what we
know. ibid. 4. To be much in prayer. p, 110
CHAP. XIII.
Use 2. A reproof of those that study to know all things else save Jesus Christ
and him crucified. p. 110. Viz. Such as study vanities, curiosities, arts and
sciences, etc. with the neglect of the study of Christ. 111
CHAP. XIV.
Use 3. A reproof of three sorts. I. A reproof of those that study to know
Christ only by speculation. p. 124 1. Because it is unprofitable and vain. p.
121 2. Because it is very dangerous and hurtful. p. 123
It is dangerous in three respects. 1. Because it breeds bitterness and
vexation. p. 123. 2. Because if Christ be not our Savior he will be our judge.
p. 124. 3. Because it will aggravate our condemnation. p. 125.

II. A reproof of those that know Christ with speculation, but not with
affection. p. 130 III. A reproof of those that content themselves with a
speculative knowledge of Christ, but know him not virtually and operatively.
CHAP. XV.
Use 4. An exhortation to be thankful and contented in every condition if we
know Jesus Christ savingly. p. 136. 1. Because Christ is the greatest gift that
God has to give, or that we can receive. p. 138 2. Because Christ is the
richest gift. p. 138 3. Because Christ is the choycest gift. ibid. 4. Because
Christ is the rarest gift. p. 141 5. Because Christ is the sweetest gift. p.
143 6. Because Christ is the freest gift. p. ibid.
CHAP. XVI.
Use 5. An exhortation to all to study the knowledge of Christ savingly. p. 146
1. Because we want nothing more then Christ. p. 147 2. Because God is ready and
willing to give Christ to those that seek him. ibid Helps ormeanes to attain
to the saving knowledge of Christ. p. 149 1. To see the worth of Christ. ibid.
2. To see thy need of Christ and misery without him. p. 150 3. To be sick with
thy sins. p. 153 4. To be sick for Christ. p. 154 5. To be willing to part
withal for Christ. p. 155 6. To seek Christ with prayers and tears. p. 156
CHAP. XVII.
Use 6. A Use of examination whether we know Christ Jesus savingly. p. 157
Because 1. Our hearts are deceitful. p. 158 2. The danger of this deceit. p.
158 3. Satan will try it. p. 159 4. The benefit of trial is very great.
Whether we be deceived. p. 159. not deceived. ibid.
Four general rules to preserve us from being deceived. p. 159. 1. To be
willing to know the truth concerning our spiritual condition p. 161. 2. To
judge our selves by the right rule, that is, by a promise in thy word. p. 162.
3. To get aright understanding of that rule or promise. p. 166. 4. To rest upon
that promise, and not be beaten off from it. p. 167.
Eleven signs or marks whereby a man may know Christ is his in particular. p.
167. The first sign 1. If it were wrought and is confirmed by the word
preached 169 The second sign 2. If the heart were ever prepared for the
receiving of Christ. p. 170 The 3d sign 3. From the right operations of faith
in the heart which are four 1. It is little at the first. p. 173 2. It
increases daily. 174 3. It opposes infidelity. ib. 4. It believes temporal
promises. p. 175
The 4th sign. 4. Repentance for sin. p 176 The 5th sign. 5. Poverty of
spirit. p. 179

CHAP XVIII.
The sixth sign of the saving knowledge of Christ is love. p. 181 I. Love to
God. ib. II. Love to Christ. p. 182 III. If we love the Saints 3. ways. ibid.
1. With a spiritual love. p. 183. 2. With an universal love. ibid. 3. With a
special love: which consists in four particulars 1. In an high esteem of
them. p. 184 2. In a readiness to help them. ibid. 3. In delighting in their
company. ib. 4. In sympathizing with them. p. 187.

IV. If we love the word of God with a sincere love. p. 188. V. If we love the
wicked with a love of pity. p. 189.
CHAP. XIX.
The seventh sign of the saving knowledge of Christ namely the spirit of
prayer. p. 192. The spirit of prayer consists of two particulars. 1. The heart
is excited to be often with God in prayer. p. 193. 2. The heart is enabled to
pray spiritually.
That is 1. To pray in faith. p. 195. 2. To pray fervently. p. 196. 3. To pray
with spiritual desires. p. 197.

CHAP, XX.
The eighth sign of the saving knowledge of Christ, is universal obedience.
p. 198. The ninth sign is selfe-denyall. p. 201. The tenth sign, when the
utmost end of all our actions is supernatural.
CAAP. XXI.
The eleventh sign is the witness of the spirit. p. 207. 1. The spirit
persuades thy conscience thou art a child of God. ibid. 2, The spirit fills the
soul with ravishing joy. p. 208.
How to know it is the witness of the spirit, and not a delusion. 1. This
witness is usually sent when the soul is mourning for sin. p. 208. 2. It
witnesses always according to the word. p. 209 3. It fills the heart with love
and thankfulness. ibid. 4. The spirit bears witness with our spirits, that it
is not a delusion. ibid.

CHAP. XXII.
An assoyling of some doubts and scruples, whereby a true believer does
question whether Christ is his or no. p. 211. The first doubt, because I know
not the time of my conversion. p. 212. The second doubt, because I know not
whether I were ever sufficiently prepared to receive Christ. p. 213. The third
doubt, because I am molested with so many temptations and doubts. p. 215. The
fourth doubt, because my faith fails me. p. 216. The fifth doubt, because I
want assurance and comfort. p. 217. The sixth doubt, because I have such strong
lusts still remaining. p. 220. The seventh doubt, because I have relapsed unto
my old sins. ibid. Object. Yea but old sins relapsed into are not pardoned
before actual repentance. p. 22^. Answer, they are pardoned to a believer
before actual repentance. ibid. 1. Because after faith there is no place or
time for condemnation. p. 222. 2. He is still regenerated. p. 224. 3. He is
still a believer and penitent person, in habit at least. p. 224. 4. He is still
a member of Christ. ibid. 5. He is still an adopted child. p. 225. 6. Then
actual repentance is required necessarily for the pardon of the smallest
sins. ibid. 7. Then a believer shall certainly live so long after agrosse
sin, till he does actually repent. p. 226. 8. Why is not actual faith also
necessary before actual pardon. p. 227. 9. Then a believer may fear at that
time to be damned. ibid. 10. The opinion of many learned Divines. p. 230. The
Objections answered 1. Object. from Romans 3. 15. answered p. 231. 2. Object.
from Matthew. 10. 28. ibid. 3. Object. from 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. 11. ibid. 4.
Object. A lapsed believer has not lost his right to, but fitness for heaven.
answered p. 232. 5. Object. Sin must be committed before it can be pardoned.
answered. p. 233. 7. Object. What need we then fear our sins, or ask pardon
for them? answered p. 234. 8. Object. The qualification required for pardon is
repentance. answered p. 235. 9. Object. Then David might joy in God as his God
whilst he lay in his sin? answered p. 236. 10. Object. from Jer. 3. I will
forgive their iniquities; therefore they were not* pardoned before. answered.
p. 237. 8. Doubt. Because I fear I am an hypocrite. p. 238. 9. Doubt. Because
I have hardness of heart. p. 239. 10. Doubt Because I have such Atheistical
and blasphemous thoughts. p. 240. 11. Doubt. Because I profit not by hearing
the word preached. p. 241. 12. Doubt. From the little measure of grace
received. p. 243. 13. Doubt. Because I have no gift of prayer. p. 245 1.
Because I cannot pray but in a form. p. 246 2. Because I pray not in faith. p.
247 3. Because God does not hear my prayers. ibid.

14. Doubt. I do not grow in grace. p 248 15. Doubt. The Saints do not love me.
p. 251 16. Doubt. Because I meet with so many afflictions. p. 253
CHAP. XXIII.
Use 7. An exhortation to the ministers of the Gospel, especially to preach
Jesus Christ to the people p. 2^6 1. Because the preaching of Christ is most
profitable for the people. p. 257 2. Because it is most comfortable to the
people. ibid. 3. Because it is the readiest way to bring the people to
repentance. ibid. 4. Because it brings greatest comfort to the ministers to
bring men to Christ. p. 259 5. Because it is most profitable to the Ministers
to preach Christ. p. 260 Object. Is it not lawful then to preach the Law?
which is answered. p. 261 Negatively. Positively.
A second exhortation to Ministers of the Gospel to preach Christ in such a
manner, as the people may best come to the saving knowledge of Christ, which
consists in nine particulars. p. 265 1. To preach Christ plainly and
perspicuously. p. 265 Five helps to preach Christ plainly. 1. A competent
measure of learning. p. 27^. 2. To be mighty in the Scriptures. p. 273 3. Be
much in meditation. p. 274 4. Be much in Catechizing or handling the
fundamental points of religion. p. 275 5. Study to know the state of the
flock. p. 275 2. To preach Christ painfully. p. 276 3. To preach Christ
profitably. p. 281 4. To preach Christ faithfully. p. 283 5. To preach Christ
zealously. p. 284 6. To preach Christ lovingly. p. 286. 7. To preach Christ
wisely. p. 288 8. To preach Christ sincerely. p. 290 9. To preach Christ
exemplarily. p. 293
CHAP. XXIIII.
Use 8. An exhortation to thankfulness for Christ revealed in the Gospel. 1.
Because Christ is revealed but to a few. p. 330 2. Because the Revelation of
Christ is so great a blessing. p. 305 3. Because where Christ is preached,
there some Elect are to be saved. p. 307 4. Because usually outward blessings
do accompany the Gospel. p. 308
1 COR. 2. 2. I desired to know nothing among you save Jesus Christ and him
crucified.
CHAP. I. The opening of the words, and the Doctrine gathered and explained.
I Desired etc. Saint Paul having preached plainly among the learned
Corinthians, and not with the enticing words of man's wisdom, or excellency of
speech, as verse the first: (...) in wisdom of wo^ds, 1 Cor. 1. 17. Pom. patica
eloquentia, Hier. Ostentatione grandiloquentiae, Pareus. Facundi^ dicendi.
Theod.
They began to slight him as unlearned, and his preaching as good honest dry
matter; but in this verse he gives the reason; You (says he) preach your
selves, but I preach Jesus Christ; you preach for ostentation to get applause
from men, but I preach for edification to bring souls to Christ; And hence it
is that you preach with puff^d up eloquence, high flowne phrasts and ^welling
words of vanity, but I preach in the plain evidence of the spirit, because I
desired to know nothing among you, etc.

In the words there are three parts; first, the object of Paul's desire; Jesus
Christ and him crucified. 2. The act, to know Jesus Christ and him crucified.
3. Paul's desire and resolution: I determined to know nothing among you but
Jesus Christ and him crucifi^d.

I desired] (...) eximium duxi, so Pet. Martyr, and Calvin reads it: that is, I
esteemed no other knowledge excellent, nor my self worthy estimation for any
other knowledge. Non ^o nomine, praestant^ me duxi. Pet. Mar.


To know nothing but Jesus Christ,] Not that Paul contemned all other knowledge
and humane learning in Arts and Sciences wherein himself was so accomplished,
being the great Doctor of the Gentiles, and could speak tongues more then they
all; but so far as it stood in competition, opposition, or comparison of the
knowledge of Christ and winning souls unto him.

Among you] Even you though otherwise learned Corinthians, yet you have not
sufficiently learned Christ.

And him crucified] That is, suffering upon the Cross, and dying for us; As if
he should say; I know preaching of Christ crucified is to the Jews a stumbling
block, and to the Greeks foolishness, but to us that are saved, the power of
God and wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18. As if he should have said, all knowledge
is excellent, of all knowledge, the knowledge of Christ is more excellent; of
all knowledge of Christ, the knowledge of Christ crucified is most excellent,
most sweet most comfortable. God forbid says S. Paul, that I should rejoice in
any thing, but in the Cross of Christ; why in the Cross of Christ rather then
in his Crown; in Christ crucified, rather then glorified?

Certainly, 1. because it argues greater love in Christ to be crucified, then
to be glorified for us. 2. Because though he makes application as glorified,
yet he made satisfaction as crucified.

Thus you have seen the meaning of the words, from whence diverse conclusions
might be gathered, yet I will insist only upon one, which I conceive chiefly
intended by the holy Ghost.

Doct. The great lesson which every* one ought especially to study and learn,
is, to know Jesus Christ and him crucified.

This indeed seems an old lesson, yet it always brings forth new fruit Semper
novu^ sit, quod semper reficit animum, Nec unquam patietnr veterascere quod
semper nos facit fructificare.
; who can be weary of preaching, or learning Christ? Dulce nomen Christi, sweet
is the name of Christ, at least to every Christian that has his part in him.

Secondly, it seems a plain lesson which every body almost knows already,
fit to be taught children, whom we ask what is Jesus Christ? But it is such a
lesson as would beseem the greatest Angel in heaven still to learn, and
indeed which the very Angels still desire to study and look into, 1 Pet. 2. 12.
and are studying to this day.

It was the desire and study of Paul still to know Christ, Phil. 3. 10. That I
may know him; Did not Paul know Christ already? yes surely, far better then
we; yet he would feign know him better, and see more into the love of Christ
which is so unspeakable, as if the holy Ghost wanted words to express it, John
3. 16. God so loved the world, so; how? so that no heart can conceive, nor
songue can utter; It is beyond expression.

In Ephesians. 3. 18. 19. It was Paul's prayer for the Ephesians that they might
comprehend with all Saints, the height, length, breadth, and depth of the love
of Christ, all which dimensions set forth unto us the wonderful greatness of
his love; The height, for it reaches as high as heaven; the depth, for it goes
down as low as hell; the hreadth, for it extends to all the world; the length,
for it continues to all eternity Bullin* in ^oc.
. And to know the love of Christ, yet it passes knowledge (...), super
eminentem charitatem Hier. Aug. Theod. Erasm.
. As if he should say, we may study this lesson all our lives, and yet never
perfectly learn it; strive and endeavor to know it we may, but we shall never
fully know it, nor fathom the bottom of it. Exuperat omnem scientiam,
Theophil. And what was Peter's last exhortation to the Saints, to whom he wrote,
but that they should grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ? As if this were the chief lesson they were to learn,
according to my text, I desired to know nothing among you, etc. Wherein two
things are to be considered, 1. What knowledge of Christ it is that is to be
studied of us* 2. Why the knowledge of Christ and him crucified is specially to
be studied of us.

For the first, we are to study to know Christ with a fourfold knowledge, with

the knowledge of 1. Speculation or Contemplation. 2. Particular application 3.
Love and affection. 4. Vertuall operation.

1. With the knowledge of Speculation in three particulars, viz. to know

Christ in his 1. Incarnation. 2. Crucifixion. 3. Satisfaction.

CHAP. II. Teaches us to study to know Christ in his Incarnation.
FIrst, we must study to know Christ in his Incarnation; That he is God and man
joined together, that God and man might be joined together, that by sin were
separated one from another.

Wherein five things are to be learned of us.

1. That he is the second Person in the Trinity, who was the wisdom of the
Father. To teach us that the divine nature is not essentially, but personally,
not simply, but Relatively (in relation to the second Person) incarnated Non
essentia De^ absolute considerata, sed persona filii erat incarnata. Buchan.
loc. com. Non essentia, sed persona deitatis est incarnata. Wolleb.
for else the Father and holy Ghost mu^t be incarnated as well as the Son;
which was the error of the Sabellians Anno Christi 257. who denied the three
distinct persons, and said they were but three names; and so by consequence
were compelled to say the Father and H. G. were incarnate, and died for our
sins, as well as the Son.

2. That he is the Son of God Psalm. 2. 7. John 1, 14.
Not by creation as the An^els and Adam were, not by adoption as the Saints
are: but his natural son by eternal generation as he was God (being of the
same substance and nature that his Father is, (as children are of the same
substance with their Parents) called indeed the Father of Eternity, Es. 9. 6. but
that was respectu essentiae, non subsistentiae, in regard of his essence not
subsistence.

The manner is unspeakable, incomprehensible, for who can declare his
generation? In natural generation the Father is 1. before the Son, 2. the
Son inferior to the Father, 3. receiving his substance from the Father: but in
this generation the Father is not before the Son, who was eternally his
son, or else there should be a time when God was without a Son, and
himself not a Father; 2. Nor is he inferior to the Father, for he is no more
beholding to God to be his Father, then the Father to him to be Essentia non
generatnec generatur Scholo^.
his son; 3. nor did he receive his Substance, but his Sonship from the
Father, who is unbegotten in respect of his essence, as having his essence of
himself; begotten only in respect of his personality, for he has his
personal subsistence from the Father: begotten as Son, not as God, Perk. on
Creed; [learned Buchan says, Aliud est esse pa^ris, aliud esse filii, aliud
esse spiritus sancti, that is, as they are persons or subsistences, but not as
absolutely God, for so their essence is the same] But this mystery is deep and
such as is fitter for the study of Angels then men; Divines have set it forth
by diverse similitudes, whereby I have thought they have rather darkened, then
illustrated it, and therefore I spare to mention them,

And further, as our Lord Christ is man, he is the son of God, but not by
creation nor adoption, nor eternal generation, but by hypostaticall union,
namely by prerogative of his personal union: contrary to the Feliciani, that
called Christ in his humane nature the adopted son of God.

And thus the Son of God became the son of man, that the sons of men might be
John 1. 12. Gal. 3. 5, 6. Mat. 3 17. John 1. 14.
made the sons of God; I go to your father and my father, Ioh. 20. 17.

And what greater love could the father show unto us then to give his dear
Son, his beloved Son, his only begotten son for us? Joh. 3. 16. Herein appeared
Abraham's love, that he offered his only son Isaac, whom he loved. Genesis 22.
There was one had four sons, who in a famine being sore oppressed with hunger,
the Parents resolved to sell one for relief; But then they considered the
eldest, was the first of their strength, therefore loath to sell him, the second
was the very picture of the father, the third was like the mother, the fourth
and the youngest was the child of their old age, their Benjamin, the dearly
beloved of them both, and therefore they were resolved not to part with any of
them, and so would rather suffer themselves to perish, then to part with any of
their children.

Another had two sons, both were condemned to dye, yet upon mediation the
father was offered to have one spared; But he could not find in his heart which
to choose to live, and so to leave the other to the stroke of death (They both
were so dear to him) and so they both died; so dear are children to their
Parents; Can a mother says God, forget her child? yet God seems to forget his
only son that lay in the bosom of the father, and was his delight from all
eternity, that he might remember Prove. 3. 30
us, deliver us from death, and make us the adopted sons of God.

Thirdly that Jesus Christ is God, The mighty God Es. 9. 6.
who thought it no robbery to be equal with God Psalm. 2. 6. Rev. 18. Mat. 8.
10. Col. 1. 15. 16.
contrary to the heresy of the Samosetanians, Servetus, Ebionites,
Cerinthians, Nestorians, Turks, Jews, Arrians, and all other Heretics that
deny the Deity of Christ; but to him is attributed eternity ( l), omnisciency,
omnipresence, creation, and providence; which are only attributed to God.
Beside the works and miracles which our Lord Christ wrought, when he was upon
the earth, declared him to be the mighty God. Joh. 5 36 and 10. 25. 37. 38.


Now Christ must needs be God; not only to support the humane nature to bear
the wrath of God from sinking under it, which else had ground him to powder,
(As the altar of wood was covered with brass, that the fire might not consume
it, Exodus 27. 2.)

But also to give worth to his sufferings, and to make them of infinite value,
because they were the sufferings of God, Acts 20. 28. Heb. 9. 14.
For we having offended an infinite God, deserved infinite wrath, and therefore
of necessity there must be an infinite satisfaction; Now it is more for God to
suffer any thing, then for all men, and creatures to suffer all things; As the
blood of a sheep is more precious then the blood of 1000 adders, toads and
serpents, the blood of a man then of a 1000 sheep, the blood of a King then of
a 1000 common men, and the blood of God is more precious then the blood of all
the men in the world.

And hence it is, that all men's fins cannot exceed the price that was paid for
them, because our sins are but the sins of men, but Christ's sufferings are the
sufferings of God; ( o) now God loves the Ho^. 11. 9. I am God and not man.
blood of his Son more then he hates all our sins; And if Adam one man was
able by his sin to condemn a world, surely God by his sufferings is able to
save a world, Romans 5. 15. 16. 17.

4. We are to know that he is a true man, also of the substance and blood of
the Virgin, not having a fantastical body as the Maniches ^ay, nor passed
through the womb of the Virgin as water through a Conduit-pipe, as the
Valentinians say, Nor passed through her Paps, as the Turks Alcoran dreams, but
of the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 14. and made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. Indeed he
took not the person of any one man, but the Non hominem sed humanitatem, non
personam sed naturam.
humane nature of all men, soul and body, contrary to the heresy of the
Apolinarians that say his deity supplied in stead of the soul, when as Christ
said my soul is heavy to death. And now he is a true man in heaven, the same
that he was on earth though glorified, contrary to the heresy of the Seleucians
that affirmed that Christ in his assention unclothed himself of the flesh of
man, and left it in the glob of the Sun. So that what God once spoke Ironically
is now verifyed, Genesis 3. 22. Behold the man is become like one of us: Or as
those heathen Barbarians said of Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14. 11. God is come
down to us in the likeness of man.

O infinite wonder, That God should please to choose one man among all mankind,
(or more properly humane nature) and exalt him to be one of the Trinity, to sit
in the seat of God, be called God, adored and worshipped as God to all
eternity. Not car^ but Deus in car^^. 1 Timothy 2. 16.
For to Christ is due divine adoration, not only in his divine nature but in
regard of his person: [Not that the humane nature is capable of it self of
divine worship, but because divine worship is terminated upon the person of
Christ, and so it is due to the humane nature] If an Angel had been thus
exalted, it had not been so great cause of admiration; but for God to take a
lump of flesh and blood, a piece of earth, the same we tread upon and join it
to himself to all eternity; Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him,
or the son of man that thou so regardest him!

That (...) should be (...), the great God a sucking child; Regens sydera,
should be sugens ubera, He that rules the stars should suck the breasts; For
man to be like unto God is wonderful; but for God to be in the likeness of
man is a greater wonder: We in our lowest humiliation can but lie in the dust
and cloth our selves with sackcloth, and put ashes on our heads; But for God
to cloth himself with dust and ashes (like Nebuchadnezzars Image, an head of
gold and feet of clay) this is a lower abasement then if a King should be
clothed with beggars rags, become a frog, a worm, or the basest creature;
was not our flesh a goodly robe to cloth the Deity with? when the Angels
themselves scorn our nature, and think it a debasing of them, so that if they
take up a man's body for their use, yet they quickly lay it down again. This
is cause of wonder indeed, but no cause of stumbling or offense; for (as
Tertullian affirms) Nulla substantia digna est ut Deus induat, quodcunque
tamen induerit, ipse dignum facit; Though God be too great to cloth himself
with any nature, yet what ever he shall cloth himself withal, he makes it
worthy, Quicquid Deo indignum patitur, iderat t^i gratia. Tertul.

Now the reason why Christ took man's nature upon him, was, Not only to Gal.
3. 12. 13.
redeem man, that as man had sinned, man should suffer; (for God could not
Homini Deus mor tem minatus est, ab homine ergo poena luenda est Wolleb.
suffer) and without shedding of blood there is no remission,) And to fulfill
the Law for us by yielding obedience to it, which the Godhead could not be
brought in subjection under: But also to make the divine nature more amiable to
us, that we might not be afraid to look upon God. As the Shepherds of old had
wont to cloth themselves with sheeps skins to be more lovely in the sheeps
eyes. Even the Sun it self may be looked upon through a cloud; And so may the
Deity through the Lan^horne of the humanty, 2 Cor. 3. 18. God has as it were,
clothed himself with our flesh, to teach us he will not hide himself from
his own flesh; The Lord Christ seems to speak to us, as once Elihu did to
Job, Job 33. 6. Behold I am according to thy wish in Gods stead, I am also
formed out of the clay, Behold my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither
shall my hand be heavit upon thee. So Christ is as i^ were in Gods stead formed
out of the clay, and he makes the apprehension of the Deity not to be fearful
to us.

Fifthly and lastly, we are to know Christ to be God and man united together.
In John 1. 14. Christ is said to be made flesh, not appeared flesh, as he did
sometimes to the Patriarchs, conferring with them in a visible shape, as to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, etc. But made flesh, that is, united to flesh, for
God cannot be made flesh, or be turned into flesh.

In 1 Timothy 3. 16. great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the
flesh.

It is called ( a Mystery) dark and hidden, not known of Adam in innocence till
revealed; in whose heart the Law was written, but not the Gospel, Col. 1. 26. A
mystery of godliness, breathing nothing but godliness, Tit. 2. 11. (though
men make it a mystery of iniquity;) God manifested in the flesh, (...)
appearing in flesh, such a mystery as not the Angels in heaven can understand
the manner. Only this we know, it was no transmutation of the Deity into the
humanity, nor of Vide Bish. Usher, a learned tractate of the Incarnation of
Christ.
the humanity into the Deity, nor by cohabitation, only as the Nestorians say,
nor by mixture as water and wine mixed together, which is neither wine nor
water, but a compound of both; nor by infusion of the Godhead into the manhood;
But by taking the manhood or humane nature into the person of the Son of God,
and so Per modu^ Accedentis says Durand. In l. 3. sent. did. 6. q. 4.
to have his subsistence in the Godhead; And hence the two distinct natures
remain in communicable each to other, and yet make not two distinct persons,
but only one person; as the body and soul two distinct natures, make but one
man; contrary to the heresy of Eutiches, who said the humane nature was
swallowed up in the divine, so as there remained only the divine nature. And
the reason of this union was because he was to be a Mediator between God and
man, and to reconcile God to man; therefore meet he should have interest in
both natures.

CHAP. III. A brief view of the sufferings of Christ before he suffered on the
Cross.
SEcondly, we must study to know Christ in his crucifixion or in his
sufferings; And him crucified: All his life was a crucifixion, from the womb to
the tomb, from his birth to his burial; concerning which, though little can be
said by way of explication more then is already largely related in the History
of the Gospel; yet give me leave for method sake to-give you a breife view of
them.

He was crucified, 1. In his conception, in that he was conceived of the seed
of the Virgin, and lodged in her narrow womb, whom the heavens could not
contain, and did not abhor the Virgins womb.

But this was was to sweeten our conception who are conceived in sin and born
in iniquity.

2. He was crucified in his birth, in Psalm. 51 5.
that he was borne of a woman, the Cretor of the creature, he that made her was
born of her; yea of a poor maid, offering two Turtle Doves for her purifying,
as being not able to bring a Lamb according to the Law, Levit. 12. 8.

Was there never a great Lady in Jerusalem for this great Prince of heaven and
earth to be borne of? But he looked on the lowliness of his handmaid.

And this teaches us that Christ regards 1 Cor. 1. 26.
not the rich, no more then the poor; that he came for the poor; poor Lazarus
lay in rich Abraham's bosom, when rich Dives was in hell torments. Poor
Shepherds had Christ revealed to them by Angels, when he was hid from the
Matthew. 18. 10.
great ones and Rulers at Jerusalem.

Who can then despise the poorest Saint? who perhaps may have move of Christ in
him, and a higher seat in glory then our selves; A pearl is rich when found on
a dunghill, though it may glister more when set in a Ring of Gold. Has not
God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of that
Kingdom? James 2. 5.

3. In that he was born in a stable, Luke 2. 12. This shall be a sign unto
you; And well they had this sign, for elle its likely they would have looked
into the fairest houses, stateliest chambers, and not in a stable for him.

You shall find the Babe: (...) a sucking child. A strange crucifixion; the
great God to become a Babe, and the eternal Word not to be able to speak a
word; The Lion of the tribe of Judah who when he roares, he makes all the
beasts tremble, to cry like a child that sucks. Nestorius despised to call an
Infant God.

But hereby the greater power of God was seen, that could by a Child overcome
sin, death, and the devil, and bring us to glory.

Nay more, you shall find the Babe (...).
swadled in cloutes, such as we cover wounds and beggars sores withal; they
were not fine linen nor silk clouts, but mean and poor, liker to beggars
rags;

Now was not this a Crucifixion? That he tha^ shall come in the Clouds should
appear in clouts? which yet he wears not so much to cover his nakedness, as
to discover ours, and because he appeared in the similitude of sinful flesh.

4. More yet) if a Babe in clouts, yet in some fair Chamber and Cradle? No, in
a Stable where horses and beasts were fed, at least, at that time when so great
a concourse of people met, and in the Manger instead of a Cradle.

Now be astonished and wonder that the great God who inhabiteth eternity, whom
the heavens cannot contain, and Solomon's Temple was too mean for him, that he
should be lodged among the beasts, as Nebuchadnezar was turned out among the
beasts.

Marcus Antonius brought Caesar's robe before the people all bloody to move
Compassion; but I have showed you our Lord Christ, not in his Rob^s of glory,
but in his rags and clouts, to teach us Christ's humility, and us humility by
his example, learn of me, says Christ, that I am meek and lowly in heart.
Mat. 11. 29

Yet all this was for our exaltation; Christ was clothed with clouts and rags,
that we might be clothed with Robes of glory; Christ was laid in a Manger that
we might have mansion-places in heaven, and lie in Abraham's bosom.

3. He was Crucified in his Circumcision, as a type of our defilement, and his
purity, and to work that on our spirits which was done to his flesh, Col. 2.
11. 12. Cutting off our superfluous lusts, that we might be all Circumcised, in
heart, as Christ was in his flesh.

4. He was crucified in his temptations, when he was so basely solicited by the
Devil to fall down and worship him; a far greater reproach then if the
greatest Queen should be solicited to uncleannes by the basest scullion, and
carried up and down in his arms at his pleasure. But this was that he might
experimentally know how to succor us when we are tempted, Hebr. 2. 18.

5. He was Crucified in his whole life 30 years together, living in no account
or reputation, Phil. 2. He made himself of no reputation, he was despised and
we esteemed him not Esa. 53. 3.

At the most he was counted but the Carpenters son, or the Carpenter* perhaps
working on his Fathers trade, Mark. 6. 3. And the deity was vaild in his flesh,
wherein it lay hid without any great manifestation.

To teach us that the same mind should be in us that was in Christ, Phil. 2. To
be content to live without respect in the world and be of no reputation for his
sake.

6. He was Crucified in his agony in Luke 22. 44 (...) * Non grumi sed unda
sanguinis. Bern. not clots but a flood of blood.
the Garden, where he did sweat drops not of water, but blood, thick blood that
ran through his garments trickling down to the ground; Not as Joseph's garment
that was dipped in blood, but his body and garments were dyed in blood, Esa. 63.
1. And all this in expectation of what he should suffer, when no hand touched
him but his Pliny reports of a serpent, that when it stings it fetches all the
blood out of the body; but it was never heard of any before that did sweat
blood.
own thoughts of what he was to suffer, (like dry Roses that under a fire
distill sweet water) 2. No burden on him or bodily labor, but the burden of
his spirit and of our sins. 3. In cold weather, for they had a fire to warm
them. 4. All his whippings, thorns, nails, never fetchr a bloody sweat from
him as his own thoughts did. 5. If the thoughts of his sufferings were so
terrible, what were his sufferings themselves?

6. His mournful speeches and wrestling, prayers, showed in what a
bittternesse of grief his soul was when he cried out, My soul is heavy to the
death; and prayed three times, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me.

O the burden of a wounded conscience As in Spira.
groaning under sin (as Christ for sin) it is intolerable, It is a
fearful thing to f^ll into the hands of the living God. And sure our sins
should draw some drops of tears from our eyes, that fetched so many drops of
blood from our Saviors whole body. Heyward sanct.


7. He was crucified in his apprehension when he was betrayed by Judas, who
sold our Savior for thirty pieces of silver, (who yet bought us with his
dearest blood) who kissed him with his lips, and Typified by the beasts that
were bound with cords to the Altar.
sought to kill him in his heart: And they bound him with cords: to teach us
that by nature we are bound with the cords of sin, and deserve to be bound hand
and foot, and cast into hell fire, Act. 8. 23. Thou art in the bonds of
iniquity. 2. To loose us from the bonds of wickedness, Col. 1. 13. 3. To teach
us that bonds and imprisonments Acts. 21. 13
await us in this life, but Christ has sweetened them with his bonds, whose
bonds were bonds of love, as it was love to Dalilah made Sampson bound.

8. He was arraigned at the bar before Pilate an earthly Judge, that we
might not be arraigned as malefactors before God at the day of Judgment; for
John 5. 24. He that believes shall not come into judgment. Indeed he shall
have judgment, 1. of examination 2, of approbation. 3. of Remuneration. 4. But
not of condemnation.

9. Again, he was crucified in that he was spit upon, the most contemptible
act almost that can be; especially because being bound, he could not readily
wipe it off, but stood with their filthy spawlings upon his face, Esaias 50. 6. I
hid not my face from shame and spitting.

10. He was crucified in his mockings, blindfolding him, asking him who smote
him, making sport with him as the Philistines did with Sampson, when his eyes
were put out.

The Roman Emperors had five privileges. 1. A Crown of gold was set upon
their heads. 2. A Scepter put into their hands. 3. Clothed with purple raiment.
4. Spoken to on the knee. 5. Salutations. All these they did in scorn to
Christ.

1. They crowned him with thorns Matthew 27. 29. (...)
sharp as a needle or sword, able to pierce the hardest heel, and then smote
him on the head, thereby driving in the thorns, and making his head all bloody.

2. They put a reed into his hand instead of a Scepter.

3. They clothed him with a purple garment.

4. They bowed their knees in scorn.

5. They saluted him with hail King of the Jews. A great crucfixion to a
noble spirit to be thus mocked.

But all this was for our exaltation; for 1. he was crowned with thorns, that
we might be crowned with a crown of glory; Do men gather grapes of thorns?
yet the blood of Christ's thorns, was the blood of our grapes.

2. He had a reed in his hand, to teach us to him it belongs to sway the
Scepter, Esaias 6. 9 And perhaps to testify that he will not break the bruised
reed.

3. He was clothed with a purple robe, that he might cloth up with the Isa.
1. 16.
purple robe of glory, and purge us from our purple sins. If your sins were
as scarlet, I will make them white as snow.

4. They bowed the knee, to teach us that every knee should bow and yield
subjection to him. Phil. 2. 10.


5. They saluted him as King, to teach us he is the only King of his Church.

11. He was crucified in his scourgings) being a shameful punishment, fit for
dogs, slaves and vassals; A strange sight Matthew. 27. 28. Isa. 19. 1.
to see a King scourged, especially by his vassals. (A punishment they
threatened Nero, to scourge him to death, adjudging him rather a beast then a
man) what is it to see the God of heaven stripped naked and scourged before the
multitude? And as it was shameful, so it was very painful, because he was in
his enemies hands, which its likely would show him no mercy, that sought his
life; Hierom says six were appointed: two to beat him with rods till they were
weary, and two with cords till they were weary, and two with wires till they
were weary. Indeed sometimes they did not only virgis caedere, but whipped them
with plummets of lead or sharp bones at the end of the cords, which tare off
the flesh to the bone, called chastising with Scorpions; If the Jews scourged
him, it is likely he received forty stripes save one; but it is probable that
as he was sencenced by the Roman Judge, so he was scourged after the Roman
manner by Roman soldiers more cruelly (who usually have not the lightest hands
nor softest hearts) certainly till the blood issued out abundantly. The
ploughers ploughed on my back, they made long furrows, Psalm. 129. 3. Yea the
very bones appeared, Psalm. 22. 17. I may tell all my bones. And so great was
this punishment, that Pilate himself thought it would have moved compassion
from his enemies hearts, and therefore he brought him before them, saying,
Be^old the man! Per vulnera patent Christi viscera. Be^il. Corpus loris
verberatum ad corpus nostrum glorificandum Bern.


Oh the love of Christ; Christ might say as Zipporah said to Moses, Sponsa
sanguinum es mihi, A bloody Spouse thou art to me. But this was, that by his
stripes we might be healed, and freed both from the rods and lashes of a
wounded conscience, and from the Scorpions of eternal torments; And to tell us
afflictions and scourges in this life are like to be our portion. Christ bids
us every day to take up a Cross, and tells us all God loves he Luke 9 23. Rev.
3. 19
chastens, ^astigat quos amat, etiamsi non amat castigare. He chastens all he
loves, though he loves not to chasten. God had one Son sine flagitio, but has
no son sine flagello (Heb. 12.) he had one Son without sin but no son without
punishment: One Son sine corruptione, but no son sine correptione.

12. Lastly, Christ was crucified in his conde^natio^, in that they condemned
him Ioh. 19 6. Luke 13. 24
to death, 1. acknowledging him innocent, (saying, I am innocent of the blood
of this just man) and then condemning the innocent, because he stood in our
stead that were nocent: and to teach us that we are all by nature condemned men
before the Lord, till we get our pardon by Christ.

And lastly, that by him we might escape the sentence of eternal condemnation,
for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 8. 1.

CHAP. IV. The sufferings of Christ at and upon the Cross.
HAving finished the sufferings of Christ in his life, we now come to his
suffering in his death on the Cross in these words, And him crucified] For
greater love (says Christ) has no man, then this, that a man lay down his
life for his friends, John 15. 13. If as the Jews dream he had come as a great
Monarch, had trod on nothing but Crowns and Scepters, and the necks of Kings,
and had had the Potentates of the earth to attend his train, it had been
great love to us: Yea it had been some love if he had only pitied us in our
misery, and wept for us, as David did for Absalom: Or if he had pleaded for us,
and spoke a good word for us, as Jonathan did for David: Or if he had sent an
Angel for us: Or if himself had suffered disgrace, reproaches, Cant. 2, 5.
opprobryes, etc. But greater love he could not show, then to dye for us: skin
for skin, and all that a man has will be give to save his life; yet Christ's
life was not too dear for us; the spouse indeed was sick of love, but Christ
exceeded her, for he died for love. This is our Pelican that has nourished
and fed us with his blood. Many mothers can endure crying of their children,
and bearing them with pain, that would hardly dye for them; but the love of
Christ passed the love of women, for he dyed for us.

Yea greater love had Christ toward us then barely to dye for us, in three
respects. 1. A man may dye for another, Codrus for the Athenians Curtius to
preserve Rome.
if perhaps it be an honorable death, to get renoune after his death, as some
of the heathens have done. 2. If it be an easy death. 3. If it be for a dearly
beloved friend to whom he has been much engaged: Scarcely for a righteous man
will one dye says Paul, that is, that has lived justly: Yet for a good man
(that has been very beneficial to him) peradventure one would even dare to
dye; and Romans 5. 8.
yet it is but a peradventure neither.

But first, Christ died not an honorable death, the people applauding him, as
they did sometimes the Martyrs; But the shameful death of the Cross, Heb. 12.
2. He endured the Cross, and despised the shame. Now dishonor and shame to a
noble spirit is as bitter as death it self; And surely if to live with infamy
be worse then death, what is it then to dye with infamy?

It was shameful in five respects.

1. In that they made him carry his own Cross, or gallows whereupon he was
hanged, as when malefactors go with halters about their necks to execution.

2. It was shameful, in that he was 1 Ioh. 19. 23.
stripped naked to the scorn of Angels and men; even he that covers the heavens
with stars, the earth with flowers, the beasts with skins, and men with
raiment, even he was stripped naked (so far as modesty would permit say some)
and clothed Rev. 3. 17. 18.
only with his own innocence. To teach us we are naked of all righteousness,
and deserve to be stripped naked of all comforts, earthly and spiritual; And
that he might cloth us with the robes of his righteousness.

3. It was shmeful, in that he was hanged; a death meet for thieves, murderers
and execrable sinners; we count it a death too base for noble blood, although
they turn traitors, and therefore they have liberty to exchange the gallows
for the block.

To see a King hanged, what a shameful suffering were it? but for God to be
hanged on a gallows much more.

The Turks mock us at this day with our crucified God: and some of the heathens
said they would not believe in a hanged God; But the greater his sufferings
were, the greater was his love, and our misery, who deserved to hang in hell
for ever.

4. It was shameful, in that he was hanged with two thieves, and in the midst
as the Prince of thieves and murderers, and as the greatest malefactor, Esaias
53. 12. He was numbered among the transgressour^. His good name was as dear to
him as ours to us; Now which of us, especially being innocent, could be content
to be esteemed as murderers, adulterers, thieves, or the like? Yet perhaps
this might figure out the last judgment when repentant sinners shall be set on
the right hand, and the reprobates on the left (as one observes *) the one
sort to be saved, Sir John Heyward knight.
the other to be condemned.

5. It was shameful, because he was insulted over in his misery, as Sampson
was mocked by the Philistines at his death; he saved others, said they, but
cannot save himself; Come drwne from the Cross and we will believe in thee.
All that see me laugh me Psalm. 22. 7.
to scorn, they shoot out the lip, etc.

Secondly, as Christ died not an honorable death, so he suffered not an easy,
but a most bitter and painful death; he was Phil. 2. Heb. 12. 2.
obedient to death, even to the death of the Cross, he endured the Cross.
This appears even in what he suffered from men in his body (which yet was
less then what many Martyrs suffered being rouled naked in a barrel of nails,
racked, burned, etc.)

First, before he was laid upon the Cross. They gave him gall and vinegar to
drink, as Matthew reads it, Matthew 27. 34. (...): Or wine mingled with mirh,
as Mark reads it, Mark 15. 23. (...) (one explaines the other) That is, wine as
sharp as vinegar, and imbittered with mirh like gall, but not gall it self (as
Beza) Or rather I think it was mingled with both gall and mirh (as Gerard.)
Some indeed think this no part of his sufferings, and that it was not to
torment him, but ut mors ejus esset celerior, so Calvin: And Beza thinks the
good women brought the wine to cheer him, and that it was Vinum dulce sweet
Calvin in Ioc. Baroni Annal. An. no Christi 34. c. 84. Bera in Ioc. Prove. 31. 6.
wine, a kind of Nectar, (and so thinks Baronius) according to that of Solomon,
Prove. 31. 6. Give wine to him that is of a heavy heart. But this cannot be; for
it is not likely the soldiers would let the godly women give him wine to
cheer him, and its very probable the soldiers gave this wine to him
themselves. ^. It is cold vinegar mingled with gall, and wine mingled with
myrrh, which cannot properly be called sweet wine. 3. It was prophesied Ps.
69. 21. they gave him gall and vinegar to drink. 4. They loved him not so well
to cheer him.

^. Others say they used to give wine Ad stuporem and mentis alienationem as
Arias Mont.
mixed with myrrh, to inebriate and intoxicate their senses, that were to die
this death, that they might not feel their pain. But this were a foul
murdering sin to make men drunk, before execution which should be a time of
greatest and most solemn repentance, thereby causing them to die in their sins
without mercy.

But thirdly I rather conceive the Jews Cornel. ^alapide Gerard. in Harm. Evang.
did it ad ludibrium and ad tormentum, to mock and afflict him, for they
brought sour wine like vinegar, and mingled it with Gall and myrrh, to make
it bitter enough, so that they did not afford Christ that comfort they did to
ordinary malefactors.

And this was to teach us that our cup should have been gall and wormwood to
all eternity; but Christ has drunk the cup of wormwood and gall, that we might
drink the cup of consolation.

2. They rackt him (as somethink) till all his bones were out of joint, Psalm.
22. 14. All my bones are out of joint, for so (they say) was the custom of the
Romans to deal with those that were to be crucified.

3. His arms being stretched out, they nailed him by the hands, bearing the
weight of his own body and then they nailed his feet to the foot of the cross,
and so taking up the cross with this bloody sacrifice upon it, probably they
set it down into the earth (or otherwise making it fast) thereby exceedingly
rending the wounds and shaking his body.

They pierced my hands and feet, or Lyon-like tore they them, as the text with
the marginall note reads it, Psalm. 22. 17. and (...)
thus were his hands and arms spread wide open to take us into his arms, and
embrace us with the arms of his mercy.

4. Thus he continued hanging the Mors minus poenae, quam mora mortis habet.
weight of his whole body by his hands, the flesh rending, opening, bleeding,
for three hours together, which could not be but a great torment. They would
likewise feign had his legs broken with an iron rod, and heard his bones crash
in his skin, but that God prevented them.

And more they would have done but could not being dead already; only one out
of desparate malice, runs at him and thrusts his spear into his heart to be
sure to kill him, and make his death to be without question.

But thus was Christ's heart wounded, that our hearts might be eased and
cheared. For from thence came water and blood, (the pericardium about the
heart, having a little bag of water to cool it, which they pierced) to
signify he would be to us both water and blood, both Justification and
sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

2. Thus you see what he suffered from men, which were his bodily sufferings;
now follows what he suffered from God in his soul, which were the soul of his
sufferings, which in comparison of what he felt from men, were but as the
biting of a flea to the tearing of a lion. If God once fight against us, who
can stand before him when he is angry? (have pity upon me O my friends says
Job, for the hand of God has touched me, Job. 10. 11.) And was not the hand of
God also most heavy upon him, when God made him feel all the wrath his elect
should have suffered in hell to all eternity, for he bare our sorrows (Esaias
53. 4. Lam. 1. 12.) though perhaps not in the same kind, and Perkins on the
Creed, says, He suffr^d the very torments of the damned in his soul, Perk. 1.
vol. p. 215. And Answerable in extremity of pain to the torments of hell, says
Cusan. excit. l. 10. p. 619. and Field. on the Chapter p. 448. 2 Timothy 4. 16.
different in regard of time, for Christ was not capable of every degree of the
second death, as separation from the love of God, despair, eternity of
torment, yet equivalent to the torments of the damned.

If the wrath of God against one sinner for one sin be unquenchable fire, and
the worm that never dies, wailing and gnashing of teeth for ever, what
torment was upon him who drunk up the cup of Gods wrath for all our sins? This
made him roar and cry out, My God my God why have thou forsaken me, as if he
should say all my friends have forsaken me, my disciples are gone from me, but
will thou forsake me also, he cries not out of Peter or the rest of his
disciples, saying, O my disciples, why do you forsake me, but O my God why
have thou forsaken me. And secondly will thou now forsake me, now I am dying,
now I am in this my greatest conflict and misery? its a great affliction to be
forsaken of God at any time, but especially in times of affliction, sorrow and
death. 3. He calls him still his God, My God. I will put my trust in thee,
though thou do forsake me; Christ himself wanted comfort, not faith, for he
was not forsaken in regard of the Hypostaticall union Q^od ^emel assumpsit
nunquam postea dimisit. Dam^sc. Vestitutus omni solatio. Tao. Field. on Chapter
nor o^ his faith, but of his comfort and ravishing joy he formerly found in
God, as in a swound there is the stoppage of the souls operation, or as the
sun when eclipsed, (for comfort is not ad esse fidei, but ad been esse not to
the being, but to the wellbeing of faith) 4. And lastly will thou forsake me?)
even Me, of whom not long since, thou did pronounce this is my beloved son in
whom I am well pleased? Yet must we not think this acclamation was vox errantis
the voice of one that was deceived, for he was indeed forsaken. 2. Nor
murmurantis. 3. Nor desperantis. of one that murmured or despaired; but
impostulantis of one that mourned and prayed* even a strong supplication that
he might not be thus forsaken.

And thus was Christ forsaken, that, we might be beloved and never forsaken, I
will never fail thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 6.

3. Thus you have seen Christ died neither an honorable nor an easy death;
Romans 5. 7.
Neither yet did he die this bitter death for just or good men, or for his
friends that had dearly loved him; but Ez^k. 16. 8.
for us ungodly, enemies, sinners, that hated him in our hearts. When he saw us
in our blood, that was the time not of his 1 Timothy 1. 13. of whom I am chief.
loathing, but of his love to us, yea to some of us greater sinners then those
that perish; greater sinners are in heaven then some in hell. Alas what are we
(may we say as Mephibosheth said to David) that the Lord should look upon such
dead dogs as we are, to dye pro vermiculis and vernaculis? for bondslaves,
for base worms compounded of slime and dust and the Devils poison; a lion for
a dog, the Kings son for a traitor, a man for a worm; nay for some Snake or
Serpent that had stung his friend to death. Yea and when he died not for
Angels, but passed by those vessels of gold, and embraced us vessels of clay.

CHAP. V. We must study to know Christ in his Satisfaction.
ANd thus we have heard how we are to study to know Christ in his crucifixion.
It follows, thirdly and lastly, We must study to know Christ in his
satisfaction, in two particulars. 1. That there is no other name under heaven
whereby we can be saved, but only by the name of Jesus Christ. Not by Saints,
Angels, our merits, or Opera nostra sunt dona dei, per pauca, and multis malis
per* mixta. Aug. Quisqui^ enumerat merita sua, quid enumerat nisi mertia tua
Aug.
good works; Alas what could we merit that were ungodly, sinners, enemies? Or
what good thing could we do to inherit eternal life? If we could scourge out
rivers of blood, out fast Moses and Elias, glaze our eyes with tears, nail
them to heaven with devotion, weep a sea of tears, yea of blood; Should we pray
never so much (yea wear out our knees in prayer) read never so much the Word
of God and other good books, hear never so many sermons, refrain from all
gross sins, build Hospitals, give all our goods to the poor, and our bodies
to be burned; yet can we not make God satisfaction thereby or obtain salvation,
Mich. 6. 8. 1 Cor. 13. 1. 2 Nay. Though we should attain to never so great a
degree of repentance, and sanctity of life, yet could we not obtain salvation
thereby; nay our perfect holiness in heaven, is not the meritorious cause of
our salvation there, but the righteousness of Christ; much less a Christians
graces here on earth: which made Paul desire with the loss of al his own
righteousness to be found in Christ, Not having Phil. 1. 9. 6. Tutius est etc.
^ell.
his own righteousness, but that which is in him by faith.

Its true, Christians may look to their graces as evidences of their part in
Christ and salvation (and the clearer they are, the greater will be their
comfort) but not as causes; They may likewise make use of duties as means to
bring them to Christ and salvation, but not to be saved by them: As the Dove
made use of her wings to fly to the Ark, but trusted not in her wings, but in
the Arc. Suppose those that were stung with fiery serpents, had used any other
remedies or medicines to cure the poison, besides looking upon the brazen
serpent, had they not been of no value? Or as those that in the time of Noah's
flood trusted to their own houses, the highest trees or mountains, or any other
thing besides the Ark, were they not all drowned? so must they all perish that
expect salvation by any other name, but only by the name of Jesus Christ,
whether Turks, Jews, Pagans, Papists, ignorant and civil persons among our
selves, or whoever.

2. As we are to believe there is no salvation out of Christ, so we are to know
that Christ is a sufficient Savior, to save Heb. 7. 25.
perfectly those that come to him and trust in him; from these two grounds.

First, because he has perfectly fulfilled the law for us, whereby we stand as
1 John 4. 17. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Romans 5 19.
righteous in the sight of God, as Christ was for us; and God accepts of us
as if we had fulfilled the law in our own persons.

And secondly, because he has fully satisfied the wrath of God for all our
sins and pacified him toward us, as if we had never sinned, or as if we our
selves had suffered for them in hell for ever, Col. 2. 14. blotting out the
handwriting of ordinances against us, so as now nothing can be read against us.

And this appears by his resurrection, Ascension, and sitting at the right
hand of God, in his glory, triumphing over all his enemies, which were not for
satisfaction, but to make application of our redemption, and for testification
of the sufficiency of his satisfaction. Hence says Paul it is Christ that
died, yea Rather that is risen Romans 8. 34.
again, thereby showing the sufficiency of his death, that God is satisfied,
and all is finished.

Nay certainly Christ has satisfied God more abundantly for us, then if we our
selves had gone to hell for ever, for we had been but always satisfying, and
God had not been fully satisfied, but in Christ he is fully and for ever
satisfied, so as now we may plead pardon not only from mercy but from
righteousness and justice it self, Romans 1. 17. and Romans 3. 15. 16.

So then we must conclude that Christ's satispassion is our satisfaction, (as
Luther pleases to call it, for by Christ crucified we are justified; and if
the least of his sufferings were meriti infiniti, of infinite Non moriendo
Greg. Sine Christi adventu. Athanas. Minima Christi poena. So Cypr. and Bern.
merit, so that God could have saved us without Christ, (as Athan.) or with
Christ not dying for us (as Greg.) or with the least degree of his sufferings
(as Cypr.) yet I am sure all his sufferings were meriti definiti determined of
God, and now we are sure all is finished.

CHAP. VI. We must study to know Christ with Application.
ANd thus I have finished the first particular mentioned, namely, how we ought
to know Christ by speculation, viz. to know him in his incarnation. 2. In his
crucifixion. 3. In his satisfaction, which though it be the lowest form of
knowledge, yet many remain ignorant of it, and without this knowledge we cannot
attain to the higher form of knowledge of application.

2. And so we proceed to the second particular, we must study to know Christ
with the knowledge of application; not only to know Christ as a Savior, but
that he is my Savior, stood in my room, bare my sins, and suffered the wrath
of God for me, whereby God is as well pleased with me, as if I had suffered for
them in my own person in hell eternally. To be able to say with Job Job. 19. 25.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and with Thomas Ioh. 20. 28.
my Lord and my God; and with Paul Gal. 2. 20.
he loved me and gave himself for me; and with Simeon, mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. Luke 2. 30.


First, This is the sweetest knowledge. The sun is sweetest when it shines
out, and not when hid in a cloud: so God is sweetest when he lifts up his
countenance upon us, and not when he hides his face from us; Ps. 4. 7.
Let him kiss me says the spouse, with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1. 2.
Ps. 63. 3.
that is, let him show me some love tokens, (As the Rabbis say Moses died ad
osculum oris dei, with a kiss from the mouth of God) for his love is sweeter
then wine, and better then life; good or evil affects not till apprehended,
Job lamented not at all his losses till a messenger related them to him. Nor
did Jacob rejoice that Joseph was alive till he knew it. Who joys in an
inheritance befallen him till he know* it; Nor can we joy in Christ a Savior
till we know him to be our Savionr. Indeed Paul knovves it already, yet he
would fain know it better; for the strongest faith is subject to shakings as
the brightest stars to twinkling, as Noah's Ark to tossing with the waves, or as
a ship at anchor to shaking with the winds 2 Cor. 4. 8. 9. Perplexed says
Paul, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but not
destroyed. Thus we see the faith of those that have drunk deepest of the cup of
Gods love, is subject to fainting and winnowing, but it shall never fail, Luke
22. 2.

Object. 1. If any shall object, a man may be saved by faith of adherence,
though he has not faith of evidence, that is by resting upon Christ for
salvation, though he come not to know particularly that Christ is his, as
appears by these texts, Job. 13. 14. Ps. 51. 11. 12.
Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Who is among you that fears the
Lord, and obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no
light? let him trust in the name of the Lord Esa. 50. 10.
and stay upon his God, etc. Answ. I answer first, i^s true, there may be faith
in Christ, and by consequence salvation obtained by those that know not that
Christ is theirs; Or a man may be saved by faith of Adherence without some kind
of evidence. But there is a twofold evidence. 1. Of salvation, and that Christ
is ours. 2. Of promises upon which our adhaerence is grounded. Ioh. 6. 40. Heb.
11. 13. Heb. 11. 13. Zach. 1^. 10. Voluntas estceca sine ratione.
Now a man can have no faith, no not of adhaerence without an evidence of
promises upon which his adhaerence is built; for faith is an act of the
understanding as well as of the will, for the will acts by the understanding,
or else it were an irrational act; But, Quisquis credit rationabiliter credit,
(as Bishop Davenant) whoever believes must at least have a reason of his faith,
for he must be ready to give a reason of his faith, as Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 3.
15.

And though the promises may be but darkly seen or apprehended in a weak
believer: yet so far as faith acts, so far he sees a promise to ground
his faith upon; As all that were cured by the brazen Serpent, saw the Serpent
more or less, though more dimly. Perhaps sometime a weak believer can see no
promise, yet he has a promise, and at that time he may not be able to act his
faith, though he has faith. If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, 2 Timothy 2 13.

But secondly, though a man may be saved by faith of adherence without evidence
of the spirit (or comfort) as before is said, yet no man can live or die
comfortably till he know Christ is his in particular: As a condemned man that
has his pardon granted, shall not die, yet he has little joy in his life till
he know of it: So such a man may go to heaven, but he will go mourning to
heaven; As Christ went to heaven being taken up in a C^oud; Or as the kine that
carried the Arc went right, but they lowed as they went.

Obj. 2 No man can know Christ to be his in particular; for then he must know
it either by the word or by the spirit inwardly persuading his heart of it. Not
by the word which speaks only in general (ordinarily) as Whosoever believes,
etc. As many as recieved him, etc. But mertions not in particular that we have
received him, that we believe, or are beloved, Dan. 9. 23.
etc. (except to a few sparingly, Luke 1. 28.
as to Daniel, O Daniel greatly beloved, and Mary, Hail Mary greatly beloved,
highly favored) etc.

Now our hearts make the application thus. But I believe in him, I have
received him. Ergo. But our hearts are deceitful above all things, and
therefore are not to be trusted unto, Yea there is a generation that are pure
in their own eyes, whose hearts are not washed from their filthiness Prove. 30.
Gal. 6. 3. Rev. 3. 17.
and many think themselves something when they are nothing, being deceived in
their own imagination: And if you say the Spirit of God persuades my
conscience, how do you know it is the Spirit of God and not a delusion?

I answ. That we may know particularly Gal. 6. 4.
Christ is ours, is without all question; else why are we commanded to prove ou
selves whether we be in the faith? to make our calling and election sure? The
Papists themselves say all Gods laws are possible, even legal, much more
Evangelicall; and therefore it is possible to make our calling and election
sure.

2. Why has God left signs to prove our faith, Matt. 5. 4. 5. 6. 1 John 3. 14.
which were in vain if it were impossible?

3. How could we else call God father if we could not know him to be our
Father? 2. Rejoice our names are written in heaven? 3. Be thankful that we are
made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light? Col. 1. 12
4, Desire the coming of Christ? 5. Or triumph over death 1 Cor. 15, 55.
if we could not know Christ to be ours?

4. This Paul, John, Thomas; knew yea the whole Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 5. 1.

5. It is clear by these Scriptures, 1 John 5. 13. 1 John 4. 13. 1 Cor. 2. 12.
Heb. 10. 34.

Caution. Not that any know it perfectly without some reluctance of the flesh,
because we know but in part, our assurance proceeds from knowledge Gal. 5. 17. 1
Cor. 13. Col. 2. 2.
and the most perfect faith is mixed with some diffidence Heb. 3. 12.
: Yet the least measure of faith has this Knowledge in some degree, for the
weakest faith must apprehend some promise it rests upon, or else we believe
presumptuously as we heard before.

And secondly, though the word does not witness in particular, and a natural
conscience is blind and deceitful Icr. 17. 9. Tit. 1. 15.
yet a conscience enlightened by the spirit cannot be deceived in any thing
necessary to salvation; because the spirit has promised to lead us into all
saving truth; Ioh. 16. 13. 1 Ioh. 3. 20.
and the spirit bears a double witness. 1. That Christ is ours. 2. That it is
the spirit of God that witnesses and not a delusion Romans 8. 16. 1 Ioh. 5. 10.
Indeed he that dreameth thinks he is awake, and mad men think they are sober,
but those that are sober, and are awake know they are sober and are awake; We
have received says Paul, The spirit of God that we might know the things that
are given us of God. 1 Cor. 2. 12.

CHAP. VII. We must study to know Christ with an affectionate knowledge.
THirdly, we must study to know Christ with the knowledge of affection; For so
knowledge is often taken in scripture, not for bare speculation, but for
knowledge clothed with affection; Depart from me faith Christ, I know you not
Luke 13. 27. Psalm. 1. 6.
That is, I love you not; The Lord-knoweth, That is, he loves the way of the
righteous.

So here I desire to know Christ: That is, to love Christ more, and to inflame
your hearts with love to him, that he may dwell in your hearts by faith, but
Ephesians. 3. 17.
rooted in love. Wonderful has been the love of those to Christ, that have
known him savingly. God forbid says Paul that I should joy in any thing, save
in Christ Jesus Gal. 6. 14. Heb. 11. 26.
that is, in comparison of him, for whom he counted all things but as loss,
dung and vanity. Moses esteemed the reproach, disgrace, contempt and scorn of
Christ greater riches then a Kingdom: How then did he esteem of the honor
and riches that come by Christ?

David prised him above heaven and its glory, or earth and its comforts. Whom
have I in heaven but thee? In heaven f Psalm. 73. 25.
there is fullness of joy and pleasures for ever, the society of Saints and
Angels; yet he regarded nothing in heaven but Christ. And whom do I desire on
earth beside thee? though he had the pleasures of a kingdom, his wives and
children, yet he regarded them not in comparison of Christ; How did the Martyrs
love Christ, who rejoiced that their bodies might burn for him? Nay, one said,
Shall I die but once for my Savior? I would I could die a 100. times for him.

Ignatius cried out when Christ was crucified, Amor meus crucisixus. My love my
love is crucified; As if he had no other love left when Christ was crucified.

Lambert at the stake cried out; None but Christ, None but Christ.

George Carpenter being asked whether he he loved not his wife and children
when they wept before him? yes said he, my wife and children are dearer to me
then all Bavaria, yet for the love of Christ I know you not.

Kylian a dutch Schoolmaster was asked the like question, if he loved not his
wife and children? Yea said he, if all the world were gold and mine to dispose
of, I would give it all to live with them, yea though it were in prison, yet my
soul and Christ are dearer to me then they all.

That noble Marquess, Galeaceus Caracciolus being tempted with money to go
back to Italy, said. Let their money perish with them, who esteem all the gold
in the world worth one days society with Jesus Christ and his holy spirit.

Henry Voes said, if I had ten heads, they should all off for Christ.

Ignatius said, let fire, rackes, pullyes, yea and all the torments of hell
come on me so I may win Christ.

John Ardley Martyr, said if every hair of my head were a man, they should all
suffer for the faith of Christ.

It was the speech of S. Ier. If my father Clerks mirror or looking glass
for Saints.
stood weeping on his knees before me, my mother hanging on my neck behind, and
all my brethren, sisters, and children howling on every side: I would tread on
my father, fling off my mother, despise my brethern, sisters, children, and all
that I might run to Christ.

Master Fox could scarce deny any man that begd an alms in the name of Christ,
he so dearly loved him. And Peter tells us, To you that believe he is precious,
1 Pet. 2. 7.

Thus have I given you a taste of the affection his Saints have borne him, that
have savingly known him; And surely they that love him least, can say with
Peter, Lord thou know all things, thou know I love thee; yea I mourn
that I can love thee no more.

Master Welsh a Suffolk Minister weeping at table, being asked the reason,
said, it was because he could love Christ no more; O that as Mary went to the
Sepulcher and wept there: So we could go mourning to our graves, because we
love Christ no more.

O that as Christ was Crucifixus, fastened to the cross, so that he were
cordifixus, fastened to our hearts; we cannot love Christ as Christ has loved
us, as the light of all candles can never make a sun; Certainly our cold love
to Christ is almost as great a wonder as his great love to us, and may justy
make us fear that we never yet savingly knew him. If a worm loved me, would I
not love it again? Vespatian when a poor maid said she was in love with him,
he gave her a reward, and wrote it down, Vespasiano adamato, to her that loved
Vespasian: And shall Christ so love us, and we not love him again? Suppose we
had a friend that had died for us a temporal death: O how dear and sweet
would the remembrance of such a friend be to us, and the thought of him fetch
tears from our eyes? Oh how dear should Christ be then to us that has
suffered the infinite wrath of God for us, delivered us from hell, reconciled us
to God, purchased heaven and al good things on earth, so far as needful for
us; Oh that Christ would kindle this fire of love in our hearts to him, for we
cannot love him except he enable us to love him; nor can we love him except he
love us first, and so our love rebounds by reflection as the sunbeams shining
upon the wall, it heates by reflection. Nothing inflames our hearts more to
love Christ, then seriously to meditate of the love of Christ. Ps. 39. 3.
Whiles I was musing the fire kindled says David, (g) And when they shall see
him whom they have peirced, then they shall mourn for him: Not only with
tears of Zach. 12. 10.
compunction, but also of affection.

CHAP. VIII. We must study to know Christ with a virtuall and operative
knowledge.
FOurthly and lastly, we must study to know Christ with an operative, and
powerful knowledge. For so know ledg is often taken in Scripture. Oh that thou
had known in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace, Luke 19. 42.
that is seriously considered of them, cum affectu and effect^, to repent and
embrace Christ. Adam in honor is said to have no understanding Psalm. 49. ult.
because he made no use of his understanding. It is said of Christ he knew no
sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
because he did no sin. So here we are required to study to know Christ, not
with bare speculation, but practically and operatively; Phil. 3. 10. That I may
know him and the power of his resurrection; that is, that we may find the
operation of that power in our souls which Christ showed in raising himself
from the dead. And this appears in 2. particulars. First, whereby he gives us
power against the love and dominion of sin, to feel virtue and strength from
Christ, to crucify our sins that crucified our Savior. They that are
Christ's (says Paul) have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof. Gal. 5.
24.
And if we know Christ to be ours, we know that our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin. Romans 6. 6. 1 Cor. 15. 31. Ephesians. 4. 21.


And truly there is nothing more powerful to mortify sin then the knowledge
and meditation of the sufferings of Christ. If one should kill our father,
would we hug and embrace him as our friend? let him eat at our table? and not
rather hate and detest the very sight of him, and seek to be revenged of him?
If a Snake should sting thy dearly beloved spouse to death, would thou
preserve it alive? warm it at the fire? hug it in thy bosom? and not rather
stob it with a thousand wounds? And were not our sins the causes and
instruments of Christ's death? Were not they the whips that scourged him? the
nails, the cords, the spears, the thorns that wounded him, and fetched his
heart blood from him? And can we love our sins that killed our Savior? Can a
spouse love her husband, and her heart embrace an adulterer. We complain of
the sin of Judas and of the Jews, and seem to hate them, and spit at the
mention of them: and can we love our Judas sins that set them all on work, and
put Christ to death?

And certainly he knows nothing of Jesus Christ savingly, as the truth is in
Jesus that has not put off the old man, which is corrupt according to
deceitful lusts. Ephesians. 4. 21. 22.
Though not totally, yet abating the love and power of them daily, as a man
wounded mortally daily weakens; Or as a tree cut at the root daily withers by
little and little; or as a dead man in the grave daily rots, stinks and wastes;
for so says Saint Paul, by our rejoicing in Christ I die daily. 1 Cor. 15. 31.


There were five Monks that were studying what was the best means to mortify
sin. One said to meditate of death; the second, to meditate of judgment; the
third to meditate; of the joys of heaven; the fourth, to meditate of the
torments of hell; the fifth, to meditate of the love and sufferings of Christ.
And indeed this is the strongest motive of all. Camer: reports that Solomon had
Camer.
a glass wherein if a worm were put, and one pricked it so that the blood
issued, it would break the glass: I am sure if any thing, the blood of Christ
will break our hearts: As they say, the blood of a Goat will dissolve the
Adamant.

Secondly, we must study to know the power of his resurrection, in raising us
up to newness of life, changing our natures, creating in us new hearts, and
making us new creatures. Ephesians. 4. 21. 23. 24.
That we may be able to say with Paul, I live, yet q Gal. 2. 20. Col. 3 1. 2.
Phil. 3. 10.
not I, but Christ lives in me; that we are risen with Christ, seeking and
setting our affections on the things above, and not on earth; having felt the
spirit of Christ in our hearts like a loadstone, drawing our hearts to heaven
whither he is ascended; Or as the Sun draws up the ^^pours from the earth;
that whereas before we were like mouls, always moving in the earth; now we are
like the Eagles soaring up to heaven, being clothed with the Sun, and having
the Moon under our feet.

CHAP. IX. That the knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified is the sweetest
and most excellent knowledge.
ANd thus I have finished the first particular, viz. What knowledge of Christ
is to be studied of us, consisting of four particulars, namely,

The knowledge of 1. Speculation. 2. Application. 3. Affection. 4. Operation.

2. Now follows the second particular; Why we ought especially to study to
know Jesus Christ and him crucified. And that for these three reasons.

Because it is the most 1. Excellent. Knowledge in the world. 2. Profitable.
Knowledge in the world. 3. Comfortable Knowledge in the world.

First, the knowledge of Christ is the most excellent knowledge. I count all
things as loss, not only for the gaining of Christ, but for the excellency
of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, says Saint Paul, (a) and yet to
gain Christ is much Phli. 3. 8. (...).
more then to know him. Nay, more, In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, Colos. 2. 3. Now treasures we know are abundance of precious
Thesauri sunt Divitiae congregater Aq.
things, (So Chrysostom. Aquin. Theoph.) In Christ there is all rich and precious
knowledge, a fountain of riches; Oh the depth of the riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of Christ, Romans 11. 33.

Nay further, In him are All treasures. He that knows Christ has all
profitable knowledge, so that he need know nothing else to make him happy; And
contrarily Si quishaberet librum ubi esset tota scientia non quaereret nisi ut
sciret illum librum sic, and nos non oportet amplius quaerere nisi Christum
Aquin. in Col. 2. 3.
if he know all things else, and knows not Christ, he has no rich or precious
knowledge, no treasures of knowledge, but empty and unprofitable knowledge.

3. Nay yet more] All treasures are HID in him; As men do hide and lay up their
treasures from the sight and knowledge of men, so there is such a vast sea of
treasures and riches in the knowledge of Christ, as men cannot apprehend, And
that in two respects. 1. propter debilitatem intellectus, as a candle is not
seen of the blind, so our understandings are not able to discern them: 1 Cor.
2. 14. And secondly, propter velamen oppositum, as a candle in a dark
Lantern, for they are not fully revealed (As Aquin.) Hence says the Apostle.
1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has Romans 8. 18. Nos habemus non limpidos, sed lippos occulos,
Acquin. 1 Cor. 2. 10.
not seen the riches that are to be found in Christ, any further then they are
revealed by the spirit of Christ. ( d)

Reas. 1. Now the reason why the knowledge of Christ and him Crucified is so
excellent; Is, because it has a more excellent, and higher revelation then the
knowledge of all other things; Adam had knowledge of the creatures by natural
instinct, yea and of God too; but had not the least scintillas of the knowledge
of Christ. Plato by light of nature wrote of God the Creator, but could not
write a word of Christ the Redeemer; and the reason is, because we may see
something of God a Creator in the Creature, but all the frame of heaven and
earth could not bring the least knowledge of Christ a Redeemer: But this
knowledge came by special revelation immediately from God 1 Col. 1. 26.
and therefore is especially to be inquired after, 1 Cor. 2. 7. We speak the
mystery of God, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world to
our glory.

Secondly,

And this appears in these five respects.

1. The excellency of the knowledge of God appears in the knowledge of Christ.
2. The sweetness of the word consists in the revelation of Christ. 3. The
knowledge of all the works of God are not so excellent as the knowledge of
Christ. 4. The excellency of man is that he knows Christ. 5. The excellency
of the works of man are, that they proceed from man endued with the knowledge
of Christ.

First I say, the sweetness and excellency of the knowledge of God himself
appears in the knowledge of Christ.

The light of the knowledge of the glory of God shines in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

And this appears in three particulars.

1. In regard of his person: for he is the image of the invisible God, the
print of 1 Col. 1, 15
the face of God is seen in him, even the wisdom, holiness, goodness, mercy,
etc. and all the attributes of God did shine in his son in a super-eminent
manner, (and that in carne visibili, in visible flesh) even as the Moon
resembles the Sun, or as some times the child is the very picture of the
Father; So that Christ might truly say, he that has seen the son has seen
the father, because he has seen the attributes of the father shining in the
son. And hence he is styled the brightness or luster Heb. 1. 3. (...)
of his fathers glory, and the Character or express image of his person. ( g)

Secondly, in regard of the work of Redempt ion, wh in all the attributes of
God shine forth more gloriously then ever they would have done if Christ had
not redeemed us: As the glory of his wisdom to find out such a way to save man
by uniting God and man together, Romans 11. 33, which the wit of men and Angels
Psa. 85. 10.
could never have found out: The glory of his holiness and justice against
sin, that rather then sin shall not go unpunished, his own son shall be
punished. The glory of his mercy, goodness and Ioh. 3. 16
love, that rather then man shall dye, his own son shall suffer for us; he
shall dye that we may live: he shall be crucified that we may be glorified. The
glory of his power, that he is able to bring life out of death, to fetch honey
out of the Lions Carcass, and to support man's nature to bear such infinite
wrath. And hence it is when Christ was borne, that the Angels came out of
heaven, singing, and rejoicing, saying, Now Glory to God on Luke 2. 14
high. As if God had never the like glory revealed before, no not in the work
of the whole Creation, and certainly if we had stood in innocence we could
never have conceived God, so just and severe against sin, so merciful and
loving to let his own son suffer to show mercy to us, etc. as now we see he is
in our redemption by Jesus Christ.

3. But thirdly, and especially the sweetness of the knowledge of God appears
in the knowledge of Christ in relation to us: Because to know God without
Christ, is to know him our enemy, a revenging God, a consuming fire which makes
us fear and tremble to think of God; As it is with the Devils, and was with
Adam after his fall, he ran from God, as his greatest enemy.

But to know God in the face of Jesus Christ is sweet and comfortable. This is
life eternal to know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. And the reason is, because now we know God, to be our God, our merciful,
loving, gracious, and reconciled father which is in heaven; that now we can
with open face, and not like Trayrors, with our faces covered, behold the glory
of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

As Moses could with delight see God pass by in all his Royalty and glory when
he was hid in the Rock; so Gods attributes shining out of the Rock Christ
Jesus, are sweet and lovely to us ( that Rock was Christ.)

For now, if I know God to be a wise God that knows all things that are done
on earth, the greater is my comfort, for then he is the more able to know what
I want, and to take care of me.

Is he a holy God? The better for me, because then he is the more able to
sanctify me. Ioh. 1. 16.


Is he a just God? The better for me, for then he must needs pardon me, seeing
Christ his own son has dyed for me, Romans 8. 33.

Is he very merciful? Then he will spare me, and take pity upon me. Mal. 3.
17. Psa. 130. 34. Psalm. 103.


Is he loving and amiable in his disposition? Then he will take pleasure and
delight in me.

Is he strong, mighty and powerful? then he is the more able to defend me from
my greatest and strongest enemies. Romans 8. 31.

Is he a rich God, that has all things in heaven and earth? the better for me,
for then he is the more able to provide for me what ever I stand in need of,
because God is my God reconciled to me, and all that is in God is for me.

But on the contrary, out of Christ the thoughts of God are terrible to us, we
look upon him as our greatest enemy; As the Devils that look upon God out of
Christ, they believe and tremble; Or as a sl^ve that looks upon his cruel
master, or as a foul felon upon a severe Judge: I knew said the evil servant,
thou wast an hard man. And the reason is, because all the attributes of God are
now against him. All this is against me, says Jacob. Genesis 42. 36.


Is he a wise God? the worse for me, for then he is more able to find out my
sins, and knows all the wickedness my heart is privy to. Jer. 17. 9


Is he holy? then he must needs hate, me, that am so filthy Hab. 1. 13


Is he just? the worse for me, for then he must needs punish me, and be
revenged on me for my sins.

Is he an almighty powerful God? then how easy is it for him at his pleasure
to break me in pieces, to grind me to powder, and to consume me in his wrath,
who am in his hands but as a vessel of clay in the hands of the potter, as
chafe before the wind, or as stubble before the fire?

Is he full of love, mercy and pity? O that is my greatest misery, because I may
Luke 13. 28
see it extended to others, but I shall never taste a drop of his mercy; as
Dives could not have a drop of water to cool his tongue.

So that we see, it were good for such a man that there were no God, or that he
had never known him, and might never see his face, if he knows him not in
Christ.

2 Secondly the sweetness of the knowledge of the word of God consists in
this, that Jesus Christ is revealed in it; for else it were the most dreadful
book to us that ever was opened, like Ezekiels roll, that was written within
and without nothing but mourning, lamentation, and woe; Or like Vriahs letter:
containing the sentence of our own condemnation.

The moral law, the very image of God, and likeness of his nature, which is
so holy, righteous, just, and good: yet it seems like Draco's laws, that were
written with blood, even a law of death, terror, and condemnation, Gal. 3. 10
any further then it is a schoolmaster to drive us to Christ.

The ceremonial law as Circumcision, Passover, water out of the rock, the
brazen serpent, cities of refuge, tabernacle, washings, sacrifices, offerings.
What sweetness or goodness was in them any further, then they did typify
Christ? Alas, they were but as dry shells, Christ was the kernel: they were but
as so many glasses, but Christ was the fair face that was seen in them; they
were but as shadows, but the body was Christ, Col. 2. 17.

And the Gospel, the New Testament is nothing else but Christ in every leaf,
and how to walk in him; As Count Anholt that Princely Preacher was wont to
say, The Scriptures (especially the Gospel) they were but the swathling bands
of the child Jesus.

And certainly, if the word be the field, Christ is all the treasure that is
hid in that D. Stough. ton.
field; Or as a worthy and famous divine once of this City said, If all the
word of God be like a ring of Gold, yet Christ is the Pearl in that Ring of
Gold.

3. Thirdly, the knowledge of Christ is sweeter and more excellent then the
knowledge of all creatures, and things that God has created in heaven or
earth; indeed all knowledge is excellent, even of the meanest creatures; which
all men and women naturally affect, as we see in Eve that would adventure the
loss of Paradise to gain more knowledge, Genesis 3. 6. Even the plough-man
learnes to plough and sow his ground by instinct from God, Esaiah 28. 26.

And what pains do men still take to get knowledge of the creatures? as the
Astronomers, Philosophers, Geographers, etc? Yea, how do we admire the learning
of the heathens? the wisdom of Solomon, that could discourse from the Cedar to
the shrub? And a man of excellent* parts and deep learning, how is he honored
of all men?

But alas, what is all his knowledge and learning without the knowledge of
Christ? It is but of the creature; He can tell you the nature of a Star, of a
bird, of a beast, fishes, etc. He can discourse of Countries and nations, etc.
when perhaps a poor milke-maid can tell what Christ is better then he; and is
it not better to know what Christ is, then to know what a star, a tree, a fish,
a bird, or a beast is, or any other creature?

Nay; suppose the knowledge of the creature may lead thee to the knowledge of
God, as indeed it does: For the invisible things of God are seen by the
Creation of the world, even his eternal power and God head, Ro^, 1. 18 Yea,
what is all the world created, but God explained? (as learnedly Cusan: Mundus
universus est D^us explioatu^:) Every creature having as it were upon it the
print of his finger, the step of his foot, and the mark of his hand. The same
spot of ground brings forth a thousand several kinds of flowers, which shows
there is a God? Even a fly, what a great noise makes Qu^ibet ^erba Deum, Cic.
that little creature.? All the world cannot make one of them. Yea Pliny
considering and viewing the gnat, and the butterfly, the music of the one, and
the curious painting of the other, confessed that there was a God; Much more by
viewing the glorious heavens bespangled with so many stars as so many Pearls
or mountains of Gold, the mighty earth to hang upon nothing, the vast Ocean
that restless monster with perpetual agitation, who can but say, this is
digitus dei the finger, the hand of God? For Quibus machinis? quae ferramenta
said the heathens? What engines, what Iron tools etc. could be made use of, in
the framing this goodly structure? Surely none; Neither yet could they come
alone, neither could men make them, no more then birds or beasts could make
stately buildings in a glorious City.

But alas, if they should bring thee to the knowledge of God, yet they can
never bring thee to the knowledge of Christ: and then the knowledge even of God
himself will be uncomfortable.

So that we may truly say with Calvin; All knowledge makes us but fools and
mad men till we have learned Christ. And he that shall prefer the knowledge
Est insania praeter Christum quicquam scire. Calv. on Col. 2. 3.
of the creatures before the knowledge of Christ, prefers trifles before
treasures, quisquilias thesauro praefert (as Daven. on Col. 2. 3.)

4. Fourthly, the greatest excellency and honor of any man, is this, that he
knows Jesus Christ; this is more then all wisdom, beauty, riches, learning,
noble birth, or whatsoever other accoutrements.

Thus says the Lord; let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong
man glory in his strength, nor the rich man glory in his riches, but let him
that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me. Jer 9. 23,
24 intimating, that the knowledge of God in Christ, is our greatest glory. And
certainly God regards a man no more then he sees Christ in him: Christ (with
God) is all and in all, Col. 3. 11: That is, God has no respect to a man for
any thing else, either the more, or the less to regard him, because he is a
Jew of the stock of Abraham, or that he is a Gentile, whether learned as were
the Grecians, or unlearned as were the Barbarians, or Scythians ( Barbarorun^
Barbarissimi) whether poor bondslaves and servants, or masters, all is one to
God, only he looks at a man as he sees him in Christ; as he preferred poor
Lazarus before rich Dives, because he saw Christ in Lazarus, and not in Dives;
Job 34. 19 Act. 10. 34. Gal. 6. 3. Mal 3. 17.
Tamberlaine in his wars, one having found a great pot of gold digd up (as I
remember.) he brought it to Tamberlain, who asked whether it had his fathers
stamp? but when he saw it had the Roman stamp, he would not own it: So God
will own none, but those that have the stamp of Christ and his image upon them:
But he will own the poorest and meanest of his servants, that have Christ
shining in them, as his Jewels, as the apple of his eye, to whom he sends his
holy Angels to attend upon them. For in heaven their Angels behold the face of
my father which is in heaven, Matthew. 18. 10.

And as God respects nothing in any man but Jesus Christ: so likewise the
Saints of God have esteemed of men only as they have seen Christ in them. So
David professes that all his delight was in the Saints that were on earth, in
whom Christ appeared, Psalm. 16. 2, 3.

And Saint Paul tells us he regarded no man after the flesh, (or in fleshly
respects) as they were wise, learned, rich, honorable, 2 Cor. 5. 16. No not
Christ himself; that is, as he was a Jew borne of their natition, or so as to
expect great things from him on earth, as the Jews did, but only spiritually:
Nay he would not so much as write a letter or Epistle to the greatest Monarchs
in the world that were not in Christ, but to the poor Saints in Corinth,
Ephesus, Galatia, etc. And to Philemon Indeed he wrote to one Lady, but she was
an Elect Lady.
the Master, for a poor servant Onesimus sake.

Mr. Fox, when a great Lord, and wicked met him in London in the streets, and
asked him how do you Mr. Fox? he said little. Do you not know me said the great
Lord? No not I said Master Fox. I am such a one said he; Sir, I desire (said
Master Fox) to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified.

Policarpus at a certain time meeting with Marcion the Heretic, he said unto
him, do you not know me? Yea said Policarpus, I know thee to be Primogenitum
Diaboli, the first begotten child of the devil. Eusebius.

Indeed, natural men are ready to despise a Christian, though Christ shines in
him never so gloriously, if he be poor, and admire the rich, Jam. 2. As
Aigalond King of the Moors, when he came to the King of France to be baptized,
and saw a great many poor tatterd people at his door, asked what they were; It
was answered, these are the servants of Jesus Christ; he went back in a fury
and discontent, and said he would never serve such a Master that could keep his
servants no better. But Ingo King of the Veneeds (contrarily) at a great feast,
to show his love to Christ's Saints, set his Pagan Nobles in his Hall, and
certain poor Christians with himself in his Parlour.

5. Fifthly, the excellency of all our works is from our knowledge of Christ;
which though never so excellent in themselves as Prayer, Preaching, Alms, etc.
God regards them not, they stand for nothing, they are but Ciphers, till Christ
be joined with them. They are at best but umbrae virtutum, shadows of virtues,
nay splendida peccata fair and shining sins, beautiful abominations Absque
Christo, omnis uirtus in vitio est. Luther
in a man out of Christ: Like as the Phoenix gathers sweet odoriferous sticks
in Arabia together, and then blows them with her wings, and burns her self
with them; just so we burn our selves with our own good works, be they never
so sweet and good, if separated from Jesus Christ.

It is Christ, and Christ alone that sweetens and perfumes all our prayers,
hearing, alms, and all our duties, and makes them acceptable, As Apothecaries
Rev. 8. 3.
sweeten all their Confections and Cordials with Musk and Sugar.

The Persians had certain trees that bare poisoned fruit, and they by stealth
had planted abundance of them among the Turks, hoping thereby to poison them:
but with the change of the soil, the fruit changed its quality, and instead of
poison became wholesome food. So our works that were poison before, are sweet
and good when they proceed from a man planted into Christ: See thou not how
Faith wrought with his works? says Saint James, Jam. 2. 22. It was Faith made
Abraham's works accepted, which else had not been regarded.

CHAP. X. The knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified, is the most
profitable knowledge.
2. NOw follows the 2 reason why we ought to study to know Jesus Christ and
him crucified: because it is the most profitable knowledge in the world; Its
better to know Christ thine, then to know all the riches in London, nay all the
kingdoms in the world, thine; As one pearl is better then a great deal of
lumber, so one Christ weighs down all the kingdoms in the world; for what
should it profit a man to win the whole world, (and lose Christ) and lose his
own soul? Matthew. 16. 26.

This is the Pearl of great price for which the rich Merchant sold all that he
had, and bought it, and found more joy in this one Pearl alone, then ever he
did Mat 13. 44 46. (...). Ephesians. 3. 8.
with all that he had without the Pearl; Nay more, Saint Paul tells us, there
are unsearchable riches in Christ, such as can never be traced or found out, no
more then we can find the way of a ship in the Sea, or of an Eagle in the air:
But (as the word signifyes in the Original) we are like hunting dogs that have
lost their game, having neither footstep nor sent left to pursue. As Gods
ways, so the riches of Christ are past finding out, Romans 11. 33. He is the one
thing needful, whom obtaining we need no more to make us happy. Luke 10. ult.
Ipse unus erit tibi omnia, quia in ipso, uno bono, bona sunt omnia, One Christ
will be to thee instead of all things else, because in him are all good things
to be found.

1. And this appears in four respects; first, because Christ will give us
better things then the world has; Alas what do we find in the world, but a
bundle of Thorns and vanities Eccles. 1. 2.
? we feed upon ashes Ier. 44. 20.
(and good enough to feed dust and ashes) which was the Serpents curse, on thy
belly thou shall go, and dust shall thou eat, Genesis ^. They are but pits, and
broken, empty pits, that can hold no water. Ier. 2. 13.
They are but Cabull, dirty Cities, our fathers dunghill, not inheritance, Esa.
55. 2.
windy husks (the Prodigals fare) not solid bread ( g) a hard shell and a dry
kernel. (...) bitter. sweets,


Yea they that find most sweetness in the world, find it like a Bee-hive
wherein they have tasted a little honey, but they have been stung with a
thousand Bees; For so God has told us before hand; though we have golden
dreams of framing a Paradise of pleasures to our selves here, yet we shall find
the gates of Paradise shut on earth, open only in heaven. Our Paradise is now
become a Bochim, a place of Lamentation; for so he has decreed; Cursed is the
earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life;
Thorns, and h Genesis 3. 18, 19.
thistles shall it bring forth unto thee.

But will Christ feed us with vanities, vexations? With earth and ashes? No,
no, he will feed us with the dainties of heaven, and will open unto us the
treasures and Jewels that are found in the richest Cabinet of God himself,
Ephesians. 1. 3. He will give us Grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold
from us if we walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. ult.

First, He will give us the grace of justification, Col. 2. 13.
a pardon for all our sins, and deliverance from hell and death, Romans 8. 1.
Reve. 20. 6. He will say to us as to the Palsy man, be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee, Matthew 9. verse 2. and as to weeping Mary, Woman,
thy sins are forgiven thee, Luke. 7.

And this alone is a greater blessing then all the riches in the world; Blessed
is that man whose iniquities are forgiven. Psalm. 32.

2. He will give us the grace of acceptance; we shall be looked upon and
accepted as righteous as Christ himself was for us; for as he is, so are we
in this world, 1. Ioh. 4. 17. 2 Cor. 5. ult. 1 Cor. 1 ult


3. He will give us The grace of sanctification; Not only pulling off our
chains of darkness, the devils fetters, Col. 1. 13
but also decking us with the Jewels of holiness, the Angels glory, by
clothing our souls with divine inclinations, to be made partakers of the
divine nature, ^Ezek. 16. 12. Ioh. 1. 16
and our hearts to be made after Gods own heart.

4. The grace of Adoption; of vassals and children of the devil to be the
spouse, the members of Christ, nay the sons of God Ioh. 1. 12
which perhaps is that new name spoken of, Reve. 2. 17. Now, behold what love
the father has bestowed upon us that we should be called the sons of God! 1
Ioh 3. 1.
thereby intimating that he bears to us the affection and protection of a
father to his children.

5. He will give us the grace of reconciliation, whereby God is as good friends
with us through Christ, as if we had never offended him, Col. 1. 21.

6. The grace of Cooperation, for we are able to do all things through Christ
that strengthens us. Phil. 4. 13. John 15. 44.

7. The grace of corroboration; for his grace shall be sufficient for us, that
no sin shall have dominion over us. Romans 6. 14. 2 Cor. 12. 9.

8. The grace of coagulation, enabling us to grow in grace till we come to the
measure of Grace that God has appointed us to come unto. Ephesians. 2. 21.

9. The grace of preservation to continue to the end. 1 Pet. 1. 5. we are kept
by his power through faith unto salvation; our life is hid with Christ in God,
Col. 3. 3. so as Nothing shall ever separate us from his love; for who can
pluck us out of the hand of God and of Christ? Joh. 10. 28. Romans 8. ult.

10. The grace of consolation; for he will send the holy Ghost (not only the
sanctifyer but) the comforter to cheer our hearts, as he promised us, Joh. 15.
26. which exceeds all other joy and comforts, being unspeakable and glorious. 1
Pet 1. 8.

11. Lastly he will give us the grace and gift of glorification; if we know
Christ is ours, then we know heaven is ours, and all the pleasures that are in
it; That that day we dye, we shall be with Christ in Paradise; for the same
glory thou have given me I have given them, says our Savior, Joh. 17. 24. and
we shall sit together with him in heavenly places. Ephesians. 2. 6. Other knowledge
may bring pleasure and content, but no other knowledge can bring salvation, but
only the knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified; can the son of Ishai
give you orchards and Gardens? etc. said Sa^l; and can the knowledge of earthly
things enrich you with these treasures?

2. Secondly, As Christ gives better things then the world has, so more
satisfying. These earthly things are called empty pits because they are empty of
content; though there may be some good in them, yet not the good we expect,
that is, content, Because nothing can give content but that that joins God and
the soul as friends together, for which end it was created, and without whom
the soul can find no content in all things else, but flies up and down like a
Be from one flower to another, from one comfort to another, to get more
sweetness; but when once it enjoys God, it says I have enough; as Jacob said,
I have enough my son Joseph is a live; and then is as quiet as a Be in her
hive, a bird in her neast, a Beast in her den, or the Dove in the Arc, because
God is alsufficient: A Genesis 17. 1.
Be flies from one flower to another, because she wants honey enough in that
flower, but when she is put into a pot of honey, then she seeks no farther: A
thirsty man, give him a glass of water, he is not satisfied, for says he,
this little water is not able to quench my great thirst; but carry him to a
river, and then he says he has enougth.

Thirdly, Christ gives more durable riches then the world has; Al other things
have their time to leave us; Hic acquiruntur, hic amittuntur. Here they are
gotten and here they are lost: The world is like the gardens in France or
Italy, where men may eat of the fruits of the garden what they please, while
they are in the Garden, but can carry nothing out, for then the Gardner
searches and emptyeth their pockets; even so when death comes she will empty
our pockets, that we can carry nothing with us out of the world. Our time is a
coming that we must bid a sad farewell to all things here; farewell husband, I
shall never see thy face more; farewell wife, farewell children, friends,
Riches have wings; Honors are like a cristall glass, Quo magis splendescit
citius frangitur; And pleasures like bubbles of soap, pleasant to see to, but
quickly blown out. Luk, 10. ult Romans 8. ult
riches, honors and pleasures both sinful and lawful; And perhaps if we be
not the better provided, we shall bid farewell God, farewell Christ, the joys of
heaven and eternal happiness; But Christ abides ever; If we know Christ
ours, we shall never bid farewell to Jesus Christ; He is the good part that
shall be never taken from us; Then we may say as Dives spoke (though brutishly)
Soul take thine ease and be merry, for thou have goods laid up for many
years; yea even to all eternity. Eterna erit exaltatio, que bono latatur
aeterno; That joy lasts for ever, whose object remains for ever.

4. But fourthly and lastly, Christ brings with him the blessings of this world
also, Matthew. 6. 33. All these shall be cast upon you, into the bargain, as a
loaf to the dozen or a little handful to the measure. All things are yours,
if you be Christ's, for Christ comes not vacuis manibus, empty 1 Cor. 3. 26
handed. And this appears in four particulars.

1. First, we shall have certainty of provision. We may say with David; the
Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want; for God has said it, I will never
leave thee nor for sake thee. Psalm. 23. 1.
Heb. 13. 5. Has he given us Christ, and will be not with him give us all
things else? Romans 8. 32. What can God deny us that is good for us, that has
not denied to give his son for us? Will a man give us the Garden and not the
flowers? The Land, and not the trees? and will God give us heaven and deny us
earth? Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and yet your father provideth
for them? Will God take care for Sparrowes, and young Ravens, etc, and not for
thee, O thou of little Faith? Will a man take care to feed his cattle in the
field, horse in the Stable, Swine in the Sty, and not for his wife and children
that sit at his own Table?

We are ready to say, especially the poorer sort, as Isaac said to Abraham;
Here is wood, but where is the Sacrifice? Here are mouths, but where is the
meat? But let us answer our souls as Abraham did his son; O my son God will
provide.

Or perhaps we will say as the Disciples said to Christ; Here are a few loafes
and two little fishes, but alas what is that among so many? And yet you know
with the blessing of Christ it served them all The Prodigal could say, if once
I could get home into my fathers house, there is bread enough.

When Hagar looked into her bottle. and saw that empty, she fell a weeping; but
when she saw the fountain or well of water, then she was satisfied, for then
she knew she could fill her bottle again; So regard not so much though thy
bottle be empty, remember the Well is full. I have been young says David, and
now am old, yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor their seed though
begging their bread (as Broughton reads it) Psalm. 37. 15.

Though perhaps we may want what we desire, yet we shall never want what God
sees best and fittest for us to do him service withal.

Always, the greatest estate is not fittest for us; as a great shoe fits not
a little foot, nor a great sail a little ship, nor a great ring a little
finger, which though it have more Gold in it, yet a lesser were better and
fitter for us. Bellarmine in his Catechism has an excellent expression;
supopse says he, a King having many children of several ages, should apparel
them in cloth of gold: Now he that is 16 years old has more gold in his robe
then the child that is but five or six year old; yet the child would rather
have his own garment then his elder brothers, because says he it is fitter for
me: So if thou have that estate that is fittest for thee, surely that is best
for thee.

2. Secondly, As we shall have certainty of Provision, so we shall have it with
better right; as coming to us not only by providence, but from the Covenant
of Grace, and streaming to us through the blood of Christ: Wicked men have a
pr^videntiall right as Creatures, as appears Acts 5. 4. Was it not thine own
while it was with thee? But the Saints receive them as the Spouse, and members
of Christ who is heir of all. Now a man were better have courser fare, wear
meaner clothes, etc. when they are paid for, then richer, and be in the books,
and his clothes not paid for.

3. Thirdly, we shall have our blessings Deuteronomy. 28.
blessed and sweetened with our Fathers love; which doubles their sweetness, like
as sweet water sprinkled upon sweet flowers makes every flower smell the
sweeter, or as wine sweetened with sugar makes it more pleasant: Whereas all out
of Christ have them with our fathers curse, Mal. 2. I will curse their
blessings, yea I have cursed them already. So Rom, 11. 9. Let their table be
their snare, a trap and a stumbling block, etc. And so they become like sweet
flowers poisoned, the sweeter the more dangerous: Hence wicked men out of
Christ, may enjoy all good, and yet enjoy no good at all; Nay the more they
abound in blessings, the more their curses abound.

Suppose a Father should give a small portion to his child, but withal says;
Son, take this portion, its but little, but thou have it with my love, and I
pray God bless it to thee; And to another he gives a greater portion, (or
perhaps he pulls it from him, as the Prodigal did from his father) but withal
says; Take it and choke with it, let it be accursed to thee. Now there is
great difference between a gift received with our fathers blessing, and with
his Curse. God give me a little with my fathers blessing, rather then a great
deal with my fathers Curse; better is a little with the fear of the Lord,
then greatreasures and trouble therewith, says Solomon, Prove. 15. 16.

4. Fourthly and lastly; These are given in hand as pledges of our future
hopes; Take these for present, but greater things are laid up for thee
hereafter; Psalm. 31. 19 How great are the things thou have laid up for them
that fear thee? He that knows Christ to be his, may say I have these and
heaven too, I have these and Christ too, these are not my portion, that is to
come.

But these are the wicked man's portion, Psalm. 17. 14. They have their portion
in this life, there is all, they must expect no more; they may say, I have
house and land, riches, honors, and pleasures; but I have no part in Christ or
Heaven: with Dives, I am merry now, but to night I may be in hell with him. Now
what joy has a condemned man in the society of all his friends, in daintiest
fare, in all delights and pleasures, whiles he wants his pardon, every hour
expecting execution?

CHAP. XI. That the knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified is the most
comfortable knowledge.
3. NOw follows the third and last reason why we ought to study to know Jesus
Christ and him crucified; Because it is the most comfortable knowledge in the
world; In other things, He that increases knowledge, increases sorrow. But
the more a man knows of Christ, and his part in him, the greater is his joy; A
poor godly man that knows Christ is his, has more joy in his heart, and lives
a more comfortable life, then the greatest rich man that has all abundance,
great manors, is rich in gold and silver, but knows not that he has any part
or portion in Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1. 8. After you believed, you Psalm. 4. 7.
Psalm. 66. 3.
rejoiced with joy unspeakable and glorious; yea such a man carries heaven
about him, and the joys of it; for the Kingdom of heaven is righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14. 17. and this appears especially
in four conditions.

1. In time of spiritual distress, when our sins are gone over our heads,
like mountains and milstones, too heavy for us to bear. Come to me says
Christ, though thy heart be never so heavy, and I will ease Matthew. 11. 28.
thee, when all other things will be bitter and miserable comforters to thee. A
sword shall pierce through thy soul (says Simeon to Mary) that the thoughts
of many hearts may be opened, that is, may be eased; as a sore when it is
opened it is eased. Luke 1. 35
When I was scorched with the heat of Gods anger, I sat under thy shadow
(says the spouse, Cant. 2. 3.) with great delight; Like as Jonas Gourd, or a
tree with broad leaves, shadows from the heat of the sun, so does Christ
from the heat of Gods hottest displeasure when he seems most angry with us.

2. The knowledge of Christ is most comfortable in time of greatest
persecution, imprisonment, banishment. etc. (like as the Unicornes horns
sweetens all poisoned waters) for then we know he will be our God, to comfort
us* in all our tribulation. 2 Cor. 1. 4.

The three children we know were in the fire, but unto them it was no fire,
because Christ was with them in the fire; And Daniell was in the lions denn
among the lions; But to him they were no lions, but as so many lambs instead
of lions, because Christ was with him in the den of lions.

Paul and Silas were whipped indeed, but it was with Rosemary branches, because
Nihil sentit crux in nervo, qua^ do animus est in Caelo.
they found more pleasure then pain, more ^oy then sorrow: Yea and they were in
prison too; but it was sweeter to them then a parlour, where at midnight they
Sung psalms for joy, because Christ was with them in the prison.

The holy martyrs amidst the flames of fire clapped their hands for joy, because
Christ was with them in the fire. Methinks said one, I tread upon pearls (when
he trod upon ^ott burning coals,) And, I feel no more pain then if I lay in a
bed of Down; and yet he lay in flames of fire. According as the Lord has
promised, he Phil. 4. 13. Ier. 30. 11. Psalm. 103. 13.
will lay no more upon us then he will enable us to bear 1. Cor. 10. 13.

3. The saving knowledge of Christ is most comfortable in our greatest
affliction, sicknesses, losses, crosses, disgraces; for likly as our
afflictions abound, our comforts abound much more, as the stars shine brightest
in the darkest night.

This comforted the Church in her Captivity when she walked in garments rouled
in blood: Yet, (says she,) Unto us a Child is born. Esa. 9. 6. Alas but cold
comfort a man would think for her to remember a Christ to come 6 or 700 years
after, especially in respect of her present misery: Yet this was their greatest
stay and comfort; for while Christ came not, so long they were sure they could
not totally be rooted out because; God had promised the scepter should not
depart from Judah till Genesis 49. 10.
Shiloh (that is till Christ) should come; (And indeed they were never totally
ruined till Christ came) And also because by Christ, all temporal punishments
are sweetened and made comfortable unto us. What comforted Job amidst all his
heavy and grievious afflictions, but this? Yet I know my redeemer lives. etc.
yea even this alone supported Habbackkuck, in the time of his own, and the
Churches misery, Hab. 3. 17. 18. Though the figtree shall not blossom, nor
shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, the field
shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there be no
herd in the stals, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation.

And the reason is, because if we know Christ savingly, we are sure of two
things.

1. First that whatsoever befalls us, it Rev. 3. 19. 2 Samuel 7. 14.
shall come in his love to us; For we are chastened, that we might not be
condemned. And is it not mercy and love to be but whipped or branded, when a man
should be hanged? To be but chastened when he should be damned?

And secondly we are sure that it shall do us good Romans 8. 28. All things shall
cowork together with God for our good though we are not sure of prosperity; nay
we know not what afflictions we may meet withal nor what cup we shall drink,
yet we are sure of this, that Goodness and mercy shall follow us all the days
of our lives. Ps. 23. 6.
If we be poor, it shall be good poverty; If sick, it shall be a good
sickness; If in disgrace and reproach, it shall be good disgrace, etc. Blessed
is he whom thou chastisest and teach, says David. God will turn all our
water into wine? And (like Sampsons riddle) Out of the eater shall come meat,
and out of the strong shall come sweetness: even lion-like afflictions that
would seem to tear us in pieces, and devour us, will bring honey and sweetness
to us; As the Israelites that were forty years going through a wilderness
full of troubles, (when they might have gone it in 40 days) but God tells them
the reason was, That he might humble them, and prove them, Deuteronomy. 8. 16
and do them good in the latter end. As indeed he did. So likewise Joseph tells
his brethern, You intended evil against me, but the Lord turned it to good,
Genes. 50. 20.

Question. But you will say what good shall afflictions work for us?

Ans. I Answer, sometimes they shall work temporal good for us in this life.
Joseph had his time to be under a cloud, and was thirteen years in prison by
false accusation, but God in due time remembered him, and caused his sun to
break out of a cloud, as God has promised. Psalm. 37. 5 6. Commit thy way to
the Lord, trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass, and he shall bring
forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as at noonday: Who
for 13. years imprisonment, reigned four scour years like a King in Egypt.

David you know had seven years banishment, yet it ended in a glorious reign
of 40. years continuance.

Ruth a while like a servant, may gleane among the sheaves, but ere long she is
mistress of all those fields wherein she gleaned.

And Job awhile may be stripped of his goods, Children, and all his comforts, but
ere long he does enjoy them doubled to him, even as much more of every comfort
as he had before. Job 42. 12, 13.

2. But however, it shall always work for our spiritual good. By the sad
Eceles. 7. 3 Heb. 12. 10 John 15. 2.
look the heart shall be made better. Like those in the time of the sweating
sickness that were smitten with Rosemary branches to keep them waking, and
from sleeping to death; though they cried out at the smart of the blows against
those that smot them, O you kill me, you kill me; whereas alas they had been
killed with their disease, if they had not been smitten; Or as tender mothers
that give their children sometimes bitter wormwood and Aloes, but it is to kill
the worms (or else they would never let their children taste so bitter a
potion) and likely too, it is sweetened with sugar.

There is a four fold spiritual good by afflictions to every one that knows
Jesus Christ savingly.

1. They keep the heart tender and humble, pliable and buxome to God (
Remembering my wormwood and my gall my soul has them in remember ance and is
humbled in me, Lamenta. 3. 19. 20) as they did David when Shemei cursed him,
and when God chastised him with the pestilence, It 2 Samuel 24. me me adsum, etc.
is I have sinned, what have those sheep done? And Jonas after he was cast
into the sea and restored, the second time he could find his way to go right to
Nineveh.

2. They keep us from backsliding; for else we would lose our graces, as too
much sunneshine makes the corn to shale and lose its fruit.

3. They make us fear to sin that have so smarted for sin: The burnt child
dreads the fire; exellent is that speech of Job; Job* 34. 31, 32. Surely it is
meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any
more; That which I see not, teach thou me, and if I have done amiss, I will
do no more. As a child will fear to commit that fault for which he has well
smarted.

4. They make us grow in holiness, and weane us from earthly delights (as the
Israelites bondage made them weary of Egypt) They are but Gods pruning knives,
to let us bleed, and purge us that we might bring forth more fruit, John 15. 2.
like as we see flowers smell sweetest after a shower; Or, as the burning bush
that burned yet consumed not, but was the brighter for the fire; Or as gold*
put into fire, loses its dross, but nothing of its substance and is made the
purer gold; Or as grapes under the press make the sweeter wine; Or as wheat
under the flaile has its chaff beaten off and is the purer corn: So are
afflictions to all that are in Christ, and know Christ theirs; They make them
like Roses, which though sweet always, yet they never drop sweet water but
when the fire is under them; Or as spices, when beaten to powder, then they
smell the sweetest.

3. Thirdly, Afflictions shall increase 2 Cor. 4. 17. Mat. 5. 12*
our crown of glory; the deeper our die is in affliction, the better shall we
wear our scarlet robes in heaven, Romans 8. 18. I reckon says Paul our
sufferings in this life are not worthy our glory that shall be revealed.
Chrysostom. said, if one man did suffer all the sorrows of all the Saints in the
world, yet they are not worth one hours glory in heaven.

4. Fourthly and lastly, The knowledge of Christ and him crucisied with a
saving applicatory knowledge is most comfortable in the hour of death: Such a
one can triumph over death, saying, Death where is thy sting? Hell, where is
thy victory? Because 1 Cor. 15. 56.
though death in it self be full of anguish, and is the destruction of nature,
yet if thou art in Christ, and know Christ is thine, the cup is sweetened
with good ingredients. For thou art sure of two things.

1. Thou art sure to die comfortably (ordinarily) and not fearing, but longing
for death; we know says Paul when this our tabernacle is broken, we have a
house not made 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3.
with hands eternal in the heavens; wherefore we sigh and groan to be clothed
with our house which is in heaven. When I walk through the the valy of the
shadow of death (says David) I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, and
thy rod and staff comfort me, Psalm. 23. 4. Luke 2, 29 Phil. 1.
And Simeon. Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine e^es have
seen thy Salvation.

Yea sometimes before they go into heaven, they are rapt up into the third
heaven with joy as Paul was in his rapture 2 Cor. 12. (though in another
manner) Some have professed they never felt such joy in all their lives as at
the hour of their death.

Paula that noble Lady, when one did read to her ( Cant. ^. 11.) The winter is
past, and the singing of Birds is come, yes, she replied, the singing of birds
is come, and so she went singing into heaven; another being as they thought in
a swound a little before her end, they cried give her some Rosa Solis; but she
put it back, saying I have Rosa Solis you know not off.

Ambrose said to his friends about him when he died, I have not so lived that I
am ashamed to live, nor yet fear I death, because I have a good Lord.

Glover from whom God did hide his face long before, yet when he was going to
the stake, said to his frind Austen, he is come, he is come.

But you will say,

The virtuous Lady Jane when she covered her eyes with her handkerchief, and
was to ly down on the block to receive the stroke of death, she cried out O
what shall I do, where is it, where is it? she was filled so full of fear,
though her faith failed not; yea Christ himself feared death with a natural
holy fear.

Yet I say thou art sure at the least to be freed from despairing fear, and to
be able John 13. 13.
to say with Job, Though he kill me I will trust in him; as our blessed Savior
on the cross, still called the Lord his God, when he felt no comfort from God;
my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And the reason is, because Christ
has promised that neither life nor death shall be able to separate us from the
love of God in Christ our Lord, Romans 8. ult.

2. And secondly, If thou know Christ to be thine, thou art sure to dye a
blessed death ( Reve. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord. etc.)
because that day and hour thou die, that day thou art sure thy soul shall
be with Christ in paradise; for to all that know Christ savingly, death is but
the harbenger to bring their Cyprian.
souls to Christ. Ejus est timere mortem qui ad Christum nolit ire. (says a
father) let him fear death that is loath to go to Christ; do not thou fear that
desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Death to thee is but as thy
fathers horse to carry thee to thy fathers house; or like Joseph's Chariot
rattling with its wheels ready to carry old Jacob to his son Joseph, so is
death ready to carry thee to thy Savior Jesus.

Alas, our misery lies in our life ( morimur dum non morimur) not in our death*
therein lies all our happiness; for we shall not die but live still, only we
shall exchange the place of our living; instead of Egypt to live in Canaan,
instead of earth to live in heaven.

Now are we afraid to live? No, life is sweet; then fear we not to die, for
that brings the sweetest and most happy life, and will make an exchange of a
life of misery for a life of glory.

Indeed to them that know not Christ, O how bitter is death* It must needs
sting them like a serpent; because they go from all their happiness to all
their misery* Death of it self is bitter; but herein lies the sting and
strength of death to all out of Christ, in that it is entailed to eternal
death; they may say as once Elisha did, 2 Kings 6. 32. Behold the murderer
death is come to take away mine head; And is not the sound of his Masters feet
(even of the devil and hell) behind him? mori non metuo (said one) sed damnari
metuo; I fear not to die, but I fear to be damned.

When Saul was told by Samuel (as he took him to be) to morrow thou shall be
with me (therefore what else but in heaven?) yet the news pleased him not (his
conscience preached otherwise to him) but Saul fell all along on the earth, and
was sore afraid, and there was no strength in him, 1 Samuel 28. 20. so Belshazzar
did read the hand writing before Daniel read it, and trembled: for his
conscience told him there could come no good news from heaven to such a wretch
as he was.

And verily herein lies the sad condition of all men, that know not Jesus
Christ savingly, That though they may make themselves merry and be pleasant in
their lives, yet death makes them miserable, they shall lie down in sorrow, Esa
50. 11.

And though now Christ seems like a root out of a dry ground, having nothing
in him why they should desire him, Esa. 53. 2. (for though he has made rich
promises, yet not of such things as they care or desire to be rich in, and with
such hard conditions too as seem unreasonable, even the parting with their
dearest lusts) yet at death what would men give for assurance that Christ were
theirs? Would they not prefer this knowledge before all earthly blessings? As
Severus said, if I had a thousand worlds I would now give them all to be found
in Christ? As crock-back Richard the third in his distress, cried a Kingdom
for a horse; O then they will cry a Kingdom for a Savior.

CHAP. XII. A Reproof of those that know nothing of Jesus Christ.
nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified) then they are justly to be
reproved that know nothing of Jesus Christ and him crucified. There are five
sorts of them who know nothing (or very little) of Jesus Christ and him
crucified.

First, the heathens, who are the greatest part of the world, and of whom there
are milions of milions at this day, who want the means of knowledge, and can
never attain salvation: for if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
perish. 2 Cor. 4. 3. And they are without hope. Ephesians. 2. 12. Qui cuiquam salutem
promittit sine Christo, nescio utrum ipse salutem habere potest in Christo.
Aug. Acts 17. 31 Ir is true some conceive it is a sin in Heathens to want
habitual knowledge of Christ, because it was in Adam in innocence, and it had
been his duty so to have acted, if God had commanded him, as now he does
command all men: Therefore habitual knowledge of Christ seems still to be
required even of heathens; Yea and actual applicatory knowledge, of all to
whom Christ is revealed: because the want is their sin, for which they shall
be damned, John 16. 9. Mark 16. 16. But where the Gospel is not revealed, (as
among the Heathens) there it seems not a sin; for we are not bound to act
that which God never revealed to Adam nor since. There is Lex interna, id est,
internus Deiconceptus, and externa or revelata: Now Gods secret will is not our
Law, but his will revealed. Leges factae instituuntur cum promulgantur. Rayner.
Panth.


Some indeed think the moralized heathens that walked by the light of nature,
were saved (as Chrysostom. Clemens Alexand. Erasmus, Casauhon, and others) but
Christ tells us the contrary Act. 4. 12. Though in comparison of us that have
the means, they are said to have no sin, Ioh. 15. 22. I grant, whether it be a
sin or no, in the Heathens not to know Christ, to whom he was never revealed,
is a question; But of this I am sure, if their negative infidelity be no sin
(being ignorantia privationis, or negativa) yet their positive fidelity is
odious, in that they trust to dumb Idols, to the stock of a tree, etc. when as
the light of nature tells them that they themselves are better then that they
trust in (by whichlight of nature they shall be judged, Romans 2. 12.) yea light
of nature tells them a living creature is better then the picture (as a lamb in
the field or a bird flying in the air. etc. are better then a picture of them)
And yet says one, si accepto spiritu occurrerent, ut monstra haberentur.

2. The Turks that acknowledge God a father, yet deny Christ a Redeemer, though
they hear of Christ, yet despise him, reject, abuse him and his members, and
prefer their Mahomet before him: whose sin is greater, because their own
religion is so absurd, fleshly, and filthy, and his rewards all fleshly, fitter
for swine then men.

3. The poor scatter'ed Jews, of whom and for whom Christ especially came, to
them still Christ is a mystery; they acknowledge Moses law and the Prophets,
but reject Christ as an impostor, and look for a savior to come, when Christ
is so plainly preached in their own law; search the scriptures says Christ,
for they are they which testify of me. John 5. 39. And yet they remain as
judiciarily, so wilfully blind and ignorant (2 Cor. 3. 14.) as a just
punishment of their own imprecation when they cried, His blood be on us and our
children.

4. Papists who nourish ignorance, teaching it to be the mother of devotion,
when as we know that ignorance is the cause of sin. Matthew. 22. 29. and
punishment of sin. Romans 1. 21. Esa. 6. 9. and surely that religion cannot be
good which hates the light; He that does evil hates the light John. 3. 10.
Neither is it likely that that should be the mother of devotion, that is the
mother of Atheism, idolatry and superstition, as appears Act. 17. 22. Psalm.
10. 4. Gal. 4. 8. But thus they pull out the peoples eyes, as the Philistims did
Sampsons, and then they make sport with them.

And further, though they know Christ to be a Savior, yet they make him not
the alone Savior, but join with Christ their own works, and make themselves
at least in part, their own saviors: But if we add but one mite to Christ's
treasure, we say Christ is not rich enough to save us, and so we make him no
Savior, Romans 10. 3. Gal. 5. 4.

5. And lastly, it reproves all ignorant An ignorant man little differs from a
beast. Psalm. 32. Ier. 4. 22. Esa. 1. 2. Ephesians. 4. 17.
persons among our selves; a man would wonder how they can make a shift or
study to be so ignorant, who are even like the horse and mule that have no
understanding; As in the creation, Darkness covered the face of the earth, so
of their souls. Ask them what Christ is? They answer some of them, that he is
a God, some a man, some an angel, a spirit, etc. Learned Master Pemble reports
of a man dying, being asked what Christ was, he said, he thought he was a
towardly young youth, etc.

But let all thus grossly ignorant consider, The light shines in the darkness,
but the darkness comprehends it not, Joh. 1. 10.) There is a threefold
ignorance, 1. A privative ignorance, 2. A wilful ignorance, 3. A negligent
ignorance. Now their ignorance is not ignorantia privationis invincibilis, that
is, negative or invincible ignorance; but first it is ignorantia pravae
affectionis (as the Schoolmen speak) That is wilful from corrupt affection: It
is one thing nescire, not to know, and another thing nolle scire, not to be
willing to know; And these are they that shut their eyes least they should see
with their eyes, Math. 13. 15. Depart from us, say they, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways, Job. 21. 14. Or secondly, at least it is supina
ignorantia, supine, careless, or negligent ignorance, when men will use no
means nor take any pains for knowledge; these are said to hate knowledge,
Prove. 1. 19. And this ignorance does much aggravate their sin, and make it
without any cloak or color of excuse; if I had not come among you (says
Christ) you had had no sin, but now you have no cloak for your sin, John 15.
22. How shall you escape that neglect so great salvation? says Paul Heb. 2. 3.

2. An ignorant heart is an evil heart; John 9. 41.
without knowledge, the mind is not good, says Solomon, Prove. 19. 2. surely if
the head be leprous, the body cannot be sound; If the head be giddy, the body
must needs stagger; If the eye be dark, all the body is dark. Matthew. 6. 22.

3. All their works are evil, and works of darkness; they can yield no
obedience to God acceptably, because it is brutish and not rational service;
for how can we shun evil when we know not what is evil? Or do our duty when
we know not our duty? The blind eats many a fly; and who so bold as blind
Bayard? Ignorance made them lay violent hands upon Christ himself; but had
they known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

4. Fourthly, They can have no repentance; for how can we repent and be greived
for our sins until we know them? and how can we cry for mercy when we see not
our misery? Jonas while he was asleep in the ship, feared not the tempest till
awakened; the child in the dark womb cries not, till it come into the light.

5. How full of fear are they that walk Light is sweet, but darkness terrible.
in the dark? The Egyptians, when the plague of darkness, was upon them, how
uncomfortable was their condition? But what horror will possess thy dark
soul in that hour of darkness? how terrible will death be to thee? The Sun
ecclipsed at the death of Christ, was dreadful; but more dreadful will it be
when the face of God is ecclipsed toward thee.

6. Sixthly, Such have no part in Christ; for as in the creation, the first
work God made was light, so in the regeneration John 17. 3. John 4. 10.
the first grace God gives is light. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up
from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, says the Apostle. Ephesians. 5. 14.
The Eagle tryes her young whether they be her own, by this sign if they can
endure to look upon the Sun, or else she ownes them not (as they say) but casts
them upon the hard stones; And certainly thy ignorance, or knowledge, discovers
thee to be a child of light, or a child of darkness; for God has sworn an
ignorant person shall never come into heaven; It is a people that do err in
their hearts, and have not known my ways wherefore I swear in my wrath, they
Hos. 6. 6. Ioh. 7. 49.
should never enter into my rest. Heb. 3. 10. Neither will God show them any
mercy (which is usually their excuse) if they be ignorant, as appears Esa. 27.
11. They are a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will
have no mercy on them. Nay Christ has said he will come in flaming fire to
render vengeance to them that know not God. 2 These. 1. 8. Ignorance will end in
vengeance. Neither will voluntary or negligent ignorance excuse a tanto but
aggravate thy wrath, John 3. 19. this is condemnation; that is, this makes
their Ignorantia, minuit a peccato, quantum minuit a voluntario. Aq. 2. 2. Qu.
76.
condemnation the greater, because light is come among them, but they loved
darkness more then light; and therefore it is affected darkness.

Quest. What should ignorant men do to come to the knowledge of Christ and
their own salvation? I answer, First I advise them to get a Catechism, and if
they cannot get it by heart, yet let them read it over and over, again and
again: and for poor servants, let this be a part of their Sabbath days work;
I could wish likewise that Parents, Masters, and Ministers, would what they
can, set upon this work; Catechizing teaches the first principles and
fundamentals in religion, and makes Heb. 6. 1. and 5. 12.
grounded Christians, and would preserve them from Schisms, errors, and
heresies, and every wind of doctrine with which now so many are blown away for
want of being well grounded, as a ship without Anchor is tossed hither and
thither with the winds, Ephesians. 4. 14. But a sure foundation will make a firm
building, as the house that was built upon a rock, the rain fell, the floods
came, the winds blew, but it fell not, because it was founded upon a rock, Mat.
7. 24.

2. let them use the means of hearing, reading, conference with other
Christians asking them questions. etc. Let us 2 Timothy 3. 16. John. 5. 39.
go (said the people) to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
his ways. etc. Esa. 2. 3. Only come with an humble and teachable heart; If
any seem to be wise, let 1 Cor. 8. 2.
him be a fool that he may be wise. 1 Cor. 3. 18.

3. Practice what you know already; for if any will do my will, he shall know
whether Prove. 24. 13, 14. Romans 1. 18. 21. 28.
it be of God or no. John. 7. 17. But on the contrary, God will take away the
knowledge we have, if we imprison the truth in unrighteousness, as Masters
blow out the candle when the servants play with it. Romans 1. 18. 21. 18.

4. Be much in Prayer; for Christ is our Prophet, and if we seek it of him, he
will teach us so much as is necessary to salvation. I council thee to buy of me
Eyesalve. Job 32. 8. 1 Cor. 2. 10.
If thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding,
says Solomon; If thou seek for her as silver, and searchest for her as for
hid treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, Ioh. 34. 32
and find the knowledge of the Lord Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. Therefore pray with Job,
Lord, what I see not teach thou me; and as David often, Teach me thy statutes,
as the naturally blind cried, Lord Jesus that I may receive my sight. The word
is like a Dial that will not show thee how the day goes till the Sun shines
upon it; So though there be a spirit in man, yet it is the inspiration of the
Almighty that gives understanding.

CHAP. XIII. A reproof of those that study to know all things else save Jesus
Christ and him crucified.
save Jesus Christ and him crucified: Then it justly reproves those that study
to know nothing of Jesus Christ, but study all other things save the knowledge
of Christ. Some study the knowledge of the creatures, and of the things of the
world (like Mouls always grovling in the earth) to have skill in corn, cattle,
land, etc. Others befoole themselves in the studying of vanities; the soul
spending her self to catch at shadows, and leting go substance, as those
heathens Romans 1. 21. They became vain in their imaginations: That is, spending
their time, and taking great pains in studying such things, the knowledge
whereof is no ways profitable to themselves or others: like the Spider that
with her intrals weaves a curious web, yet good for nothing, but to be swept
down; Or like unto foolish children that sweat and toil, and heat themselves
to catch Butterflyes; Or as the Israelites did weary themselves to gather
stubble in stead of straw; or as Jeat that gathers dross and refuse things to
it self, but lets go all precious things; Or as the Loadstone that draws Iron
to it, but lets go Gold and Silver: And thus they sow the wind, and reap the
whirlewind.

I remember a story I have read of Alexander the Great, when one was presented
before him that could do famous exploits, who said he could throw a Pease at a
far distance upon the point of a Needle: But instead of a reward or
countenance given him from that noble warrier, he had a check from him; what
said he, do thou spend thy precious time in throwing Pease upon the point of
a needle? And surely all study after vain knowledge is but as throwing Pease
upon the point of a needle, and shall receive from God a check rather then a
reward. Queri non debet, quoth solvi non potest. Me lius est dubitare de occultis,
quam litigare de in certis. Aug Quaesupra nos, nihil ad nos. Socrat. Quae sunt
oculta non sunt scrutand^, quae manifesta, non sunt negligenda, Presp.


Others spend their time in studying to know things hidden from them, and that
concerns them not. Thus the disciple enquired when Christ would restore the
Kingdom of Israel, Acts 1. It is not for you, says our Savior, to know the
times and seasons, etc. So Peter, John 31. 21. Master, what shall this man do,
etc? What if I will that be tarry till I come, what is that to thee etc? Est
aliqua docta ignorantia, Aug. There is a learned ignorance, Secret things
belong to God, but revealed to us and to our children.

Others spend their time in studying foolish questions, genealogyes and
curiosities, the knowledge whereof may gender strife, but are usually
unprofitable and vain, Tit. 3. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 23. Thus the Athenians had books
of curious arts ((...)) Its thought they were books of Necromancy.
yet good for nothing but for the fire, Acts 19. 19. though they prised them at
five Myriads, or 50000. pieces of silver, which if they were but the Roman
pennies, some have computed to come to about eight hundred pounds. And thus the
Schoolmen have wasted a great deal of precious time in very vain and
unprofitable questions, Picking strawes in Divinity Bish. Hall.
(as a Reverend, godly, and learned Bishop speaks:) And at the best they are
Quantum mali facit nimia subtilitas? Senec. *Nor can they agree in their rules
of Art; some say Plato wanted order; Aristot. was dark; Pliny wanted method;
and Seneca was lime without sand. Corn. Agrip. de vanit. Scient.
but Questiunculis lascivientes, waxing wanton with vain and curious
questions, as says another.

Others they spend their time in studying Arts and Sciences, but study not to
know Jesus Christ; Scientes in omnibus nisi in quibus vera constat sapientia,
that is, studying to know all things but only those wherein lies all true good
and happiness.

First, * The Grammarian he will tell you, he studyes about letters, and words,
how to speak every word aright, but forgets to study how to live aright; And
yet alas words are but sounds and spoken according to the custom of the
people, and not always according to rules of Art.

2 Secondly, the Rhetorician he will tell you, he studyes to speak his words
in print ( Perpolite, eleganter, Ornate) adorning them with flowers, and adding
as it were vermilion to the color: And yet Plus horret orationis in^legantiam,
quam vitae deformitatem.
he regards not sordescere vita and moribus, how foul his life and
conversation is. And in conclusion they are but so many painted words, or wise
words at the best, good only to tickle wanton ears and deceive the simple:
But solid reality, good matter, clothed with decent words, takes more with the
wise. Hence Demosthenes feared Phocion vera and ad rem pertinentia simpliciter
dicentem (that is, speaking home and to the purpose) more then all other
Orators; And he called him securim orationum suarum, the hatche^ of his
orations. Hence many of the wiser heathens despised this art; Socrates calls it
Nec artem nec Scientiam, sed sagacitatem and servilem adulationem. Neither an
art, nor Science, but subtilty, and flattery. Plato esteemed them but as
stage players, calumniators, and sycophants ( Hinc innocens ut nocens damnatur
and contra) making the guiltless guilty, and the guilty guiltless. Cato
Refused that Rhetoricians should plead, quia Orationis facundia, facile possent
aequa and iniqua persuadere, because by eloquence of words, they could easily
persuade to right or wrong. Demosthenes boasted he could change the sentence of
the judges at his pleasure; and Cicero was called Rex oratione sua omnia regens,
playing Rex with his oratory, thereby ruling all things at his pleasure.

3. The Logician he will tell you that he Irrationale hominu^ genus si absque
Disciplina nesciat ratiocinari.
studyes how to see clearly with the eye of reason, and therewith often times he
puts out the eye of faith, which though never against, yet it is often times
above our reason: But we must walk by faith, and not by sense or reason, 2
Cor. 5. 7. Heb. 11. 1. 3. Its true, voluntas est caeca sine ratione, the will
is blind without reason; but it is also as true, Theologia est sepulchrum
rationis, Divinity is the grave that burieth reason, where we must learn often
times to shut the Plato, Cicero, Socrates, and the Athenians condemned this
Art. Aug. calls it Vinum erroris, Hier. Cibum daemonum, Democritus, Non artem
sed insania^^
eye of reason, that we may see the better with the eye of faith.

4. Fourthly, The Poets, how light and emply are they? Like fits of music
which delight us for the present, while the music is in our ears, but after
leave us malancholy; Of whom we may say as Aug. said of Homer, that they are
Dulcissime vani, but pleasantly vain. And what do they else but please the
ears of foolish men, with wanton Rhimes, with measures and weights of words
and syllables, with fables and lies? Yea they are so given to lying (says one)
that they study nil sani dicere, but stultis auribus cantillare.

And all their study is, that they may not claudicare pedibus, halt in their
feet, but yet they regard not claudicare moribus, to halt in their manners.

5. Fifthly, The Historian, he can tell you a long story of Nations, cities and
countries, and of the lives and actions of other men, but neglects to study the
history of his own life, he never studyes his own heart, but is a stranger at
home, though busy abroad. And how often do they take things upon trust by
hearesay from others, flattering some, and detracting from others, that (as one
says) Plerumque aliorum auditu, nihil certi scribunt; Non quod est, sed quod
cupiunt and volunt. That is, very often they have things only by relation, and
do not write the naked truth as things were, but as they desired and would have
them to be.

6. Sixthly, The Arithmetician he will tell you, that he can number all things,
yea he can number the stars; but never studyes to number his days, that he
might apply his heart unto wisdom

7. The Astrologian, he will tell you, that he was nuper e coelis delapsus
lately dropped out of heaven; And his though^s are celestial, as high as the
stars, but not supercelestiall above the stars: And, Quid futurum erit
divinatur, he can divine by the stars, and tell you your fortune what shall
happen to you hereafter; And yet he knows not Quid sibi ipsi quotidie imminet,
what hangs over his own head every hour, or what shall happen to himself to
morrow. Jam. 4. 14. And let men fancy what they please, certainly to
conjecture of men's fortunes, end^, virtues, vices. etc. * Picut Mirand. Quae
solius dei sunt astris tribuunt and nos liberos natos, siderum servos faciunt.
Some of the Heathens called this art, superstitiosorum hominum conjectura fallax
1. they know not certainly, vires stellarum, and therefore cannot give certain
judgment of their effects. 2. Propter innumeras cooperantes cum caelo alias
causas. 3. because influxus stellarum inclinant, say they, non cogunt. 4. Si
vita and fortuna est abastris, quid timemus? 5 Saepe iis, quibus maxim
confidunt maxim infaelicissimi sunt, as they were to Nebuchadnezzar. Pharaoh,
Caesar, Pompey, Nero, etc.
by the stars, is (I conceive) very impious; for (as Picus Mirand. says)
they attribute those things to the stars which belong to God alone. Esa. 8.
20.

8. The musician, he will tell you, he studyes to tune his strings aright to
make sweet harmony, and will not endure a jarring string in his instruments of
music, and yet forgets to tune the strings of Dulcisonum reficit tristia corda
m^los.
his untuned affections. It is true, it cannot be denied but it is a great
refresher of the spirits, yet it is but vanity; for the birds in the air seem
to sing as sweet as any artificial melody can be made. The Egyptians denied it
to be learned by their youth because they thought it would make them
effeminate, Antigonus hearing Alexander making music; Citharam fregit,
inquiens aetati tuae regnare convenit, non canere, he brake his harp, and told
him, it beseem'd him rather to learn to reign, then learn to sing and make
music.

9. The Philosopher, he will tell you he studyes to know the nature of the
whole fabric of Gods creation, as Birds and Beasts, and creeping things,
fowls of the air, fish in the sea. etc. And yet knows nothing of God and
Christ, and his own corrupt nature, he knows not that himself is wretched
and miserable.

10. The Physician, he will tell you, he studyes to know how to cure the
diseases of other men's bodies, but regards not to cure the diseases of his own
soul; who looks upon his own sins, as he does upon his Patients deseases, as
in a glass, wherein he sees other men's diseases rather then his own, and is
not pained with Dum dolet accipe, ergo agit sepe ut dolca^.
them. And though I will not say saepe plus periculi est a medico quam a morbo,
that is, there is more danger often in the Physician then in the disease, as it
was said of Adrian, Medicorum turba Principem perdiderunt, they killed their king
with a multitude of physicians; Or as Cato said of them, quod plures occiderent
quam sanare^t, they would kill more than they would cure; Or as he that was
asked how he came to live so old, answered, Nunquam usus sum medico, I never
went to Physician: Yet this we know, except God be the Physician, they are
Physicians of no value, and nothing can cure the diseases of the soul, but the
knowledge of Christ and him crucified.

11. The lawyer, he will tell you, he studies to know the laws of the Land, and
not the laws of heaven: the laws of men, but not the laws of God: and is
often more skild in Law then Gospel, many having little or no knowledge of
Jesus Christ and him crucified, and so dye with what they have gotten by the
law, because (God knows) they have got nothing, many of them, by the Gospel.

12. Lastly, the Theologian, he will tell you he studyes Verba dei dicere, not
facere, to say and do not, and so turns Pharisee, by making his words blush,
when his deeds reprove them. Yea how often do we Ministers preach the knowledge
of Christ to others, when we know him not our selves savingly? while we preach
to others, we our selves may become reprobates. But the truth is, he knows
nothing that knows not Christ, and that he has his part in him; or if he do,
yet frustra novit omnia, he knows nothing as he ought to know.

I intend not by this discourse to condemn the studying of arts and sciences,
which are good in their degree, and of great use, but when men study these with
the neglect and slighting of the knowledge of Christ: Were it not solly to
slight the light of the sun, and prefer the light of the moon and stars
before it? Alas, other sciences are at the best but Cornel. Agrip. de van.
Hominum opiniones, veritatis imagines (opinions of men and shadows of truth)
but Christus est ipsa veritas, Christ is the way, the truth, and the life,
without the knowledge of whom there is no salvation.

CHAP. XIV. A reproof of those that study to know Christ only by speculation.


First, Those that content themselves with a general and speculative
knowledge, that Christ is the Savior of the world, but know not that he is
their Savior; that he died for sinners, but know not whither he died for them
yea or no, which is the highest degree of knowledge that most men have attained
unto: But let these men seriously weigh these two things; First, That general
knowledge of Christ by speculation without application is unprofitable and
vain. Secondly, That it is dangerous and hurt full.

First, I say it is unprofitable and vain. It is true, it is life eternal to
know God, and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ, John 17. 3. But it is not
meant of the knowledge of Christ by speculation only, which the devils have,
and yet it makes them neither more holy, nor more happy; for happiness
consists not in bonorum cognitione sed fruitione, that is, in the knowledge of
good things, but in the enjoyment of them. A Pearl in the eye does not enrich
a man (by mere gazing upon it) but a Pearl in the hand when we come to enjoy
it. And why did Paul say he counted all things as loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ? Phil. 3. 8. Surely he meant not for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ by bare speculation only, which a man may know and be a
devil in his life, but he means as after he expounds himself, such a
knowledge whereby he may come to win Christ; for so he adds, I count all
things but as dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness, etc. Alas what profit and benefit got the old world
by hearing and knowing there was an Arc, wherein some were saved, whiles they
themselves were drowned in the waters? And what good did it those Jews that
were stung with fiery serpents in the wilderness, to know there was a brazen
serpent set up, whereby others were cured, but they themselves died with the
sting of the fiery serpents? What good, what benefit, or comfort is it to me,
to hear there is a pardon for other malefactors but not for me, I must die? Or
for an hungry man to know there is bread enough, but I starve for hunger? There
are clothes, but I am naked? There is water enough in the sea, but I thirst,
and have not a drop? So (beloved) what does it profit me to know there is a
Savior for others, but not for me, I shall be damned? What good does a
plaster if not applied? It were as good For as Moses Rod, when it was out of
his hand turned into a Serpent, so does Christ when not taken hold on by the
hand of faith.
for thee there were no Savior, if he be not thy Savior.

2. The knowledge of speculation without application is very dangerous and
hurtful for us, and that in three respects.

1. First, Because it breeds bitterness, grief, and vexation to the soul.
Even the devils themselves know Christ by speculation, but alas this knowledge
of Christ makes them not rejoice, but makes them tremble, or roar like the
roaring (...).
of the sea, Iam. 2. 19. Suppose ten men in prison condemned, and a pardon
obtained for three or four of them, but the rest must die; this adds to their
sorrow: So This, even This will fill the soul with torment and sorrow, that
thousands are pardoned and saved by Christ, but they themselves are damned; As
Spira said, Christ is to me a grief and a torment, because I rejected him, I
despised him.

2. Secondly, the knowledge of Christ by speculation only, without application
m^st needs be dangerous; Because if Christ be not thy Savior, he will be thy
judge; if thou can not call him Lord Jesus, thou shall call him Lord judge;
If thou gettest not thy part in the blood of the Lamb, thou shall have thy part
in the wrath of the Lamb, John 9. 39. For judgment am I come into this world,
and therefore not for salvation to all, but only to his elect; Yea it is
Christ that will give thee thy sentence of condemnation; There is one will
condemn you (says Christ) even Moses in whom you trust; So there is one will
condemn you, even Jesus in whom you trust, John 5. 45. I have heard of a
lawyer having a bad cause of a Clients to plead, yet being a good pleader did
keep him off from sentence; but the same lawyer being made a judge and the
same cause coming before him, he that before pleaded for him, did then condemn
him: So shall Christ which was your lawyer while you lived to plead for you,
become then your judge to condemn you. Then shall he say to them on his left
hand, depart from me you cursed; Matthew. 25. 31. He even he that shed his blood
for you, which you trod under your feet; He that wept for you, that begd
reconciliation with you, but you hardened your hearts against all tears,
expostulations, and impetrations, he shall say depart from me thou* cursed; He
that once appeared like a lamb, will then appear like a lion, when thou will
tremble and fear to look him in the face when all nations shall wail Rev. 1.
7. Rev. 6. 15. 16, 17.*
before him; when Kings of the earth, great men, rich men, mighty men shall say
to the rocks and mountains, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

3. Thirdly, General knowledge without application is hurtful, because it will
aggravate thy condemnation. Woe to him (says Christ) by whom the son of man
is betrayed; Nay rather, woe be to him by whom the son of man is not believed
in, it had been good for that man he had never been born, yea perhaps that
Christ had never been born; This is condemnation, John 3. 19
that light is come, etc. in three respects.

First, it is condemnation inevitable; there is no possibility of salvation for
that man, Mark. 16. 16. He that believes not shall be damned. As Spira said,
God has given me diverse gifts, but denied me the grace of faith, and these
are left but to increase my condemnation. What hindered the Jews from entering
into Canaan, but unbeleef? And what hinders us from heaven but unbeleef? Heb.
3. 19. God has but two seats to sit upon, his seat of Justice and his seat of
mercy; If Justice condemn a man, yet mercy may plead for him; but if mercy
condemn him there is no help for him; And God has made but two Covenants, one
of the Law, and the other of the Gospel; If the Law condemn us, we may fly to
the Gospel, but if the Gospel condemn us, there remains no more sacrifice for
sin, but he must certainly perish. He that believes not says our Savior,
John 3. 18. he is condemned already, wanting nothing but execution; first he is
condemned by the sentence of the word ( he stands a condemned person) Gal. 3.
10. 2. In the Court of mercy Mark. 16. 16. 3. In the Court of his own
conscience, 1 John 3. 20. 4. He shall be as certainly damned, as if he were
dam-Ned already. 5. He is every hour in danger and fear of hell and
damnation. Nay farther, John 3. ult. The wrath of God abides on him, it sticks
fast upon him, so as there is no possibility of taking it off, till he get into
Christ, but it shall abide upon him for ever.

Secondly, It is condemnation inexcusable, these judge themselves unworthy of
eternal life; As he that delpiseth his pardon, tears it, or treads it under
foot, is unworthy of mercy, (it is worse then the treason,) these despise their
own mercy, Jonah 2. 8. and love despised, of all other injuries, is hardliest
borne of by God or man; how can those expect God should have mercy on them,
that would have no mercy on themselves? surely they shall have judgment without
mercy that would show to themselves no mercy. If the old world had bin drowned
and they had had no ark; or the Jews had bin stung to death in the wilderness,
if there had been no brazen serpent, it had bin excusable; But when God
provided an ark to save them, and yet they were drowned, because they would not
go into it; And when he provided a brazen serpent, and yet they were stung to
death, because they would not look upon it, they were without excuse; so
likewise i^ men had perished, and there had been no Savior sent to deliver
them; they might have pleaded some thing more for themselves, but now their
mouths are stopped, and are without any shadow of excuse. Thirdly, this is
condemnation Indeed Zanch. de Not. Dei l. 4. c. 4. says Christ is a Savior to
all men by giving common gifts, restraining grace, and moderatur paenas
debitas, that is, that all are actuaally saved from some degree of death by
Christ, as he thinks: But sure we are, this shall aggravate their torment, and
be their great est misery that they rejected Christ.
intolerable and unutterable, as if no sins brought damnation upon men in
comparison of unbelief. When God threatens severest judgment against sinners,
it is to give them their portion with unbeleevers Luke 12. 46. And Paul tells us
( Heb. 10. 27. These shall have sorer punishment, then those that despised
Moses law, and yet they died without mercy under two or three witnesses,
because they trod under foot the blood of God, accounting it as dung and dirt,
which is pr^tium lavacr^m and alleviacrum animarum, the price, laver and
refresher of souls, they throw his blood in his face, and count it as common
blood, as the blood of a swine, of a theif, or murderer. Hence the Lord
charged his disciples, that if any to whom he was offered did reject him, they
should wipe off the dust of their feet against them, Luke 10. 41.

The Jews rebellion, idolatry, and other sins, were sometimes plagued of God,
by Ammonites, Philistines, Edomites, and others, and they were carried captive
70 years, but when once they rejected Christ. wishing his blood upon them and
upon their children, then they were rejected of God totally, and so have
continued sixteen hundred years together. In Matthew. 11. 24. God threatens it
shall be easier for Sodom in the day of judgment, then for those that refuse
Christ; you know Sodoms sin and judgment, that fire came down from heaven and
burnt them to ashes, and now they suffer the vengeance of eternal fire; But it
seems the rejecting Christ is a greater sin then Sodomy in Gods account, and
shall have greater torments. Turks and Pagans that never heard of Christ, shall
sport in hell, in comparison of these. The Devils themselves are not guilty of
this sin, of despising mercy offered, and the blood of a Savior, and
therefore in this respect man's sin may be said to exceed the devils.

Object. But you will say who rejects Christ, or desires not to have his part
in him?

I answer, It is true; none absolutely refuse Christ, but upon the hard
conditions (as they conceive) upon which he is offered, the plucking out their
right eyes, parting with their dearest lusts; As Adam preferred the forbidden
fruit before Paradise, as Esau preferred his pottage before his birthright, or
as a dung hill cock prefers a barley-corn before a Jewel; And thus they are
truly said to despise and reject Christ, as the young man in the Gospel did,
that preferred the world before his Savior, Psalm. 81. 11. Israel would none of
me.

2. Secondly, It reproves those that know Christ by speculation, but not with
affection; they know him, but they do not love him; he dwells in their heads,
but Ephesians. 3. 17.
not in their hearts, rooted and grounded in love. Now such as love not Christ,
know not Christ in Gods account, 1 John 4. 8.

But you will say, what not love Jesus Christ my sweet Savior? then it were
pity I should live; I were worse then a beast, (as Hazael said, what am I a
dog?)

Yet certainly there are many that profess they love Christ, that do not love
Ioh. 5. 42. Col. 1 21. Ioh. 15. 18.
him; I know you says our Savior, that you have not the love of God in you.
Perhaps thou bear a mercenary love to Christ, to love him for his benefits,
as a wife may love her husband for his riches, and not his person, or as the
fly loves the Apothecaries boxes for sweet ointments, or as a Patient his
Physician, non propter se sed propter sanitatem, not for his own sake, but for
health sake, and yet thou may bear him no real or spiritual love. How can
we say we love Christ, whiles our hearts go not with him, whiles our thoughts
and affections are estranged from him, and set more upon the world Anima est
ubi ama^ non ubi animat.
and other objects? For where ^ur treasure is, there our heart is also. Matthew.
6. How can we say we love Christ, when we will part with nothing for him,
suffer nothing for him? love is bountiful; solus amor nescit difficultates,
love knows no difficulties, Cant. 8. 6, 7. as appears in Jacob and the
martyrs; what is the reason, many poor women and ignorant (in comparison) died
for Christ, when great learned men turned against him? but this, because they
had indeed more learning, but these had more love; as Alice Driver said, I
drove my fathers plough often, yet I can die for Christ as soon as any of you
all. How can we say we love Christ, when we love not his members, his children,
his picture and image? (whereas we know David loved Mephibosheth for Jonathans
sake) when we take not part with him but against him? when we love his enemies
and hate his friends? Is this thy kindness to thy friend? said Absalom to
Cuship; why wentes^ thou not with thy friend? how can we say we love Christ,
when we delight not in communion with him (have no intercourse of love letters
to him) and love not his appearing, but rather like the harlot wish he would
defer his coming? And lastly to name no more, How can we say we love Christ,
when we do nothing but wilfully and wittingly wrong him and provoke him to
anger by our evil works? Deuteronomy. 31. 29. If you love me, keep my Commandments
says our Savior John 14. 15. Would we say that man loves us, that delights
to vex and grieve us? that cares not how he wrongs us in our goods and name?
etc. Does that woman love her husband that does willingly prostitute her self
to an adulterer? or does that child love his father that would shoot an arrow
at his heart? Or would we say that man loves us, that carelessly or wilfully
omitteth any thing, he knows we take pleasure and good liking in?

In a word, he that loves his sins, loves not Christ* and he that loves him
not, has no part in him, nor does he know Jesus Christ and him crucified, but
only by speculation, for to them that believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. And
against such as love him not, the Lord had pronounced Anathema Maran atha, let
him be acursed till the Lord come to judgment.

3. Thirdly and Lastly, it reproves those The Sun gives heat as well as light.
that content themselves with knowledge of speculation, without an operative,
virtuall and practical knowledge; to live according to their knowledge and
profession of Christ, that their light may shine that men may see it, and
glorify God for it, Matthew. 5. 16. But they desire only to know that they may
be known, even for Cupiunt cognosce^e ut noscantur.
discourse and vain glory; who make no practical use of their knowledge, but
live in sins against their knowledge, Romans 1. ult. Jude 14. These are like
starregazers, that look upon the stars to gaze only, but the Ma^iner looks
upon them to stear his ship, and be guided by them to the haven; These imprison
the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18.

Consider two things; First, What good does a light under a bushel? or a Non
eloquia Dei s^ire, sed secundum haec viver^ est vera sapientia. Chrysostom.
Candle in a dark Lanthorn? or gold whiles it remains in the earth never dug
out? or fire in a flint if it be never struck out? Yea who would regard the Sun
it self any more, then a dark cloud, if she had great light, and yet gave no
light, if she did never shine to us? wherefore are talents given us, but to
occupy with them? Such knowledge is but umbra scientiae, a shadow of knowledge,
like corn on the house top, that neither fills the empty belly, nor the Mowers
since: it makes them neither more holy nor more happy. If you know these things,
blessed are you if you do them, says Christ, Joh. 13. 17. A good understanding
have all they that do his commandments, says David, Psalm. 111. 10. One apple
of the tree of life, is better Ward^ happiness of Pract.
then all the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil; for one day, we
shall not be judged according to the light we had, but the light we gave; as
those in Matthew. 25. were judged not by the talents they received, but how they
had occupied and wrought with them.

2. Secondly, Nay the truth is, men do a great deal of hurt, with speculative
knowledge only, in two respects.

1. They hurt themselves; for it makes them sin with a candle in their hands,
as if a man should have a torch in his hand, and yet would walk in the
gutters; it makes them sin like the devil against knowledge, and makes their
sins inexcusable; Romans 1. 18.
it were better for them never to have known the way of righteousness, then
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered to them,
2 Pet. 2. 21. To him that knows to do well, and does it not, to him it is
sin, says the Apostle, Romans 2. 1. 2
Jam. 4. ult. that is, it is sin with a witness; it is wilful rebellion, and
daring God to his face, and a kind of sinning against the holy Ghost. Act. 7.
51. And if they sinned inexcusably, that did go but against the light of
nature, that they were without excuse, Romans 1. 21. what excuse shall they have
that go against the light of the Gospel? ^any such have died in despair; as
Spira, who said there was no mercy for him, because he denied the truth against
his conscience. If we sin wilfully (says the Apostle) after we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment, Heb. 10. 26. who pities a man, when
you tell him this is poison, yet he will drink it? or that such an house is
infected, yet he will go in to it? He that increases this knowledge,
increases his own sorrow.

2. They hurt others; like the Unicorns horn, which though a precious horn,
Like a sword in a mad man's hand.
yet so long as it is on a beasts head, is dangerous and hurtful. They lay a
stumbling block before the weak, and prove like false lights on shore, which
lead ships on sands and rocks to split them. A Gentlewoman turned Atheist,
because she lived under a great Doctor that preached excellently, was very
learned, but lived very licentiously: And no wonder; for we are ready to walk
by example, more then precept; and ignorance thinks why should it fear, when
knowledge dares venture? Now all these are truly said by the Apostle not to
know Jesus Christ; he that says he knows him, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and ^^e truth is ^ Ioh. 2. 4.
not in him; As it was said of Eli's sons, they knew not the Lord, because
they were sons of Belial, and lived in rebellion against the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.
12.

CHAP. XV It shows forth how thankful and contented those ought to be, that
know Jesus Christ and him crucified savingly.
HItherto we have reproved three sorts of people; some that know nothing of
Jesus Christ; others that study to know all things but Jesus Christ; and a
third sort that content themselves with a bare speculative knowledge of Christ
without application. Now in the fourth place, seeing the knowledge of Christ is
so excellent, profitable, and comfortable; It teaches us the happy condition
of all those that know Jesus Christ savingly, viz. with knowledge of
application, affection, and operation. O how should they with the wise
merchant, having found this Pearl of great price, rejoice, though they had
nothing else left to rejoice in? How would those men rejoice that should find a
Cabinet of richest pearls and Jewels, or a great spoil? Much more should they
rejoice in this Pearl, in comparison of which, all other Pearls and Jewels, are
not worth the mentioning, Christ being a Jewel of more worth then both the
Indies. Thus did the Eunuch when he had found Christ, then he went on his way
rejoicing, Act. 8. 39. whom though you see not, yet you love, (says Peter) and
believing, you rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8. The
Virgin Mary rejoiced more that Christ was her Savior, then that she was his
mother, Luke 1. 47. My spirit rejoices in God my Savior.

And that in these six considerations.

1. First, Because he is the greatest gift that O Thesauris omnibus opulentior
noticia Christi.
God can give, or we can receive; John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only son; this is more, then if he had given us all the world; for
God has but one son, and can make no more sons, but God can make more
worlds at his pleasure; this gift is God himself, and God can give us no
greater gift then himself; we may say as one said to Caesar, when he gave him
a great reward, this is too great a gift said he for me to receive; yea, but it
is not too great a gift for me to give, said Caesar.

2. Secondly, He is the richest gift; for Christ is all in all; if he has
given us Christ, he will with him give us all things else, Romans 8. 32. He is
that one thing needful, that brings all things (as I have treated at large
before) Yea he is Gratiae non sunt agendae pro luna nisi nocte tantum.
That gift of God, John 4. 10. Surely God have given us more gifts then one;
True, but as one sun is more worth then all the stars, so that gift excels
them all; according to the Proverb, we bless not God for the stars, when
the sun shines, for when the sun shines, the stars appear not.

3. Thirdly, because he is the choycest gift that God has; Other gifts he
gives Promiscuously to good and bad, so as no man knows love or hatred, by
any thing that is before him, Eccles. 9. 1. Judas had the bag, and Dives fared
deliciously every day, when Lazarus would have been glad of his crumbes: But
God never gives this gift to any, but whom he loves with his dearest, special,
and eternal love. Suppose a Prince should woe some great Lady, and had a Jewel
worth a million: It may be he would scatter pieces of silver, or give some
slighty tokens of favor upon the servants; but his rich Jewel That he gives to
his spouse. This Jewel is Christ; Abraham may give Ismael a bottle of milk, but
Isaac had the inheritance.

Herein is love, in that he has given us his only son, (says St. John) 1
John 4. 9. Alas, herein is love that we are out of hell, not roaring with the
damned; that we are freed from the colic and stone, strangury, and other
tormenting diseases; that we have bread to eat when others have none. Ask the
hungry and he will tell thee that bread is sweet; As I read in these late
Germane wars, of a Girl about nine years of age, that asked her mother,
saying, good mother, let me kill you; Child, said she, why would thou kill
me? O said she, let me either kill you, or do you kill me, for I am very
hungry, and they say man's flesh is very sweet. But we are nor fed with man's
flesh, we feed upon the flesh of beasts, and of birds of the air, and fish in
the sea, and the best of his creatures, we never were yet brought to say man's
flesh is very sweet. Herein is love, that we have water to drink, yea the
blood of the grape, when others drink wormwood and gall, nay mingle their
drink with weeping and blood. Lament. 3. 19, 20. Herein is love that we are
not consumed with sword, pestilence and famine, even in these sad times, when
so many have been utterly ruined, maimed, wounded, slain; that when poor
Protestants in Ireland were stripped stark naked in winter frosts, and so were
driven before them to execution, with instruments of death; yet then we had
clothes to put on, our houses to dwell in, our beds to lie on, the fire to
warm us, the creatures to comfort us; and we are still fed with the finest of
the wheat, our table is richly spread, our cup runs over, and God daily loadeth
us with his benefits, etc.

No, no, herein is no love (comparatively) though we are less then the least
of Gods mercies, but in this that he has given us Jesus Christ, that he has
given us the Jewel. It is true; it is some love for a Traitor to enjoy meat,
drink, and other comforts a while; but this were love indeed, if he might have
his pardon; so this is love indeed if God give us Jesus Christ: But otherwise
we may say as Abraham did murmuringly, when God told him what great things he
had and would give him; what do thou give me, said he, so long as I go
childlesse? and truly what does God give us (in comparison) if he give us not
the child Jesus? But then we may say to God as God said to Abraham, Now I know
thou love me, seeing thou have not denied to give me thine only son.

4. Fourthly, The Lord Christ is the Rarest gift, given but to a very few, here
one and there another; Jewels we know are not common but rarely given, tho
pibble stones are common; every body have something of the world, but few have
part in Christ, yea very few, Matthew. 7. 14. few find it: In all ages, God has
given this Jewel to very few: there is but twenty righteous families mentioned
from Adam to Abraham, which was above 2000. years; in the old world but eight
persons; In Sodom and the five cities not ten righteous; and to this day the
most part of the world are heathens, and Christ is not given to one of them, to
whom yet God has given the riches of both the Indies. The Turks whom God has
given leave to sit in the midst of the world, a mighty nation, yet not to one
of them (so dying,) has he given Jesus Christ. The Jews, from every one of
them is Christ hidden, who all must perish and are accursed, except God
extraordinarily reveals Christ to any of them. Among the Papists millions of
millions perish for not knowing and trusting in Jesus Christ, as their only
Savior, though perhaps some poor and ignorant ones God may have mercy upon.
And among our selves how many ignorant, civil, hypocritical, profane, and
deluded with common graces, and a form of Godliness, (wih being garnished,
for being sanctified) who take copper for gold, weeds for flowers, presumption
for faith? Now though God feeds them with worldly pleasures and delights, yet
none of these does God bestow Christ upon. Though Israel be as the sand of the
sea, yet but a remnant are saved; was not Esau Jacobs brother (says the Lord)
yet Jacob have I loved, and hated E^au, Mal. 1. 2, 3. There were many widows
in Israel, yet only to the widow in Sarephta was Elias sent, Luke 4. 26. so
there are many people in the world, nay in England, yet to a very few is Christ
given; as there is much common earth, but little dust of gold. Then what cause
have thou for admiration and thankfulness? Lord why do thou give this Jewel to
me rather then to others?

5. Fifthly, the Lord Christ is the sweetest gift of all other; for if God
gives us Christ, then he gives all other gifts in his As the tree sweetened the
bitter waters, Exodus 15. 25.
love, and they come as blessings sweetened to us. What good did Hesters banquet
do Haman, while the king was wrath with him, and his face was covered? We
esteem a ring of gold from the king more then it is worth in substance, because
it is a token of the Kings favor.

Sixthly, Christ is the freest gift of all other. It cost us nothing, we shall
pay no Gratia evacuatur si non gratis donatur. Non esset, gratia si non erat
omni modo gratu^ta. Aug. Epist. 109.
more for it, then for the sun shining upon us God so loved the world that he
Gave his son; we bought him not, nay we begd him not; in some respect he may
be said to be freer then the bread we eat; for, for that we sweat and labor:
but so we did not for Christ. Nor shall men pay any thing to obtain him, but
only receiving him. Ho, every one that thirsts, come buy without money and
without price.

Quest. But how is Christ said to be freely given when I must repent and
believe to receive him?

I answer, As if a beggar should say my dole is not free, for I was fain to go
for it, and receive it; and yet that is not of thy self neither; for God is
feign to give thee legs to go, and a hand to receive, even to work that
condition in thee which he requires of thee; By grace you are saved through
faith, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8.

Quest. But how is it free, when we must buy it? Esaias 55. 1.

I answer, yet its free because we pay nothing but our sins, which are worse
then nothing; and we give them not to God, but cast them from our selves,
because they would hurt us.

O then let us be thankful for, and content with Christ, though we want all
things else; As if a father should leave a rich Jewel to his son and nothing
else, no other lumber, yet he is content with that alone, because it is more
worth then all other lumber; would thou sell thy pearl for all that the world
injoys? will thou change portions with them? Who would exchange a Pearl for a
pibble? a Crown for a coronation flower? earth for heaven? Christ for the
world? Then say as Jacob did, I have enough so long as Joseph is alive; and as
Esau (though Genesis 28. 20.
upon better grounds,) I have enough my brother; and let us resolve with Jacob,
if God will give us bread to eat, and clothes to put on, we will cheerfully
serve him, seeing he has given us Christ. And not only to be content when God
gives, but when he takes; when we receive good from the hands of God, but
when we receive evil; when we abound with blessings, but when with crosses;
when we enjoy all, and when stripped of all; as the sheep is patient as well when
she is shorn, as when her fleece grows upon her back. This lesson though
hard, yet Paul had learned it. I know Psalm. 4. 11. 12.
how to be abased, and I know how to abound; I can be full and hungry; abound
and want: I have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content;
and the reason is because he had learned Christ. Yea though thou be never so
poor, yet if thou know Christ to be thine, learn to be content; for it is
no token of Gods displeasure to be poor, but to want Jesus Christ; neither to
speak properly, can he be said to be a poor Saint, that has got so rich a
Savior, nor he poor that is rich in faith. Suppose a man were robbed of all his
money, and had a rich Jewel about him, which they found not; would he not go
home rejoicing, that still he saved his Jewel? All thy happiness lies in this
one precious Jewel, and it is portion enough; Eccles. 10. 19.
it is the one thing that is needful, so as nothing is more necessary, because
that one thing will be to thee instead of all things; Solomon said it of money
that it answered all things, perhaps speaking according to the opinion of the
world; but I am sure it is true of Christ, that he answers all things.

CHAP. XVI. An exhortation to all to study the knowledge of Jesus Christ.
to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure, that is, make
Christ sure. Omnia siperdas 2 Pet. 1. 10.
animam (Christum) servare memento; whatever we loose, be sure we loose not our
souls, we loose not Christ; one soul is worth all the world, and one Christ is
worth a 1000. souls; therefore let this be our greatest care to enquire with
the Acts 16 3.
Iailor, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved; what course shall I take to come to
know that Christ is my Savior? To excite us thereto, let us seriously ponder
in our hearts these two things.





1. By Acclamation; Preach the Gospel to every creature, Matthew. 16. 16. 1 John
3. 19. And let whosoever will take of the water of life, Rev. 22. 17. 2. By
Exhortations and persuasive arguments; Turn you, turn you; why will you die?
Ezekiel. 33. Come unto me all you that are weary, etc. Matthew. 11. 28. 3. By
Impetrations and intreatyes; I pray, be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. 4. By
Injunction and oommand, say not I dare not believe; for its your duty; I
command you to believe; 1 John 3. 23. This is his commandment, etc. 5. By
Comminations and threatenings, If you will not receive Christ, it will lie heavy
upon you; Matthew. 11. 21. Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida, etc.
6. By Patheticall lamentation; As when he wept over Jerusalem and said, Oh that
thou had known in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace! Luke 19.
42. Oh that my people h^^ harkened to me! Psalm. 81. 13. 7. By Continuation, he
continues persuading again and again, yea a 1000. times; Behold I stand at the
door and knock, Rev. 3. 10. O Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee,
and thou would not, Matthew. 23. 37. 8. By inward motions and excitations of
his spirit striving Acts 7. 51.
with our spirits to persuade us to come unto him. My spirit says God shall
not always strive with man, Genesis 6. 3. We know the Prodigals father met him
half way when he returned, to show how ready Christ is to embrace those that
come to him; and sure if Christ knocks at our door that we might open, if we
knock at his door he will open; and if God gave Christ when we never begd him,
he will not deny him to those that ask him. Open to me my sister, my love, my
dove, my undefiled, for my head is filled with Cant. 5. 2.
dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, says our blessed Savior to
his spouse.

Quest. But you will say how should a man come to attain to the knowledge of
Jesus Christ with application.

Answ. I answer briefly, and plainly, for the help of the ignorant and young
beginners;

First labor to see the worth and excellency that is in Christ; ^f thou
knew that gift of John 4. 10. Ignoti nulla Cupido. Voluntas sequiturdictamen
intellectus.
God, thou would have asked; you see because she knew it not, she asked not;
our affections are kindled, according as our understandings apprehend? The eye
affects the heart; beauty draws affection; Hence the Lord Christ sets forth
himself in all his robes of glory in the Canticles, to this end that the
spouse might be the more ravished with his love, and to win her affection to
him, Because of the savor of thy good ointments poured forth, therefore the
virgins love thee, Cant. 1. 3. yea hence it is that the whole book of the
Canticles is so bespangled with the praises of Christ, as the firmament with
stars, but especially in Cant. 5. 9. to the end. And what is the reason why
men set so light by Jesus Christ? is it not because they see nothing in him,
why they should desire him? Es. 52. 3. But the excellency of Christ has been
at large handled before, in the ninth, tenth and eleventh chapter, to which I
refer the Reader.

labor to see thy need of Christ; that without him thou art most wretched and
miserable, Rev. 3. 17
yea more miserable then any creature that ever God made, except the devils;
which appears in five particulars. 1. Consider seriously the multitude of
sins thou art guilty of, even more then the hairs of thy head, or the sands
on the seashore, or the stars in the heavens which are innumerable;
Innumerable evils (says) David has campassed me, they are more then the
hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me; Ps. 40. 12
2. And yet alas one of thy sins were enough to sink thee into hell for ever.
Gal. 3. 10.
Consider also the foulness, and greatness of thy sins (which will one day
stare upon thee as so many devils) thy Atheism, and blasphemy, thy pride,
hypocrisy, vain glory, thy oaths and perjury, filthiness and uncleanness,
coveteousnesse, deceit, oppression, malice, envy, and a world of wickedness.
Mine iniquities (says David) are gone over my head, like a heavy but then they
are too heavy for me; Ps. 38. 4^
3. Consider them likewise with their aggravating circumstances; many of them
committed with deliberation and wilfulness against thy knowledge and
conscience, the motions of the holy spirit, against thine own vows, covenants
and resolutions; thy reiterated relapses, like the dog returning to his former
vomit which he had cast up, or the washed sow to her wallowing in her former
mire; Thy continuing in thy sins, 20. 30. 40. 50. years, till perhaps thy
glass be half run, or almost out; and all this time has been spent in
serving the devil, thy lusts and the world, and in enmity to God and his
righteousness. 4. (Because we are ready to say, Alas we are all sinners, who
can say non peccavi?) Consider thy sins, thy spots, are not the spots of Gods,
Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
people; for they sin, but they hate their sins, mourn under them, are weary of
them; but thou love them, take pleasure in them, and art loath to forsake
them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12.
and live willingly in known sins against conscience, and art under the
power and dominion of sin. Romans 614. Tit. 3. 3.
5. Fifthly and lastly, Consider the heavy judgments that hang over thy head
for them; thou art hated and accursed of God, lie open to all his judgments
in this life, to be tormented with devils and reprobates for ever in the life
to come, where thou shall nothing but roar, howl, weep and wail, and gnash
thy teeth to all eternity. Think with thy self that some are in hell already
for the same sins thou live in, and if thou live and dyest without Christ,
thou shall ere long be with them; Reason thus, Is Cain in hell for hating
goodness in his brother? John 3. 12.
That's my sin; I have hated goodness in my brethren; are some in hell for
coveteousnesse, uncleanness, voluptuous living, etc. these are my sins, and
lurk in my heart. Nay if one sin lived in with delight will damn me, as a
wanton look, a Job 31. 5.
right eye, a lustful vanity, etc. what heaps of wrath must I lie under, that
am guilty of so many millions of sins. And now tell me sadly, have thou need of
any thing more then a Savior, and to get thy pardon? Surely no; I know men are
hardly brought to believe this, who are naturally filled with pride and
self-love, ready to think well of themselves; to say as Peter to Christ,
Master, pity thy self, this evil shall not come unto thee. Damned, God
forbid; I would not for a thousand worlds this should be my condition; but yet
it is so, and will be so, if thou gettest not thy part in Christ. And certainly
men will never seriously seek after Christ, till they see this their need of
him; the whole needs not a Physician nor cares for him? who cares for a
pardon till he be condemned?

3. The third means to get Christ, is to be sick with our sins. For Christ
came not to call the righteous, but sick sinners to repentance; Mark 2. 17.
such as are weary and laden, Mat. 11. 28.
brokenhearted Esa. 61. 1.
pricked in their hearts, Act. 2. 37.
stung with their sins, as the Israelites were with fiery serpents. A^
bruised Christ will lie in a bruised heart. e Ioh. 3. 14
Which though some make it a back door, yet I am sure the whole Scripture holds
it forth, (ordinarily) as a qualification praevenient to receive Christ: and
therefore tells of a repentance (whether legal only, or evangelicall also
following it before faith, I will not now dispute) praeceding faith, as in
Matthew. 21. 32. You repented not that you might believe; And Paul preached of
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Act. 20. 21
And in the Primitive Catechism they taught repentance from dead works, and
faith toward God* Heb. 6. 1.
Such and such only are fit to prise Christ, as the sick only are glad of a
Physician; a condemned man, and upon the ladder ready to be turned of, O how
glad is he of a pardon? As those that were stung with fiery serpents, O how
welcome was a brazen serpent to them? Yea such will be willing to receive
Christ upon his own terms; Heaviness in the heart will make it stoop; Prove.
12. 2. 9.
As we see Paul who then cried out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Acts 9.
6.
And in the Prodigal who prayed, Father, make me as one of thy hired servants.

4, The fourth means to get to know Christ is ours, is to be sick for Christ,
as the Church was; I am sick of love; Cant. 2. 5 I Ioh. 7. 37. Esa 44. 3. Luke
1. 53.
Christ calls the hungry and thirsty, etc. Let him that is athirst come and
drink; I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon dry
ground; the hungry thou fillest with good things; (l) As the mother opens her
breast when the child cries for it, so Christ opens the bosom of his love to
such as earnestly desire him; we know thirst has 4. properties, first it
proceeds from ardent heat, either when scorcht with heat of the Sun, or by
excessive labor, etc. And secondly it is ardens desiderium, not a lazy, but a
burning earnest desire. Give a thirsty man what you will, gold or silver,
nothing contents him but water. 3. It is a speaking desire he begs, cries and
roares for water. 4. It is a present desire; delay increases, in^ageth his
desire; so is it with a soul that thirsts for Christ, 1. He is one scorcht
with the heat of Gods anger. 2. His desire is ardent, he desires Christ more
then thousands of gold and silver. 3. He cries out I thirst. The hunted Heart
brayeth not more for water, then a thirsty soul does for Christ. Ps. 42. 1.
Romans 8. 26. Prove. 13. 1^. 19.
Fourthly he is not satisfied till he has found Christ; give me Christ or else
I die, say they; as Rachel said, Give me children or else I die.

Matthew, 13, 44.
As the wise Merchant sold all that he had to buy the pearl; Acts. 96.
Paul cried, Lord what will thou have me to do? I am content to do any thing,
be any thing, suffer any thing for Christ. Many are higlers and cheapeners, and
some come near, but few come home to the full price, and so lose the bargain;
some will part with all but one lust it may be; As Jacob would part with any
son but Benjamin; He should not go; they say of some darling lust, as Naaman
said; God be merciful in this or that only, as Herod in his Herodias, the
young man in his coveteousnesse; O spare my right eye, my Joseph, my Adonijab.
But Christ will have all, or none at all; if a man part with many lovers, yet
if he retains the love of one harlot, he is an adulterer; so if thou retainest
the love of one sin in thy bosom, hating to be re-formed, thou can never
receive Christ, Ioh. 13. 9


Caution, Not but that sin will cleave to us while we live here: but yet we
must part with our sins two ways. 1. In our affections and desires, being
willing to part with them all. Rom 7. 15. 24. ult.
2. In our purposes, resolutions and endeavors to forsake them all. Acts 11.
23. Heb. 13. 18


6. The sixth and last means to get Christ, is to seek him, Precibus and
suspiriis with prayers and tears, Ask and you shall receive, Matthew. 7. 7.
Romans 10. 11. If thou had asked, I would have given that gift of God, says
Christ. Thus Paul sought Christ, Act. 9. 11. behold he prays. Only ^ John 4.
10. Ezekiel. 36. 37.
seek earnestly and constantly, as Jacob wrestled with God, and said I will not
let thee go until thou bless me; or as the woman of Canaan, that would not be
put off at least with a crumme of mercy; or as Mary when John and Peter went
back, when they found not Christ, presently she stood and stayed at the
sepulcher, weeping till she found her Savior. Also use all other means; seek
Christ in the temple, for there his mother found him, and thou may find him;
wait upon all ordinances, and let thy end be hoping to find Christ in them;
seek Christ also among his Saints, forsake all bad company, and join thy self
with them as Paul did, Acts 9. 26. 25.
and continue thus seeking; and in his blessed time he will say unto thee, be
it to thee according to thy desire; and thus may thou come to know Christ,
not only a Savior, but thy Savior, thy Lord, and thy God.

CHAP. XVII. Certain signs and marks are laid down, whereby we may come to
know Jesus Christ to be ours.
Prove your selves (says the Apostle) whether you he in the faith; 2 Cor. 13.
5. Gal. 6. 4.
As men try their gold by weight and touchstone.

1. We know our hearts are deceitful and desparately wicked; and we are ready
to bless our selves, that Christ is ours, when it is no such matter; thus was
Laodicea deceived, who thought her self rich, increased in goods, and wanting
nothing, when she was most wretched and miserable; Rev. 3. 17 Gal. 6. 3. Romans
7. 9. Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
And the Pharisee who blessed God he was not as other men, nor as that
Publicane, when indeed he was not so happy: Nay Solomon tells us. There is a
generation that are pure in their own eyes, whose hearts are not washed from
their filthiness, Prove. 30. 12.

2. Consider the danger of this deceit; As if one should sell all that he had,
and buy a rich Jewel, he were undone if it proved a counterfeit; so if thou art
deceived to conceive Christ is thine, when he is not, thou art utterly undone
for ever. If a man be deceived in taking copper for gold, it is but the loss
of so much gold; if in the title of his lands, it is but the loss of his
estate; but if thou be deceived in this particular, to think Christ to be
thine when he is not, it is the loss of thy soul, and the greatest judgment
thou can be given over to, to be thus deceived, Job 8. 13. and 11. 20. Esa.
6. 9. 1.


3. Satan will try us when we lie sick, and in time of distress, who then will
lay sore at us with temptations, to despair, Luke 22. 13. He will minnow you as
wheat; and God will try us at the day of judgment, 1 Cor. 3. 13. 14. and then
if our work ahide not, we lose our reward.

4. Again, fourthly and lastly, the benefit is great every way; For if we be
deceived and know it, we have time now to seek after Christ; If a man has a
disease upon him, and know it, he may then send to the Physician for cure in
time; or a man that is out of his way, if he know it in time, he may return
into the right way again: But what an intolerable vexation will it be to a man
not to see his disease till it be past cure? or not to know himself to be out
of his way, till he be at his journeyes end? so for a man to think himself to
have part in Christ, When he has not, and that he is going to heaven, when he
is going to hell, and yet not to know it till he comes in hell, this is the
greatest and most irrecoverable misery.

And on the contrary, for a man to have part in Christ, and not to know it
(which is possible in time of temptation to a child of God, as it was to David,
Psalm. 22. 1. Psalm. 51. and to Job, Job. 3. and cap. 4. and to Heman, Psalm. 77.
and to the Church of God, Es. 49. 14. 15.) he has little comfort of it, nor in
his life, but he is continually full of fears and temptations, as is a
condemned man that has his pardon, but knows it not; as Hagar wept that had
a fountain of water by her, but she knew it not; or as a man that is right in
his way but knows it not, how uncomfortably does such a man travel on his
journey? what heart has that man to work, when he knows not but he may lose
all his labor? what heart to build or bestow cost upon that house which he
knows not whether it be his or no? But if a man be in Christ, and certainly
knows it, he has heaven in his heart; when a man knows he has his pardon,
then he rejoices in it; when he knows he is right in his way, then he goes
on cheerfully; when he knows the house is his own, he bestows great cost in
building, because he knows he shall not lose his labor. Yea, this only, will
make us die with comfort, nay with a holy triumphing over death, as being
assured of Christ and a better life; death, where is thy sting? Natural fear
a man may have, but this assurance will overcome it, by fixing our eyes upon
the joys of heaven by the eye of faith; as it did in Simeon, Paul, Stephen,
the thief on the cross and others. O what would a man give when he lies a
dying for this assurance, that Christ is his! would he not give all the world
for it if he had it? and would he part with it again for a 1000. worlds? surely
no; and yet alas if some men had no more assurance for their lands then for
Christ, they would have but little comfort.

Quest. But you will say, How should a man know this certainly, so as not to be
deceived?

Answ. I answer, first be willing to know the truth concerning thy condition,
whether it be right or wrong, good or evil; if Christ be thine, that thou
may know it, or if he be not thine, yet that thou may know it; Therefore
pray with David, try me O Lord, and let me know my own heart; search me, and
let me know Psalm. 139. 21, 22.
my thoughts, and let me see if there be any wicked way in me; O let me not be
cozened to mistake hell for heaven, to go to hell hood wink. There be some men
cannot endure the trial, nor a searching ministry; but will leave it at an
adventure, although their hearts misgive them; and truly this is trial enough
that those ways are naught, that love not the light; that gold is too light
that loves not the trial of the scales and weights, and naught that will not
endure the touchstone. Foul faces love not clear but flattering glasses, as
the Panther when she goes to drink, troubles the waters, as not being able to
abide her own deformity; it is the gald horse that cannot endure to be touched;
and if thou can not endure the trial of the word and thine own conscience,
how will thou endure the trial of God, who is greater then thy conscience? For
if our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things; 1 John 3. 20.

2. Secondly, Judge thy self by the right rule, the word of God, and the
promises therein contained: let us build our confidence upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.
20. Rest not upon Enthusiasmes, dreams, visions, revelations, thine own
thoughts, etc. for these may deceive thee, and will deceive thee, if they be
not according to the promises in the word. I trust in Esa. 8. 20.
thy word, (says David) Psalm. 119. 42. so Heb. 11. 13. They saw the promises
and embraced them. Nay, if God should send an Angel from heaven and tell us
Christ is ours, or should speak with an audible voice from heaven, yet could we
not be more sure then by the promises in the word; for is it not all one, to
have a promise under his hand as from his mouth? If thy knowledge of Christ be
built upon a word from Gods mouth, thou art sure it is built upon a rock, that
no winds or tempests can ever blow over; God is faithful, he cannot deny
himself; and this made Abraham confident, both that he should have a son, and
that though he should kill him, yet he should receive him alive again, because
he knew God was faithful and able that had promised, Romans 4. 21. In 2 Pet. 1.
19. Peter proves Christ to be the son of God by the voice that came from
heaven, saying, this is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, verse 17. but
says he in the 19 verse, we have a surer proof then the voice that came from
heaven, to wit, the word of the Prophets, wherein Christ is revealed and
promised; we have a more sure word of (...) firmissimum testim.
Prophecy, etc. What is the word a surer testimony then Gods voice from heaven?
I answer, Beza reads it, we have a most sure word, intimating they had two sure
testimonies, the voice from heaven, and the word of the Prophets. Others read
it as it is properly in the original, Firmiorem, a firmer word, being a
stronger foundation to rest upon, then the voice from heaven: Not that it was
surer in it self, for the same God that spoke from heaven, spoke in his word,
as appears in verse 20. But in regard of the Jews, who might cavil at the
voice from heaven as a delusion, as they said before in the like case, John 12.
28, 29.
It thundered: but they believed whatsoever the Prophets said to be true: (as at
this day the Jews believe not the new So Calvin, Paraeus, Aug. Ser. 27. de
verb ap. c. 4. Firmiorem propter in fide infirmiores. Bull.
Testament, but stick to the law,) and therefore Peter sent them to the
Prophets, who all testify of Christ, Joh. 5. 29. Acts 10. 43. The sum of all,
is that the word is a most sure foundation to build our faith upon, and as sure
as if we heard a voice from heaven, because it came from heaven; And perhaps in
regard of us it may be more sure, because we may be ready to fear, whether
such a revelation or vision were not a delusion. And I am persuaded no^ they
are very rare, if any at all; for heretofore he spoke by visions, but now by
his son, that is by his word, Heb. 1. 1.

Object. You will say the word is a good light, when we are in darkness; but
when the spirit of God, the day star appears in our hearts, then we may live
above ordinances, for so says the Apostle, you do well to take heed to the
word of prophecy, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.

I answer, Calvin thinks the place of darkness is this life, and the
day star, and Aecumen. Corn. Lap.
day-dawn, is the light we shall have in heaven. Others think it is meant, the
preaching of the Gospel, which is clearer then the Law; and the word until,
does not intend that then we should regard the Prophets no more, but that we
should have a clearer light by the Gospel. Therefore if thou would be sure
Christ is thine, let thy faith be built upon some Ephesians. 2. 20*
promise in the word. For faith (or assurance Christ is ours) consists in two
things. 1. to see Christ offered to us in the promises Hebr. 11. 13. as to
those that are weary, hungry, mourning, etc. 2. To rest upon Christ* for
salvation, according to those promises, Heb. 11. 13. They saw the promises and
embraced them; and then our faith is grounded upon a rock immovable, when it
is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus
himself being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20.

3. Labor to get a right understanding of those promises which thy assurance
is built upon; take heed of taking common graces for saving, weeds for flowers,
Samuel for the devil in his likeness. Thou say if I repent, if I believe,
love the Saints, have good desires, then the word says that Christ is mine:
but thou must know there is a kind of faith, which a man may have, and yet
have Acts 8. 13. John 2. 23.
no part in Christ; as Simon Magus believed, and the stony ground believed,
Luke 8. 13. So likewise Judas repented, Matthew. 27. 3. Balaam had good desires,
Numb. 23. 10. Herod loved John-Baptist; Darius loved Daniel; Pharaoh loved
Joseph, etc. There are transient motions that are not habitual dispositions;
there is difference between a mark with chalk, and a fire mark, one is quickly
rubd out, the other is durable: So there are lighter operations of the spirit
which may soon vanish.

Quest. But how shall I know that I rightly understand the promises?

Answ. I answer, Be not willing to be deluded; compare one Scripture with
another; inquire of the Ministers which are appointed of God thy teachers, and
pray earnestly to God to enlighten thee in the truth; and he will lead thee
into all truth necessary to salvation, as it is written, Ioh. 16. 13. When the
spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth.

4. Having got a promise rightly understood, hang and rest upon it, and be not
beaten off; say, God has said if I mourn for my sins, hunger after
righteousness, love the people of God, etc. then I have part in Christ. But I
mourn for my sins, hunger after righteousness, love the people of God, etc.
Therefore I have part in Christ, and I will trust to his word; if I perish I
perish; so did Abraham, Romans 4. 21. and Jacob, Genesis 32. 9. 10. Thou have said,
(says he) Return into thy country and I will do thee good; David also stuck
close to the word; Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which thou have
caused me to hope; Psalm. 119. 49. And the Prophet Esaiah says, Es. 66. 11.
They shall suck and be satisfied with the breasts of consolation: so let us
suck the blood of the promises, as a dog that has got the blood of the Bear,
he hangs on, and will hardly be beaten off.

5. Though it is true, that any one saving grace whatever, is a sign Christ is
thine, yea though thou have a 1000. temptations and doubts that thou can not
answer; Yet it is good to gather an abbreviate of some few signs, that thy
soul may feed upon in time of trouble. These I acknowledge are so plainly laid
The more experienced Reader that finds less need of them, may be pleased
patiently to pass them over.
down in Scripture, and so familiarly taught almost in every book that treats
of faith, that it would seem almost lost labor: therefore I will be the
briefer, yet I dare not altogether neglect them for the benefit of some weak
ones. The general sign is, If any be in Christ, he is a new creature; 2 Cor.
5. 17. Col. 3. 9. 10. (which is called regeneration) whereby the law is written
in his heart; God having Though the strings be the same, yet the tune is
changed
planted in him a love and liking to every good, and a hatred to all that is
evil. Thou love righteousness and hate wickedness; Psalm. 45. 7. A new
heart will I give you; and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will cause
you to walk in my statutes, Ezekiel. 36, 26. 27.

More particularly I shall lay down eleven marks or signs, whereby a man may
know that Christ is his in particular, (which is nothing else but a strong act
of justifying faith)

is thine, is; If it were wrought by hearing the Word preached (ordinarily) and
is confirmed by it; for faith comes by hearing (ordinarily) Romans 10. 17. 1
Cor. 1. 21
Of his own will begat he us, with the word of truth; Iam. 1. 18. every child
has a father. So the 3000 were converted by hearing Peter. Acts 2. 37 Acts 8.
26.
I deny not but that afflictions, losses, death of children or friends, etc.
may prepare for Christ, as Paul was by being unhorsed by Christ, Act. 9. 3, 4.
Yet they do not work faith, but usually that is wrought by the word preached;
therefore Ananias was afterward sent to Paul, Act. 9. 10. so likewise good
council, reading good books, etc. may stir us up to seek after Christ, as
perhaps it did the Eunuch, Act. 8. 28. but do not set us into Christ; and hence
Philip was sent to the Eunuch readding, to work faith in his heart, as appears
verse 30. to verse 38. And as the word begets it, so it feeds, confirms and
Ex iisdem nu^uimur a quibus constamus.
cherishes faith, as the ashes cherish the fire whereof they were bred, 1 Pet.
2. 2. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.

Now then inquire; how came you by your particular knowledge of Christ to be
your Savior? did the word preached convince, humble, and excite you to seek
Christ? and does it confirm and stablish your faith? then it is good. But on
the contrary, if you know not how you came by your faith, (never by hearing of
sermons,) but are like the Israelitish women, quick of delivery before ever the
midwife (the Minister) can come at you, you may suspect your faith; as we
suspect those to be stolen goods when they know not how they came by them, and
that a base born child when it is not known who is the father, (although I say
not that every one converted knows the Minister that co^verted him, yet
ordinarily he knows he was converted by the word preached, except God
instilled grace into his heart, when he was a young child, as he did unto
Samuel, Timothy, etc.) But especially they have cause to suspect their faith,
when the preaching of the word shakes and winnowes their faith, and fills them
full of doubtings and tormenting fears; the preachers of the word being like
the two witnesses, their tormentors, who say of them as Job did of his friends,
Rev. 11. 10.
miserable comforters are you all. Certainly she is but an ill mother that will
not give such to the child she bare (if she be able) but rather hunch it, beat
it, and deal unkindly with it.

ever prepared for the receiving of Christ, as the stones were prepared for the
Temple, or as a man prepares his house to entertain a king, Luke 3. 5. Every
valley shall be filled, or levelled. In some sense a Christian sometimes may be
said to be too low, when he despairs of mercy then he is said to be too low,
for despair lays his soul as low as hell, as it did Judas; And every hill
shall be brought low; that is, the mountanous and high thoughts thou had of
thy self, like the Pharisee that thought himself not like other men, shall now
be changed, and now thou shall have low thoughts of thy self, saying as Jacob;
I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies; as the Prodigal, I am not worthy
to be called thy son; as the Publican, Lord be merciful to me a sinner; as
Paul, of sinners I am chief; or as David, I am a worm and no man; for Christ
dwells only in the humble heart, Esaiah 57. 15. with him will I dwell that is of
a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble. It follows;
And crooked things shall be made straight, that is, even the crooked paths of
the serpent, thy crooked ways shall now be made straight, and even, now
levelling at the rule of the word of God and his glory; And the rough ways
shall be made smooth, that is, even Bears, and Lions, rough Esaus, shall now
become Babes and Lambs, for meekness and gentleness; as it was prophesied,
Es. 11. 6, 7, 8. Now all this is done by a spirit of bondage, and fear of hell
and damnation, which God usually smites the heart with, before he gives Christ;
as the plow goes before corn is sown; as it was with Paul, Acts 9. 45.
with the Jailor, Acts 16. 29, 30.
with the 3000 Jews at their conversion, Acts 2. 36, 37.
etc. No woman brings forth a child without sorrow and pain, nor is any born
again usually, without their spiritual pangs of sorrow, though some feel more,
some less, as some children come forth with more, some with less pain of the
mother, yet all have so much as to make them willing to let go their sins to
receive Christ, Act. 9. 6. You know the stony ground wanted depth or softness
of earth, and so quickly withered; Matthew. 13. says dwells not in a stony heart;
as some flowers or herbs are found only in a soft soil, and not among the
rocks, so faith only is found in a soft heart. A broken bleeding Christ dwells
only in a broken heart; a plaster will not stick upon the whole flesh, but
upon a sore, Esa. 61. 1. All believers can call their faith Benoni the child of
their sorrow, as Hannah said, This is the child, for which I wept, and mourned,
and prayed 1 Samuel 1. 27.

from the right operations of this strong faith or assurance that Christ is
thine, which are four.

1. It is little at the first, like a little child that cannot go alone nor
speak, but is carried in the arms of others, and lives almost by nothing but
sucking and crying; so this weak believer is fain to be carried in the arms of
stronger Christians, and does nothing almost but cry for his sins, and hunger
after the word, and run to it; it is a weeping faith, full of doubtings,
temptations and fears, as the poor man cried weeping; Lord, I believe, help my
unbelief; it is like Mat. 12. 20
the smoking flax and bruised reed, that smoakes with desires, but the fire is
not strong enough to flame with comforts; and a reed; now a reed is a weak
thing, scarce strong enough for a bird to sit upon, but much weaker if it be
bruised; lastly it is like a grain of mustardseed, which is so small a seed as
you can scarce discern it; so is faith so weak at first, that the poor believer
can scarce discern whether he has faith or no. But if the child be of a man's
stature so soon as it is born, it is a monster; so if thou be all of a
sudden fully assured that Christ is thine, and no sooner art stepped out of thy
natural sinful condition, but presently thou art so sure as that thou can
not be more; this faith is a monster; soon ripe and soon rotten, like Jonas
goard that did grow in a night, and did perish in a night.

2. It increases daily, as a child grows daily; it lies not in the heart
like a stone in the earth, but like a tree or seed in the earth which grows,
so Romans 1. 18. the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, that
is from one degree of faith to another: as the little grain of mustardseed, in
time grows to a great tree, so that it is a shadow for the fowls of the
heaven; so the faith that before could scarcely be discerned, is now so strong,
that it is able to shelter other scorched souls under its shadow; and the babe
Romans 15. 1.
now can go alone, yea is able to carry other children in his arms; so
Nicodemus that at first came by night, but after went openly and boldly with
Joseph to Pilate to beg the body of Jesus.

3. The third operation of faith in the heart, is, that it opposes infidelity
and fights against it; I have fought the good fight of faith, (says Paul) 2 Timothy 4. 7. and this made the poor man cry out against his unbelief, Mark 9. 24.
Lord, help my unbeleef. But if there be no opposition in thy heart, no striving
against doubting, etc. there may be bold and strong presumption, but no faith,
no certain knowledge or assurance that Christ is thine; for Satan tempted the
faith of Christ, Matthew. 4. 2. and of Peter, Luke 22. 31. and surely he would
shake thine if it were of God; but thou may fear the strong man keeps the
house, and therefore all is at peace: That man never believed that never
doubted; the liquor of faith is never pure in these vessels of clay, without
the lees of distrust, says bishop Hall.

The fourth operation of faith, is, if the same faith that makes thee believe
that Christ is thine, does enable thee also to believe all other promises for
temporal blessings and deliverances; As Jacob believed God for his going
safely back into Canaan, upon the promise of God for it, Genesis 32. 9. 10. I am
less then the least of all thy mercies, etc. But thou have said return into
thy country, and I will do thee good; and Abraham believed God for a child,
after he had a promise, as well as he did for salvation. But many there are
whose faith is strong enough to assure them of their salvation by Jesus Christ,
who yet cannot trust God for the performance of temporal promises.

Repentance; (a) if we carry our sins as Christ did, with a heavy and broken
heart, grieving and Acts 3. 19. Acts 26. 18. 20. 2 Cor. 7. 10 Zach. 12. 10.
mourning, for the impieties and impurities of our natures still remaining,
contrary to the holiness of the spirit of grace, as fire to water, as light to
darkness; hence Paul cried out, O wretched man! who shall deliver me from
this body of death? Romans 7. 24. the evil I hate, that I do. Romans 7. 18. Yea
all the promises are made to a mourning spirit under sin, Matthew. 5. Blessed are
they that mourn, Psalm. 51. 17. Esa. 61. 2. if a wound bleeds, there is less
danger, but it wrankles if it bleeds not.

Yet not every repentance (or sorrow for sin) is a sign that Christ is ours;
for Esau, Cain, Saul, Ahab and Judas had a kind of sorrow for their sins, in
relation to the punishment, and as it wounded conscience, which also was found
in Pharaoh, and is found even among the damned; There is water in their eyes,
because of the fire in their bones; every stubborn child will cry when the rod
is on, but it is more usually for the smart then for the fault; a thief grieves
when he is taken, not because of his theft, but because he fears he shall be
hanged. A man repents that he has eaten sweet meats, not but that he loved
them well, but because they made him sick; children busy about the fire, if
they burn their fingers, then they will cry, but not for soyling their clothes,
etc. So to be grieved for our sins, and love them, is but as if a snake should
cast her coat, but keep her poison, or a man leave his whore, but still love
her, or a merchant that casts away his wares into the sea, but it is in a storm,
still he loves them* wicked men may weep salt water, tears of bitterness, they
cry for anger, as Saul cried for madness, 1 Samuel 24. 16. but the Saints weep
sweet water, spring or loving water, even tears of love. Hence it is that when
they had been pricked thus in their hearts, Peter bids them still repent, Acts
2. 38. which is nothing else but sorrow (...) (2 Cor. 7. 9.) toward God, when
it proceeds from love to God, and hatred of sin as offensive to God, as a child
grieves because he has offended a loving father. In Zach. 12. 10. it is said,
they shall see him whom they have pierced, and mourn for him; that is, because
they have offended him. So likewise David Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, Though no question he was grieved that he had sinned against Bath-sheha
and Vriab, yet specially and chiefly because he had sinned against God. So
Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. how shall I do this wickedness, and so sin against God? So
Peter went out and wept bitterly; but it was when Christ Luke 22. 65.
looked upon him with an eye sparkling full of love, as if his eye had said,
what do thou not know me Peter? am not I worth the owning, etc. Some report
this sin so affected him, that every night the cock crew, he fell on his face
and wept for his sin and prayed, ( Lyra, Clem. alex.) So Mary in the Pharisees
house, when there was a feast, and they sat merry at the table with music and
joy, she got under table, and turned her eyes (once beams of sinful Ille vere
dolet qui sine test dolet.
lusts and pleasures) into rivers of tears and mourning, wherewith she washed
the feet of Christ; and her hair, her ornament and net to catch wanton lovers
withal, is now become a towel to wipe the feet of Christ withal, ( yea some
report that she lived 30. years a penitent in France.) And the reason why she
wept so much, you see it was because she loved so much, it was her love to
Christ produced those lovely tears. So the Prodigal lamented that he had
offended his loving father; saying; father, I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, etc. and that grieves me most that I have offended thee.

Now the reason why this is a certain sign of our part in Christ, is, because
corruption and the natural unregenerate part cannot hate sin, but grace and
the spirit of God which is contrary to it; The flesh* lusts against ^he
spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
so contrarily the spirit of God in us cannot love sin, but must loath it, and
grieve for it; grieve not the holy spirit of God, by which you are sealed to
the day of redemption, says Paul, Ephesians. 4. 30.

Matthew. 5. 6. Not after comfort, pardon of sin or salvation only, as Balaam
did, and those in John 6. that cried Lord, evermore give us this bread, that we
may never hunger more, etc. but after righteousness, to have more power
against sin* and more grace to love God and Christ, and his Saints more, and do
God better service; when it is not so much after happiness as holiness, not
so much after the reward as after the work, not only to be glorified of God,
but to glorify God, Ob that my ways (says David) were so directed in thy
sight that I might keep thy statutes. Now these desires are signs of thy Psalm.
119. 5.
faith in Christ, 1. because they are wrought by the spirit of God, Est a Deo
ut been velimus, ac ut valeamus. Aug. that is, it is God that works in us to
will and to do. It is the Phil. 2. 13
Spirit of God that stirs up in us sighs and groanings, Romans 8. 26. they cannot
come from our own spirits, but are supernatural desires. If iron move upward
contrary to its nature, surely some loadstone has been there; desire of grace
is grace, because grace is seated in the desire; (yet desire of meat is not
meat, because meat is not seated in the desire) Hence the new born babe de
sires the milk of the word, to grow thereby, because he has tasted how good
the Lord it, 1 Pet. 2. 3. 2. Secondly, Si non ad voluntatem, tamen ad salutem.
Aug.
because these are pronounced blessed, and promised by God to be satisfied,
that is with such a measure as God sees meet for them, Matthew. 5. 6. 3. Thirdly,
because desire of grace is accepted, as if we had what we do desire, 2 Cor. 8.
12. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that we have, and
not that we have not. As it appears in the widows two mites, who in Christ's
account cast in more then they all, because her affection was larger then
theirs; so Abraham is said to have offered his son, because he (...) willing
to do it; and David to have built God an house, because he was willing to have
done it. To will is present says Paul, but to do good I have no power. On the
contrary, a natural man his desires are earthly, voluptuous, ambitious, who
will show us any good? Psalm. 4. 6. or if he desires spiritual things, Ii is in
a carnal manner, and out of self-love, because he is loath to be miserable, and
usually his desires are sudden, inconstant and lazy, not settled and painful.

CHAP. XVIII. The sixth sign of the saving knowledge of Christ, namely love.
faith works by love, Gal. 5. 6. ( a) and that consists in five particulars.

1. If we love God. (As it is an instinct of nature for child en to love the
parents that begat them) with a heavenly holy love, for his holiness, for the
excellency of his nature, and as looking upon him as a reconciled father that
dearly loves us, so that the thoughts of God are swe^^ and precious to us, 1
John 5. 1. Romans 8. 28.
whereas naturall^ we bear no love to God, we love not the thoughts of him, nor
look we upon him as loving us; or if we do love him, it is only mercenarious
and meretricious love, Vtimur deo ut fruamur mundo.
as a woman that loves her husband not for his person, but for his riches; so
we love God only for his benefits, naturally; not but that it is lawful to
love God for his benefits, as Mary loved much, because much was forgiven her,
but not chiefly and only for his benefits, but also for the excellency of his
nature.

2. If we love Christ with a conjugal love, with the love of a spouse, even as
our best beloved, loving nothing in heaven or earth in comparison of him; Psalm.
73. 25.
To you that believe be is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. as he was to Paul, Phil. 3.
8. I count all as loss and dung in comparison of Christ; so Moses, I esteem
the rebuke of Christ greater riches, etc. Heb. 11. 25.

3. If we love the Saints and members of Christ 1 John 3. 14.
. This mark stays by us when many others cannot be discerned, and is most
certain; for we cannot love grace in another man's heart, except there were
grace in our own hearts, Genesis 3. 15. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Only it has these
qualifications.

1. First it is a spiritual love, to love Col. 1. 8.
them in the name of righteous men, for the image of Christ appearing in them,
and in no other by-respects. Epaphras has declared to us your love in the
Spirit, says Paul; and he that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
and a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall have the reward of a
righteous man, says our Savior, Matthew. 10. 41. Now love of goodness must
needs proceed from a spirit of goodness.

2. Secondly, It is an universal love to all the Saints, Col, 1. 4.
there being the same reason of loving one as another, even the spirit of
Christ that dwells in them, which is the same in all, Ephesians. 4. 3. And hence it
is that they love them, though they be poor Saints. 2. Though afflicted
Saints. 3. Though hated and despised of others. 4. Though they have many
infirmities. 5. Though they have done us injury and wrong. As Calvin commends
Luther to be insignis dei servu^, the famos servant of God, etiamsi me millies
diabolum vocavit, although he has called me (said he) devil a thousand times.
And 6, though we never saw faces, never knew them but by reports from others.

3. Thirdly, In respect of the degree, it is a special and choice love, they
love them as brethren and sisters, Matthew. 12. ult. All my delight is in the
Saints, says David, Psalm. 16. 2. and this appears in four particulars. It is
called 1. Amor Complacentiae, 2. Benevolentiae. 3 Amcitiae. 4. Sympathiae.
Schoolm.


1. First in their high opinion of them, esteeming them even as pearls to
pibbles, in comparison of other men; hence David calls them the excellent, Psalm.
16. 2. And in Psalm. 15. describing the godly man, he says he is one, in whose
eyes a vile person is contemned and slighted, but he honors them that fear
the Lord.

2. Secondly, In a readiness to help them if they be in need, and do them good
before others; they will do good to all, (because misericordia non quaerit de
meritis sed de miseriis, mercy looks not at worth but at misery) but especially
to the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10

3. Thirdly in delighting in their company, more then in the society of any
other men; I am a companion of them that fear thee, says Psalm. 101 6. Psalm. 6
8.
David, Psalm. 119. 63. Moses loved the company of his afflicted brethren, more
then of all the Court of Pharaoh Heb. 11. 25. 26.
: Ruth and Naomi being one of heart could not part Ruth 1. 16.
whether thou go I will go, etc. The two disciples that went to Emmaus, knew
not that it was Christ that was with them, but thought he was some good man;
and how loath were they to let him depart from them? (his company was so sweet
to them.) Hence they constrained him, saying, Abide with us, etc. Luke 24. 29.
And the disciples when Christ was from them, when he lay in the grave, and
after his resurrection and ascension, they often met together in private houses,
but not a wicked man among them Ioh. 20. 19. Act. 1. 13. 14. Act. 4. 32. Act.
9. 19. 26.
. And Paul as soon as ever he was converted, he changed his company, and
assayed to join Yea if they could they would have their bones lie together in
the grave. Gen 49. 29. 30. Genesis 50. 25. 1 Kings 13. 31.
himself with the disciples, Acts 9. 26. Oh how the hearts of Jonathan and
David were knit together, and how they delighted in the society each of other?
In the Primitive times, the Christians so flockt together, that the Heathens
said of them, ecce quam invicem se diligunt, behold how they love one another;
Tert. And the reason is, because they are of alike disposition; similitudo
gignit amorem, likeness in disposition breeds delight in communion. Birds of a
feather will flock together; lions, Bears, sheep, doves, and all flock Simile
simili gaudet*
together in their kind; sheep and hogs go not together, nor do doves and crows
fly together. Many times a man walks so closely and covertly, that we cannot
discern what he is by himself, yet a thousand to one but he may be known by his
companion he is most delighted withal. The Lacedaemonians marked what company
their children kept, and accordingly judged of their dispositions. And August
Caesar marked at a combat what company courted his two daughters; and when he
espied grave Senators talk with Livia, but young and wanton persons with
Julia, etc. he conceived accordingly of their dispositions, that one would
prove a wanton, the other would be the more sober. Why seek you the living
among the dead? says our Savior; Never but one (that was living) desired to
keep company with the dead, and he was possessed with a legion of devils. A man
out of Christ cannot possibly make a godly man his choice society, in whom he
takes most delight; for what communion has light with darkness? and what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what concord has
Amos 3 3.
Christ with Belial? etc. 2 Cor. 6. 14. we know God has put enmity between the
Genesis 3. 15.
seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent. An Israelite is an abomination
to an Egyptian. Indeed a godly man converseth lovingly with all, in a civil
and a sociable manner, and loves all men with a natural, civil and moral
love, (yea and with a spiritual love of pity and desire of their salvation)
and expresses all offices of love to all, as innocence, peaceablenesse,
courtesy, kindness, etc. As Abraham bowed himself to the People of the Land,
even to the children of Heth, Genesis 23. 7. (And its Gods will, both tares and
wheat should grow together till the harvest, as clouds among the stars, weeds
among the flowers, thorns among the Lilies.) But the Saints are his choice
society, in whom he Cant. 6 9. Ephesians. 4. 3.
takes most delight, because there is a union of hearts and spirits which
makes the sweetest and the nearest union. Stones and clay may lie together, but
will not soder together, as Nebuchadnezzars image, part of iron and part of
clay quickly brake asunder; for iron and clay will not incorporate one into
another.

4. Fourthly and lastly, in sympathizing one with another, and taking part each
with other; so that if one member rejoices, all rejoice, if one mourn, all
sympathise 1 Cor. 12. 26. Heb. 13 3. Est. 8. 6. and c. 4.
As Mordecai and Ester did sympathize with the misery the poor captive Jews
were in, and adventured their lives for them; and Moses sympathized with his
brethren that were at their hard labor, and had stripes without measure, but
himself in glory and advancement, yet he would go visit them, and see their
burdens; Exodus 2. 12.
So Jonathan in his absence took David's part, and spoke in his behalf to Saul;
and Abraham fought for, and rescued Lot, Genesis 14, 14.

4. Fourthly, the fourth sign from love, is, if we love the word of God with a
sincere love, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow
thereby; they that are born the womb desire the milk of the breast, as the
tender infant cries for milk as soon as it is born; and their end is, that they
may grow thereby, as bees fly upon flowers to suck honey and sweetness, and
therefore they delight not always most in the gayest flowers, but wherein most
honey is to be gotten, and hence often they prefer a plain leaf of a tree
before a gay flower.

An hypocrite indeed may seem to delight in the word, as Herod did in hearing
John-Baptist Man. 6. 20
. But it is not to this end to gather honey from it, for the holiness of it, to
have his heart made better by it, but to tickle his ear with novelties, and
please his fancy, or to get notions, that he may be able to discourse, etc. But
if it come home to his particular sin, O then he kicks and flings and hates the
word, and the messenger of it, as Herod hated John-Baptist when he spoke
against Herodias, and the Pharisees hated Christ, when he began to reprove them
of their hypocrisy, By this saying thou reproachest us say they; Luke 11. 45.
but David loved Nathan who dealt so plainly with him, as appears, 1 Kings 1.
27. Is this thing done by my Lord the King, and thou have not shown it to me
thy servant? intimating he was David's choice counselor still, There is 1. the
careless hearer, that hears but regards not Esa. 6. 9, 13 2 There is the
gazing hearer that comes only to see and be seen. 3. The curious hearer that
looks more how the glass is painted, then what face he has. 4. The carping
hearer that comes to see what he can catch at. 5. The spiderlike hearer, that
comes to suck poison by wresting the word to his own destruction. 6. The
Butterfly-hearer, that like as the Butterfly lights upon flowers to paint her
wings, but not to suck honey, so he comes not to be more holy, but more gaudy
with notions; All these love not the word with a sincere or spiritual love.
notwithstanding all his sharp reproof he gave him.

The fi^t sign from love, is, if we love those that are out of Christ,
(especially in relation to us) with a spiritual love.

Quest. But David says, Do not I hate them, that hate thee?

Answ. I answer, he hated their sins in relation to Gods dishonor; but it is a
mark of our being in Christ, to love their persons with a threefold love.

1. First, with a love of pity (as was touched before) in grieving for their
sins, and pitying their misery, as did Jeremiah, My soul shall weep in secret
for your pride, Jer. 13. 17. Our blessed Savior wept over Jerusalem, saying, O
that thou had known in this thy day the things that belong to thy Planxit
ruinas animarum Dyon. Carth.
peace; Why were Christ's eyes wet with tears, but because their eyes were dry?
quare flevit dominus nisi quia flere te docuit? Wherefore did Christ weep for
us, but to teach us to weep for our selves? Cypr. Did not Abraham pity even the
Sodomites, when he pleaded so with God for them, if there were but ten
righteous among them? and did not Paul tell them weeping, their end was
damnation? we see grace will make us love and pity the souls of other any; But
much more the souls of those that are in near relation to us, as of our wives,
husbands, parents, children, brethren and sisters, and dear friends; so David
wept for Absalom; Iephta for his daughter, when he met her, whom he had vowed
to sacrifice to the fire; so Abraham prayed for Ishmael, O that Ishmael might
live in thy sight; and Augustines mother for her son in his natural condition.

2. Secondly, In having an earnest desire and care to bring others to the
knowledge of Christ and salvation. Nascitur indigne per quem non nascitur alter.
A good man would not go to heaven alone; when thou art converted, strengthen
thy Brethren, said Christ to Peter, Luke 22 31. Josh. 24. 15.
As the Reubenites, Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh, when they themselves
were provided for, they were yet to help over their brethren into Canaan, Numb.
32. 17, 18. Spiders indeed work only for themselves, but Bees for others. Acts
26 28.
Paul wished not only Felix, but all that heard him, were not almost, but
altogether as himself was, (except his bands and imprisonments, his chain, his
gold chain, was too rich for him yet to wear, that honor he reserved for
himself.) So when the Grecians which came to worship, would fain see Jesus,
Philip and Andrew went and told Jesus. John 12. 21. 22.
So the woman left her water ( o) John 4. 29.
pot when she had found Christ, and went and told them of Christ that were in
the city.

But especially they cannot but earnestly desire and endeavor to bring those
united to them in near relation, to the knowledge of Christ; As Mary when
Christ appeared to her, how she ran to tell the disciples! (r) Paul wished
himself separated from Christ for his brethren, Romans 9. 3. Exodus 32. 10
and kinsmen in the flesh; and Moses to be blotted out of the book of life,
rather then the Jews should not be spared. Yea even Dives in hell torments had
so much charity as to pity his brethren, and prayed Abraham to send Lazarus to
them, lest they should come to that place of torment, Luke 16. 28. And
certainly they that have no regard of the souls of others committed to their
charge, to bring them to the knowledge of Christ, may justly fear that they
themselves never had the knowledge of Christ savingly revealed to them, nor
know the worth of souls.

CHAP. XIX. The seventh sign of the saving knowledge of Christ, namely the
spirit of prayer.
if we have received the spirit of prayer; You have received the spirit of
adoption to cry Abba Father, says Paul. And the Prophet Zachariah, Romans 8. 15.
chap. 12. verse. 10. says, I will pour upon you the spirit of grace and
supplication, which consists of three particulars.

1. First, the heart is moved and excited Infertur appetitus orandi Aug. ad
simplic. l. 2.
by the spirit to be often with God in prayer, as the child naturally cries and
runs to the mother, the young to the dam; So that they make conscience to
perform it, and cannot live without prayer, Romans 8 26. Psalm. 19. 1. 64. Seven
times a day will I praise thee, etc.
especially not without private prayer. So Paul as soon as ever he was
converted, he got alone, and betook himself to prayer, Act. 9. 11. Behold he
prays. And Cornel. Act. 10. got upon the top of the house, and there was
alone with God in prayer; Daniel three times a day prayed in his closet, when
he was in danger of his life. Nazianzen reports of his sister Gorgonis that her
knees seemed to cleave to the earth by her often praying; and Gregory of his
Aunt Trucilla, her elbow was as hard as a horn, by often leaning upon a desk
when she prayed; Eusebius reports of James, that his knees were as hard as
Camels knees, bereaved of sense by often praying; And one reports of Ioachim
the father of the Virgin Mary, that he would often say, Cibus and potus mihi
erit oration, Prayer is my meat and drink; whereas natural men have no ability
or gift of prayer, they cannot pray; many a wise man that can speak eloquently,
yea before a king, yet is not able to speak five wise words to God in prayer;
whereas many a poor simple man, that is scarce able to speak five wise words
to a man, (especially if he be some great man) yet can speak to God by prayer,
even to admiration; To say, we have no gift of prayer, is to say we have not
received the spirit of grace, for the spirit of grace and supplication are put
together, Zach. 12. 10. Nor that we have received the spirit of Adoption, for
that would make us cry Ab^a father, Romans 8. 15. It may be such cannot pray
eloquently, nor so as their words will well hang together, yet they can weep,
sigh and groan, which are the strongest prayers, Rom 8. 26. 27. Others there
are that have no list to this duty, they cry what a weariness is it, ( Mal. 1.
13) and never pray for conscience sake, out of love to the duty, but only out
of custom for fashion sake, or in distress, as the Mariners in the ship with
Jonah, when they were in a storm, Jonah 1. 5.
then they cried every man to his god, but yet he delights not himself in
the Almighty, he will not always call upon God, as Job speaks of the
hypocrite, Job. 27. 10. Now these and such like, are so far from having any
faith in Christ, that they may rather be called Atheists who think there is no
God, nor do they believe his providence; The fool has said in his heart there
is no God, says the Prophet David, Psalm. 14. 1. hence it follows, v. 4. He
calls not upon the Lord.

2. Secondly, by the spirit of prayer, the heart is not only excited and
enabled to pray, but to pray spiritually, to make a spiritual prayer; as the
Apostle exhorts that we pray with all manner of prayer and supplication in the
spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18.
and to pray in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20.
and the Apostle Paul tells us the spirit helps our infirmities; though we
know not what nor how to ask, yet the spirit makes intercession for us with
groanings, etc. Romans 8. 25, 26.
which assistance of the spirit, consists not in orderly invention, or
composure of words and eloquent phrases, for some godly people may want this,
and it is but a common gift, and the common, not the special help of the
spirit promised, in Romans 8. 27.

But the spirit of prayer consists in three things. First in enabling us to
pray in faith with a childlike spirit, that can go to God as a father, and not
as to a stranger Romans 8. 15. Esa. 63. 16. Lords prayer*
. Wicked men pray, but they have not the spirit of prayer, because they pray
not in faith, but shoot their arrows at random, never regarding nor looking
after them. Now these are but bold narratious, (or orations) not humble
petitions. It is true, a man in Christ may have risings of infidelity, but they
are overcome by faith.

2. Secondly, The spirit of prayer, consists in enabling us to pray fervently;
the spirit helps us says the Apostle, to ( c) Romans 8. 26.
pray with sighs and gronings which cannot be expressed; the affections are as
it were set on fire by the Holy Ghost. Thus Hannah poured out her soul before
the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. 15. So Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and wept sore,
Esa. 38. 1. and Jacob wrestled with God in prayer, Genesis 32. 24. Wherefore
cryest thou to me says God to Moses? Exodus 14. 15. and Abraham strove with God
from fifty to ten, Genesis 18. 23. especially our Lord Christ, who prayed with
strong crying and tears. Invention may make us speak, but Non semper opus est
clamore, quia deus suspiria audit. Non vox sed votum non musica, etc.
the spirit will make us cry, which yet consists not so much in strength of
words, as of affections; natural men may have external elocution, but want
inward affection, they are dead and cold prayers; they usually pray as though
they cared not whether God heard them or no, like cold Suitors that care not
whether they Ludit deum qui ore petit quod cord negligit.
speed or no, they want the aspiration of the spirit to pronounce Shibboleth.
Caut. Not that a Christian is always alike in prayer, but as the spirit
pleases to help with his adjuvant cooperating grace, (without me ye can do
nothing) the spirit must inspirare, or we cannot exspirare, The wind must blow
that the spices may flow, Cant. 4. 16. we are like a ship at sea, if the wind
blow it goes amain, or else it creeps upon the ground; sometimes like Pharaohs
chariots onr wheels are taken off and we drive heavily, and sometimes like
Joseph's chariots we drive cheerfully.

3. Thirdly and lastly, to pray with the spirit, is to pray with spiritual
desires, when we pray for spiritual things, or for temporal blessings, with
spiritual affections and spiritual ends, to honor God by them as Christ's
petitions were, John 17. and as we are taught in the Lords prayer. A natural
man may be very earnest in his prayer, yet it is not a spiritual prayer,
because his desires have only reference to self-love, and natural ends, but
not to God and his glory. They have not cried unto me with their hearts, when
they howled upon their beds, says the Prophet, Hos. 7. 14.
where the Prophet esteems of their prayers no better then howlings, like the
howlings of Baals Priests, who cried aloud, O Baal hear us, and they cut
themselves till the blood gushed out upon them. 1 King. 18. 28.
Therefore such prayers God sometimes sends away with a mock, rather then an
answer, Prove. 1. 28. 29. when distress and anguish shall come upon you; then
shall they call upon me but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but
they shall not find me.

CHAP. XX. The eighth, ninth and tenth Sign of the saving knowledge of Christ.
and have respect to all Gods commandments; which consists in a settled
resolution and endeavor against all sin, and a settled purpose and endeavor to
please God in all things; Then I shall not blush (as it is in the original,)
or be ashamed when I have respect to all thy commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. It
was the commendation of Zachary and Elizabeth, They were just before God,
walking in all the commandments of God without reproof, Luke 1. 6. And this
Paul makes a mark of a good conscience to endeavor in all things to walk
exactly, Heb. 13. 18. And it must needs be so; because the whole law is written
in our hearts, one precept as well as another, I will put my laws into their
minds, and write them in their hearts, Heb. 8. 10. that is, I will plant an
habitual disposition and inclination in their hearts, to a love and liking of
them; by giving them a new heart and a new spirit. Ezekiel. 36. 26. and this
inclination is to one precept as to another, and he that has not a
disposition, liking, and endeavor to keep all, has it not to keep any, Hence
says James, Iam. 2. 20. he that keeps the whole Law, and offends in one point,
is guilty of all, (that is dispositive, though not formaliter or actualiter) he
has an inclination to break them all, though he does not actually break them
all, and his heart is not upright before God.

2. Because there is the same reason why we should make conscience to abstain
from one sin as from another, and to perform one duty as another; So says the
Apostle, For he that said do not commit adultery, said also do not kill, etc.
Iam. 2. 1. Perhaps an upright man may fall into sin, but yet he never falls from
his resolution; in my mind says Paul, I serve the law of God, though in my
flesh the Law of sin; for though there be an inclination and desire to do the
will of God, yet there is a contrary inclination of the old man against the
will of God, the flesh lusts against the spirit.

I grant likewise, a man out of Christ may have resolutions against some sins,
(though always for the evils that come from sin, and not that are in sin,
for the frnit, and not for the filth of sin) but it is not universal, but he
has always some reservation'; God be merciful to me in this, or that; some
lust he cherishes (and says as Jacob said of Benjamin, it shall not go) As
Herod his Herodias, Jehu ^eroboams calves, Judas, Demas, the young man, etc.
their covetousness; But if a man's heart be in league but with one sin, which
his soul cleaves to, hating to be reformed, he has no part in Christ.
Suppose a woman should say to her husband, Sir I love you better then a hundred
and a hundred men, only I love one man better then you; were she not an
Adulteress; one deadly wound may kill a man as well as a one thousand, and one
sin lived in with love and delight, may damn a man as well as a thousand.

if any will follow me, he must deny himself, etc. Luke 9. 23.
so 2 Cor. 10. 5. 6. The weapons of our warfare, are mighty through God, to
cast down strong holds and high imaginations, and bring into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ, as a servant gives up himself to the will
of his master, or wife to her husband; and the reason is, because he receives
Christ as a Lord and Savior; Come to me says our Lord Christ and I will ease
you, etc. but not except you take my yoke upon you. Unto us a child is born,
and the Government is upon his shoulders, Es. 9. 6.
so as we are not exempted from subjection by Christ; Faith destroys not
obedience but sanctifies us, and enables us to yield obedience; thus it was
with Paul, Act. 9. Lord what will thou have me to do; as if he had said I am
willing to do any thing, be any thing, or suffer any thing thou will have me, I
am wholly at thy disposal; and with the Prodigal, receive me father, and make
me not a son but a servant, yea a hired servant (As Abigail said, let me be a
servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord) And with David, if he
says he has no pleasure in me, let him do with me as seems good in his eyes.
2 Samuel 15. 26.


And this discovers many, that think they have part in Christ, (that they know
Es. 1. 2.
Christ is theirs) are deceived, because their faith works not obedience, but
rebellion; they believe him, but will not take his yoke upon them; they say; To
them a child is born, but they pluck the Government from his shoulders; living
in constant rebellion against God, and only according to the law of their own
minds, that is, walking after the stubbornness of their own hearts Deuteronomy. 29.
19.
.

Perhaps they are content Christ should rule them, so far as he pleases them,
and as his will likes them: but if it dislikes them, Christ may deny himself
if he please, and stoop to their will, for they cannot, will not stoop to his;
God be merciful to them, in this their will they must have (though it cross
Gods will) saying as the Jews, we have no king but Caesar; so none shall rule
us, but our wills; let us break his bonds, Psalm. 2. 8. Thus did Pharaoh, who is
the Lord (says he,) that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not
the Lord; neither will I let Israel go; and the Jews who quarrelled that
Jeremy spoke falsely, and the Lord had not sent him, Jer. 43. 2, 3. but when
they were convinced of that, then they spoke plainly. The word thou have spoken
to us in the name of the Lord, we will not do, Ier. 44. 16.
and this not of weakness, against the law of their minds; nor ( f) Romans 7. 23.
sudden risings, and passions, as in Jonah, Peter and David, that would number
the people for which they meet often with ^ore afflictions to break their
stomachs, but it is voluntary, allowed and cherished rebellion.

Now let all such think what they please of having part in Christ, and knowing
Christ to be theirs, but God has told us, he will never show mercy to that
man, though he bless himself he shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 29, 19. yea the Lord
forbids such so much as to take his name into their mouths that hate to be
reform Psalm. 50.
; And it is a carnal mind that is enmity against God, and is not subject to
the law of God, nor indeed can ( i) Luke 19. 27.
^e, Romans 8. 7. 2. 2 These. 1. 8
yea Christ takes those for his enemies that will not let him reign over them.
To conclude, if Christ be no Lord, he will be no Savior; for therefore he
died, and rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of quick and dead, Romans
14. 9.

when whatsoever he does, it is to the glory of God; when he lives not to
himself, but to him that died for him and rose again; when he is more grieved
at Gods dishonor then his own, and is content to be abased that God may be
glorified; for now the will is elevated above nature to look at a higher
principle then it self, even the glory of God. Thus did Joseph, it is not in
me says he, but God shall give Pharaoh an answer Genesis 41. 16.
; so Daniel, there is a God in heaven that reveals secrets; but as for me,
this secret is not revealed to me, for any wisdom that I have more then
others, etc. Dan. 2. 28. 30.
And the disciples when they healed the lame man, told them, why look you so
earnestly upon us, as though by our own power and holiness we had made this
man walk? the God of Abraham, etc. Act. 3. 12.
And lastly to name no more, Saint Paul tells them, 1 These. 2. 4. 6.
we speak not as pleasing men, but God which tries our hearts, and v. 6. Nor
of men sought we glory, nor of you, nor yet of others. And hence it is that our
Lord Christ makes it a mark of a righteous man, Ioh. 7. 18.
he that seeks the glory of him that sent him, the same is true, and there is
no unrighteousness in him. And this is made a mark of a vessel of honor, by
Paul. 2. Tim. 2. 20. Nihil agit ultra sphaeram activitatis suae.
He is a vessel sanctified for his masters use. And the reason is, because
nothing can move above its principle, the stream can rise no higher then the
fountain, nor can nature go beyond nature, as water cannot heat except fire be
in it.

Caut. Not but that some risings of self, remains in the best, as in David
when he numbered the people, and the disciples when they reasoned which of them
should be greatest: but they are lamented and repented off, and mourned under
as their greatest burden, as did Hezekiah who humbled himself, because his
heart was lifted up, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25.

Contrarily, a natural man makes a god of himself, has no higher end in all
his actions then himself, his own ease, credit, happiness, etc. As God
complains, Israel is an empty vine, yet he brings forth fruit to himself,
Hos. 10. 1. and our Lord Christ of the Pharisees, All their works they do, is
to be seen of men. ( g) Matthew. 23. 5.
They may say of all their best actions though never so specious, as
Nebuchadnezzar said of his Babel; is not this great Babel that I have built for
the honor of my name? So all they do, is for the honor of their name; like
windmils which go because the wind blows, or like marigolds that open because
the Sun shines upon them. Now these, their hearts are not upright in them, Hab.
2. ^4. but like false servants that sell their masters wares well, but then
purloyn and rob them of the gains; He that speaks of himself, seeks his
own glory, etc. John 7. 18. and such cannot have part in Christ, John 5. 44.
How can you believe that seek honor one of another? And it is a mark of those
that were counterfeit believers, they loved the praise of men more then the
praise of God, John 12. 43.

CHAP. XXI. The eleventh sign of the saving knowledge of Christ, is the
witness of the Spirit.
THe eleventh and last sign I shall mention, is the witness of the spirit.
Romans 8. 16.
The spirit bears witness with our spirits that we are the children of God.
Some make this the only mark to prove our interest in Christ, and deny all
signs from the fruits of the spirit; but this were to deny the fruit grown upon
the tree to be a sign that the tree is alive; but our Savior tells us, a tree
is known by the fruit; and the Lord has left them in Scripture as infallible
marks, and therefore to deny them, were to impute folly or unfaithfulness to
God himself, which were the greatest Blasphemy. Yet we exclude not the
witness of the spirit, as a certain evidence of our part in Christ. ( a) 1
Ioh. 5. 6. Ephesians 4. 13. Ephesians. 4. 30.


Which consists in two particulars.

1. First, The spirit persuades my conscience I am the child of God, Romans 8.
16. A witness is for manifestation and confirmation, 1 Cor. 2. 12.
1 Cor.* 2. 12. As it were a secret voice speaking to our hearts, and saying as
Christ to the leper, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. ( b) Matthew.
9. 2.


2. Secondly, in an inward ravishi^g joy and comfort, which the spirit works
and leaves with this assurance, which is that hidden Mannah, which that man
that feels it in himself, cannot express to others, Rev. 2. 17.
which is called the Lords Supping with us, Rev. 3. 20.
and his chearing us as with flagons of wine, Cant. 2. 5.
and hence the spirit is called the Holy* Ghost the comforter, for he fills the
heart sometimes by this testimony, with such joys, is unspeakable, the soul
for the time being with Paul in his rapture, rather in heaven then on earth;
though here he has but a taste, yet the fullness thereof are the joys of
heaven it self.

1. For the Kingdom of heaven is righteousness and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 1.

Quest. How shall I know that it is not a delusion?

Answ. I answer, this voice God sends usually when the soul is mourning and
full of heaviness, as we give wi^e to them that are of a heavy heart; Blessed
are ( f) John 16. 20.
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Matthew. 5. 44. And likely either
when they are waiting upon God in his ordinances to find Christ; as Mary waited
at the sepulcher to see him; Or wrestling with God in prayer, etc. as Cornel.
Acts 10. 31. Dan. 9. 31. But as for dreams, visions and Enthusiasmes, though
Jacob Genesis 28.
when he slept, saw a vision of Angels, and was comforted; (and diverse others)
yet God seldom now speaks by visions, but by his word and spirit, Heb. 1. 1.
and therefore visions are to be usually little regarded.

2. The spirit witnesses always according to the word, and that by
discovering the promises in the word to our consciences, persuading us that
they belong to us. 1 John 3. 14. Matthew. 5.


3. It fills his heart with love and thankfulness to God, and makes him more
watchful and careful to walk in answerable obedience. 1 Cor. 15. 31. 2 Cor.
5. 14. 1 Ioh. 3. 4.


But on the contrary, if it makes thee bold and presumptuous to walk in sinful
courses, and more remiss and careless in thy walking with God, thou may
fear it is not a testimony of the spirit, but a delusion of the devil.

4. It has its own witness, even a secret manifestation to the conscience,
that it is the spirit of God, and not a delusion.

There are likewise signs of a weak assurance that Christ is ours; As
earnestly to long after Christ, as he is offered: They would feign believe and
grieve because they cannot, they mourn under their sin, and make conscience
of their ways, who though they cannot believe, yet they dare not willingly sin
against God, etc. These have some degrees of a true and saving knowledge of
Christ, and are not to be discouraged, because Christ has promised not to
quench the smoking flax, nor break the Matthew. 12. 20.
bruised reed; and he has pronounced them blessed that mourn, that are poor
Matthew. 5.
in Spirit, that hunger and thirst after righteousness. Therefore trust firmly
upon these promises, live and die with them, and say, if I can perish with
these marks, I am content to perish.

There are likewise signs of a strong assurance that Christ is ours. As when a
man can hang upon God without comfort or apprehension of favor, nay when the
Lord seems to smite him with great afflictions. Job. 13. 15. Genesis 22. Psalm.
42. 11.


2. When he is filled with ravishing joy and peace in believing, more then he can
express. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Rev. 2. 17.


3. When he can contemn the world as vain and dead things in comparison of
Christ, having the moon under his feet, 1 John 5. 4. Rev. 12. 1. Heb. 11. 15.
16. Col. 3. 3.


4. Holy admiration and unspeakable thankfulness to God for Christ, as Judas,
not Iscariot, Lord, why do thou show thy self to us, and not to the world?

5. A longing for death that we might be with Christ, and an earnest desire of
the coming of Christ, as Paul did, 2 Cor. 5. 1. 22. Rev. 22. 17.
Phil. 1. 21. I desire to be dissolved, etc. And many other signs may be
brought to this purpose, but all cannot find these marks; yet those that can,
have the greater comfort.

CHAP. XXII. A brief assoyling of some doubts and Scruples, whereby a poor
believer does question whether Jesus Christ is his or no?
IN the next place, considering notwithstanding all the former clear evidences
of our part in Christ, yet Christians are continually assaulted with doubtings
and fears of their condition: and no wonder, considering the evil heart of
unbelief, that still remains within them, Heb. 3. 12.
which Satan helps forward by his temptations, who desires to winnow us as
wheat, that our faith might fail us, Luke 22. 31.
and goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour; I shall
therefore to satisfy them, labor to answer the doubts that rise in their
hearts, and make them question whether Christ be theirs, yea or no.

First,

I answer, its true, first, some do know the particular time of their
conversion, because they may be converted at one Sermon, as the three thousand
in Act. 2. though more rarely now then heretofore, because in the primitive
times, the Church was more quick in her delivery, then since.

2. Others though they know not the time of their conversion, yet they know the
time when they were not converted; they see a plain change in them, from what
once they were; they can say they were blind, and now they see; they were dead
but now alive, that they hate what before they loved, and love what before they
hated, that they are new creatures.

3. Some there be (though very rare) that never saw any change in them, and yet
may have part in Christ, such as are sanctified from the womb, as was John and
Jeremy, etc. or when they were very young, which sometimes happens to such as
have had godly education, in whom God wrought grace so insensibly, as the
change was never discerned, though there was a time when they were without
grace.

But if we see any work of grace in us, this ought not to trouble us; shall I
doubt whether I am alive, (when I can breath, speak and move as living men do)
because I know not when life was put into me? or whether I be born, because I
know not the time when I was borne?

Secondly, Matthew. 13. 5. because they had not much earth, they withered, and
many have had deeper humiliation then ever I met with, by far.

I anwer, though all are (usually) prepared or humbled to receive Christ: yet
first God has not set down the quantity, but the quality: he calls those
that are weary and laden, sick, brokenhearted, stung with their sins, etc. but
he says not if they be thus much humbled, brokenhearted etc.

2. Secondly, As some women bring forth their children with more pain then
other (as was before touched) so some are more humbled then others are, as
appears in Paul's conversion, and the Iailors compared with the conversion of
Zacharias, Lydia and others. Rough wood requires many wedges, and many blows
before ever it will split, and hard mettle requires a great fire before ever it
will be melted, when a softer mettle, a less fire serves the turn; God knows
what is best and fittest for every man.

3. Then a man has been sufficiently humbled or prepared, when he is willing
to receive Christ as his Lord and Savior, which is the end of humiliation. As
then a woman has pains enough, when the child comes forth; then Jacob was
pinched with famine enough, when he was willing to let Benjamin go; then the
child is beaten enough when his stomach is broken to stoop and yield. That
Physic is strong enough that cures the malady; Some go to hell with more
humiliation then others go to heaven with; when they roar, but will not let go
their lusts, as Ahab, Judas, etc. Now if thou have enough, though not so much
as others, what needs more? if a little wound will serve the turn, what need a
deeper? if a pin, what needs a sword? art thou more cruel to thy self when
God is more merciful? if easier Physic will cure, what needs a more bitter
potion? can you drink their cup? you know not what you ask; that that but cured
them, might have been too strong for thee.

I doubt, being justified by faith we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1.

I answer, there is a twofold doubting, either from want of faith, which is not
properly doubting, but total infidelity and distrust; or secondly from
weakness of faith, when it assents to the promises, yet is joined with
suspicions and fears* Now these may stand with faith, as the poor man that
wept saying, Lord I believe, help my unbelief; Mark. 9. 24.
for the root of infidelity within us will oppose faith, 1 These. 3. 10. Heb. 3.
12, 1 Pet 5. 8.
and neither is it our case alone (though we are ready to say, no body has so
many temptations as we have, etc.) but of all Gods people; Simon, Satan (c)
Luke 22 31.
has desired to win^ow thee as wheat, etc. But I have prayed that thy faith
shall not fail thee.

2. Secondly, I answer, Paul says indeed we have peace with God, and so we
have, for God is at peace with us, though we do not always discern it, (as
the root remains sometimes when the flower is gathered.) But he does not say
we have peace with the world, with the devil, with our lusts, etc. for the
world will now hate us, that loved us before, and the devil will tempt and
assault us bitterly, that seemed quiet before, and our own sinful lusts will
now wound, vex and trouble us, that we regarded not before, and God will ost
afflict us more then he did before.

Fourthly,

I answer, we must distinguish between the habit and the act of faith; the
habit or grace of faith, that is, the inward principle or quality of faith,
infused by the Holy Ghost, this never fails, but is an abiding quality; now
abides faith, hope, charity, etc. 1 Cor. 13. But the act of faith may cease
for a time, and does in the best sometimes, especially in time of temptation;
as it was in Abraham when he said of his wife, she is my sister; in David, who
said, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul; and in Peter when he denied
Christ and forswore him. A man may have a hand, and yet sometimes through
distemper not be able to put it forth; yet God has promised, Though we believe
not (that is, sometimes are not able to act faith) yet God is faithful, be
cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13.

Fifthly, when some rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, they have tasted
hidden Manna, and have gotten the white 1 Pet. 1. 8.
stone and the new name which no man knows but they that have received them,
and are filled with peace that passes all understanding.

1. I answer; first, comfort is not the standing dish of a Christian in this
life; as we make not a meal of sweet meats, but they are as a second course to
close up the stomach; your conduit pipes do not run sweet water all the
year, but at a Kings Coronation, or at some day of special solemnization; we
give Cordials only when men are sick.

Our Lord Christ after his resurrection appeared indeed to his Disciples, but
he was quickly gone, it was but a sight and away; as Latimer said of the
spirit, it is going and coming; comfort is reserved for Heaven, and we have but
a taste on earth, to teach us to walk by faith, and not by sight, and to teach
us to expect our life of comfort in Heaven, and not on earth.

2. Comfort is not of the essence of faith, but a degree of glory; Christ
himself wanted comfort when he cried out, 2 Cor. 5. 7. John 20. ^9.
My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? but he wanted not faith, but he
still called him his Lord and his God: So David, when he prayed to God to
restore to him the joys of his salvation, had no joy, nay instead of it he
roared all day. Psalm. 32. So Job, Heman and others, and yet their faith failed
not.

Now we are not to believe, so long as comfort lasts, but so long as the
promises last, which are better then comfort without them; if we have not the
shining of his countenance, let us be glad of the shining of his graces; if we
have not the sun-light of his spirit, let us be glad of the starlight of the
fruits of his spirit; if we have not the Holy Ghost the comforter, let us be
glad of the Holy Ghost the humbler, sanctifier, etc.

He that makes joy and comfort the ground of his faith to rest upon, rests upon
an inconstant object, and will be tossed up and down daily with continual
fears; let us bring our feeling down to our faith, and not our faith to our
feeling; he that will not believe God in his promises, would hardly believe, if
he had comfort from him; how shall we prove our comfort, but by the promises?

3. That is the strongest faith that can believe without comfort, yea when God
frowns upon us, as Job did, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Every
body can say the sun shines, when we see the light and feel the heat, as
Christ said to Thomas, thou will not believe except thou see, but blessed are
they that have not seen and yet have believed, as David did Psalm. 42. 11. Why
art thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? still
trust in God, etc. and Isa. 50. 10. he that fears the Lord, though he walks
in darkness, and sees no light, yet let him stay himself in the Lord, and
trust in his God.

Sixthly, faith purifieth the heart; Hab. 3. 17.
and if any be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things are past away, and
all things are become new; 2 Cor. 5. 17.
and they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof
Gal. 5. 17.
. But I am the old man, I find the old inclination to old sins, etc.

I answer, Christ and sin cherished, allowed, ( d) Psalm. 66. 18. 1 John 3. 9.
cannot stand together, but Christ and ^in mourned under, may dwell together,
as in Paul that cried out, O wretched ( e) Romans 7. 24. ult.
man that I am, who shall deliver me? etc. and in my mind I serve the Law of
God, but in my flesh the Law of sin; For grace is seen as well in opposing, as
overcomming corruption, (because corruption would never dislike corruption.)

The Lord looks not so much what we are, but what we would be; neither does he
measure us so much by our actions, as by our affections.

Caution. Yet ever remember, the more sin is mortified, the more faith is
vivified; the more the disease weakens, the more health strengthens.



I answer, there are relapses into enormities, which are peccata vastantia
conscientiam, these a godly heart does seldom relapse into, though sometimes
through weakness of grace they may, as Peter and others.

Secondly, there are relapses into infirmities, which are peccata quotidianae
incursionis, which we cannot help, and God has left daily to humble us with
all, and of which none are free; as rash anger, idle words, vain thoughts,
distraction in prayer, etc. And these the best do daily relapse into; for
original sin does still retain its inclination to sin in the most sanctified
heart, Romans 7. 23. Col. 3. 4. 5.

Again there are relapses of wilfulness Ier. 31. 18. 19. 20.
and of weakness; now thy relapses are of weakness, and not of wilfulness,
thy heart still is on Gods side; there is a great difference between a woman
forced, and an alluring adulteress, between our entertainment we show to a
friend whom we rejoice to see and bid welcome, etc. and to a thief that breaks
into our house, of whose company we are weary and long to be rid of. He is not
a swine that is driven into the mire, but he that delights to wallow in the
mire.

Now if thy relapses are of weakness, fear not; for he will forgive us (that
so offend) not seventy times 7, times, but seventy thousand times; and every
day as long as we live we must pray, Lord forgive us our trespasses; neither do
future sins repeal former pardons, Peccata semel remissa nunquam redeunt.
Neither can a child of God so sin (as some think) as to be in the stata of
damnation by them, no not for an hour. And because it is an assertion that
has much troubled many, I shall be larger in setting down the arguments some
make against it, with the answer to their objections.

Object. Some affirm that gross sins of believers are not pardoned, no not in
heaven, till they do actually repent of them, that they cannot say, My God, and
my Christ, etc. but* do incur an actual guilt of eternal damnation,
redundant upon the person (at least pro tempore) so as if David should have
died before his actual repentance, etc. he should have been damned.

Its answered, the sins of believers are not only actually pardoned (in heaven)
after actual repentance, but before any subsequent act of repentance, even at
once in the first act of Believing and Repenting: So as if David and Peter had
died, one in the act of his adultery, and the other in the act of his denial of
Christ, yet they had been saved; though (as they say) they cannot conceive a
regenerate person can commit a known actual sin without some present act of
repentance, some resistance of spirit (called displicentia vel renisus
voluntatis) Cum peccant, ea tantum part qua non sunt regeniti peccant,
secundum vero interiorem partem, nolunt, detestantur peccatum, ergo non plena
voluntate peccant, Zanch. Epist. 91. p. 114. And to this agrees that in Gal. 5.
17. 1 John 3. 9. Romans 7. 13. 24. But that he stands a condemned man till solemn
acts of repentance, as confession, petition, etc. they deny.

1. Because in the first act of believing, our sins are so pardoned, as there
is no place or time after left for condemnation; he that believes, has
everlasting life, John 3. ult. and cap. 5. 23. but if at any time any one sin
were not pardoned, he were for that time under the curse and in the state of
condemnation, Gal. 3. 10. but can a man have right to heaven and hell at the
same time?

2. Because still he is regenerated, 1 John 3. 9. the seed of God remains in
him; but he that is in the state of regeneration, cannot be in a state of
condemnation, at the same time.

3. Still he remains a believer, and a penitent person in habit at least,
(except by his fall he has lost all grace, as the Arminians hold) but a
believer is still a justified person, Romans 5. 1. and they say they cannot see
how that man can be properly said to be justified, though he be acquitted of a
thousand offenses, if he stands guilty of any one offense, for which at that
time he is in the state of condemnation, except we will say a man may be in a
state of Justification, and condemnation, of life and death at the same time.

4. In the present act of his sin, he is united to Christ, and a member of
Christ; but a member of Christ cannot be in the state of condemnation; for then
at the same time a member of Christ may be a member of the Devil.

5. He is still an adopted child of God, notwithstanding his fall, John 1. 12.
13. but every adopted child is an heir of heaven; if sons, then heirs, Romans
8. therefore till he loses his sonship he cannot lose his right to life; it
would seem strange, that God at the same time should be pater and hostis,
reconciliatus and infensus, a father and an enemy.

6. If greater sins are not forgiven till after actual repentance: then
neither are the least and smallest sins, committed every moment, forgiven,
till after actual repentance; for all sins deserve condemnation, as well the
least as the greatest, (though some deserve a greater degree of torment, Gal.
3. 10. Romans 6. ult.) and secondly, there is the same way appointed by God, for
the pardon of the smallest sins as of the greatest, viz. faith and repentance;
but it cannot be true of the smallest sins, because then a believer should
never be justified a minute together; for as for idle thoughts, etc. we are
continually acting, and so a believer should almost every minute be in the
state of death; and then they see not but in ictu mortis, he may perish, except
the last operation of his spirit, be actual repentance. Yea if lesser sins (
peccata quotidianae incursionis) need daily repentance, surely that daily
repentance is actual repentance, and then even those sins are not forgiven
till actual repentance.

7. Then it is certain a believer after his fall into some gross sins, shall
live so long by Gods decree, till he actually repents, (as the elect shall,
till they believe) but they conceive this has no warrant from scripture, that
a believer shall not die in the act of a gross sin, as adultery,
selfe-murther, bitter and malicious speeches, when perhaps the provoked party
may immediately run him through, and kill him; yea this they say seems to judge
too rigidly of those that die by selfe-murther, as drowning, hanging, stabbing
themselves, etc. which though it be a sin to be trembled at, it being blood,
and murder, yea self-murder against our selves, to whom we owe greatest love,
yea the last act is sin, and our hope of the salvation of these is exceedingly
weakened by so terrible and dreadful an act, yet they believe it were harsh
judgment to conclude these certainly damned; but what time have these men for
actual repentance, when they may die ipsoictu, and as the wound may be, their
repentance must be very short, having scarce time enough to say Lord have mercy
upon me.

8. That that instrumentally justifies on our part, is not repentance, but
faith, because faith only lays hold upon the merits of Christ, and by it the
merits of Christ are imputed to us; and repentance only justifies declarative,
as an evidence and fruit of faith, or as a special concomitant of it. But
pardon of sin is an act of justification, therefore, rather actual faith is
required, (at least as well as actual repentance) before actual pardon.

9. Argum. Then a believer may ^ustly fear hell and to be damned, till his
actual repentance after his sin. But a believer ought never to fear damnation.
The Major necessarily follows, and cannot be denied. And the Minor they prove
by laying down three particulars.

First, they deny not but filial fear may stand with fear of temporal
corrections, Psalm. 119. 120. my soul trembles for Job. 34. 31. 32.
fear of thee, etc. the thing I feared is come upon me, says Job Job. 3. 15.
and 31. 32. 2 Samuel 7. 14. Amos 3. ^*
. And God is very severe in chastising his children in this life, more sharply
then the wicked, for judgment shall begin at the house of God, to the Jew
first, etc. Thus Moses lost Canaan; Eli fell down backward and died; David's
adultery, etc. how severely punished? the child born in adultery died, Tamar
defiled, Amnon slain in his drunkenness, Absalom rebelling and defiling his
fathers wives, yea the sword never departed from his house; Hezekiah, how
severely did God deal with him, for a sudden act of vain glory? 2 King. 20. 14
to 19. and David for his priding himself in his people, God slew seventy
thousand, 2 Samuel 24. And therefore actual repentance is not denied to be
necessary to believers, (as we heard before,) to get assurance of our pardon,
and prevent scourges.

Secondly, they deny not, but the Saints do often carnally and slavishly fear
hell and damnation, which proceeds sometimes from their weakness of faith, and
the root of infidelity still remaining, in them, which breeds doubting, and
doubting breeds fear, though never so far as to suffer the soul to be quite
cut off from all hope in God; There is certitudo fidei, which does import a
steadfast cleaving, In credente potest ^nfurgere contrarius motus huic quod
firmissim^ tenet. Aquin.
though not absolute quietness, as ^ ship at Anchor, may shake but not blow
over. And sometimes it is sent as a punishment and correction from God, which
he inflicts, not po^^ndo, positive or operative, that is, not positively
instilling, that conception into them, that they shall be damned: but
Abnegando, des^rendo, permittendo, etc. leaving them to Satan and their own
spirits to be thus tormented.

Thirdly, But they deny it to be lawful, for a believer once justified to
fear hell or to be damned, after God has left him to fall into a gross sin.

1. Because it is the fear of Reprobates and devils, which God has forbidden
directly, 1 Pet. 3. 14. Luke 12. 32. Iam. 2. 19. Rev. 21. 8. Luke 1. 74. True,
Filial fear still remains; for blessed is he that so fears always; but
servile fear, which is cum per timorem Gebennae homo se continet a peccato,
Pet. Lomb. l. 3. did. 34. and Oderunt peccare mali formidine paenae, etc.
though it remains, yet is forbidden.

2. Because quod non licet credere non licet timere, that which we ought not to
believe, shall happen to us that we ought not to fear; but we ought not to
believe we shall be damned till we actually repent 1. Because then we should
believe a lie. For here is nothing present or to come, can separate us from the
love of Christ, Romans 8. 36
and Job. 10. 28. I give my sheep eternal life. Secondly because for a
believer in Christ, to believe or think he shall be damned, proceeds from
infidelity or weakness of faith, and therefore is his sin.

Object. If any object Adam in innocence had the fear of eternal death set
before him to keep him from sin, Genesis 2. 17.

Answ. they answer, that which Adam might fear (as they conceive) even with
filial fear we cannot, because Adam was liable to eternal death, if he
sinned; but we are not, being freed by Christ.

Lastly, as it is true many learned Divines are not of this opinion, as Bishop
Davenant, and Suffrag. Theol. Mag. Brit. Art. 5. and some other Divines not
here mentioned. So likewise many learned Divines, do assert it, * as Musculus
on John Dr. Twiss. Dr. Ames. Luther de capt. Babil. de Euc^ar. Dr. Plaifer. the
sick man's couch p. 46. 47. etc. clearly and excellently.
5. 24. Non est intelligendum tantum de peccati^ ante fidem, sed and post
acceptum fidei donum; yea, Bishop Davenant himself says, Persona hominis pii
est semper deo grata non obstantibus delictis, and adds that their sins
displicent deo odio simplici sed non redundante in personam. So Luther says,
no sin with which faith may stand can hurt us, (I think he means) to attract
guilt of eternal condemnation, except sin be reigning, so as that it excludes
faith. And Zanch. Epist. l. 1. p. 116. says, Reprobi quando peccant, a regno
Christi prorsus excidunt. Sed electi quamvis aliquando inviti and circumventi
labuntur, ^on tamen a Christi regno prorsus excidunt, nec a Christo avelluntur.

The objections brought against this assertion are thus answered.

1. Object. Romans 3. 25. Christ is said to forgive sins that are past.

They Answ. he speaks not exclusive excluding sins to come, but inclusive,
hence in Col. 2. 13. Christ is said to forgive us all our trespasses.

2. Object. Matthew. 10. 28. fear not them that can kill the body, etc.

Answ. It is rather a description of the person whom we ought to fear, then of
the kind of fear wherewith he is to be feared; namely, that we should fear
that God that can cast soul and body into hell in regard of his power, but
will not in regard of his promise.

3. Object. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. 11. No fornicator, drunkard, etc. shall inherit
the kingdom of God.

Answ. They answer, That is, without he gets his pardon by Christ, received by
faith and discovered, and confirmed to him by repentance; its true, I believe
he is not then unjustified; so nor yet is he able always to act repentance,
yet notwithstanding he stands then justified before God, and pardoned.

4. Object. A believer by his relapse loses not his right, but fitness for
heaven, not ^us ad rem but jus in re, as the Leper had right to his house, but
might not come at his house before he was cleansed. A subject outlawed is a
subject still, and has right to the laws, but he cannot make use of that
right, till his outlaw be reversed. They ans. God appointed a leper legally
unclean should be separated, etc. to typifie, that no unclean unregenerate
person should come into heaven: but a believer in Christ is by imputation
washed, sanctified, Ioh. 13. 10
and never to be counted unclean. And our fitness for heaven is* not by our
own inherent righteousness, but by the righteousness of Christ imputed to us
by faith, Phil. 3. which is imputed to us, so long as we remain believers. 2.
If a believer by any actual sin, contracteth the guilt of eternal death, he
loses not only his fitness for heaven, but his right to heaven, for a time
at least, Romans 6. ult. Gal. 3. 10. neither can a believer be in a condition,
with a subject outlawed, and the contrary they conceive cannot be proved.

5. Object. Sin must be committed before it can be pardoned, ubi non est culpa,
ibi non est remissio.

Answ. Its answered, so sin must first be committed, before it can be punished,
either in our selves or in our surety; yet Christ died for our sins before they
were committed. But God foresees all things to come as present, or else it had
been injustice in God to punish Christ without a fault committed, or for faults
not committed.

6. Object. A believer may be excommunicated for gross sins out of the Church,
and therefore till the Church receive him, he is excommunicated out of heaven.

Answ. Its answered, that is, he may be excommunicated out of the external
society of the visible Church, but they cannot cast him out for having nothing
to do with Christ and salvation, if he be a believer. ( absque errante clave.)
2. All excommunication is usque ad fidei and paenitentiae testimonia publica,
till he testifies his repentance, yet the excommunicate must needs repent, and
have his sin pardoned by God, before he can restifie it, so as an
excommunicated person before he be received into the Church, may be pardoned by
God, and fit for heaven, 2 Cor. 2. 5. 6.

7. Object. What need we then fear sins, or ask pardon for them if they be
remitted in the first act of believing.

Ans. Its answered, there is a twofold forgiveness. In foro poli, and in foro
soli.
1. In foro dei in the Court of God. 2. In foro conscientiae in the Court of
conscience. Now in Gods Court, all sins past, present, and to come, are
actually pardoned, at the very first act of believing and repenting. But
secondly, in Court of conscience to have apprehension or comfort of pardon, so
they are not pardoned, that is, we shall have no comfort or assurance of the
pardon of them, till we actually repent of them, which is called our renewing
by repentance, Heb. 6. as is seen in David, Psalm. 32. and Psalm. 51. who till he
confessed his sin and actually repented, he roared all day, and his moisture,
etc. and he had no comfortable assurance that his sin was pardoned, till then.
Nor Peter till he wept bitterly. Again, a believer prays for pardon daily of
his trespasses, for two reasons. 1. To have his faith strengthened in his
pardon, and to have more assurance of it; for our faith at the best is weak and
full of doubtings, but especially after great falls, which blot our evidence,
that we cannot well read it, and hide Gods countenance from us, as clouds hide
the shining of the sun. 2. We contract, though not an eternal, yet a
temporal guilt by actual sins, and are liable to temporal corrections,
(though not eternal damnation) not by way of satisfaction, but of castigation:
For Christ which has pardoned the punishment, will not always pardon the
temporal chastisement, but will often visit us with sorer and more grievous
afflictions in this life, then he does wicked men.

8. Object. If you object that the qualifications required for pardon, are
confession of sin, 1 John 1. 9. Repentance, Act. 3. 19. etc.

Ans. Its answered, in an unbeleever it is requisite there be actual faith and
repentance, before he be actually pardoned in heaven, or in his conscience. But
he that is a believer, and has received Christ by actual faith and
repentance; Subsequent repentance is required to evidence his pardon to his
conscience, but not to procure a new pardon in heaven before God, which is done
in one act as they affirm.

2. As before was expressed, they cannot conceive how a child of God can commit
an actual sin without some degree of actual repentance in the very act of
sin, and therefore if actual repentance were necessary before they can be
pardoned, yet why is a subsequent more solemn actual repentance required
absolutely necessary to pardon, beside the present act of repentance in the act
of his sin?

3. If faith goes before repentance, (as many affirm) then a man is actually
pardoned, before he does actually repent, because by faith we are justified,
which is only testified by our repentance.

9. Object. Then David, etc. might joy in God whilst he lay in his sin, etc.

Ans. Its answered, there is no condition a believer can be in, but he has
cause to rejoice in God, Hab. 3. 17. Phil. 4. 4. rejoice in the Lord always,
etc. yea as in his God his Christ, etc. (though he cannot always do it) yet he
has cause also at the same time, of great sorrow, bitterness and grief, that
he should offend his God so gracious to him, and provoke God to punish him, and
bring scandal to religion, etc. Even Paul when he mourned under his sin, Romans
7. 24. yet rejoiced in Christ, verse 25. Secondly, if he dorepent without some
precedent or concomitant act of faith, is it not the repentance of an
unbeleever, and so not acceptable to procure pardon? etc.

10. Object. I will forgive their iniquities, Ier. 31. says God, ergo they
were not pardoned before.

Its answered, though they were pardoned before, yet they are not pardoned to
our consciences till we actually repent, nor is the temporal correction
remitted. So then they conclude gross sins of Believers, cannot as they
conceive, be committed without some present act of repentance, and the habit
both of faith and repentance still remaining, though not always acting, they
are not for a moment in a state of condemnation, but are only liable to
temporal punishments; And yet can receive no pardon in their consciences,
without some acts of repentance.

8. Doubt. I fear I am but an hypocrite, me thinks there is nothing almost I
Reader, pardon this large digression, now I return to the 8. Doubt.
do well, but I am subject to reflect upon my self, and take glory to my
self, as Herod did, Act. 12.

Answ. I answer, O this devil of vainglory sticks close to us all, and will
creep into our best duties, as the serpent crept into the garden among the
sweet flowers and trees of pleasure; even Paul himself was subject to be
exalted above measure, and the disciples reasoned among themselves which of
them should be greatest; And its true, that thou say there are risings of
pride and hypocrisy in thy heart, (which are also increased by Satan's
temptations) but thou art not an hypocrite because there is hypocrisy in thee,
because thou complainest of it. The best sign of sincerity is to complain of
hypocrisy; as a man that complains of his disease, (O I cannot sleep, taste
my meat, etc.) shows it is his disease, tha^ he would fain be rid of; he would
fain sleep, relish his meat, walk, and the like. One told Bradford he said he
did all out of hypocrisy, because he would have the people applaud him, but he
answered, its true said he, the seeds of hypocrisy and vain glory are in me
and thee too, so long as we live here, but I thank God, its that I mourn under
and strive against.

9. Doubt. Ninthly, I doubt whether Christ be mine, because my heart is so
hard, even a heart that cannot repent; you can as soon almost fetch water out of
a rock or stone, and therefore I fear I am one that have nothing to do with
Christ, and whom God will show no mercy to Romans 9. 18. Romans 2. 5.

Answ. I answer, there is a threefold hardness. 1. Total, when there is no
softness at all, Ephesians. 4. 19. when men are (...).
past feeling. 2. There is a judiciary hardness when God gives a man up to
hardness of heart, as he did Pharaoh, and those in Romans 1. 28. Is. 6. 9. who
cannot be broken with judgments nor melted with mercies. 3. There is a
partial hardness, when our hardness of heart is felt and bewailed. Now in
these there is some softness, for else they could not bewail their own
hardness, as he that is stark dead cannot groan, but these cry out as they
did, Es. 63. 17. wherefore have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? And
such is thine hardness.

does God delight in our sorrow, as it is sorrow, for we know there is none of
this grace in heaven where we shall be most perfect, but only as and so far
as it imbitters sin, and makes Christ the sweeter to us, neither can we have
our hearts softened proportionably to our sins, except we will go down to hell,
and mourn there. Nor need we seeing Christ has borne our sorrows.

10. Doubt. Tenthly, ye but I have such cursed, blasphemous, Atheistical
thoughts, that I am afraid to mention them; as that there is no God, the
Scriptures are not true, etc. which cannot be in those that know Christ
savingly.

Answ. I answer, there is no sin so vil'd, but the devil may tempt the best
man unto it, as he tempted Christ to fall down and worship him, (which was as
it were to kneel down and ask him blessing) and it is Satan often times that puts
these thoughts into our hearts, and then roars upon us with his temptations;
just as Joseph dealt with Benjamin, first he puts his cup into his sack, and
then he accuses him for it; or as if a cutpurse should cut a man's purse, and
put it into thy pocket, and then accuse thee, that thou have stolen such a
man's purse.

If thy heart join not with it, this temptation, may be thy cross, but is not
thy sin; or if any corruption of heart in the least measure join therewith,
(for there is much Atheism in the best of our hearts) yet it is not thou, but
sin that dwells in thee.

Es. 48. 17.
would teach me to profit by the word, but I cannot at all profit by hearing, I
get little or no good, but only take Gods name in vain, for I can remember
nothing; sometimes though I be affected at present, yet before I get out of the
Church, all the sermon is lost, whereas I know some can repeat a whole Sermon
verbatim, and yet I would be loath to live as they do.

Answ. I answer, Some men's memories are healed that are not sanctified; and to
have a gift to repeat a sermon, and to make no conscience to practice, is but
to spit sermons out of their mouths, or as if a beast should cast out her hay
and food into dung, and show you her dung, but not her fatness.

But 1. thou remembrest what thou can; to will is present, which is accepted
for the deed; neither is it expected thou should remember the whole Sermon,
but thou may have comfort, if thou can remember that which most concerns
thee, as if thou were bidden to a feast, it is not expected thou should eat
up all the meat that is set upon the table, but (especially) that which is
carved out for thee, and laid upon thine own trencher.

2. Though thou forgettest for the present, yet in due time, the Spirit of God
will bring those things to thy remembrance, that thou have most need of in thy
life, as he has promised, John 14. 26. that his Spirit shall bring all things
unto our remembrance: As Peter remembered the words of Christ when the cock
crew, Matthew 26. ult.

3. Though thou do not remember much, yet if thy heart be made better by it,
or thy affections be kindled to burn in more love to God, (as the disciples
when Christ Luke 24. 16. 32.
talked with them, their hearts burned with in them) thou do profit; show me
not the meat (say we) but show me the man; as Cattle show not the grass they
have eaten, but their fat; the earth shows not the rain that fell upon it, but
the grass.

A poor woman coming from a sermon, a minister meeting the coming from
Church, asked her who preached, whether he made a good sermon, what she
remembered of the sermon, etc. Truly said she, I have a weak memory, I can
remember* but little, yer this I am sure, I have learned to love Christ better
then ever I did in my life before; and that comforted her more, then if she
could have remembered all the sermon, and not have had her heart warmed at all
with more love to Jesus Christ.

I might say I live, yet not I but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20.
I should have holy thoughts, heavenly desires, gracious speeches, and holy
affections, etc. but I feel no breathings of the spirit in me; if I had the
grace that others have, could walk with God as they do, be so holy and
heavenly in my conversation as they are, I should not fear; but I feel my
self so barren, frothy, and empty of all good* that I can scarce discern any
breathings of the spirit of God in me at all.

I answer, to every one is given grace, Ephesians. 4. 7.
acording to the measure of the gift of Christ; Some are babes, and some are
men in Christ Jesus, as in David's army, some were common soldiers, some
captains, and some his worthies; In the body there are the feet and toes, and
head and heart; God gives that measure of grace to thee that he sees fittest
for thee; Some have five talents, others two, some but one, even as it pleases
God, who has appointed some for eminency, and some but for sincerity; As Paul
that was a chosen vessel to bear his name before kings, Act. 9. 15. and
therefore must have eminent graces, answerable to his employments. Now is not a
soldier a faithful subject, because he is not a captain? is not the foot a
member of the body, because it is not the head or heart? has a babe no life,
because it has not the life of a man? and has a man no faith, because he has
not the faith of Abraham? has a man no love nor zeal to God and his glory,
because he has not the love of Moses, nor the zeal of Eli^s? is there no fire
because it does not flame; Christ will not quench the smoking flax (which
smoaketh only with desires, but cannot flame with comforts,) nor break the
bruised ^eed. Thou have some grace to love righteousness and hate wickedness:
and though to desire and aemulate the graces of others be good, yet it may
Matthew. 12. 20.
proceed from ^ride, because we would be eminent, and have none above us, when
we so desire more grace, that we forget to be thankful for what we have.

Secondly, this objection brings its own comfort with it, for how could I love
the grace I see in others, and long after it, and not have grace in my own
heart? it is impossible.

Doubt. I fear I have no part in Christ, because I have no gift of prayer,
Zac. 12. 10
whereas God has promised to pour upon us a spirit of grace and supplication,
(as was said before) but I make ropes of sand, such broken stuff as I would be
ashamed men should hear me. I cannot pray.

I answer, though they be broken prayers, yet thou make conscience to pray*
and they are the best prayers thou can make; that is the best prayer that
comes from faith, and where there is most affection; suppose a child were sick
and could not speak, but only give a sad look toward the father and groan,
did it not even thereby pray the father to help it? certainly our sighs, groans
and tears are prayers; when we know scarce our own meaning, the Lord knows
the meaning of the spirit, Romans 8. 27. And God will accept of a willing mind,
according to that a man has, and not that he has not. The spirit is willing
says our Savior, when the disciples slept, but the flesh is weak, Matthew. 26.
41.

1. Object. But I cannot change my words to bring new expressions every time,
except there be some new occasions, but I have almost the same words, and
therefore it is the same prayer.

I answer, some men make too much of a set-forme of words, and some too
little; for he that ties himself to a form of words, and can go no further
then his stint of words, neither in private, nor as any new occurrences happen,
he may suspect himself that he wants the spirit of prayer. But some on the
contrary dote too much upon change of words, as if their prayer were better
accepted of God for new words, or new invention; indeed we judge of the prayers
by the elegancy and invention of words, but God judges of them by the strength
of our affections.

We think God delights in prayers as dainty stomachs do in choice of meats, as
men do in flowers sweet only while they are new; but in Gods esteem that is a
new prayer, that comes (though with old words, yet) with new affections; did
not Christ himself pray three times together saying the same words, when it
was for the same thing? and did he not leave us, not only as a pattern, but
also as a precept, a set-forme of Prayer, to wit, the Lords Prayer.

Many men study sometimes so much for new invention, that they lose affection,
method and devotion; and many there be that have good affections, but want
invention.

2. Object. But I pray not in faith, I am like those in Iam. 1. 6. 7. that
waver and doubt, who shall receive nothing from the Lord.

I answer, there is difference between doubts rising and doubts reigning, such
as proceed from weakness of faith, and are resisted, and such as proceed from
total want of faith; now thou have some faith though it be mingled with
doubtings, which thou fightest against.

3. Object. If Christ were mine, God Mat, 7. 7.
would hear my prayers, but alas I pray, but they are all lost, I have no
return of my prayers.

I answer, thy prayers are always heard and liked, so far as they are
agreeable to the will of God; And answered so far as God sees good for thee;
because thou art his child; Now if a child cry, a mother regards not, but when
she knows its her own child that cries, then she runs to help it. 2. Thy prayers
are the voice of his own spirit, and he cannot deny the inspirations of his
holy spirit, Romans 8. 26. 27. 3. Christ prays thou may be heard, who can
never be denied. But thou must distinguish between delays and denials; if God
denies, it is because it is not good for thee; if he delayth, it is because
its not yet good for thee.

Doubt. I fear I am not in Christ, because I do not grow in grace, for the
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, that is, from one degree
of grace to Romans 1. 17.
another; and the way of the righteous is like the way of the light that
shines more Prove. 4. 18.
and more unto the perfect day. But I am decayed; I have lost my first love,
Rev. 2. 4.

I answer, a man may grow when he discerns it not, as the Sun moves upon
the dial insensibly, Quanto despectior tibi, tanto pretiosior deo, says Aug.
The more vile we are in our own eyes, the more precious we are in Gods eyes.
True grace like a tree, grows in the root as well as in the branches, and
downwards under ground as well as above ground; ever the more humility, the
more grace, 1 Pet. 5. 5. So Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Ephesians. 3. 8. I am less then the
least of all Saints, etc. Some men indeed are swollen bigger with the wind of
spiritual pride, but alas that's but a tympany, it is no growth in grace at
all. Again, some things are like decay in grace, but are not, As first ebs and
flows of comfort, are no sign of decay or growth; which God often sends to
support us when we are weak, but when we are grown stronger, he looks we should
believe without comfort. God sometimes withdraws comfort that we might exercise
faith, as we take away bladders from swimmers that they might learn to swim
without them.
Secondly, Nor particular coldness, unfitness, and indisposednesse to duties
at some times, if it be not a constant habitual disposition, which may proceed
from distemper of body, weariness, sleepiness, etc. or God may deny assisting
grace. Thirdly, Nor sense or apprehension of more corruption; for grace
discovers corruption, as the Sun does motes, (as the smoke was in the torch
before, but not seen till lighted, says Dr. Sibs on Psalm. 42.) 4. Nor always
when a man is overcome with some corruption, more then heretofore; because he
may have stronger temptations then before; And thus Job showed more impatience,
in Job 3. then perhaps he ever did in his life before. 2. There may be stronger
resistance then before, as 2 Corin. 12. 8. for this I prayed thrice, that is
often. Thirdly, The body of sin may decay by the growth of that particular
lust, and thy heart may be kept more humble and thankful; the more hatred and
resistance is made against sin, the more grace. Though to be kept from sin
brings most comfort, yet for us to oppose sin, and God to pardon, that brings
God most glory, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.

2. A man that has part in Christ, may for a time decay and lose some degrees
of grace, (though not totally nor finally,) as trees in winter have neither
leaves nor fruit, yet there is life in the root, Rev. 2. 4. and chapter 3. 2. 2
Epist. of Joh. 8. and he may for the present be worse then he was before,
(though usually he shoots out the more afterward, as men that runs backwards to
leap the further forward, or as children after some sicknesses, shoot out
exceedingly) Indeed growth in grace is a sign of true grace, yet want of
groath is not always a sign of no grace, for grace has its winter and
stoppages sometimes that it grows not always.

3. If thou mournest and grievest because thou do not grow, either thou do
grow, (as we say the child is grown, when his coats are too little for him: so
that man is grown, when his graces are too little for him) or else seeing thou
mournest for want of growth, it is a sin repented of, and God accepts of thee
as if thou did grow, Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent, says the
Lord, Rev. 2. 5. And I will not come against thee.

Doubt. I fear I am not in Christ, because the Saints do not love me, they
shun my company and are afraid of me, as the disciples were of Saul, Acts 9. 26.

I answer, this indeed is a sore temptation, and one of the greatest
afflictions a Christian can meet withal, as the contrary is a great blessing,
(though not an infallible sign, for a man may have a name in the Church to be
alive and yet be dead) as Demas had of Paul, and Simon Magus of Philip, and
Judas of his fellow disciples) yet it is a great comfort. Thus Paul comforted
the Hebrews, Heb. 6. 9. I am says he persuaded better things of you, and such
as accompany salvation. So likewise in 2 Cor. 3. 8. Paul prays the Corinthians
that they would confirm their love to the penitent incestuous person,
intimating thereby, that the confirmation of their love would be a great
chearing to the poor dejected penitent.

But this affliction may happen to a man that is in Christ, as it did to Job,
who was suspected to be an hypocrite by his three friends, and to Paul who was
judged by the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4. 3. Therefore be not too much affected with
it, but remember he is not a Jew that is one without, but he is a Jew that is
one within, whose praise is not of men, but of God, Romans 2. ult.

Now if our hearts condemn us, God is greater 1 John 3. 20.
then our hearts, and will condemn us much more.

I answer, our hearts may misjudge us sometimes (especially in time Psalm 22.
1. Psalm. 77.
of temptation) and tell us we are forsaken of God, when we are not, as they
did David, Heman and others; and they are not to be listened unto any further,
then they are enlightened, and do witness according to the word of God, and not
when they speak against the word; to the law and to the testimony, if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Is.
8. 14. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of 1 Ioh.
4. 1.
God or no, it is good even to try our own spirits.

The last Doubt I shall mention, is, because 16 Doubt.
I meet with so many afflictions, in husband, wife, children, goods, goodname,
smiting of the tongue, etc. if Christ were mine, would he thus load me with
sorrows?

I answer, this is a sore temptation, and has troubled Gods people Es. 49.
15. Psalm. 119. 12. 13. Lam. 3. 18. 19.
heretofore; Was not Job judged of his wife and friends an hypocrite, because
he was so grievously afflicted of God? and did they not make him to complain,
thou writest bitter things against me, Job 13. 26. But we must know this is the
Lords dealing with those that are his dearest servants (yea usually the more
holy they are, the more afflictions they meet withal) those I love, I rebuke
and chasten, as you Rev. 3. 19. Lam. 3. 1.
see by Joseph, David, Job, and almost all the Saints rehearsed in Scripture,
who may all say as Naomi, call me not Naomi, but call me Marah, for God has
dealt very bitterly with me, and as Jacob said, few and evil have the days of
my pilgrimage been. Yet (as we heard before) all our afflictions are determined
by the wise counsel and providence of God for our good, and as blessings to
us, even to make us partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10. Yea some meet with
more afflictions then others, as seems good to the Lord; God is pleased (says
one) to keep some in sugar, and some in brine, even as he sees they will keep
best, from putrefaction.

If all that have been spoken, will not satisfy thee, but still thou doubtest
of thy part in Christ.

1. My counsel is, First, that thou discover thy grief to some faithful
friend; it will be some comfort and ease of mind to have a friend to take part
with us in our sufferings; for sometimes God comforts us, that by our
experience we might be the better able to comfort others, 2 Cor. 1. 4.

2. Secondly, Remember what thou Psalm. 77. 11. 12.
were, and whether thou did never believe Christ to be thine, and whether
there be no sign of saving grace still remaining in thee, as mourning under
sin, love to the brethren, etc. and then though thou have a 1000. doubts thou
can not answer, yet thou art sure to be saved, for that cannot be a dead tree
that has fruit growing upon it.

3. Thirdly, if thou can not believe Christ is thine, yet resolve to love and
obey him; say thus, whether he will save me or no, I will love and serve him as
well as I can, I will walk in his ways, and not sin against him. And this will
reflect comfort upon us of its own accord; for how could I love God if he did
not first love me? Our affections of love to God (says a Reverend Divine) are
but reflections Dr. Sibs on Psalm. 42.
of Gods love to us. If cold bodies have heat, it is a sign some fire has
warmed them, or the Sun has shined upon them.

4. Fourthly, Resolve what ever become of thee, to die believing as Job did,
though he kill me, says he, I will put my trust in him, and as Joab did who
would die with his hands holding upon the altar, and as Ester resolved in
another case; upon Christ will I trust, if I perish I perish.

CHAP. XXIII. An exhortation to the ministers of the Gospel, especially to
preach Jesus Christ to the people.
IN the next place, Paul desired to know, learn and teach, nothing among the
Corinthians, but Jesus Christ and him crucified: let it be an exhortation to
all the minsters of the Gospel, to follow the example of Saint Paul in two
respects.

First, to preach nothing to our people in comparison of Jesus Christ and him
crucified.

Secondly, to preach in such a manner as men may come to the saving knowledge
of Jesus Christ. First I say to preach Jesus Christ (especially) to the people;
woe be to me says Paul if I preach not the Gospel; and again, my little
children of whom I travel in birth till Christ be formed in you. Gal. 4. 19.

It was the prayer of Luther at his death, thee o Christ have I known, thee
have I loved, thee have I taught, thee have I trusted and now into thy hands do
I commend my spirit. O the more of Christ in a sermon, the sweeter is our
preaching, and our greatest ornament is that we can set forth the honor of
Christ. Saint Augustine professed of Cicero he was much delighted in his
eloquence, but he soon grew weary, quianomen Christi non erat ibi, because the
name of Christ was not to be found there.

1. And it must needs be so; first, because the preaching of Christ is most
profitable for the people; alas, what can we enrich them withal in comparison
of Christ, the knowledge of whom can only make them happy. This is life
eternal to know thee, the only true God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ; thus we shall save their souls from death, hell and damnation, and
hide a multitude of sins, Jam. 5. ult.

2. It is most welcome and comfortable; as it is sweeter to bring a pardon to
condemned men then to read their sentence of condemnation; for so we shall be
their ministerial saviors, whereas else we shall be but their tormentors.

3. It is the readiest way to break the Ephesians. 3. 17, 18.
heart; as the Traitor flies at the pursuit after with hew and cry, but the
kings proclamation of pardon, that brings him in; we know by the law is the
ministration of death (like Hagar that saw her bottle empty, Gal. 2 16. Gal. 3.
10.
and nothing but death before her eyes, but no fountain to fill it again.) The
law is like a glass wherein we see our spots, but no water to wash them out,
(as Paul said when the commandment came, sin revived, but I died) But the
Gospel is like the Laver, in Exodus 38. 8. which was made of the women's looking
glasses, whereby they might both see their faces, and also wash out their
spots; for it was both a glass and a laver: and this typified Christ; If any
man sin, we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John
2. 1. And certainly if any thing, its mercy melts the heart, Adam ran away from
God, when he heard the terrible voice of God in the garden, saying, I heard thy
voice in the garden, and I was afraid, and I hid my self, But when he spoke to
them with a milder voice then they came in, Genesis 3. 9, 10. In Eliahs vision,
the Lord was not in the whirlewiud, nor in the earthquake, but in the still
voice, as you may read at large, 1 Kings 19. 11. 23. etc.

I have heard a story of a Gentlewoman condemned to die for killing three of
her children, many godly ministers seeing her hardened as they thought in her
sin, much pressed her with her grievous sin, and the dreadfulnesse of her
condition, but all nothing moved her, but rather she grew more obstinate: but
at last another Reverend Divine hearing of it, comes to her, preaching to her
the unspeakeable mercies of God in Christ, etc. and that there was mercy for
her, (notwithstanding her great sin) if her heart were touched with grief, for
what she had done, etc. what, mercy for me said she? O that's impossible, etc.
But expressing further, how God delights in mercy, that mercy pleases him,
that where sin has abounded their grace and mercy, with God abounds much more
(or to that effect) she presently fell a weeping, wringing her hands, crying
for mercy, etc. and died most comfortably, (as it was related) having had the
mercy of God abundantly revealed to her before her death.

4. What greater joy can a minister have, then to bring men to Christ? to be
able to say, here am I and the children thou have given me; are not you our
hope, our joy and crown of rejoicing in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ
at his coming? yea are our glory and our joy, says Paul, 1 These. 2. 19. 20.
But on the contrary, what comfort will this be to us, when we lie a dying to
say, I studied to fill the hour, but not a soul I have won to Christ?

5. Fifthly and lastly, the preaching of Christ is most profitable for our
selves; for they that win souls to God, shall shine as the stars in the
firmament, and Gal. 6 8. 1 Cor. 15. ult.
receive a Prophets reward; yea we shall receive a crown of glory that fades
not away, 1 Pet. 5. 4. every soul won to God, is as a new pearl added to
our crown, Matthew. 24 45. 46. O what a heavy account shall that man have to
give, that must give an account for loss Qui ludit in Cathedra legebit. in
Gehenna, Bishop Hall. Ier. 48. 10.
of souls: either through idleness and negligence in his preaching, or not
preaching Christ savingly to his people; if one soul be worth a world, then
the loss of one soul is a greater loss then the loss of the whole world;
all blood cries aloud, ( Cain could not endure to hear the voice of his
brothers blood) but none to the blood of souls, Ezekiel. 33. 8. for that death is
to all eternity in hell fire.

Quest. But one main question must here be answered, before I leave this point;
seeing ministers must preach Jesus Christ and the Gospel, whether then is it
lawful for the ministers of the Gospel, to preach the law, yea or no?

I answer negatively, none ought to be legal preachers, that is to preach
salvation by keeping of the law, (so far we are all Antinomians,) and for my
own part, I know none but Papists or popishly minded, that are preachers of
salvation by keeping of the law; for we know and teach that we are not under
the law, (that is under the Covenant of salvation by keeping of the law,) but
under grace, Romans 6. 14. Col. 2. 14.

Secondly* I answer positively, that the law must be preached as a rule of
obedience, for so God requires as perfect and personal obedience in us
believers, as he did in Adam in innocence, (though we cannot perform it, nor
are we bound thereto upon condition of life) for else the defect were no sin,
as Matthew. 22. 37. 38. God requires us to love him with all our heart, etc.
which though we cannot perform, yet God requires it still in us that believe,
and it is our sin if we fail therein; and hence it is that the law was
promulgated to the Jews, two thousand years after the Gospel was preached to
Adam, and four hundred and thirty years asrer it was preached to Abraham; and
thus Christ himself, Matthew. 5 17. 19. Matthew. 3. 8. Col. 3. 5. 12.
Iohn-Baptist, and the Apostles preached the law.

2. Secondly, the law must still be preached as a means to discover sin, and
convince men of their misery out of Christ, as a Schoolmaster to drive us to
Gal 3. 23.
Christ, which is Gods ordinary way to prepare us to the receiving of Christ;
for as the Brazen serpent was set up, so Ioh. 3. 14.
was Christ set up; but that was only for those that were stung; so is Christ
only for those that are stung with their sins; hence you see the promise of
salvation by Christ, is to those that are weary, heavyladen, sick,
brokenhearted, etc. teaching us that legal humiliation, at least is a
preparation required ordinarily to the receiving of Christ by faith; And thus
God dealt with Adam, first he began 1 King. 19. 11. 12.
with a terrible voice, and then with a milder; and with Elias, who had three
legal preparations before God appeared in mercy to him; so likewise Paul, the
Iailor, and those in Acts 2. 37. etc. had the law preached to them before the
Gospel. The good Samaritan poured oil and wine, because it was into wounds; we
preach the law that we might preach the Gospel. And certainly, that will prove
at last the best preaching that drives men to Christ, and he the best preacher,
Non qui aures tetigerit, sed qui cor pupigerit, not that tickles the ear, but
that breaks the heart to seek after Christ. Men's hearts are generally so
hardened and secure, that the word had need to come like a hammer, a fire or
sword, to wound, and melt stony hearts; we had not need in these times, be the
sugar, and honey, but the salt of the world; we have more need of the voice of
the Turtle, then the voice of the Nightingale, to make men mourn rather then
to rejoice. As Hierome wrote to Nepotian Hier. ad Nepot. Bern. ser. 59. Cant.
when thou preachest Non clamores populi sed gemitus suscitentur; lachrimae
auditorum sint lauds tuae; Libenter vocem audio (says Bernard) non qui mihi
plausum sed qui mihi planctum movet.

Its reported of Vincentius Ferer: who preaching in England, Scotland, France,
Spain, etc. everywhere preached, Repent, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at
hand, and there followed almost every where, delictorum paenitentia, morum
reformatio, omnium contritio, cessabant Blasphemiae, Coren. lap. in lam. p. 426.
aleae, ludi, etc. that is men repented of their sins, reformed their ways,
left off their blasphemies, di^ings, etc. who converted thousands as is
reported.

It is also reported of one A^tonius Padua who so moved the people with
preaching the law, that they smote their breasts in the streets, and with sighs
and tears cried out misericordia domine, misericordia, mercy, Lord, mercy, etc
as they did Acts 2. 37. Sirs, what must we do to be saved, Ramiz said, if you
would know a good preacher inspice p^pulum, mark the people, whether their
hearts be set on fire or upon laughter; if thou see them merry, applauding
the sermon with O quam doctus, eloquens, etc. O what a learned eloquent man is
this? scito concionem infructuosam esse, know says he, it is an unprofitable
sermon; sin vides tristes, percussos, meditantes etc. but if thou see them
sad, silent, deeply musing, etc. then it profits them.

And daily experience shows us the only way to bring men to Christ, is to
break their hearts, and make them sick, and stung with their sins, and then
they will more eagerly embrace Jesus Christ, a Physician to their souls.

Now follows the second part of the exhortation. viz. that ministers do not
only preach the Gospel, but that they preach it in such a manner as the people
may best come to the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, as Paul did in this
text, 1 Cor. 1. 17. 1 Cor. 2 1^ 3. 4. Non Rhetorice sed Apostolice. Its the
foolishness of preaching that saves souls, (though not foolish preaching) as
Rams horns blew down Jerichoes walls, when golden trumpets could not have done
it, Moses serpent of brass cured when Aarons Calfe of gold brought death.
who did not only preach Jesus Christ to them, but in such a manner as that he
might not make the Cross of Christ of none effect. And Paul prays that we may
make the Gospel of Christ, manifest as we ought to speak, Col. 4. 4. which
consists in nine particulars.

First, that we preach Christ plainly and perspicuously to the understanding of
the meanest; Non quant^ eloquentia sed evidentia, says Aug. so that if the
people used to call ossum a bone, he would call it so too, Melius est ut not
reprehendant grammatici, quam ut non intellig^nt populi, Aug. on Psalm. 138. we
are to be stars and lights to give light, not clouds to darken the light, as do
p^inted glasse-windows in Churches; the Gospel of Christ is a mystery and our
understandings are blind and weak, therefore we must drive (as ^acob did)
according to the pace of our people, Esa. 28. 10. Christ taught them as they
were able to hear it, Matthew. 4. 33. and as they were able to bear it, John 16.
12. And Paul professes he had rather speak five words for edification, then
speak ten thousand words to work admiration.

It is not want of skill, but the greatest art to make dark things plain; if we
had the tongue of Angels, we could but communicate our notions to the
understanding of another, as that is the best glass that shows the truest
face, and not that which is most curiously Optimus textuarius estoptimus
Theologus.
wrought and set with Pearl; clearness and perspicuity, is the grace of
speech. A learned Divine being asked why he preached so plainly and did so much
dilate in his sermons, knowing him to be of such excellent abilities, etc.
answered, he was a fisherman; now if they should wind up the net, and so cast
it into the sea, they should catch nothing, Dr. Praeston.
but when they spread the net, I spread my net (said he) because I would catch
the fish.

One brought Plate and silver-spoones to a Country fair, where poor men
looked on them, and gazed only, but scarce cheapned, but went and bought up the
wooden spoones; Gay things in a 2 Samuel 18. 29.
Sermon, are only for men to gaze upon and admire, like Ahimaaz that saw a
tumult, but knew not what it meant. Its the fault of many ministers, rather
(...) then (...), to turn Artists rather then Divines, and to sore aloft with
obscure discourses, uncoth Epithites, 1 Cor. 1. 4.
of some cloudy Lycophroon, and all to work a vain admiration of them in the
ignorant.

But Paul tells us he came to preach Jesus Christ to them, and therefore he came
not in excellency of words, nor with entising 1 Cor. 2. 14
words of man's wisdom, but with power, as if he should say, such preach with
little power, nay they make the Cross of Christ of none effect, they destroy
Christ.

The king of Persia, having sent to Aelian. Hist. l. 14.
Antalcidas the Lacedemonian Captain a garland of Roses, wonderfully perfumed
with spices, and other sophistications, he accepted of his love, but misliked
the present, and sent him word, Rosarum odorem artis adulteratione perdidisti,
thou have marred the sweetness of the Roses, with the sweetness of thy
perfumes.

Alas what are our fine flowers, strains and flashes of wit, but like gay
weeds, and blew bottles to the good corn, or like the gayes to the matter in
the book? he that has my word, let him speak my word, what is the chafe to
the wheat? Ier. 23. 28. Alas we do but mingle our water with Gods wine. The new
born babe desires sincere milk, not stuffed with 1 Pet. 2. 2. (...).
moates and hairs of man's pretty fancy. The infant you know is better
nourished with the natural milk that comes from the mothers breast, then with
all other milk, though never so sweetened with sugar; and those flowers are best
and sweetest that grow in the garden, and not in the wilderness. Fine words
are but the gay clothes of truth; now truth is like Solomon's spouse, all
glorious within, and needs not outward adorning to make her amiable, but (as
Adam in innocence) she is most beautiful, when most naked; or if she does
appear in raiment Dr. Stought.
of needle work, it is more for majesty then for gaudinesse.

Caution. Not that we should be rude and unseemly in our speech, but clothe our
matter in decent words, and not Barbarism, ( est aliqua frondium gloria) the
leaves give some beauty to the tree. Good matter in an unseemly language, is
like a bright Taper in a sluttish candlestick, or like a fair body in
unhandsome clothes; truth, (says one) loves to be plain, but not sluttish; as
she loves not to be clad in gay colors like a wanton strumpet, so not in
lousie rags like a nasty creature, Aarons bells were golden, dulce sonantes,
sounding pleasantly, and not as sounding brass or tinkling cymbals.

2. Caution. Nor yet that we should be nimis verbosi to tantologize,
battologize, and be nothing but words, like empty orators, that have a flood of
words, and a drop of matter. Multa loquuntur and nihil dicunt, they speak much
and yet say nothing, because they say nothing to the purpose.

And as some delight in fine starcht phrases, curious words, so others in
speaking in unknown tongues, which the people understand not, which are at the
best but like a treasure concealed, or a fountain sealed, (as Ptlotomy said to
the 72. of the word till it were translated) Others like the true Humanists
that relish nothing but what is of man, and have the studies of the Scriptures
in base contempt, (as Pemble speaks) who delight to deck their sermons with
humane writers (not divine authority) and the crabby quiddities and subtleties
of the schoolmen, and with the authority of the fathers, in stead of preaching
Christ, and are of the opinion of Gerson, (that wise and learned chancellor of
Paris,) they that, says he, prefer modern writers before the ancient, are
like children that love raw fruit more then that which is ripe; but we know a
Pigmy if he stands upon a Giants shoulders, may see further, then he; of whom
we may say, not as they said of Herod's oration, the voice of God and not of
man, but contrarily the voice of man but not of God.

I deny not but there may be good use of fathers and humane writers, etc. as
handmaids to attend divine truths, and give sight to truths already laid down
in Scripture, as Hagar did attend her mistress; namely as probable testimonies
of dark and doubtful truths, or any way to clear our judgments or quicken
our affections, as the Israelites did whet their swords at the Philistines
forges, or as a man would see the sun in a pail of water. As he answered well
one that said the Fathers are but as so many feathers; be it so, said he; yet
feathers well fastened to the arrow makes it fly the faster, and wound the
deeper: But yet we must remember that we ever use them with these three
Cautions.

First, as witnesses, not as Judges, nor as Ephesians. 2. 20 Matthew.* 11. 15. 3. 9
pillars of our faith; let not your ears, (says one) be nailed to the door of
any man's authority. For divine faith must have divine testimony; as Aug. speaks
of Cyprian contra Crescon. cap. 32. Quod non convenit cum Scripturis respuo;
Talis ego sum in scriptis aliorum, and tales esse volo intellectores meorum, I
regard not Cyprians authority any further then it agrees with the authority of
the Scriptures.

2. Secondly that we use them very sparingly, as sauce and not as meat, and
making use of what they say, but hiding the authors, except when it makes more
for edification, as the Bees that gather honey from the flowers, they show you
the honey they have gathered, but not the flowers they did fly upon, or as the
Cowes that feed upon the sweet flowers in spring time, as the Cowslips, dayses
and Primroses, and the like, and they give you all their sweetness in their
milk, ( Attamen occultum redolent in lacte saporem) though they show you not
the flowers Dr. Featly.
they feed upon.

3. Thirdly, Be sure nothing be done for ostentation, but all for edification,
to clear the understanding, or quicken the affections; as the Israelites Jewels
were good in their ears, but not when they made a god of them; we may wear or
use Jewels, but not make Idols of them.

I speak not against use of arts and sciences, humane Authors and tongues,
which are as great helps to open the Scriptures, but the abuse; I know well if
the blind lead the blind, both will fall into the ditch; and truly we cannot
say of many in our days, much learning has made them mad, but want of
learning has made them bold and proud; of whom I may say as Paul said, a
necessity is laid upon them (for perhaps they know not else how to live) but
yet if not gifted and called, woe be to them if they preach the Gospel.

There are five helps to enable us to preach Christ plainly and clearly.

1. Competent learning, John 3. 10. Art thou a teacher in Israel says our
Savior, and know not these things? A blind seer is a solaecisme, but he
that has not an eye to see, may have an hand to work; such may be fit for the
flaile or rake, but not the pulpit; some like young Eliphaz begin so rawly
without being well stored that they are soon spent, like green wood that
smoakes away into smoke and darkness; and how can they expect it otherwise?
except God should increase that little oil in the cruse miraculously, as he
did the widows; such as are over hastily ripe like Jonas gourd likely quickly
wither; And, like young Eliphas they may be full, yea ready to burst if they
vent not, but it is with wind, they sow the wind, and reap the whirlewind. But a
minister like a good householder, should not content himself with a few
baskets full of broken meat, but should be able to bring forth out of his
treasure both new and old; and at least should have a competent measure of
skill both in the tongues and arts which are as keys to unlocke the
Scriptures: Skill in the originals is required, because else we shall see with
other men's eyes, and take all upon report and trust; but then we may say as
they to the woman, John 4. 42. Now we believe, not because of thy sayings, but
because we have seen him our selves, etc. But especially there is required
skill in arts and sciences; for tongues without arts are but empty vessels,
mere sounds: and if the best skill in tongues made the best Divines, then a Jew
or Grecian might be the best expositors of the Scriptures; but whether is
better, the vessel or the liquor contained in it? the box or the Jewel in it?
the apparel or the man?

Secondly, to be mighty in the Scriptures; All Scripture says Paul is by
inspiration from God, and is profitable to make the man of God perfect, yea
wi^e to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. Arts and sciences and humane learning may
have their use, but the Scriptures are the fountains and the foundation we must
build upon; Ephesians. 23. 29.
There is more light in the sun then in the stars, and more water in the
fountain then in the streams, and more honey in a barrel of honey then in a
few scattered flowers: Now it is good digging for gold in the mines of gold;
Besides that we find by experience, much reading is weariness to the flesh,
and does often disturb us, more then profit us, according to the golden saying
of Seneca, Sen.
Distrahit animum librorum multitudo. and of Corn. Agrip. de van. Librorum
multitudo onerat discentem non instruit. Some men are too curious, says one,
to pry into all books whatever, and never think they know the truth, till they
know what all men say of it.

Thirdly, be much in meditation, make use of thine own understanding, or thou
can hardly be a clear Preacher. There is no greater impediment of our
learning, (says learned Pemble) then so to make use of other men's parts, as to
neglect our own.

4 Be diligent to handle the fundamental points of religion by way of
catechizing, Heb 5. 12. Heb. 6. 1.
(plainly and briefly to the ignorant) Lay a foundation sure before you begin
to build; thus religion will be made more pleasant to them, to see the
beginning and end of divine truths, as Moses upon the top of mount Nebo saw all
the land of Canaan, or as men sees countries in a map. This seems too low
service for our learned Rabbis; but in truth it is the noblest 1 Cor. 3. 10.
and hardest work to lay the foundation well, and ^^t for a skillful master
builder to undertake, and makes a wellgrounded people.

5. Study to know the state of thy flock, that thou may apply thy self
accordingly in thy teaching, as the eye in the head over-vieweth all the other
parts, and sees what is most necessary and convenient for them.

I have been the larger in this particular, because it seems chiefly to be
intended by the Apostle, who pressed both in the words going before, and which
follow after, that we preach Christ plainly, and not in excellency of speech,
or enticing words, 1 Cor. 2. 1. 4.

2. Now a second thing required in 2 Painfully.
the manner of our preaching the Gospel of Christ is to preach Christ
painfully, to be laborers not loyterers, to spend and be spent for them, to be
like a candle that wastes and consumes it self to give light to others.

Which consists in two things. 1. In painful labor in our studies, for our
public work; To provide as David did for the house of God, even with all our
might, 1 Chro. 29. 2.
to put to the breast and the shoulder, which was the portion allotted for the
Priests. Exodus 29. 27.
So Paul bids Timothy 1 Timothy 4. 13. 14. 1 Timothy ^ 3. 4. Acts 6. 2. 3* 4.
give attendance to Reading, meditate on these things and Give thy self wholly
to them, A Minister must be like the painful Be that flies from flower to
flower to gather honv, and though she find the honey in the flowers, yet she
works it out by her own labor and so its rather the honey of the Be then of
the flowers. But we must not be translators, like drones that steal the honey
out of the Hive already gathered; for this were to wipe the sweat off from
others brows, upon our own brain, for God will bless our endeavors but not
our idleness; nor must we make any thing serve the turn, to fill the hour. Not
two or three hours on saturday night, when God wrought six days for our
example; Cursed be he that does the work of Ier. 48. 13.
the Lord negligently. Woe to all evil beasts, slow bellies, and woe to the
idol shepherds that feed themselves and not the flock* Ezekiel. 34. 2. 3. But
especialy woe to those who are worse then idle drones which though they are
ready to burst with honey but not with work, yet do not sting the painful
Bees, though lazy yet without a sting; But not long ago this was offense
enough, to be a diligent preacher, they casting as evil an eye upon such men,
as ever Soul did upon David, because their laboriousnesse, did condemn their
laziness. This is so great and difficult a work, that Paul says who is
sufficient for these things, yea Aug. says, it is onus angelicis humer^s
formidandum, a burden too heavy for the shoulders of Angels to bear. O how
have men spent themselves, wasted their lungs, and lives in this laborious
work? which far exceeds the greatest bodily labor, being the labor of the
mind, the distraction of the brain, etc. O what wonderful pains have the
fathers and modern writers taken in studying and preaching? what huge volums
of Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom. Calvin. etc. are yet extant as monuments of
their unwearied pains; may they not check our idle nesse, and make us blush?
Its true the body must be regarded, we may use cruelty to a a beast, and be
selfe-murtherers; God requires of us no more then we are able. But I believe
rather generally we are too indulgent; It was a noble saying of Dr. Reynolds
who by reason of great study had contracted a sickness, his friends persuaded
him to moderation, and not to lose life to get learning, Non perdere
substantiam propter accidentia, and he answered smiling, Nec propter vitam
vivendi perdere causam.

2. As a Minister must take pains in his studies, so likewise in the Pulpit by
diligent and laborious preaching; Love ( a) Ioh. 11. 15. 1 Timothy 4. 2. 1 Pet.
5. 2. Acts 20. 28.
thou me says our Savior to Peter? then feed my sheep? and Paul exhorts
Timothy; Be instant, stick close to the business, preach the word in season
and out of season, (...), in a good season, (which I conceive he means the
Lords day, being the particular season appointed for the preaching of the word)
and out of season, that is, at other seasonable times, besides that set time,
as occasion is offered, taking all opportunities of doing good. You see though
he bids him Es. 28. 10.
drink a little wine for his stomachs sake, yet he bids him not preach but a
little for his healths sake; for we cannot be spent better then thus to waste
our selves to save the souls of others. It was the speech of Bishop Jewel unto
a Gentleman that met him going to preach, and saw him so feeble, advising him
to turn back again, but he answered him Oportet Episcopum conciona^tem mori, a
Bishop ought to die preaching, and so he did, for soon after sermon by reason
of sickness he was forced to bed, and never came off his bed again, It was
Aug. his wish, that Christ might find him at his coming Aut precantem aut
predicantem, praying or preaching. Mr. Calvin also being much weakened in body,
by his great pains in the work of the ministry, said, would you have the Lord
when he comes, to find me idle? O blessed is the man says our Savior, whom
his Lord when he comes shall find so doing, that is, giving them their meat
in due season, Matthew. 24. 45. 46. Alas our time is short and precious, we have
not long to work though we would; night comes when no man can work; Think
every sermon, this may be the last sermon that ever I shall preach; therefore
whatever thou find in thy hand to do, do it with all thy might, Eccles. 9.
10. 2 Pet. 22. 14. Christ died and bled, and wept for souls, and shall not we
sweat for souls? O consider often, what a fearful thing it is to be guilty of
the blood of souls, as we heard before. One reports that in a Synod of the
Clergy at Paris Clerks mir^our p. 127. examp. 10.
1228. one appointed to make a sermon, was much troubled what text to take, the
devil appeared to him, and told him he needed not to be troubled about that,
the Princes of hell (said he) salute you, O you Princes of the Church, and
gladly give you thanks, because through your negligence so many souls go down
to hell; (a dreadful saying) shall we prefer our idleness before the
salvation of the peoples souls? what pains did Jacob take in feeding of his
flock of sheep? he regarded not the heat of the day, nor the cold of the night,
nor want of his sleep, Genesis 31. Remember the woes denounced against idle and
idol preachers by the Prophets, ( a) and by Paul, woe Exek. 34. 2. Zach 11. 17.
I^r. 48. 10.
be to me if I preach not the Gospel; it may be on our death beds we will cry
out of loss of time, that we were all day long in Gods vineyard, and almost
all the day idle, or took no pains to what we might have done. Its true, all
have not abilities alike, but our best endeavor is required, and accepted, if
there be a willing mind it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
that he has not, 2 Cor. 8. 12. he that had but two talents and wrought with
them, was accepted as well as he that had five; only the slothful servant that
hid his talent in a napkin, was condemned.

Thirdly, Ministers must study to preach 3. Profitably.
profitably, 1 Pet. 2. 2. 11. Tit. 3. 8, 9. not froth in stead of food, like
those Prophets that prophesied vain and foolish things to the people, Lament.
2. 14. ^eeding them with empty husks in stead of the bread of life; Not empty
clouds, which when we see, we say a shower comes, but behold in stead of a
gracious shower, perhaps a stormy tempest, or at best clouds without water,
unsavou^y salt, trees without fruit; shadows in stead of ^ubstance; Children
crying for bread, they give them a stone, and for fish, and they give them a
serpent. But we must feed them with bread of life, wholesome food, such as Cor
12. 7. 1 Cor. 14. 12.
may nourish. This is the end of all gifts to profit with them, ( a) and
therefore we should study to excel in gifts for the edifying of the Church;
(b) I had rather says Paul speak five words to teach and edify, then ten
thousand words in an unknown tongue (so as the people could not profit) 1 Cor.
14. 19. where the dead carcass is, thither will the eagle resort. Think not
what pains thou take, but cui bono; whether thy pains be profitable for the
people; for a man may preach painfully; and yet very unprofitably; and then as
he that swears vainly takes Gods name in vain, so he that preaches
unprofitably, takes Gods word in vain. And yet sometimes a minister may take
comfort, and shall have his reward, though his people be not gathered; I have
labored in vain, etc. says Isaiah, yet my reward is with the Lord, and Es.
44. 4.
my work with my God; sometim^s we are sent to be the savor of death unto
death, Es. 6. 21.
and to make the heart of a people fat, etc. but this is not when the people
perish through our negligence. Aug. makes this resemblance, suppose a
Blackamore* and another comes to a Barbers shop to be washed, he takes equal
pains with both, the one is made whiter, the other Blacker, yet the Barber is
equally paid. There is cura offi^ii that belongs to us, and cura eventus that
belongs to God, Weams Cert. Law. Alas its not our work to convert souls, but
Gods; we may sow the seed, but God must give success; Rebecca may cook the
meat, but Isa^c must give the blessing, Moses may hew the tables, but God must
write the law; we may carry the bottle, but its God that gives the wine; we may
speak words, but its God that gives grace; in Caelo cathedram habet qui corda
movet. Si non sit intus quidocet, inanis strepitus noster; Paul is nothing,
Apollos is nothing, but God must give the increase.

4. Ministers must preach Christ faithfully; 4. Faithfully.
he that has my word, let him preach my word faithfully, Jer. 23. 8. 1 Cor. 4.
2.
as stewards and ambassadors must do their masters message. 1. Not to call
evil good nor good evil, making the heart of the righteous sad, and
strengthening the hands of the wicked. Ezekiel. 13. 22.
2. Not to suppress or omit any needful truths, or reproo^es out of fear or
^avour, as ( c) Ezekiel. 2. 7. Ier. 1. 7. 8.
Nathan was faithful to David, John to Herod, Elias to Ahab, yea Balaam
himself said, the word that God puts into my mouth, that will I speak,
Number. 22. 38.
3. Not to preach pleasing things out of flattery and desire to get ^avour,
Ier. 6. 14. Ier. 13. 17. Ezekiel. 13. 19. 11.
when like false glasses they represent not a true face; ( f) As those that
told Dionysius his spittle was as sweet as honey, and those that flattered
Caesar that told him his freckles in his face were like the stars in the
firmament; flattery undid Ahab, Nero, Herod, Alexander, etc. These are the
undoers of the souls of the people, like evil Chirurgions that skin over the
( e) Ier. 6. 14. Lam. 2. 14. Ier. 23. 17.
wound but never heal it. ( g) Especially at their deaths, O then especially
take heed of daubing them over with untempered mortar, and so the poor man is
in hell, when he thought to have been in Abraham's bosom. This sin will lie
heavy upon a ministers conscience when he lies a dying. Will you lie for God,
or talk deceitfully for his cause? says God, Job. 13. 7.

5. Ministers must preach Christ zealously, with intention of affection, and 5.
Zealously.
speech. Cry aloud, spare not, etc. Es. 58. 1. though we need not boar bellow
out, Es. 40. 8. Tit. 1. 5. Act. 7. 5
yet we must acriter urgere, and cloth the matter with suitable expressions,
as apparel to fit the body and the season; when the Holy Ghost came upon the
Disciples in Acts 2. 3. 4. fire sat upon their tongues: And the Angel touched
Isaiahs tongue with a cole of fire, it was not dipped Es. 6. 6. 7.
in water; and the two witnesses, fire came out of their mouths, Rev. 11. 5.
Elias was a man made up of heavenly fire, and for his zeal was carried up in a
fiery chariot into heaven; And Jeremy professes that the word was like a fire
within his bones, Jer. 20. 7. Gods word is compared to fire, a hammer and a
sword, Ier. 23. 29. Heb. 4. 12. and therefore we must so use it, as it may heat
the coldest heart, break the stony heart, and cut and fetch blood from the
hardest hearts, Acts 2. 37. Alas natural men are in a dead sleep, and many
godly are in Ephesians. 5. 14. Es. 6. 9.
a lethargy, and in asnorting sleep, as the wise virgins, and had need be
awakened with a loud voice, especially considering our message is of so great
importance. But this is a fault of Ministers now a days, who love not to have
their tongues tipped with fire, but dipped in water, not to be a hammer or a sword,
but a reed shaken with the wind; they love not to be the salt, but the sugar
and honey of the word, (the salt has lost its savor,) and the reason is,
because men will not endure it, but are ready to gnash their Act. 7. 51.
teeth at such preaching, and call it malice, etc. when as indeed it is the
greatestlove that can be: As if a man's house be set on fire, we must not speak
softly as loath to awaken him, Sir your house is on fire, etc. Cry aloud, spare
not, save them with, fear, pulling them out of the fire; he is the Jude 23.
Zach. 3. 2.
best Surgeon or Physician, not that puts his Patient to least pain, but
that cures and heales; Not he that is most pleasing but most profitable. Yet
alas men cry out of such preachers, as fiery fellows, (like the fiery disciples
that said, command fire from heaven) the man is mad, now he railes and vents
his malice; And their best language is, its his passion the man is angry; like
the widow while her oil increased the Prophet was a good man, but when she
thought he slew her son, then she cries out, art thou come to call my sin
to remembrance and to slay my son? 1 Kings 17. 18. What have I to do with thee?
Indeed anger may be a sin, when it is against the person of another; but not
when against his sin, keeping bounds, so it is our duty to be angry; as Paul's
spirit was whetted, sharpened, etc. Act. 17. 16. and c. 13. 10. And John's
spirit, Matthew. 3. 7. And our blessed Savior, Matthew. 23. 33. Yea serpents,
generation of vipers, etc.

6. Ministers must preach Christ lovingly, 6. Lovingly.
take heed our own passions mingle not with our zeal, that we vent not them to
disgrace others, or ease our own venomous spirits; excellent is the speech of
Bullinger in his preface before his Decades, Ab^it fell amaritud^nis and
petulantia; Sit objurgatio prudens, potius quam audax; Ardeat non ira sed
spirit us ve^ementia, and scelus potius quam scelerati person im-persequi. We
were gentle among you, says Paul, as a nurse cherishes her children, and we
exhorted you as a father does his children, 1 These. 2. 7. 11. Zeal and love
may stand together; for zeal is nothing but the blood and spirits of love; as
Moses loved the people, and prayed for them, and wished to be rased out of the
book of life, for their good; yet so zealous was he that he made them drink
the powder of the calfe that they had made, Exodus 32. But take heed of that
same (...) bitter zeal complained of in James 3. 14. when strange fire is
mingled with Gods fire.

Caution. Yet its good not only to come with love in our hearts, but to use
expressions of love in our speeches, as bees that carry honey in their mo^thes,
as well as a sting about them, and pills are wrapped in sugar; Thus our blessed
Savior wept over them in Jerusalem, when he said, O that thou had known in
this thy Luke 19. 41.
day the things that belongs to thy peace; weeping tears are the blood and
spirits of love; By this he showed how he was affected with their misery; His
eyes were glazed with tears, that they might be as looking glasses to view the
bowels of compassions that lay at his heart; as when he wept for Lazarus, they
said, behold how he loves him. So likewise Paul, I tell you it weeping (whiles
my pen is going, mine eyes are weeping) yet I tell you it, their end is
damnation; and Jeremy, if you will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret for
your pride, Jer. 13. 17. Ministers are indeed the salt of the earth, but we do
not use to set on nothing but salt upon the table, though we sprinkle every
dish with salt. One reports of Pharaohs daughter, that she had a fistula in her
breast, and would admit none to touch it, the Surgeon got leave to cool it,
washing it with a cloth, etc. and so having a penknife secretly hid, he opened
it, and so he cured the disease; Its love that edisieth.

7. Ministers must preach the Gospel wisely. I am full of power by the Spirit
of the Lord, and of judgment says Micah? I caught you by craft, says Paul.
(b) This wisdom must appear in three particulars.

1. To put difference between persons and persons, for though we may reprove
all, great as small, yet not after the same manner; reproof is a degree of
punishment or correction, and therefore not to be given to all in the same
manner; rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a father; 1 Timothy 5. 1.
Is it fit to say to a king thou art wicked; or to Princes, ye are ungodly?
says Job; John 34. 18.
And yet Ministers may reprove kings for their ungodliness, as Nathan did
David; But it must be done with great reverence and respect to their persons;
as Nathan bowed himself to David, and Ioah also in his reproof of David, 2 Samuel 24. 3. 2. We must difference between sinners: Some sin of weakness and
some of wilfulness, those that sin of weakness we must restore with a spirit
of meekness, Jude 23. we must not break a bruised reed; Our Lord Christ bare
with Peter in his weakness (when he deserved to have bin left to himself) and
took him by the hand, saying, O Thou of little faith, etc. Matthew. 14. 13. and
when the disciples slept. Matthew. 26. 41. The spirit says he is willing, but
the flesh is weak. Those 1 Cor. 9. 19. etc. Gal. 6. 12. Romans 15. 1.
that are bold, proud and obstinate sinners, those we must rebuke sharply Tit.
1. 13. Act. 13. 10.
((...)) cuttingly; some are like nettles, the gentler they are handled, the
more they sting, or like lime, the more water you throw on them, the more they
burn. Again some sins are secret, which we must reprove them of secretly; Tell
him between him and thee; Matthew. 18. 15. John 4. 16.
But some are more open which may be rebuked more openly, yet so as (if we can)
to hide the ( c) 1 Timothy 5. 20.
person and discover only his sin, aiming at his reformation, not his
defamation; It is great wisdom to know when to mourn, and when to dance, when
to use oil, and when vinegar, when to use a searingiron, and when a
sear-cloth, 3. Cor. 9. 20. thou art not far from the Kingdom of heaven says
our Lord Christ to the young man: And Paul to Agrippa, Beleevest thou the
Prophets? I know that thou beleevest, etc, Act. 26. 27, 28.

Sincerely.
own applause to advance our own credit; As Ioab when he was ready to take
Rabba, sent to David, saying, Come thou and take it, (least the glory should
have been attributed to himself) We are the friends of the bridegroom, we must
not sue for our selves (as Sampsons spokes-man wooed for a wife for him, and
took her to him self, Judge. 14. 20.) but for the bridegroom; we preach not our
selves, says Paul, but Jesus Christ, and our selves your servant for Christ's
sake 2 Cor. 4. 5 He must increase, but I must decrease, and in this I rejoice,
says John, Ioh. 3. 29. 30. This sin sticks very close to the best of us. Paul
himself was subject to be exalted above measure; you may easily empty a
vessel of water, but not of air; This serpent will creep into paradise amidst
the trees of pleasure; Corn though never so well ^and, when sown, will come up
with chafe; the envious man, though we sow good seed, will be sowing tares.
Nay the better our parts and gifts are, and the better our performances come
off, we are the more subject to be proud of them; Rarum est in multis
praecellere and multum de^ spicere; It is rare to be eminent in gifts and
humble, as the finest cloth is most subject to moths, and men are soonest
poisoned with sweet flowers. Gaetera vitia in malefactis sunt cavenda, superbia
vero in bonis. Aug. Other sins are to be taken heed of in things that are
evil, but pride in those that are good!

But remember no honey was offered Levit. 2. 11.
in sacrifice, because though it was sweet yet it would bubble up; were thy
duties as sweet as honey, yet if they bubble up with pride, they are not
acceptable; Nay ^he better the sermon, and the more pains thou have taken, if
proud of it, the greater is thy sin, because thou robbest God of the more
glory; and it proves but great pains to purchase great misery. It was a noble
and excellent saying, Melior est humilitas in malis quam superbia in bonis,
that is, a man were better fall into a sin and be humbled after it, then to do
a good action, and be proud of it. If we could trust God with our credit, name,
etc. and seek his glory, he would honor us; Those that honor me I will honor,
(even here so far as he sees good for us, and in heaven eternally.) But on
the contrary God will stain the pride of all glory, Es. 23. 9. and turn our
glory into shame, Prove. 25. 27. As to eat too much honey is not good, (because
it turns into gall and bitterness) so for a man to seek his own glory is not
glory; why? because God turns it into shame and infamy.

In the last place we must preach 9 Exemplarily.
Christ examplarily; In holy conversation, thas life and doctrine go together,
and do not cross each other; Be thou an axample to the flock, says Peter, 1
Pet. 5. 3. We must say as Gideon to his soldiers, Judge. 7. 17.
look on me, and do likewise; We must not bind h^avy burdens upon other men's
backs, and we our selves not touch them with one of our fingers, as did the
Pharisees; The Priests had on their breastplates Vrim and Thummim, because they
were not only to give light of direction by teaching, but also to be a pattern
of perfection in their practice; They had also upon the fringe of their
garments bells and pomegranates, typifying their sounding doctrine, and their
fruitful life; but if there be nothing but bells and no pomegranates, they may
make a noise, but it will be like sounding brass and tinkling cymbals; And the
disciples when the Holy Ghost came upon them, had cloven tongues, as it were,
fingers on their tongues to teach them their words should be their works; It
was the mark of a bad man, but it is the note of a good minister to speak with
his feet, and teach with his fingers, Prove. 6. 13. He must be tota vox not vox
and praeterea nihil; Let the people say; As we have heard, so we have seen; The
people should see the preachers voice acted in his conversation. Like the
Angels that had wings, and hands under their wings, Ezekiel. 1. 8.


1. Ministers are called Angels, because (perhaps) we should be as Angels in
our lives, in comparison of other men; but if Angels fall they turn devils. We
are called stars which are the ornaments of the heavens, because we should be
the ornaments of the Church, but if we be spotted and blemished with sinful
lives, we are not the stars, but stains and blemishes of the Church. O then
let our care be to be holy as Angels are holy, yea as God is holy in all manner
of conversation, walking with God in our closets, in our families, in our words
and speeches, not given to foolish talking and unseemly jeasting, but sober,
and gracious, our lips dropping as an honey comb, forgetful of injuries, slow
to anger, patient in afflictions, ready to do good to all, but harmefull to
none, and a companion of them that fear the Lord. We areas a city set upon a
hill, our conversation is narrowly looked into, a little spot is soon seen, a
little hole soon spied in our coat; (yea if there be none, they will make one
if they can) As Plutarch observes; The least blemish in the face, be it but a
wart, is more perspicuous then deformed scars in the rest of the body; for a
scarr in the body may be covered with garments, but a mole in the face is
apparent to all. Therefore let our light so shine that men Matthew. 5. 16.
may see our good works, and glorify our father which is in heaven.

2. We are called to draw near unto God, and be with God as it were in the
mount, as Moses was, therefore we had need be holy; I will be sanctified of
them Medius inter deum and populum debet esse similimus. Rain. Panth. Levit.
21. Zach. 3. 4.
that com^ near me. Levit. 10. 3. it was written upon Aarons forehead when he
stood before the Lord, (...) holiness to the Lord, and no man that had any
blemish could be made a Priest; When Iohoshua the high priest stood before the
Lord, he was then commanded to put off his filthy garments; Unclean hands are
unfit to carry Gods ark; Alas who are we to speak to God and live; much less
to speak from God to the people, that they may live? When God appeared in his
holiness, woe is me, said Isaiah, I am undone because I am a man of unclean
lips, for mine eyes have seen the king the Lord of hosts, Es. 6. 5. 7. He was
afraid to look upon God, till God sent an Angel to him that said; Thine
iniquity is taken away, and thy sin is purged. How holy had they need be that
draw near to so holy a God? who can dwell with everlasting burnings Es. 33. 14.
(that is have communion with the holy God) Surely none other but he that
walks righteously, as verse 15. Hence the Priest in the old law, was not to
go up by steps unto the altar, least his nakedness should have been discovered
thereon, Exodus 20. ult. and they were appointed linen breeches from the loins
to the thighs for the same end, typifying Exodus 28. 42. 43.
how holy we ought to be that draw near unto God, that no filthy nakedness do
appear.

3. Then indeed we preach with authority, Id ^um imperio dicitur quod pri^s
agitur quam dicitur. Suadet loquentis vua. Non oration.
when we practice that our selves which we preach to others; As our blessed
Savior taught with authority, not as the Scribes, because he did and taught
Act. 1. 1. he taught by example as well as precept; Learn of me says our Lord
Christ, that I am meek and lowly; So Ioh. 13. 15. when he washed his disciples
feet, I have given you, says he an example, that you should do as I have done
unto you, etc. Then is there life in our doctrine, when there is doctrine in
our life, and likely, that that comes from the heart, goes to the heart, and
(ordinarily) affects more then all studied phrases and Rhetorical flourishes.
Why did Herod reverence Iohn-Baptist, but because he was a just Matthew. 6. 20.
man and holy in his conversation; For holiness is venerable; Godliness with
power is full of majesty; This made wicked Saul so reverence the Prophet
Samuel; (he was afraid of him) And Ahab Elias; And Ioash Iehoiada, Yea a child
or poor manservant or maidservant in a family, have a throne set up in the
heart of a wicked master, father, etc. But on the contrary, our words have
little power with the people, when our lives are contrary, as the Scribes and
Pharisees taught with little authority, because they said, but did not. Words
Dicta factis deficientibus erubescunt. Quid verba audiam? facta non video.
blush where deeds fail; Physician heal thy self; Thou that say a man
should not steal, do thou steal? says the Apostle, Romans 2. Suppose a man
should smite another with a wounded arm, alas he would smite but faintly,
because while he smites another, he bleeds himself. Mr. Dyke on Philem. tells a
story of Lucian an Apo^hecary, who made himself ridiculous by selling a
medicine to cure the cough in others, but could not cure himself. And surely
such a man that reproves another of what himself is guilty of, foameth out
but his own shame, Jude 13.

4. A bad life makes men loath the wholesome truths taught, though never so
excellent; As a man loathes good and wholesome meat when it comes out of a foul
dish, or as we loath the light of the candle, when set upon a sluttish
candlestick: Thus Elies sons made the people abhor the offerings of the
Lord by their wicked lives, 1 Samuel 2. 7. The Lacedaemonians when one deboist in
life stepped up and gave good counsel, they would Cujus vita despicitur, ejus
praedicatio contemnitur. Greg.
not receive it, till another of a grave carriage stepped up and gave the same
counsel, and then they followed it. The sins of a Teacher are teaching sins:
Praecepta docent, exempla movent. And hence it is that in the old law there was
as great a sacrifice offered for the sins of the minister, as for the sins of
the whole congregation; as if his sins were as great as the sins of the whole
congregation. Levit. 4. 3.

5. In the last place; If we preach not Christ exemplarily, alas we shall not
save our souls and those that hear us, but whiles we preach to others, our
selves 1 Cor. 9. ult.
may prove castawayes; of whom it may be truly said (as it was falsely of
Christ) They saved others, themselves they could not save; As those that built
the ark of Noah which saved others, but themselves were drowned; Or as Moses
that brought the people to the land of Canaan, but entered not in himself; Or
as Sampsons lion that had honey in his belly, which refreshed others but not
himself or as trees that bear fruit for others, but not for themselves; Or
like Caesar's soldier that digd a fountain for Caesar, and himself perished
for want of water: So we (if such) while others are seasoned we shall be thrown
to the dunghill, and when we have shined like candles in the house to others,
our selves shall go out in a snuff. Yea then all our sermons to others will
witness against our selves, and make our judgment inexcusable. Thou art
inexcusable O man, that reprovest another, and do the same things. Romans 2. 21.
Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee, Luke 19. 22.
thine own words shall accuse thee and not I, yea thine own lips shall bear
witness against thee, says Job. Job. 15. 6.
O then let us tremble and take heed with Paul least that by any means when we
have preached to others, we our selves 1 Cor. 9. 24.
should be rejected; And let us take the counsel he gave to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.
16. To take heed to our selves, and to our doctrine, that thereby we may both
save our selves and those that hear us.

1. Caution, Not that men can expect we should be free from infirmities, though
from enormities we may, we can hardly keep our clothes from dust, though from
dirt we may. Alas we are but men subject to like passions with other men, as
was Elias, Paul, etc. The High Priest himself who was only to enter into the
holy os holyes, he was, first to offer for his own sins, and then for the sins
of the people; the most godly Minister that is, Heb. 9. 7.
has his pillar of cloud as well as his pillar of fire, has some frailties,
weaknesses and infirmities; They are but men not Angels, yea though men of God,
yet but men; Or if they be Angels, yet Behold he found not steadfastness in his
Angels, Job. 4. 18. and the stars are not clean in his sight, Job. 25. 5.

2. Caution. though our clothes be clean, yet we cannot hinder others from
soiling us, as men that brush their clothes when they ride forth, yet if they
ride in dirty ways, they may soon be dashed and spotted by the passers by: I
say no man is so clean but others may cast dirt upon him. No cloth is so white,
but a Dyer can make it black; As the Indians that paint Devils white, and
Angels black, because they could not make them black, they would paint them so,
(yet it were better to be such a black Angel then a white devil.) Thus they
did with David; They laid to my charge the things that I knew not, Psalm. 35.
11. Even Christ himself was called a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of
Publicans and sinners. Joseph, Mephibosheth, Naboth, how falsely slaundered! In
the Primitive times when the Christians met before Sun to pray, the Heathens
reported of them that they worshipped the Sun and aspired after monarchy, and
committed unnatural adulteries and uncleanness: They reported of Luther that
he died despairing, and that in his grave there was a great stink of brimstone,
and his body not in it, when he was alive to confute it; That Beza ran away
with another man's wife; That Calvin was branded on the shoulder for a Rogue.
Athanasius was accused about thirty times, and cleared his innocence. And Cato
was accused fifty times wrongfully. Si satis est accusare quis innocens erit.
And yet let a report be never so false, it takes always, either to censure, or
suspicion; Audaciter calumniare, semper aliquid haerebit; There is no smoke we
say, but there is some fire. Calumnia says Beza (in opusc.) Leviter volat sed
graviter vulnerat; Leviter volat sed non tam leviter revocatur; reproach
quickly flies out, but it deeply wounds, it quickly flies out, but it is not so
quickly recalled again. Yet no sin more common in these days; As they did with
Jeremy, Come let us devise divices against Jeremy, let us smite him with the
tongue; Report say they, and we will report it, Ier. 18. 18. and 20. 10. But
let these men take heed, least with what measure they meet, it be measured to
them again; And as they judge, least they also be judged, and least others also
blot their name on earth, and least God should blot their name out of heaven.
And let them remember, they do not only blemish and take away our good names,
which are better then riches, yea then multitudes of gold and silver, Prove. 22.
1. but also hinder the power of our ministry, (and the preaching of Christ) in
the hearts of our hearers; And Christ takes it as done unto himself, He that
despises you, despises me, etc. whom God often meets withal in this life, Act.
23. 4. 5. God shall smite thee thou white wall, etc. which was not Paul's
weakness, as Hierom thought; Nor a malediction as others; But (as some think)
a prediction, for so it is reported, he was afterw^rd cruelly slain by a
captain of the Jews in the beginning of the Jewish wars; Indeed Paul said he
wist not that he was the High Priest, etc. Not that he forgot him or knew him
not, but because he was not justly the High Priest, which now was ceased, (as
Calvin, Chrysostom. and Beda.)

CHAP. XXIIII. An exhortation to thankfulness for Christ revealed in the
Gospel.
IN the last place it is a use of exhortation to stir us up to thankfulness to
God for the revelation of the Gospel; That Christ is preached among us, without
the knowledge of whom there is no salvation; Eccles. 11. 7.
We rejoice in the light of the Sun, what were the world without it, but a
dungeon of darkness? but we have much more cause of joy that the Son of
righteousness does shine among us, with healing in his wings. Mal. 4. 2. For
consider that,

1. First as Christ is given but to few, so he is revealed but to few; It is a
mystery hid from ages and generations, though now manifested to us in this
Island. He has not Col. 1. 26.
dealt so with every nation, Psalm. 147. 20. nay scarce with any nation as with
us; The most part of the world never heard of Christ, who sit in Egyptian
darkness and the shadow of death, against whom The wrath of God is revealed
from heaven, Romans 1. 18. but no mercy or glad tidings of salvation, have ever
sounded in their ears; The Gospel is hid from their eyes, and they are left
blindfolded by the god of this world, to their eternal destruction, 2 Cor. 4.
3. 4. being strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope and without
God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12.

Yea it is not above an hundred and odd years ago, since England was in
darkness and a sink of Idolatry, and therein our forefathers lived and died,
witness Queen Mary's days and before. But we live in Goshen. We that sat in
darkness now see great light, and to us Matthew. 4. 16.
that sat in the region and shadow of death, is light sprang up: yea, amongst
us Christ is not only revealed, but more clearly then ever since the world
began; O what glorious lights, (almost in every Congregation) are daily set
upon the candlesticks; how many kings and Princes would have been glad to have
seen the things that we see, but never saw them!

In the old law Christ was revealed indeed (to a few) but darkly; as to Adam in
that dark promise, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head; so
Abraham saw my day, (says Christ) and rejoiced, John 8. 56. and Moses saw
Christ, (yea glorious amidst reproaches, Heb. 1^. 16.) yea all the believing
Jews saw the blood of Christ, streaming in their bloody sacrifices, and they
expected a Savior by the promised seed, but darkly as in shadows and glasses,
Col. 2. 17. they saw Christum velatum, we revelatum; they saw Christ vaild, but
we revealed; their light was but like a candle under a bushel, but ours is set
on a candlestick. They expected a Savior indeed, but 1. such a one that should
be a great king upon earth, as appears, Act. 1. 6. will thou at this time
restore again the kingdom to Israel? Secondly, only for themselves, but not
for the Gentiles, as in Ephesians. 3. 5. 6. Now it is revealed, says the Apostle,
that the Gentiles should be partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel.
Thirdly, with the observation of Moses Law. Fourthly and lastly, it was ig^is
umbratalis, they knew but little of the manner of his birth, death and
sufferings, resurrection and ascension in respect of us.

2, Secondly as it is a blessing bestowed but upon a few, so, it is a great
blessing, because when the Gospel is revealed, where Christ is preached, there
God dwells with his special and gracious presence. He walks in the midst of
his golden candlesticks, Rev. 2. 1 we may say of such places as Jacob of his
brethren, where God appeared* this is the gate of heaven, this is the house of
God, Genesis 28, 17. Here God is made known unto us, in Judah is God known, and
his name is great in Israel, Psalm. 76. 1. for we enjoy near communion with him,
which was the happiness of Adam in paradise. and is the happiness of the
Angels and Saints in heaven where God and his presence is all in all. Hence
Moses prayed when God said, my presence shall go with thee, and I will give
thee rest, if thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence says he, Exodus
33. ^4. 15. Now what a mercy is it to live in Bethel where God dwells* and not
in Bethaven among Idolaters?

Yea here is the Pearl of great Price, the Lord Jesus Christ revealed to us, a
Pearl richer then all the mines of gold and silver in both the Indies, which
if they were in England, we would count them great riches, yet are not so great
riches as is the Gospel. In other places may be found the fatness of the
earth, but here is the dew of heaven; Here is Manna bread from heaven, and that
is the sweetest bread; who cannot but cry, Lord evermore give us this bread?
Here is water out of the rock, and that's the sweetest water; who cannot but
long with David to drink of the waters of Bethlehem, and to be satisfied with
these breasts of consolation? Here is Paradise, as the French Protestants called
one of their Churches, and so long as the Gospel is preached among us, we live
as it were in Paradise, and who can but say its good being here? yea and here
are the glad tidings of salvation preached, and what sweeter tidings can Romans
10. 1 Pet. 1. 21.
we hear of? yea here is the kingdom of God, Matthew. 3. because it is the
ordinary means to bring men to heaven and salvation, called the power of God to
salvation, Romans 1. 16.

Hence it is that Noah's prayer for Japhets kindness was only this; God
persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem. And hence it is that David
desired to dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of his life, and that
he so longed for it, when he was deprived of it, as appears, Psalm. 27. 4 and
42. 1. and 84. 10.

3. Where Christ is revealed* and the Gospel Psalm. 128. 5. Psalm. 133. ul^.
is preached, there we are sure there be some elect to be saved; If three
grounds be bad, yet one of four will prove good ground; the Gospel seldom or
never comes but as a blessing to some; Hence Paul desired to come among them,
with the abundance of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15. 29.
Indeed the Act. 18. 10. Romans 10. 17.
Gospel is preached to reprobates, but it is as the weeds are watered for the
flowers sake.

4. Where the Gospel is revealed, and where Christ is preached, usually outward
blessings do accompany; The Gospel is called Cornu copia the horn of plenty, 2 Samuel 6. 11. 12. Judge. 17. 13.
as when the ark was in Obed-edoms house. all his house was blessed for the Arks
sake, and as Mich^ said, now I know the Lord will bless me, seeing I have got
a Levite to be my Priest; according as the Lord promised, Exodus 20. 24. In all
places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee;
And in Exodus 23. 23. ye shall serve the Lord, and he shall bless your bread
and water; and especially David, Psalm. 132. 13. 14. 15. The Lord has chosen
Sion, he has desired it for his habitation, this is my rest for ever, here
will I dwell, for I have desired it, I will abundant^y bless her provision, I
will satisfy her poor with bread. O then that we could sing the song of
Zachary, Luke 1. 68. to the end; blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that has
given light to us that sat in darkness, as v. 79. But alas how many are weary
of the Gospel of Christ, and the revelation of him? like sore eyes, they love
not the light of the Sun; He that does evil hates the light, John 3. ver.
20. like those Ethiopians that live under the sun, and are scorched with the
heat of it, they curse the Sun, Mal. 1. 13. Amos 8. 5.
and shoot arrows against it. They hate, despise the messengers or candlesticks
that hold forth this light; Never were they more vilified and reproached then
among us at this day, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Nay, how weary are they of hearing of
the Gospel. Man Hu? the bread from heaven is light bread, men and women will
scarce come out of doors to receive it. The wise men in Matthew. 2. went many
weary hundreds of miles to find Christ at Jerusalem, (some think near a
thousand miles.) The Queen of the South went far (some say 964 miles) to
hear the wisdom of Solomon; The holy Martyrs thought no weather too hot, no
winter too cold, no journey too far, no torments too great to enjoy the
preaching of the Gospel though darkly. O how will they rise up injudgment
against some of us, that think any pains too much, account any journey too
far, any weather too hot, or too cold, and will scarce come out of their
doors to the Temple to hear Christ revealed to them. One week in their shops is
sweeter then all the Sabbaths in the year, as if they would tell the world,
they have got more there, and found more sweetness there, then ever they did
in hunting and seeking after Christ; And how just were it with Christ, to say
to those men, verily I say unto you none of those that were bidden shall taste
of my supper. Luke 24. 14. These shall be esteemed one day as despisers of
Christ, yea this is the condemnation that light is Luke 10. 16.
come among us, but we love darkness more then light, says our Savior; To be
in darkness is a great evil, but this aggravates it to choose, embrace and
love darkness; the poor heathens whom we esteem accursed, are infinitely
happier then Matthew. 11.
these men; Woe to thee Chorazin, etc.

Nay, may we not justly fear God will take away the Gospel for our contempt
of it and leave us and our children in darkness, as our forefathers were? and
go to some other people that will more embrace it, and more highly prise it?
Act. 13. 46. This judgment God threatened the ^ewes, Amos 8. 9. 11. 12. that
their Sun should go down at noon day, an^ that he would send a famine* not of
^read or water, but hearing the word as v. 1^. O Jerusalem says Christ, Luke
^9. 42. that thou had known, (that is regarded) in this thy day, the things
that belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. As Moses said,
Exodus 1. 6. there rose up a generation that knew not Joseph, so perhaps there
may spring up a generation that never knew of our plenty but may meet with as
many years of famine, as we have done of plenty; and the ways of S^on may
mourn among us, as they have a long time rejoiced, and all for our contempt of
the Gospel, and the preaching of Christ. What is now become of the seven
Churches of Asia? are they not now dungeons of darkness, and cages of unclean
birds that were once Lam. 1. 4.
seven golden candlesticks? nay in Ireland and Germany to what a low ebb is
the Gospel brought, where the enemies have burnt up all the Synagogues of God
in the land? And then if the Gospel be gone; Icabod, our glory is departed from
this our Israel; woe to us if once God departs from us; and he departs when his
Gospel departs, or when Christ can be preached no longer among ^s^ which
judgment the Lord divert from us. Then woe to them that put out the lights, when
they go not out by being wasted in Christ's work, but some ill breath has blown
them out, which else might still have been burning and shining lights; but happy
are they that shall snuff the lights to make them burn the clearer, and tread
out such snuffes as rather stink then give light. And let us pray that lights
may be set up in all the dark corners of the land, yea that in every
congregation there may be a faithful Pastor to preach Jesus Christ savingly to
the people.

To God be glory for ever. Amen.
FINIS.

