TRUTH TRIED: OR, Animadversions On a Treatise published by the Right Honorable
ROBERT Lord BROOK, ENTITVLED, The Nature of Truth, Its Union and Unity with the
Soul. Which (says he) is One in its Essence, Faculties, Acts; One with Truth.

By I. W.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop, for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND at the Sign of the
Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard, 1643.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT Lord BROOK.
My Noble Lord,
YOur Lordship being pleased to do the World that honor, to impart to it
somewhat of Yours (and therefore Honorable,) it was My Happiness, amongst the
rest, to be an Object of that Favor; And yet my Unhappiness so far, as not
in all things to fall in with your Lordship: Like a Mariner at Sea, descrying
within kenne a fair Vessel under Sa^le, promising a rich Lading, makes up to
her; and understanding whence she is, and whether she is bound, desires to view
her Fraught; but coming so near as to go aboard, falls foul of her (as they
speak) and is entangled, and perhaps may both have work enough to get clear.
The ^^ire Vessel I had in view, was your Lordships Treatise, now under Sail,
(when made public;) which however directed* to a Private Port or Sinus (a
Friends Bosom) yet passes the Ocean to arrive at it: your Lordships Name
enforms me Whence it is, and withal promises a Rich Fraught; which the Bill of
Lading tells me What it is, The Nature of Truth; and blame me not if I were
ambitious to see it, that I might adore it: If, by mischance, I be entangled, I
hope your Lordships hand will help me to get clear. Our first fathers, which
had never seen Fire before, while every one was catching at that which shone
so Bright, no marvel if he that first meddled with it, Burnt his Fingers: The
Beauty of Truth is likewise Bright and Glorious; so Glorious, that some have
found her Dazzle their Eyes, (he might have said, Others have Burnt their
Fingers, And I, perhaps, am one of them.) Truth is a Glorious Object, a fit
Object only for a Noble Hand: Yet Suitor sometimes, though he presume not to
Better Apelles Picture, may yet find fault with the Shoe; and that without
blame, while he go not ultra crepidam.

Your Lordship, sometimes, in this Divine Treatise, for fear of Dazzling our
Eyes, has left us in a Want of Light. Naked Truth, which your Lordship had the
happiness to Behold, is proposed to us Clothed, and Gilded (rather then
Painted) in a most curious Dress indeed, yet such as hides the Body; the
Beauty whereof being so well worth beholding, we had rather have seen her (as
your Lordship did) without her gown, without her crown, the better to have
discerned her true Proportion. Rhetorical Embelishments being the same
sometimes in a Philosophical Discourse, that varnish on a fair Picture, which
helps to set it off, but withal hides it, and presents it more Glossy but
less Distinct. For what the Orator uses to Illustrate, that the Philosopher
finds to Obscure.

And thus much perhaps, if no more, may be gained by the ensuing discourse,
that your Lordship taking occasion from thence, may afford more Light to that
which diverse desire better to understand, and Unmask so Fair a Face. (At least
those who have once seen her Naked, may take the pains to Undress her.) And
perhaps having taken a second view, through this a more thick Perspective of
not so high raised a Fancy, may give us a more Distinct Delineation of what its
own Dazzling Brightness presented at first more confused.

I hope I shall need no large Apology to obtain Acceptance, at least a Pardon
from so Noble a Lord, ( to whom, I am told, nothing can be more grateful, and
who promises the fairest answer,) if I Accept the Challenge: which it is like
your Lordship would Perform, (if at least Encounters of another nature would
give way to those of the Pen.) If I be demanded therefore of what I do, Why
at all? I reply, Because, in your Lordships name, invited: If why so late? I
have nothing to reply but this, Qui sero dat, diu noluit. What was at first, in
a few days, written to a private Friend, having lien so long in your Lordships
hands, is a sufficient testimony that I made no haste to publish it.

I have but one request to make, and kiss your Lordships hand, that you would
vouchsafe, if I have done well, to Accept, if otherwise, to Pardon

Your Lordships

To the Worshipful, and my Worthy Friend, Henry Darley Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
THe Sad news of so Unhappy a Loss as his Lordships Death, forces me to give
an account of what might else seem a Soloecisme. The book was newly finished
in the press, before his Lordships death, and expected only to be first
presented to his Noble Hands, before it was presented to the World; to whom it
was then a going, when that unhappy news stopped it, and some copies were gone
abroad. I have suppressed it since, to add that which you see adjoined; in
testimony of mine own sadness for so great a Loss. Which yet cannot be so
fully expressed by a private pen, as by the common Tears of all those to
whom Religion is dear. A sad loss it was, had it been in the Best times, to
loose so many excellent Accomplishments in one Noble Breast; but Now most
Unhappy, when there is so much work and so few hands; in which, I am confident,
None was guided by a more single Eye, with less Obliquity to collateral
aims. Unhappy then was that accident, that deprived us of one so well worthy
to live;

Unhappy hand! by one sad stroke who shot
Religion, Learning, Piety, what not?
Sir, The Treatise penned long since at your request, had once passed in
another Character through Yours to his Lordships Hand, not then intended to be
made public, nor directed to any other then your own eye; what entertainment
it then found (such Candor and Nobleness dwelt in that Breast) You know as
well as I: And now, being often solicited, as well by you as others, It was a
second time Advancing, ambitious again to be made happy by the same Hand; (and
indeed I had been extremely injurious to His Candor, if I should have seemed
to decline His Eye and present it to another, who taking liberty sometime to
dissent from Others, did with the same freedom allow others to dissent from
Him, willing to accept of any Assistance in the search of Truth;) but being
there prevented, it is fain to Retreat, and fall back to the same hand where it
first lodged, as being, next after his Lordship, due to you; from

Your humble Servant
March. 11. 1642
THE CONTENTS of the ensuing Chapters.
The Preface.
Diverse acceptations of Truth. page 1. Logical and Moral Truth, their nature,
and difference. ibid Whether breach of Promise be formally a Ly. 3.
Metaphysical Truth. 4. Veritas Essendi and Cognoscendi, or Cognoscibility. ibid
None of these are Truth or Light as here taken. 5. The Object not Identically
the same with the Faculty. ibid By Truth or Light is meant the Light of Reason.
7. 9. 27. 63.
Chap. 1.
A double Notion of Truth. 8. His first Position, that Truth in the first
Notion is the Understanding in its Essence, the Argument because both, a Ray of
Divinity cousidered 9.
Chap. 2.
A second Argument from the three Requisites to every Being, a Fountain
imparting, a Chanel receiving, and Wa^ers imparted, considered; and Where we
may find these in the Understanding, if a Faculty 12. Whence Ignorance, and
Error in the Understanding. 13. Reason and the Understanding, ratio and
facultas ratiocinand^, all one. 1^. The efficient of Accidents. 14. What is the
Recipient of Truth. 15. How Reason in the ^nderstanding, ^an make the Soul
Rati^nal, and give it an Essential Difference from the Irrational. ib.
Whether the Qualities be Formae ^ementorum. 17. The Efficient or Fountain
whence Reason comes to the Soul; Internal, External, from the Soul it
self, from the Parent, from God. 18. Whether the Recipient of Truth must be
Truth. 21. Whether Light pass from the Understanding to the Soul; from the
Understanding to the Will; and how the Soul acts by its Faculties. 22.
Chap 3.
How these are found if the Understanding be Truth. 24. How every thing is its
own Recipient. ibid To receive a Being, and to receive a Form Do Esse, and do
Habere; differ. ibid
Chap. 4.
Whether the Vnderstanding-Faculty may not be the Recipient of Truth. 26.
Chap. 5.
A second Assertion (or the first improved) that both Truth, and the
Understanding, be the same also with the Soul, considered. 27.
Chap. 6.
A Corollary, that All things are this One Truth, considered. 28. Whether a
consequent of the former Assertions. ibid Whether true in it self, viz.
whether all things One. 32. 5. Whether Physically, Integrally, Specifically;
one Thing, one Whole, of one Kind. 32. How all from one Fountain. 34.
Simplicity in God hinders not Variety in the Creatures. 28. 34 Unity in God
equivalent to an infinite Variety. ibid Whether the Divine Attributes be
distinct ratione ratiocinat^. 35. Whether all Beings be Homogeneall; of the
same specificall nature, only gradually distinct. 36. How all received in the
same manner. 37. Whether Number be Real. ibid
Chap. 7.
A farther Corollary, that Unity is the Essence of all things, considered. 38.
Whether Unity be the Essence of God. ibid Whether Infiniteness or Unity in God
be first. 39. Whether Unity be the Essence of Created Beings. ibid How the
Commandments are comprised in Love: and Moral Virtues concatenate in
Prudence. ibid Whether Quantity may be divided in semper divisibilia. 40. Unity
as opposed to Multitude, is purely Negative. 43. Yet, not Imaginary. 44.
Negatio realis and negatio rationis. ibid Ens Rationis and Negatio rationis.
45.
Chap. 8.
The nature of Habits. A third Assertion, that Habits also are the same with
the Souls Essence, considered. 46. Faculties and Habits how they differ, and
how distinct from the Soul. ibid Habits Infused and Acquisite. 47. Plato's
Reminiscentia, and Aristotle's Rasa Tabula, compared. 49. Whether former acts do
help subsequent acts or only Seem to do. ibid Whether Reason and Faith differ
only in degrees. 51. The Liberty of the Will, wherein it consists. 53. 55. Why
some of more Knowledge have less Faith. 54. Whether the Will always follow the
Understanding, and how. 55. Libertas Contrarietatis and Contradictionis. 56 It
is no perfection to the Will, to be able to disobey Reason. ib. How all sinful
acts may be called Omissive. 58. The Understandings dictates are Declarative,
not Imperative. 59. Speculative and experimental Knowledge. 60 This latter the
Will cannot reject. ibid. Whether God be all Mercy to the Devils. 6^. How Mercy
and Justice are One in God. ibid.
Chap. 9.
How Knowledge and Affection differ. 62. Whether Knowledge extinguish
Affection. ibid. Why some of less knowledge have larger affections. ibid. How
far we may admit, Reason, the Understanding, the Soul, its Habits, and Actions
to be the same. 63.
Chap. 10.
A fourth Assertion, that the Operations are the Souls Essence, considered.
64. How the Soul is Actus 64. Several acceptions of Actus. 65. An materia
individuetur a forma. 66. Whether the Act or the Power be first, in order,
dignity, and nature. 67. How Omnis virtus consist it in action. ibid. The
difference between actus primus and secundus, ibid.
Chap. 11.
An Objection against his last Assertion, Whether the actions being diverse,
there be not so many souls, considered, and Whether Time and P^ace be only
imaginary. 69. Distinction of Operations proceeds not from Time and place.
ibid. Whether all the Souls Actions be One. 70 How all things are present to
^od. 71 How permanency in God may consist with succession in the creature. 72
Whether Good and Evil may be in the same act. 72 Whether contradictions may be
conscistent. ibid. Whether Copernicus opinion be confused by sense. 73
Chap. 12.
Another Objection against the same Assertion, concerning Falsehood in the
Souls Operations; Whether it cease to be, when it cease to act Truth,
considered. 75 Whether it cease to be, when it cease to act. ibid. Whether
succession of moments be only imaginary. ibid. Whether all acts be the same.
76 Whether it cease to be when it acts Falsehood. 78 Whether the reality of the
Object be requisite to make the act real. ibid. Distinction of Metaphysicall
Goodness and Truth, from Moral and Logical Goodness and Truth. 79 Whether
Evil be merely privative. ibid. Whether any individual action be indifferent.
82 Whether Falsehood be merely privative. 83 How Ens and Verum convertuntur.
ibid. The difference between Ensrationis and Error intellectus. 84 Whether Pain
be merely privative. 86 Whether better to be miserable, then not to Be. ibid.
Whether God be the author of Falsehood, or Evil. 88 Relations, how produced.
ibid.
Chap. 13.
Corollaries or general Consequents from his whole Assertion, (That all things
are One Truth:) Whether useful in Practicalls. 89
Chap. 14.
Whether Knowledge and Sciences receive benefit from this Assertion. 91
Curiosity in searching, blamed. 92
Chap. 15.
Whether confusion in the knowledge of Causes be redressed by this Unity. 92.
Chap. 16.
Whether divisions in other parts of Learning be redressed by it. 93. Wherein
the nature of Faith consists. 94 And Bellarmines Dilemma avoided. 95 Whether
Faith save only declarative. ibid. Whether we be saved, even in the Execution
of the Decree, without Faith. ibid. Scientia simplicis intelligentiae and
scientia Visionis. 96. Whether God Will do what ever he Can do. ibid.
Chap. 17.
Of curiosity in the search of causes, with a close of all. 97
The Postscript.
A Breviate of the whole Discourse. 100
ERRATA.
Page ^9. l. 6 read ^i^t. l. 11. r. first. page 48. l. 36. r. produced. p. 90.
l. 37. r. and ^ood. p. 117. l. 38. r. contrary, sin^ulares vero
contradictorie. p. 11^. l. 19. r revera singulares.

TRUTH TRIED: OR, Animadversions on a Treatise, entitled, The Nature of Truth.
SIR,
I Have, according to your desire, perused that Treatise concerning The Nature
of Truth. (The which how far it serves to the expounding the 24. Chapter of
Math. I examine not.) One thing that may make it seem somewhat dark, is, that
his Lordship speaking of a matter somewhat unusual, is forced to use such
Metaphors, for want of native words, which may somewhat obscure it: And his
Lordship was the less careful to avoid it, because they being with himself
of frequent use, and sufficiently understood by him to whom he wrote, there
was the less fear of being not understood, or mis-understood: And so the
less need to prevent it, by seeking for such words as might better suit with
an ordinary Reader.

Before I proceed to state the Question, Whether Truth and the Soul be One; It
is very requisite to search, in what sense his Lordship understands Truth; that
through the ambiguous sense, and diverse acceptations of the word, we be not
confounded in the progress.

Truth in Logic, is when the Proposition agrees with the Thing; and Falsehood,
when they disagree.

Truth in Ethics, is when our Words and Actions agree with our Mind; and is
opposed to a Lie, to Hypocrisy.

And Truth in these acceptations is nothing else but an Agreement or ^onformity
of a Type with its Prototype, Archetypi and Ectypi; of a Transcript with its
Original* of an Idea, or thing representing, with that represented; Signi and
Signati.

Thus in Logic, Vox est signum rei, or Imago r^i. If therefore we have that
expressed in Words, to which in the order of Things there is nothing agreeing;
it is a False Copy, or rather no Copy, being drawn according to no Pattern. If
that be, which is affirmed to be; it is True, because they are a Copy or
Representation of the Things so being.

As it is in words, so it is also in Apprehensions, in conceptibus; If our mind
conceive a thing to be, which is not, or to be otherwise then it is, this is a
False Apprehension, because the Idea in our understanding is not a true
representation of the Thing.

In Ethics, our words are to be compared with another Copy; because (thus^
they are not the representation of the Things (immediately) but the
representation of our Thoughts, or Intentions: Therefore, if our Words do truly
express or represent what we Think; It is morally True, that is, it is not a
Lie, because they agree with this Copy; but yet they may be Logically False, as
not being a true expression of the Thing. If the Idea in our apprehension agree
with the Things, so that we conceive a ^ight of them; and our Word* be a true
representation of this Idea; they do truly also represent the Things: There is
both v^ritas Logica, and veritas Moralis If we conceive a right of things, and
our words express otherwise then we think; this Proposition is both ways
false; for it neither agrees with the thing, nor with our judgment: But our
Judgment is Logically true* because the Idea in our mind is a true expression
of the thing. If we conceive amiss, and yet ^ffirm as the thing is (if we
affirm snow to be white, which we conceive to be black,) our Proposition is
Logically true, but Morally false; and our conceptus is also Logically false.
If lastly, we conceive amiss, and speak otherwise then we conceive, and yet
diverse from what we ought both to think and speak (as if we conceive snow to
be bl^^k, and affirm it to be red:) our Idea or Conceptus is Logically false,
our Proposition Logically false, and Morally false.

Thus i^ one* intending upon a Signet to grave the Kings* Image, mi^^^th of the
true proportion, and with this Signet makes impression in Wax* the wax
cont^^nes a true representation of the Seal* but not the true Image of the
King; whereas, if the Signet had been truly graven, and then impression made in
the wax; the wax had truly represented both the one and the other. Thus is it
in Moral and Logical Truth.

Accordingly, one making a Promise with intention to perform it, yet afterward
breaks it; this Promise is Morally true, because it is a true representation of
his Intentions; but it is not Logically true, as not being a representation of
his future Actions. And in his subsequent Actions there is also a kind of
Moral falsehood; because they are not conformable to his promise, by which they
should be regulated. Or you may say, his Promise was ( Morally) a True
expression of his Intention; but his Intention was ( Logically) False, as not
agreeing with the Thing, because he intended that which was not Futurum
Whereas, if he had promised, with a purpose to break it, his Promise had been
Morally False, but his Intention Logically True* If, intending to break it, he
yet perform it, his Intention is Logically false, and his Promise Morally
false, though Logically true. And thus Breach of Promise will come under the
nature of Injury, or Injustice; but not under the nature of a Lie, except it
were made to deceive; because it is the true expression of the Intention, which
is the immediate rule of Veracity or Moral truth.

Thus Hypocrisy, or Dissimulation, is a branch of Moral Falsehood; because
Actio and Gest^s, are Index animi, as well as Words.

And this I conceive to be the Nature of, and Difference between Logical and
Moral Truth.

There is yet another Truth, and you may call it a Physical Truth, ^ Formal
or Essential Truth: Thus that which has the Essentialls of a Man, is vere
Homo; so an Infant is a true Man. Thus we say, a true Church, true Faith, true
Grace, true Gold, (not counterfeit:) thus a Syllogism in a right form, is a
true Syllogism, though the Propositions be false. And the like.

(But mistake me not; by Moral Truth, or Natural Truth, etc. I understand
not, Truths about Natural things, or Moral things, (though the words be
oft-times so taken:) For I am not now distributing Truth into its several
Species, or several Parts; but am showing the Ambiguity of the Word, and so
distinguishing it into its several Acceptations. Thus Moral or Ethicall
Truth, is that Acceptance of Truth that is usual in Ethics: Logical Truth,
is that Accep^ation of ^^uth, which is used in Logic, etc.)

But ^ ^^pp^^^, we ^^^ yet ^^rre from that Acc^pt^tion of Truth, in which ^^^
Lo^^* speaks: I will therefore come somewhat ne^rer. ^^^ ^^ the Logical and
Moral ^ptat^^n ^^ Truth, we have a Metap^ysicall acc^ptat^ ^^s and V^rum are
^ermini conv^r^ib^les. And Truth is taken in ^^^^ such acc^ptation, when it is
divided into veri^^s Essendi and Cognosc^ndi.

Veritas Essend^, or the truth of Being, is that per quam res ver^ ^st: And
thus Ens and Verum conver^untur. Quic ^uid est, ver^ est* For except it have a
Real and True Being (and not a Supposed Being) it is not ^ind^^d) a Being, but
is Su^^os^d ^o be.

Veritas ^ognosce^di is that per quam res ver^ Cognoscitur. And thus also Ens
and Verum conver^u^t^r: For whatsoev^r is, may b^e ^n^wn to be. This Veritas i^
nothing ^lse but Cognoscibilitas: Th^re^ore Veritas, as it is Affectio Entis,
is d^fin^d by some to be Convenie^^ia r^i, seu Co^formit^s rei, ^um I^tell^ct^;
(^ive humano ^ive di^^^^.) Thus Truth in the Things and Knowledge in the
Understanding have ^elation to each other as Objectum a^^ P^tentia. As Color
in the Object to Sight in the Eye.

Color, as it is inherent in a Body, makes it to be Colored ( cor^us
coloratum:) The same Color, as it stands in relation to the Eye, makes it to
be Visible ( corpus visibil^.) Thus Essence, or Being, as it is in the thing,
constitutes it in the nature of a Thing, or a Being: And the sa^e ^^^^nce in
the thing, as it has relation to the Understanding, makes it ^ognos^ibile. ^n
the first sense it is Veritas Essendi* in the second it is Veritas Cognos^end^.
(Where the cons^^uction will be somewhat hard, exc^^t you give Philosophers
leave to use the G^^^^d in a Possive signification, which amongst pure
^rammaria^s is more ra^^ly ^^und.) For by the some E^se^c^ by which it is Ens,
by the same it is Cognoscibile; That Being by which it is, by the same it ^^y
be ^^own to be: As by the same Color, by which the object is Color^tum, it is
also Visibile.

And this ^ conceive to be the right acceptance of Metaphysicall Truth, or
Truth as it is taken in Metaphysics for an Affection of Being: not being a
Thing Really di^^inc^ for that thing, that truly is, and may be truly known to
be; But (as they call it) Modus Entis.

And now we be come somewhat n^e^er that acceptance of Truth wherein his Lo^^*
takes it; though (if I mistake him not) that sense wherein he uses it, is
somewhat distinct from all these: For whether you consider the Truth of ^eing,
or the Truth of Knowledge* they are in themselves really the Same, and the same
^l^^ really with that Ens, t^^^ Being, which tru^y Is, and is truly K^o^n ^^
be: which thing (...) a being, and as truly Cognos^^ble, when there is no
Understanding present to take notice of it, as when it is actually Unders^^^d.
^^^e a^ an Object is ^^uly Col^u^ed, and truly Visible, even then when ^^^re is
no ^ye present to behold it. And therefore this truth cannot be One with the
Understanding* because it may be then and there where the Understanding is not.

Again, Truth being (as I said) One with the Thing known, if it ^^ also One
with the Understanding, or the Soul; the Understanding or Soul knowing shall
be One with the Thing understood: A S^one and the Soul shall be one
Individual Being: For how can Truth be the same with the Stone, and the same
with the Soul, except the Soul and the Stone be the same.

Object. But you will say thi^ is that he contends for, not only, that Truth
understood is one with the Soul; but that both the Thing understood, and the
Sou^ understanding, are this Truth.

Answ. 1. To proceed therefore. If the Stone understood, and the Soul
understanding, be the Same; then when began this Unity, ^^^^ Identy? Were they
the Same before the Stone was actually understood? Or did they then contract
this Unity, when first the Soul did actually Know it?

Why they should be the same, Before the act of Knowing; there (...) no more
reason, then why one ^^^ne should be the same with ^ne; ^^y one man should be
the same with another man: And so Peter or Paul might be ^s truly said to
b^^ray Christ, as Ju^^^, if Peter and Judas be one and the same.

And if they should ^^^n ^^ntr^^^ a^ Unity, (and not before when the
Understanding ^o^h ^^^s^ Actually understand it; we must ta^e ^^^^ saying,
Intell^ct^s i^^ellig^^do ^m^^a ^it ^mn^a* in a more gr^^^e (...) it w^^ m^^^^.
A^^, ^^ ^y j^^^emen^, it i^ utt^^ly impossible, for that which has ^^^^ been
Al^ud ^^ be made Idem; ^s also for that which is O^^, to ^e made A^^ud a
s^ips^. I say, ^^ i^ impossible for two things to be made one and the some, by
a Re^ll Identitie.

It Is true, Two things may be so united as to be made One Aggrega^um; as the
Body and the soul make one M^n, the Divi^^^y and Humanity of Christ make ^n^
Person: But that two things can become the same; that the Soul is the Body,
and the Body the Soul; that the Humanity of Christ is his Divinity, and his
Divinity his Humanity; I conceive not only false, but impossible. The Hand and
the Foot (with the rest of the members) make one Body; but neither the Hand is
the Foot, nor is the Foot the Hand, but really distinct.

Answ. 2. But further, as it is hard to show, when this near kindred either of
Affinity, or Consanguinity; this Union either of Identity, or of
Identification, had its first Original: So, if there be any such Union,
(either con^ate or contracted) between the Soul and a Stone: Then will not
only One but All Souls (at least, all souls actually understanding and
apprehending it) be the same with this Stone. And these Souls, being one and
the same with this one individual stone, they will be one and the same with
each other.

Thus we shall have but one Soul informing all Bodies; not by a Pythagoricall
Metempsychosis* by translating of souls from one body to another, but as
A^^mus Averroisticus, one soul extended through the whole Universe, informing
so many men as there be bodies, whereof every man is partaker tanquam communis
aur^: Nay nearer, for of the Air each takes a part; but as for this Soul, each
Is, each Has this Soul entire.

Neither does it infer only an Identity of Souls, but an Identity of
Objects also: For all* Objects being apprehended by one Soul, they become all
One with it: And being all one with the same numericall Soul, they must be
also One with each other.

So that all Souls will thus be One, all Objects will be but One, and this One
Object one and the same with that One Soul; and all the World but Vnum Ens,
whose every parcel is alteri ^dem; the same with each other.

Object. You Will say, All this is no more then he contends for; to make Truth*
One with the Soul; and that all things that are, are nothing but this One
Truth.

Answ. If this be his opinion, To prove an Identity of all creatures, because
their Being, from whence proceeds their Cognoscibility, is all One with the
Soul, or Understanding: His Lord* must give me leave to dissent from him, if
for no other reason, yet because ^e dissents from himself: For if his Argument
be good, That all things are One with the Soul, because Truth or
Cognoscibility, (which differs not really from their Essence) being the Object
of the Souls Operation, must also be One with the Soul; It will follow also,
that God is likewise One and the Same with the Soul, because He also is
Cognoscibilis, and may be known by the Soul: And also, that all things else are
one with God, because they are al known by Him. And so he falls upon the first
of those Errors, which he mentions in the and of his Prooemium, immediately
before the first Chapter; which is, by mounting too high in the exal^ing of
Truth, to confound the Creator with the Creature* by making her God. Neither
does it only make Truth to be one with God; but even all things else, being
one with Truth, to be One with God.

Again, if so, how is it that in the end of his 3. Chapter, concerning the Body
and the Soul he tells us, not that they are the Same, or that the Body is the
Soul, but as husband and wife each brings his part toward the making up of
the Compositum. At least M^. Sadler is mistaken as well as I, (who is presumed
at least to understand his Lord* mind, su^^^ciently,) who ^ells us in his
Epistle, that Corporal Union ^^ materials is sometimes [Miscalled] Identity,
which is at best but a ^^ld touch in a point or two.

But I suppose there may be another acception of Truth, which may better suit
with (at least the first part of) his Lordships discourse. You may call it
Veritas Cognoscendi, as well as the former, bu^ in a different sense. There
Knowledge was taken in a Passive ^^^se, and Truth was that which makes the
thing Cognoscib^le, or fit to be understood: Here you must take it in an Active
sense; and so Veritas Cognoscendi, or the Truth of Knowledge, will be that
which makes the understanding Cognoscitivum, or fit to conce^ve and apprehend
that Cognosc^^li^y which is in the Obj^ct. And thu^ Truth will be that
^rinciple, whereby the Soul is able to ^hend or conceive that which may be
known.

Veritas Cognoscendi in the former sense, and that in this sense, are both
Principia cognoscendi, Principles of knowledge, but in a several way. (You may
distinguish them, if you please, thus; Truth of knowing, and Truth of being
known, and veritas cognosce^di may be (...) both) They differ as Color in the
Object, from the power of seeing in the Eye: The former makes the Object
Visible, and fit to be perceived; the other makes the Eye Visive, and fit to
discern it. If the first were wanting, Vision would be hindered, because there
is nothing Visible: (Hence it is that the Air, and Spiritual substanc^^ are
not seen even by the s^arp^st sight.) If the latter be wanting* ^^^ sight is
hindered from a desect in the Organ: (Thus* the most persp^^^ous Colou^s are
not discerned by a blind Eye; whereas the ^ame Colors are in themselves
sufficiently Visible, and actually Discerned by others*) Thus Veritas
cognoscendi, in the former sense, makes the Object to be Cognoscible; Truth, in
the latter sense, gives the Understanding, or Soul, ability to know it.

Now if you call the Power of se^ing, which is in the Eye, by the name of
^^^ate light (^o dis^^^gu^sh i^ from Light either in the Object, or in the
Medium:) You may also call Reason, which is this principle of knowing in the
Soul, or Understanding, by the name of innate Truth, or Light.

And this signification of Truth I conceive to be most suitable to his Lord*
meaning. (But Verum, or Truth, in this sense, is not convertible with Ens: For
though all Beings have in them Truth, whereby they may be Known, yet all have
not this Truth, or Power to Know.)

And thus if you understand it, it will not seem so strange a Paradox, ^o (...)
th^^ Reason (which he calle^h Truth) is all one with the Understanding; and
that the Understanding is not distinct from the Soul. For this will be granted
by all those, which affirm that Potenti^ non real^ter distinguuntur ab Anima;
that the Powers or Faculties of the Soul, are not really distinct from the
Soul it self: And these a^e (...) I mistake not) the greater part of ^ound
Philosophers. And ^^us his Lord* opinion is but the same with theirs in other
words. (Yet may we ^^^ll speak distinctly of these several Facul^ies; as w^ do
of the Wisdom of God, the Power of God, the Will of God, etc. which are as
en^^rely one with God, as these Faculties can be with the Soul.) And thus much
for explaining the state of the (...). ^ proceed next to examine the Grounds of
this his Lord* opinion.

CHAP. ^. Whether the Understanding, and Truth understood, be One.
IN his first Chapter he tells us, That Truth (that is Reason) is enthron*d in
the Understanding; and there appears under a double Notion Th^^^ ^^ the
Fountain or Groundwork (which is Reason it self,) We call it (says he) the
form or substance. And then those workings which breathe from thence (the
Streams issuing from it) viz. the Operations and exercise of Reason, the
effects of a reasonable soul. (We call them usually, actus primus, and actus
secundus.)

The first of these he begins with, proving it to be the Understanding in its
Essence: (The second he proceeds to in the tenth Chapter.) His Argument is
this, What is the Understanding other then a Ray of the Divine Nature, warming
and enlivening the Creature, conforming it to the likeness of the Creator? And
is not Truth the same?

If you take Truth in any other acceptance beside that last mentioned, I see
not how the Argument will hold: For if you take it either for the Truth of
Being, or the Truth of Knowing (in the common acceptance;) for that Essence,
whereby every Creature both is and may be known to be: It may be granted, that
the understanding is one of those Rays of the Divine Nature, somewhat of that
Excellency implanted in Man, of that Image of God whereby Man is conformed to
the likeness of the Creator: It will be granted also, That the Essence or
Truth of every Creature, whereby it Is or is Known to be, is a Ray proceeding
from the same Center, (though to another point of the Circumference,) a Stream
issuing forth from the same Fountain of Being; and carries some weak
Resemblance, some Sparkling of that Primitive Light, or Truth, that Original
Essence which is in God; (For thus every Creature has something of God in it,
Refert quaelibet herba Deum.) Yet will it not follow from hence, That this
communicated Ray of Being is the same with the Understanding. For the Argument
will prove erroneous, as being Affirmative in the second Figure, in which no
Affirmative Proposition can be concluded: And the Consequence will be the same
with this, [What is the Body of Man but a material substance? And is not a
Stone the same?] Which you would hardly admit as a sufficient argument to prove
our Body to be a Stone.

If you take Truth for Reason, the Argument will admit of a reduction into an
exact Form, thus, [That Ray of the Divine Nature, which does (solely, or
principally) express Gods Image in Man, is the Understanding; but Truth or
Reason is this divine Ray; Therefore Truth (that is Reason) is the
Understanding.]

And this Argument will hold good, if we grant the Soul to be the immediate
worker in rational Operations, without an intervenient Faculty: But
(otherwise) those that are of the contrary Opinion would deny (or distinguish)
the Major, and say, That this divine Ray, this Image of God, consists not
wholly in the Understanding by it self, but in the Soul or Understanding,
accompanied with its several Faculties and ^perations.

And indeed it cannot be denied, but that the Operations of the Soul do
contain part of this Divine Image, ^s well as the Soul in its Essence; and
yet They are the Souls (immediate) Progeny, and are not immediately produced
by God.

Now what others admit concerning the Operations, They will a^^^rm concerning
the Faculties; That they are but parcels of this Ray or Divine Image, That they
are but lesser Rivulets derived from the greater stream* or branches annexed to
it.

Now from hence, [That the Soul in its Essence, together with the several
Faculties and Operations wherewith it is endowed, does make up the chiefest
part of Gods Image in Man] to prove, [That every part of this Image are the
same with each other*] and so [the Faculties to be the same with the Soul;] is
that which they will not allow.

And to presume, or take for granted, That this Image of God consists but in
One single Ray; i^ but petere principium, it being no less hard to prove, then
that the Faculties and the Soul are One; That Truth (or Reason) is One and the
S^^e with the Understanding, or Reasonable Soul.

They would say rather, That the Soul is One of those Bra^^he^, which (issuing
from the same Root of Being in God, from whence all other Created Beings do
arise) divides it self into several Twigs. And we have no way to convince
them of falsehood in this particular, till we have first proved the Soul and
its Faculties to be one Simple o^ Single Essence.

The prosecution or explication of his Lord*. Argument does no way oppose this
acceptance of Truth which I have given, but confirms it; which (if I rightly
understand it) may be thus explained; That Truth (Reason) is Light, none will
d^ny* (by Light understand, that internal Principle whereby the Soul can See
o^ Know, which is so called by a Metaphor drawn from the Innate light, (we call
it potentia visiva) whereby the Eye is enabled to See:) That Light (this power
or principle of Knowing or Reasoning) i^ a reasonable creature i^ the Fo^ntai^
of Life, i^ ma^^f^s^: (by Life understand the Life of the Soul, if I may so
speak, That which specificates the rational Soul, and makes i^ (...)) For ^^^
^^^^ of a reasonable Soul, (that which makes it to be Reasonable) is Light,
(that principle whereby it know^ and understands:) And therefore when the Soul
informs, or gives life to Animal rationale, (making it Rational) it
inableth the Creature to work according to that Light, (according to this
principle of Knowing: that is, It inableth the Reasonable Creature to Know or
Understand, etc.) Thus whilst Life (that which makes a reasonable creature to
be Reasonable) and Light (this power of Knowing) is Truth (or Reason; And Truth
(or Reason) is Conformity to God (or Gods Image in us:) And the Understanding
also, as we yet discourse of it, is this Light (this principle of Reasoning) to
the Soul; The Understanding and Truth (or Reason) can be but One.

The whole Argument i^ briefly thus; [the Image of God in us, is our
Understanding; and this Image or divine Radius, consists in Reason (which he
calls Truth;) therefore Truth or Reason is our Understanding.] His minor (that
this Ray or Beam of Divinity in us, is Truth or Reason) is thus proved;
[Because Reason in us is ^ derivative Beam, a sparkling, of that primitive
Light (or Wisdom) which is in God:] And so That which enlightens us, and
inables us to Know, or Understand, according to our measure (that which
furnishes Us with Knowledge) is a representation of Gods Sapience or Wisdom
whereby He is said to Know. Now, [that Truth or Reason (which is all one) is
this derivative Beam of Light, whereby we are able to Know;] and [That this
ability to Know or Understand, is that which makes u^ to be Reasonable,] is
manifest. Wherefore he concludes, That, whilst ^ur Life (or Rationality)
consists in Light, (that is, in an Ability to know and understand) and this
Ability consists in Truth (or Reason) which is a conformity to God (as being a
Stream issuing from his Ocean of Wisdom;) And whilst (as Reason is this abilit^
of knowing, so) the Understanding also is this Light (this Ability or power of
Knowing;) The Understanding and Truth (that is, Reason) must be all One.

Those, who deny his Conclusion, would answer, That both Reason and the
Understanding, do enable the Soul to Know, or Understand, but in a several
way, as distinct principles (and therefore are not the same:) The one
Instrumentally or Ministerially; The other, by using this as its Minister. Thus
Fire, by its Heat, burns; a Stone, by its Heaviness, descends; Glass, by its
L^vity or smoothness, re^^ecteth; and the like.

If you say, the Weight of the Stone, or Smoothness of the Glass, are not
Things distinct from the Stone and Glass, but rather Modifications of these
Things; I contend not: For neither do I hold the Understanding, or any other
of the Souls Faculties, to be a Thing distinct from the Soul; but, at the
most, only an accidental Modification of it, not Really distinct from it: Yea
rather, That it is the Soul it self, quatenus intelligens, (as the Power of
God, is God himself quatenus potens) admitting no other but a distinction of
Reason.

CHAP. II. A second Argument (from the three Requisites to every Being)
examined.
IN the second Chapter, he proposes first the Opinion of those that style the
Understanding a Faculty, whereby the Soul receives or entertaineth Truth, and
Acts accordingly.

But here his Lordship (if I mistake not) varieth from his former acceptance
of Truth; Comparing it not to the Innate Light, or power of Seeing, in the Eye;
but to the Advenient Light, which streams to it through the Air, bringing with
it the Idea, or visible Species, of the Object seen. For, soon after, he calls
it, those sweet beams of Light which beat upon us continually; which cannot be
meant of any innate Light, but of an advenient Light.

And thus I see no inconvenience at all, to say, That the Soul, or
Understanding, by its Innate Light, of Reason, (which whether you say to be
distinct from the Soul, or not, it is not much material) does daily receive
or entertain new Truths, or new Representations of that Truth of Being which is
really existent in Things; either by a reiterate actual understanding of those
things which it had formerly understood, or by a new apprehension of somewhat
whereof before it was ignorant. Like as the Eye by its innate Power of Seeing,
discerns new Species (conveyed to it by advenient Light) either from Objects
formerly seen, or now first represented.

Next he lays down three Requisites to the constitution of every Being. A
Fountain commu^icating; a Channel entertaining; and Waters imparted.
(Conferen^, Collatum, Recipiens.) And he asks Where we shall find these three,
if the Understanding be a Faculty.

I answer. If you speak of Advenient light (last mentioned) which is a
Representative Truth, or an Idea of that R^all Truth which is in the Things
Known; I say, the Real Truth (or Veritas Ess^ndi) sends forth this
Representative Truth, or Idea, which is conveyed by a Deferent Light (either of
Discourse, or Information, or the like) till it come to the Understanding,
where it is received and entertained by the Innate Light (or Truth) of Reason.
Like as the Inherent light of Color in the Object sends forth a Representative
light of visible Species, which is conveyed by a Deferent light in the Air,
till it come to the Eye, where it is entertained by the Innate light, which is
the faculty of Seeing.

And, as the Remoteness, or Obscurity of the Object; the Darkness of the
Medium; or the Weakness of the Faculty, may hinder Sight, so that we see not
at all, or not perfectly: In like manner the Distance of the Object, as in
things quite out of our reach; or the Obscurity of them, which send forth no
Species, or manifestation of their essence toward us; our imperfect Discourse,
or insufficient Information, which is as a dark Medium; and lastly, the
weakness of our Apprehension; do cause Ignorance in the Understanding, which
is answerable to not-seeing in the Eye.

Again, as in Ignorance so in Error. A reflection of a false Light upon the
Object, casting a false seeming color, which may be mistaken for the true
color of it; an indisposed Medium, as when we see through Red glass, etc. and
a distempered Organ, by reason of some vicious humors accidental in the Eye,
etc. may cause a mistake and Error in Sight: So here, when there is a False
Light upon the Object, as when we conceive that to be the effect of one thing,
which indeed proceeds from some other cause, fallacia non causae pro causa, or
the like; a false Discourse or Inference, or a false Relation, which is as a
stained Medium; or a distempered Understanding, by reason of Passion, of l^sa
Phantasia, or the like; may cause an Erroneous Judgment, apprehending things
to be otherwise then inde^d they are.

And thus I have showed not only those three requisites which his Lordship
requires, but some others besides them; supposing in the mean time the
Understanding to be a Faculty; and taking Truth for those sweet B^ams of Light,
which beat upon us; Advenient Light.

If you take Truth for Reason; and withal suppose Reason to be distinct from
the Understanding, and ^t also from the Soul. You may say, The Understanding
is the Recip^ent; Reason the thing Received in it; and that Then and from
Those, when and from whence it received its Essence, to which Reason is a
conna^e and appendent Faculty; That is, either from God, by immediate Creation,
which many think; or from the Parents, by Propagation, which others* ^old.

But I suppose there be few or none, that hold, Reason to be distinct from the
Understanding, and That also from the Soul. For when they speak of Reason, as
a faculty of the Understanding; by Understanding they mean, the Soul it self,
quatenus intelligens, being considered a^ the Subject of Reason: And when they
speak of the Understanding ^^ a faculty, whereby the Soul is able to conceive
and judge of Truth; Then they take the Understanding to be the same with Reason.

I should rather say, That Reason, and the Understanding (as it denotes a
Faculty) are two words Synonima, denoting the same Faculty or Power of Knowing
and Judging. Which Faculty I would not grant to be another Thing from the
Soule-Knowing, or the Soule-Understanding but a Modus* As neither do I allow
to Any Naturall-Power, or Faculty, (which they make the second Species of
Quality) any other Being then the Being of a Modus, and not the being of ^
Thing.

And thus we may safely say, the Soul receives the Faculty of Reason or
Understanding; Thence, from whence it receives its Being: (as a Stone receives
its Heaviness from that which Produces it:) That which gave it to Be gave it
to be Thus.

Sometimes indeed Accidents are not received from that which produces the
Substance, but from some other Efficient; as the Smoothness of Marble proceeds
not from the Producer, but from the Polisher: And yet I hold not, the
Smoothness to be One Thing, and the Marble to be another Thing* but the Marble
to be a Thing, and the Smoothness to be Modus. And thus it must be granted in
Acqui^^te Habits; where the Giver and Receiver are the Same, and the Thing
Received Modally, but not really, distinct from either.

But for Faculties, or Naturall-Powers; If you look for an External Efficient
or Giver, it will be the same that produces the Substance; But if you be
contented with an Efficient per Emanationem, Thus they are said to flow or
arise from the Form, or Substance. And then the Giver and Receiver is the Same;
(for the Form which i^ the Subject Receiving, is also per emanation^m
Effectiva, from whence it arises as an Essential Consequent:) and if you say
the Faculty Received is not so much as Modally distinguished from it but only
ratione (...); I contend not. But so much* distinction at least, I suppose, we
must allow it.

Having thus answered his Lordships Qu re, I proceed to answer his Objections.
If the Understanding (says he) be the Recipient, then the Light (of Reason)
which differenceth us from the Vegetative and Sensitive creatures, lies in the
Understanding, and not in the Soul: And so the Soul is either not enlightened
at all, but only a Theca to the Intellect; or else there be two Enlightened
(rational) Beings in ^^^ Reasonable creature.

For answer, First, I suppose (as I said before) that there are few, if any,
that will affirm, the Soul, the Understanding, and Reason, to be Three things:
But they will either say, Reason Is the Understanding, and not in the
Understanding: or else, Reason is in the Understanding, which Understanding is
the Soul, considered only under this Notion* quatenus Intelligens, as it is the
Subject of Reason. And thus the difficulty appears not; For the Light which
differenceth us from Unreasonable creatures, whether you call it Reason, or
call it the Understanding* is seated in the Soul, and so denominates it
Intelligent or Understanding.

But secondly, we want not a Recipient for Truth though the Soul be not it, It
may be the Understanding.

Yet thirdly, though the Soul be not the Immediate Subject, it may yet be the
Vltimate, which is more then a Theca.

Object. But you will reply, However it be so, that we make this Light to be
inherent in the Soul; yet it is not sufficient to make an Essential difference
between the Reasonable and Unreasonable Soul. For though Reason be in the Soul,
except it also Be the Soul, it makes the difference but Accidental; For thus
the Reasonable and Unreasonable Soul will not differ in their Essence, but only
in their Adjuncts.

Answ. To this I answer* First, this is a new difficulty not arising out of his
Lordships argument: For though this Light (of Reason) be an Accident, yet this
hinders not but that there may be his three Requisites: For an Accident may be
truly received, in the Subject, from the Producer.

And yet (secondly) This, though a Faculty of the Soul, and not the Soul it
self, makes notwithstanding a Noble difference between a Rational and
Irrational Soul; so that the Soul loses not its dignity* neither becomes a
bare Theca to the Understanding or Reason: And is su^^iciently dignified to
have such a Divine faculty in it, and of it, by which it produces it
operations, which the Irrational Soul has no^. We account those S^ones
precious, that have in them some rare Virtues: And why not the Soul, endued
with so Divine a Faculty?

Especially (which is the third thing I reply) since it is so in the Soul,
that is also of the Soul. The Honey which Samson found in the dead Lions
carkas^, proceeded not from it, but was only accidentally or casually in it. A
Knife touched with a Loadstone will take up a Needle, or the like; but this
attractive Virtue is not from It self, but from the Loadstone: And you may call
the Knife, if you please, a Theca or Receptacle of this Virtue* and say, it
has no other then a Relative Excellency, as it is the Receptacle of an
Excellent Virtue; (though indeed to be the Subject of Inhesion, is more then a
Theca, or a bare Receptacle.) But in the Loadstone it is otherwise, For there
the Attractive Virtue is not only in it, but of it, or from it self: It is so
received in it, that it ^^owes from it, it is sui partus. Thus in the Soul,
though Reason be a Faculty of the Soul, yet is it such a Faculty as flows
from it; and so the Soul not only its Receptacle, but also its Original. Thus
is Light In the Sun, and From the Sun, it is not received aliunde. And it
is a Real Excellency in the Sun, and not only Relative, to be the Author
and Original of that which enlightens the whole World. And it is a Real
Excellency in the Soul (and more then the Excellency of a Theca) to have
from it self, from its own Essence, such a Faculty whereby it is able to Know
and Understand.

But you will say still, However Reason may thus dignifie and distinguish it
from Irrational Beings; Yet this is but an Accidental Dignity, an Accidental
Distinction, no^ Essential; as consisting in that which is in the Soul, but
distinct from it. Therefore

Fourthly, Reason in the Soul, is not only an Accidental, but an Essential
Perfection, an Essential Consequent flowing immediately from the Essence of
the Soul, as an inseparable endowment: And so may make an Essential
difference; (it is Essential to the Soul that Reason should arise from it.)
And thus that which is distinct from a thing, may yet be Essential to it, viz.
Essentiale Consequens, though not Essentiale Constituens.

But fifthly, (which I conceive to be of the greatest force) though Reason, or
the Understanding (as a Faculty) be only Essentiale Consequens* and so, in its
Formality, makes only an External difference (aposteriori;) Yet it points out
unto us an Essentiale Constituens, an Essential Ingredient (as I may so call
it) from whence this Consequent does arise. Which is somewhat in the Essence of
the Soul: Whereof we can take no other notice then from its Operations* (And
this Answer holds good, though you suppose Reason to be distinct from the
Understanding, and Both from the Soul: For so, that Essence (from whence the
Understanding flows, together with its Immediate and Remote Issue, viz. Reason
and its Operations) will make this Essential Difference between the Rational
and Irrational Soul.)

Thus they say, prim^ Qualitates are not Formae Elementorum, but That from
whence these first Qualities do Essentially flow. And though the Qualities make
but an Accidental difference between them, yet the Substantial Forms from
whence the Qualities do arise make an Essential difference. (So here: The
Rational Soul is such a Substance as is able to give rise to such Faculties,
which the Irrational Soul is not.)

If you ask What this Substantial Form is? You know the ordinary answer; Dic
formam lapidi^ and eris mihi magnus Apollo. (It is a hard thing, by his own
confession, to find out the Form of any Being, much more to discover the Being
of a Form, page 32.) Tell me the Being of Any thing, and I will tell you the
Being of This. If I ask What the Soul is? (which to be we are sure:) You will
say perhaps, a Spiritual Substance: And that is all you can say, for the
Essence of it. But if I ask, what it is To be Spiritual? what, To be a
Substance? I suppose you cannot tell me otherwise, then by Negations, or
Effects. And (thus) they will do in the Elementall Forms; They are not these
Qualities, but something from whence they arise. (And so for the substance of
the Soul, It is not these Faculties but the Original of them.)

If you will say, There is no such Something, as this substantial Form of the
Elements; because we cannot tell you what this Something is.

(To omit, that by the same reason you might banish all Being, because none can
tell you, what Being is: For if you say (and that is all you can say) that
Being is a Ray communicated from the Original Entity in God: This tells us at
the most, but whence it is, not what it is.)

I say, If you deny, that there be any other Forms of the Elements (beside
their Qualities) whereby they differ one from another; Then need we look no
further: For then these Faculties, though but Accidents, may be sufficient to
make an Essential difference in the Rational Soul from the Irrational.

But further, If you can persuade them, that the Essence or Form of the
Elements, and their Accidents or Prime Qualities, are the same: I doubt not,
but then they will as easily grant, the Soul and its Faculties to be the same
also.

And thus I have answered according to their opinion that hold the Soul and its
Faculties distinct: And have showed, that we are not so far to seek for a
Recipient of Reason, or Truth, as his Lordship might imagine. And indeed there
is nothing more difficult in this particular, then in all Accidents whatsoever;
their Subject is their Recipient, and so is the Subject of Truth, or Reason,
Its Recipient.

But there is another kind of Recipiency (which I shall touch in the next
Chapter) which (if I mistake not) will cut the sinews of this Argument, and
leave it of no force.

But in the mean time (having found a Recipient) we must seek for a Fountain,
from whence this Light of Reason, or Truth, is derived. For that is his
Lordships next demand; Who is it that communicates this Light?

For the answering of this, I shall first propound another Qu^re of the same
nature, and then apply mine answer jointly to both. I ask therefore first,
whether Fire (supposing it to be an Element) be not the true Recipient of Heat?
and the Loadstone the true Recipient of the Attractive virtue that is in it?
and the Sun, the true Recipient of Light? If so, then I demand, From whence
they are received? What is the Fountain from which they are communicated?

If you speak of an Internal Fountain, from whence they flow by an Essential
Emanation; The Recipient and the Fountain will be the same. And so, if you say
the Body of the Sun, of the Fire, of the Loadstone, be the immediate
Recipients of their Light, Heat, and Virtue; Then must I say, That these
several Bodies are the several Fountains from whence (respectively) those
Qualities do proceed. If you s^y, That these Qualities are Received (
subje^tantur) immediately, in the Form or Essence of these bodies, and not in
the entire Substance; I must say also, They do arise from these Forms, and flow
from them by an Essential Emanation. And the Definitive Resolution of this
Quare depends upon the determination of that Question in Philosophy, whether
Accidents be subjected immediately in the Form, or in the Comp^situm: and
(consequently) whether they flow from the Form immediately, or jointly from
Matter and Form together. Which questions it is not material for me to
determine; for take which side you please, I shall soon find both the Fountain
and a Recipient.

If you look for an External, Physical Fountain, or Efficient; we must say,
That the same Fountain from whence they have their Essence, from the same do
they receive with their Essence their Inseparable Accidents, or Essential
Consequents, by a Comproduction. Thus the Sun received its inherent Light by
Creation, together with its Essence, from God: For in the Creation of the
Substance, the Accidents are also Concreated. So Fire produced by a natural
Agent, receives its Heat comproduced, or congenerated, and conferred upon it
together with its Essence from the same Efficient.

Now in any of these ways, it will not be hard to find a Fountain of Truth, an
Original from whence the Light of Reason or Truth may be conferred; Though we
hold the Understanding and the Soul to be distinct.

If you ask an Internal Fountain; It will be answered, That Reason* or the
Faculty of Understanding, flows from the Essence of the Soul, as an Essential
Consequent; and is received and inherent in the Soul* (For I think not fitting
to say, that it is inherent in the whole Reasonable Creature (jointly)
consisting of Body and Soul; because it remains in the Soul separate, without
the Body.) Or (if you look at them as Three things) then Reason must be said to
flow from the Understanding, and It from the Soul; and to be received, by
Inherence, in the Understanding, as That also is received in the Soul.

If you enquire for an External Efficient; So the Faculties are either
Concreated with the Soul by God; or else comproduced by the Parents by
Propagation. And so we want not a Fountain, from whence Reason may be
communicated.

I proceed to his Lordships prosecution of this Quaere. This Light (of Truth or
Reason) must be conveyed (says he) to the Understanding, from the Soul, from
some other Creature, or from God himself; but neither of these* ways;
therefore not all.

I see not why Any or All of these Fountains may not be admitted to be the
Source of Reason, in a several way.

First, why may not the Soul be the Fountain of Reason or the underding
Faculty; as well as the Essence of Fire is the Fountain of its Heat, and the
Essence of the Magnet the Fountain of its Virtue? not by Physical Production,
but by Essential Emanation? Indeed, I like not to say, The Soul communicates
Reason to the Understanding, (as to a Third thing;) For I have said before, the
Recipient and the Fountain in this way of conveyance, viz. per emanation^m, are
the Same: like as in I^manent acts, the Agent and the Patient are the same. But
I say, That Reason or the understanding Faculty, which the Soul as Recipient
entertains In it self; it has also From itself, as being the Fountain. (But
if you take the Understanding as a third thing from both; then the Soul must
not be said to be the Immediate Fountain, but the Understanding must be said to
be the ( Immediate) both Source and Channel.)

And thus his Lordships reason troubles me not, viz. If the Soul communicate
Light, then Has it Light already, and so this Faculty, the Understanding, is
in vain. I say, the Soul has This Light, which both flows from the Soul as
an Essential Consequent, and is Inherent in the Soul as an Inseparable
Accident.

Next, why may not the Soul, or Understanding (whether you will) receive this
Light of Reason from another Creature? I mean, from the Parent, by Procreation;
producing both its Essence, and Adjuncts, as well Essential as Accidental,
together* not by Essential Emanation, as before, but by Physical Production?

To the Reason annexed, viz. That if a Creature produce a Faculty in the Soul
or Understanding that Creature must produce it by an intervenient Faculty, and
That faculty must be produced by another Faculty, and s^ in infinitum; I
answer, The faculty of Reason (together with the Soul) was produced by the
Parent (according to this supposition,) and that by an Intervenient Faculty,
viz. the Generative Faculty in the Parent^ And yet shall we not proceed in
infinitum, For This generative faculty was produced by Another, and That again
by Another, ascending still upwards till we come to the Generative Faculty of
Adam, which was immediately produced of God, without an intervenient Faculty*
either by Concreation with the Soul; or by Infusion, when he pronounced that
blessing Increase and multiply.

Lastly, why may not this and other Faculties be produced in the Soul and with
the Soul, by immediate creation, from God? I mean, if Souls be daily created,
as most suppose; Or, if not, yet at least the Faculties in Adams Soul might be
by God Created or Concreated with it, notwithstanding that they be distinct.

But you ask, Why then did not God immediately and intrinsecally communicate
this to the Soul it self, rather then as a Faculty, or by a Faculty? If he
did not, it was because he Would not; and we cannot give account of this will.
God might have created immediately all Mankind, as he did the Angels; yet we
see he pleased rather, that they should be produced by Generation, one from
another: But who can give us any other account of this his pleasure, save only
his Will? So neither, why Reason should be an Accidental Faculty, rather then
M^d^^ Substan^i^li^; that is, why he should produce it mediante anima, rather
then by himself immediately, together with it: he might do either.

But, in general, By what means soever (says he) Truth (or Reason) be
conv^yed; if the Understanding do at all, receive Truth, then it is Truth* For
God does not communicate Light, but to Light.

If he mean, God gives Lucem non nisi Lucido; or Lumen non nisi Luminoso; I
grant it, saking the words i^ sensu composito, but not insensu diviso. (And so
God gives not Animam nisi Animato, nor Rationem nisi Rationali) That is, God
gives not Light but to that which is Light (^. Lucide or Illuminate,) viz. when
that Light is bestowed: But in s^nsu diviso, That this was ( before) Lucid, it
is not to be admitted. Light communicated to the Air, makes it Illuminate, but
finds it not so. God inspires not a Soul, but into a Living-creature: And so
breathing into Adam the breath of Life, he made him a Living-creature; but
found him (his body) Inanimate, a ^ump of Earth. So here; God gives not the
Light of Reason, but to that which is Light, or Enlightened, viz. Then
Enlightened when this Light of Reason is bestowed.

But if by this, God gives not Light but to Light, he means, Lucem non dat nisi
Luci, or Lumen non nisi Lumini; I cannot admit it, either in sensu composito,
or in diviso. When the Sun imparts Light ( Lumen) to the Air; the Air is
Illuminate or Enlightened: But, that the Air is Lumen, I must never grant, till
we cease to hold, Lumen non est Corpus. So if God communicate to the Soul or
Understanding the Light of Reason; the Soul or Understanding becomes thereby
Illuminate or Enlightened with Reason: But, that the Soul or Understanding, is
this Light, this Reason; follows no more then if you would say, That Water is
Heat when it grows Hot; The Air is Light ( Lumen,) when it is Enlightened; A
Body becomes a Color when it is Colored; Any Substance whatsoever is
metamorphised into an Accident, when (as a Subject) it Receives that Accident;
or That the Body of Adam, formed out of the Dust, was made a Soul, when it
received a Soul inspired.

That which is annexed as a proof; Because Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad
modum recipientis, (together with the illustrations following;) proves no more
but this, Whatsoever is conferred* is no further forth conferred, then as the
Subject is capable of, and actually does receive it. And this we grant, That
the Soul or Understanding, upon which the Light of Reason is conferred; is a
fit Subject to receive or entertain Reason, and is actually endued with
Reason. And so I admit that which he cites of Dr. Twisse, Neither a quality
permanent, nor an act immanent unless they be made INHERENT IN the Soul,
(observe the phrase) and the latter also produced by it, can be said to be
given to the Soul. He says, It is Inherent in the Soul, not that it is the
Soul.

Lastly, How passes (says he) this Light from the Understanding to the Soul?
there being as vast a distance between It and the Soul, as between It and the
will, (supposing them distinct Faculties) whence grow those inextricable
disputes, How the Will is made to Understand, what the Understanding judges
fit to be Willed.

But here his Lordship varies somewhat the state of the Question in altering
the acceptance of the word Truth, from truth understanding, to truth
understood, and instead of innate truth of Reason, speaks of the advenient
truth, which is a Conceptus or Idea framed to represent the truth of Being in
the Object. For we cannot conceive Reason, which is now looked upon as a
permanent Faculty, to be transient from one subject to another.

But Truth Understood, how it may be conveyed from the Understanding to the
Soul; I shall Then perhaps better tell when he shows me, How the Visible
Species are conveyed from the Organ to the Soul, or Faculty, seeing. That the
Organ receives species, he will not deny; for else the Soul might as well see,
when the Eye is out: That the Soul also (by the Organ) does apprehend these
Species, must likewise be yielded; else why should not the Eye of a dead man
see? That the Soul and the Organ are distinct, must needs be granted; for we
see them really separated by death, whereas nothing can be separated from it
self: And when I am informed, How the Soul and the Organ, being distinct, are
conjoined in Seeing; I shall better be able to resolve, How the Soul and the
Faculty, though distinct, may jointly Understand.

Till then, it might suffice, in general to say, That, As by the Organ the
Soul S^^th, so by Reason or the Understanding-faculty, the Soul Knows and
Understands: (only allowing such disproportion as must be allowed between a
Material and Immateriall instrument.) And it seems to be no more vast distance
between a Faculty and the Soul, then is between an Organ and the Soul. So
that if by Visible Species in the Organ, the Soul may see; why not by
Intellectual Species in the Understanding (though a Faculty) may the Soul
Understand?

But, because I love not to answer a difficulty only by opposing another; you
may resolve it thus. We are not to conceive, there is any such vast Gulf
between the Soul and the Understanding (though a Faculty) as that Truth should
need a Ferry-boat to want it over: For as the Eye does not first see, and then
Inform the Soul or Visive Faculty, what it has seen; but the Organ and the
Faculty jointly concur to the Act of Seeing: So neither does the
Understanding first Receive and Entertain Truth, and afterward inform the
Soul, what it has Understood: But the Soul with and by this Faculty of
Reason or Understanding, does Know and Understand; Both concurring to the same
Act. (Thus a Stone, by its Heaviness, descends; Fire, by its Heat, warms; by
its Light* shines; Glass, by its Smoothness, reflects light; a Knife, by a
communicated Faculty from the Magnet, draws iron: And yet (in some of these at
least) you must of necessity grant a distinction ex part rei.)

There is indeed sometimes a Reflex act of the Soul, whereby it Knows* what is
Understood: But we must not think, that it is an act of the Souls Essence,
surveying or taking account of the Understanding Faculty, what it has done;
But the Soul, by this understanding Faculty, reflects upon a former Act, which
It self by the same Faculty had formerly performed.

The Gulf is likewise fordable between the Understanding and the Will, though
they be distinct faculties. Not as if the Will by an act of Knowledge should
Understand what the Intellect does dictate: But the Soul, which by its faculty
of Understanding Knows, does by its Willing faculty Command, and by its
Loco-motive Execute. So that neither the Will Knows what the Understanding
Judges, nor the Inferior Faculties what the Will Commands; But the Soul by
several Faculties executes several Functions. Thus when the Soul by the Eye
discovers a danger imminent, by the Hand it endeavors to divert it: And yet
there is no Messenger dispatched between, to inform the Hand, what the Eye has
seen; notwithstanding that the Hand and the Eye are Really distinct, yea
Locally distant.

As for mine own Opinion, I could easily grant, The distinction of the
Faculties, from the Soul, and among themselves, to be neither Real, nor a
part rei. And concerning the first, I am sufficiently confident: But for the
second, whether the Distinction be Modall (i. a part Rei) or merely Rational
(rationis rati^cina^^,) I do yet desire a convincing Demonstration to determine.

CHAP. III. The same Argument further prosecuted and examined, in this and the
ensuing Chapters.
IN the next Chapter he shows, That if we make the Understanding and Truth to
be One, (which I suppose will be easily granted; there being but few or none
which make the Soul, the Understanding, and Reason (that is, Truth) to be
Three distinct things:) then will it be easy to find these three Requisites:
For thus Light or Truth is Dispensed; By the Father of Light; and has for its
Recipient, the whole Reasonable creature, consisting of Body and Soul. All
which I admit, (as likewise will those that be his greatest adversaries:) only
with this Proviso, That he make the entire Reasonable creature to be subjectum
Denominationis, and not subjectum Inhaesionis, to Reason or Truth.

Next, he spends some time to clear this, How the whole Reasonable Creature can
be said to be the Recipient; which labor, in my judgment, might have been
spared: For I cannot see any reason to fear, but that it will as easily be
granted, that the Reasonable Creature may be the Subject of Reason; as that the
Air illuminate is the subject of Light: without any fear of Identity in the
Thing Received with the Recipient.

But it seems his Lordship speaks of another kind of Recipiency beside the
Recipiency of a Subject: Such a kind of Recipiency as where the Recipiens and
Receptum be the same. No Being (says he) but it is the thing Receiving and
Received: For consider any Individual Being you please, Vegetative or
Rational, or what you will; Who is it that entertaineth this Being, but the
Being it self which is entertained? Who is it that receives from the Womb of
Eternity that reasonable creature, but the creature received?

You may distinguish them thus, The Recipiency of a Being, and the Recipiency
of a Form: And so, the Fountain or Efficient, dat Esse, and dat Habere. In the
first kind of Giving and Receiving, the Recipient and the thing Received must
of necessity be the same; Thus the Efficient or Producer of Light, dat Lucido
ESSE Lucidum, dat Luci Esse Lucem, not dat Lucido esse Lucem. But in the second
it is otherwise, not dat Lucido HABERE Lucidum, nor Luci HABERE Lucem, but
Lucido Habere Lucem. Thus the Efficient or Fountain of Reason, dat Rational^
Esse Rationalem, Habere Rationem.

(But how his Marginall note stands good, viz. That in all things the Agent and
the Patient must be One, because The thing Receiving and Received are One, I
cannot conceive; For thus he makes God and the Reasonable creature to be One:
For, if I mistake no^, the Fountain or Efficient is the Agent, and the
Recipient the Patient.)

And indeed he must of necessity admit this distinction of Recipiency: For
otherwise his Fundamental Axiom would have failed. For if we allow no
Recipiency, but the Recipiency of a Subject, whereby it receives or entertains
a* Form* It will not be Universall^ true, That to the constitution of every
Being, there must be the three Requisites formerly mentioned. For Substantiae
non sunt in subjecte; Complete Substances are not communicated or imparted To a
Subject Receiving (and so would want a Recipient,) but are only made to Be,
and to be the Subject Receiving other things.

But ^ desire his Lordship to consider, Whether, admitting such a Reception,
wherein every thing is its own Recipient; he do not lay open so wide a gap,
that his adversaries may make an Escape; and Himself break that Net wherein
his Adversary should have been taken? Whether, in answering an Objection, he
do not overthrow his principal Argument? For how easy is it to say, That
Truth, though it be neither Soul, Intellect, nor Reason; Yet it is a Faculty
(or what you will) Proceeding from God, and its own Recipient. And so, though
they imagine an hundred Faculties in the Soul, one dependent upon another; yet
they shall never be put to a straight to find either a Fountain or a Recipient:
For God, of necessity, must be the Fountain of all Being whatsoever (either
mediate or immediate;) And that Being whatsoever it is, shall be its own
Recipient. Therefore the Soul (in this sense) has not the Body for its
Recipient; neither did God communicate or bestow a living Soul upon Adam's
earthly Body, when he breathed into it the breath of Life: But he gave To the
Soul, to Be a Soul. Neither is the Soul a Recipient to the Understanding, Nor
It to Reason, no^ any of these to Truth, (if they be distinct things:) But each
of these their own Recipient. Neither (lastly) is the entire Reasonable
Creature a Recipient of Truth or Reason (as he would have it) But Truth is its
own Recipient. And then must he hold his hand from Concluding as he does in the
Close of this Chapter, That the totum existens consisting of Matter and Form:
the Reasonable creature, is the Recipient of this Truth: Except he will say,
Veritas est Animal rationale, and Animal rationale est Veritas*

But how, the Ignorance of this Point should give the ground to that Question,
whether the Soul or the Body be Contentum; (which he admonishes us of) I
cannot see. For though it be granted, that Every thing be its own Contentum;
yet this difficulty remains as firm as before. For, Is not Water its own
Contentum: Is not the Vessel also its own Contentum? Yet he will not deny, but
that (in another sense) the Water is contained in the Vessel; nor can he say,
That the Vessel is contained in the Water: So though the Soul and Body be
either of them their own Contentum and Recipient ( quia datur Animae* ut sit
Ani^a; datur Corpori, ut sit Corpus:) Yet that the one may not be Locu^* and
the other Locatum; one the Subject, and the other an Adjunct (which is the
meaning of that Question) will not from hence appear.

CHAP. IV. Whether the Understanding, faculty may not be the Recipient of Truth.
IN the 4. Chapter he proceeds, further to show, That the Understanding cannot
^^ this Recipient. And if he speak of such a Recipiency as where the Recipient
and the Receptum be the same; his Adversaries, that say, Truth and the
Understanding to be distinct, will contend for this as well as He: For neither
will They say, datur Intellectu^ se esse Rationem, nor datur Rationi ut sit
Intellectus. But if he speak of the Re^ipiency of a Subject, I see not from
what has yet been said, why the Understanding (if distinct) may not be the
Subject of Reason; why they may not say, Datur Intellectui Habere Rationem:
Since it is granted in Logi^k, That one Accident may be the immediate Subject,
though not the Vltimate Subject of another. And so, if any will have the Soul
the Intellect, and Truth or Reason, to be tria distincta: They must say, The
Intellect is the immediate Subject of Reason, and the Soul the Vltimate. And
then call the Understanding either a Quality, a Faculty, or Virtus qua, it is
no great matter; (we will not contend with his Lordship for the name.) For
Virtus qua i^ but a Faculty, and a Faculty, (or po^^^tia naturalis) is the
second species of Quality.

CHAP. V. Whether the Soul and Truth in the Soul, be one.
THe like Answer must be given to that in the 5. Chapter, Whether the Soul
(without an intervenient Faculty) may not be the Recipient of Truth? For we
cannot say, Datur Animae ut sit Veritas; except we agree to make the Soul and
Reason one: But we may say Datur Animae ut sit Subjectum veritatis, or
Subjectum Rationis, though we ^old them distinct. As may appear at large by
what I have said upon the second Chapter.

That which is further added in this Chapter, whether as a Su^sive to enforce
this, or as a New Argument* viz. That our Soul resembles God, who is Vnus and
simplex actus, and therefore it self must be simple in its Operations* and we
must not expect first an Essence, and then a Faculty whereby it works, etc.
may as well be urged, to prove, That our Soul and Body are the same, because
Man was made after Gods Image, who is ^nus and simplex, not consisting of
Parts. Or (if you instance particularly in the Soul) It may as well follow,
That we know not one thing ( successively) After another, nor ( discursively)
By another; but by One entire Act like God, because the Soul bears the Image
of God, and Vnitas (which I grant not) is formalis ratio Dei.

That which is lastly added, concerning a Resemblance of the Trinity, in Truth
thus understood: Is no way peculiar to this acceptance of Truth; But holds as
well in every degree of Being whatsoever. All Entity or Being, As it lies
involved in the Original* Fountain of Being, which is Gods Essence, may
represent patrem intelligentem; As it descends from above, filium intellectum;
As it is received in the Creature, and makes it to Be, spiritum dilectum.

And thus I have surveyed his Lordships reasons to prove, the Soul and Truth
to be One. Understanding by Truth, or Light, the Light of Reason; which is the
Original or actus ^rimus, from whence Rational Operations do proceed; And
therefore must needs be the first of those Nations of Truth laid down in his
first Chapter.

And, that it cannot be any other acceptance of Truth, that is here meant, is
very apparent; If we look upon the other acceptations of Truth; which we shall
find to be no way consonant either with his Method or his Arguments. For if you
consider of Truth understood, or the Idea of Truth entertained in the Mind by
actual Apprehension; This will have no Being, either in the Understanding, or
elsewhere, till such time as the Understanding it self frames this Conceptus:
But (as ye^) we have nothing to do with the Operations of the ^^tellect* (For
he proceeds not to consider the Operations or Effects of the Reasonable Soul,
till he come to the 10. Chapter*) But with something ante^^dent them, which is
the Fountain from whence these Operations do proceed; which can be no other
but Reason. Yea, himself affirms it in this 5. Chapter, page 23.) And likewise
that acceptance of Truth, for the Truth either of Being, or of Cognoscibility,
in the Object has no conjunction with the Understanding, till it be actually
understood: And, even Then, we cannot make it to be One with the Understanding,
except we make those things to be One, which have neither coexistence of Place,
nor coexistence of Time; For those things may be understood, which were many
thousand Years past, and many thousand Miles distant.

CHAP. VI. Whether all things be this one Truth.
IN the next place he proceeds to a Consequent or Corollary, arising out of his
former Thesis, viz. That All things, are this One Truth.

I confess, I was at a stand a great while, and could not imagine any show of
Consequence between these propositions: If Truth or Reason, be the same with
the Soul or Understanding; then is it also the same with All things else. Why
so. This Argument (says he) will press all things that are.

This Argument? which Argument? Does he mean that argument which was last
propounded, toward the end of the fifth chapter, [That because God is one
simple act; therefore, not only the Soul and its Faculties must be One, but
even All Creatures must be One, because there is in All somewhat of Gods Image,
whose Essence is Unity?] If this be his Argument, I shall content my self with
a bare denial of the Consequence, till I see some show of proof. For, That
Unity is Gods Essence, is (in my judgment) grossly false* Or, were it true,
yet, That because God is One, therefore the Creatures must also All be One;
has no strength: For this Unity in God is equivalent to an infinite
Multiplicity. And, That One simple Efficient, may not produce distinct Effects,
seems to me a Paradox.

Or is it his second Argument, propounded in the second chapter, and prosecuted
in those that follow; [That, to the constitution of every Creature there must
be a Being communicated, a Fountain from whence, and a Recipient to which; the
which Recipient must be the same with the Being received?] From hence perhaps
he might prove, That every thing is the same with its own Being: But That very
thing should be the same with each other, or the same with reason, or the
understanding; follows not.

Is it then his first Argument, propounded toward the end of the first
chapter? Which perhaps his Lordship looks at as the principal Argument; and
at all that follows, only as a Prosecution of that; (Though his Marginall
notes, and the Titles of Chapters (which I question whether or not they be of
his Lordships doing) point out to us distinct Arguments, in the beginning of
the second, and in the end of the fifth chapter.)

The Argument was this, The Understanding is nothing but a Ray of the Divine
Nature, etc. And is not Truth the same? which I understood, as you may see,
thus, [The Understanding is Gods Image in Man, And this Image consists in
Truth, or the Light of Reason; therefore Truth, or Reason, is the
Understanding.] And thus the Syllogism will be true in the first figure, if
you transpose the Premises and convert the Conclusion. Or thus, [The Image of
God in Man is the Understanding; And this Image is Truth* therefore (some)
Truth is the Understanding:] And thus it will be true in the third figure. And
beside these two forms, ^ see not how that Argument can be reduced to a true
Syllogism. Now choose you which form you please; yet how ^^ should follow from
hence, [That All things else are this One Truth,] I do not yet perceive.

It may be his Lordship would have his Argument thus ordered (in the second
figure) [The Understanding is a Ray of Divinity; And Truth also is a Ray of
Divinity: therefore Truth is the Understanding, or Truth and the Understanding
are One.] And if this be the form of his argument; I will easily grant, that it
presses all things that are, as much as this. For, is not this Syllogism in
the same form, [The blessed Angels are Spiritual Substances; And the damned
Spirits are Spiritual substances; Therefore the damned Spirits are blessed
Angels, and the blessed Angels damned Spirits?] Then which Consequent, scarce
any thing could be less probable. And thus indeed he may prove all things that
are to be One Truth, one Understanding, yea one Stone, or what you will: For
take any two Beings whatsoever, and they will both be sound to be Rays of
Divinity, because both proceed from the ^ame Original and Fountain of Being in
the Divine Essence; and therefore (according to this Argument) they will be
both One.

But his Argument thus ordered, will prove but a plain Fallacy, offending
against the Laws of the second figure, wherein no affirmative proposition can
be concluded.

The most that he can prove from hence will be this, That there is some common
Praedicate, which may be affirmed of Both; and so That there is some General
Nature in which they both agree. And this I am confident there is none will
ever deny that grants but this proposition, Quicquid est, est E^s, That All
Beings, whatsoever agree in the general nature of a Being. For then they may
all be the Subjects of the common Praediate Ens.

But this is far enough from proving, All things to be One and the Same. For
to assume [That whatsoever things agree in a Universal Nature, are also the
same Numericall and Individual Existence;] is such a proposition as Logic
will not admit of.

Yea, though his Argument should proceed thus, [The Specificall Essence of the
Understanding, consists in this, that it is a Ray of the Divine Nature; And the
Specificall Essence, as well of Truth, as of all Beings whatsoever, is the
Same, viz. That it is a Ray of the Divine Nature; And therefore all things
whatsoever agree in the same specificall Essence;) And (consequently) all
things whatsoever, having the same specificall Essence with each other, must
also be One and the Same with each other.] I say, though his Argument proceeded
thus, yet would it little avail to prove All things to be One and the same.
For, besides, that the Specificall Essence of the Understanding (and so of
other things) consists not in being a Ray of Divinity; Besides this, I say,
although they had all the same Specificall Essence; Yet does it not follow that
they must be all One and the Same. For are there not many Individualls under
the same Species, whereof One is not the Other? Does not the Soul of Peter and
the Soul of Judas agree in all the ^ame Specificall and Essential
Praedicates, whilst notwithstanding it may be truly said, that the Soul of
Peter is not the Soul of Judas, and again, that the Soul of Judas is not the
soul of Peter? What Essential difference is there beeween water in the
Baltic Sea, and that in the Mediterran^an, ^ince they are both but Integrall
Parts of the same Homogeneall Ocean? Yet how true it is withal, That the
Baltic Sea* is not the Mediterranean Sea; and That the Water which is now in
the Baltic, is distinct from that which at the same time is in the
Mediterranean Sea? Two drops of Water taken out of the same spoonful, be they
in their Essentialls never so Consonant, in their Accidents never so Like; Yet
we may truly say This is not the Other, nor the Other This. How then can it
follow, That Truth is One with the Understanding, and That All things are this
One Truth, Because all Being is but a Ray of Divinity.

It follows indeed, That if all Things have the same Specificall Essence, then
are they all, Things of the same nature; (but that they are all the Same Thing,
it follows not.)

Thus much therefore I suppose will be granted him by all, That All things are
of the Same (at least Genericall) nature, because all things have a Being; And,
When he has proved their Specificall essence to be the same, It will be
granted also, That they are all, Things of the same Specificall nature; and (if
you will) That All Being falls under the same Praedicament* (Though yet a
Predicamentall distinction be not always a Real distinction; no, not a par^e
rei.)

But is this all he seeks to prove? I supposed he had labored to show That the
Light of Truth or Reason was not only of the same nature with the
Understanding, but That it was the Understanding. Otherwise he proves less
then his greatest Adversaries would have granted him. For those that contend
for the greatest Distinction between the Soul and its Faculties, do not yet
maintain a more Real or Physical distinction between them, then is between
One Soul and another, which yet agree in the same Essential Praedicates. And
if you allow them the same distance between the Soul and the Understanding,
which is between the Soul and a Stone, yea between two Souls, They will tell
you it is more then they desire: For they will grant that the Soul with all
its Faculties, and the Body with all its Members, do constitute the same
Suppositum; which is a more Physical, a more Real Union, then is between two
Souls, though agreeing in every Essential Praedicate.

But (if I mistake not) that which he was about to prove, was, not that the
Understanding is of the same Nature with Truth, but that it is Truth. His
supposition in the first words of the ^. Chap* is, If the Intellect, the Soul,
Light, and Truth are all but One, etc. Not, A like, or of the same nature. And
p. 22. If you make the Understanding* the Soul, Light, Truth One, then are you
delivered out of these streights, etc. And page 10. If the Understanding be
enricht with Truth, then is it, it self that Truth, that Light; Thus he
frequently calls them One and the same* Now To be, ^^ self that Truth* and To
be of the same nature with Truth, is far different. And if he prove no other
but a Logical Union, That Truth and the Understanding are of the same
(Genericall or Specificall) nature; we may yet safely deny a Physical or Real
Union or Identity; and say, Truth is not the Understanding, nor is the
Understanding Truth, (though of the same nature with Truth) as well as say,
This drop of water is not the Other drop, though This and the Other be of the
same nature. Neither can the same Argument (taken in the same sense, without
Equivocation and Ambiguity) possibly prove a Physical and Real Identity
between the Soul and its Faculties; and also a Logical or Specificall
Identity between It and all things else. It is impossible by the same argument
to prove, The Soul and its Faculties to be One Thing, and, The Soul with All
things else to be Things of the same Nature: These to be T^lta, and Those to be
Id^m.

But to omit the consequence and dependence of This, upon that which went
before: I will examine it as an entire proposition by it self, Whether All
things are One?

And if so, Then must it be either thus understood, That All things are One and
the Same by a Physical Identity; This is the Other, and the Other is This;
Bucephalus is Alexander, and Alexander is Bucephalus: and (by the same reason)
the Bread in the Lords Supper is the Body of Christ, and the Body of Christ is
this Bread, by Consubstantion. In which sense it seems so impossible, that (in
my judgment) it needs no Refutation.

Or thus, That all things are One and the Same by an Integrall Identity; that
is, They be all Parts of the same Whole: all Members of the same Integrum, the
same Aggregatum. And in this sense it is True indeed, but there is nothing New
in it, nothing Strange: For who ever denied, that All things, as parts, as
members, do constitute the (...), One Universe? That the whole Aggregatum, the
whole Heap or Multitude of Creatures do make One World?

Or (lastly) thus, That All things whatsoever are One, by a Logical Identity,
as being all of the same Nature. And if he speak of a Genericall Nature, this
will be as easily granted as the former: For none deny, that all things agree
in the Genericall Universal nature of a Being: And whether Ens be Genus
Vnivocum, or Gen^^ Anagolum, yet it is predicated or affirmed of All Beings;
Only that which He calls Truth, Others call Being, both meaning no other then
the Formalis ratio Entis, propter quam dicitur Esse.

Put if he speak of a Specifical^ Nature, wherein he would have all things to
agree; making the Universe to be One Homogeneall Body, (which ^e seems to mean
here; though he meant, I suppose, a Physical Unity, when he said, The Soul
and Truth were One:) Then are we to enquire, whether those things which agree
in a Universal Genericall Nature, may not admit of a Specificall difference?
And for This, it will not be sufficient to prove That every Being is a Ray of
Divinity issuing from the Center of Being in God, or That the Essence and Form
of every particular thing is a Roy of Divinity: Except it be proved* That every
Being is This Ray, that it is such a Ray.

If therefore all those Rays that have issued forth of that Center of infinite
Being, If the Streams derived from this Fountain be exactly of the same nature,
without any Specificall difference; Then is it because God could not send forth
Distinct and Different Rays, or because he would not. If we make God an Agent
so Uniform, as that we will admit no possible Variety, not so much as in the
Object, or Manner of his Actions; what difference is there between the most
Determinate Natural Agent, and God the most absolutely Free Agent? if in his
operations we admit not of this choice, to work Thus rather then Th^^? But if
he could work in several manners, by communicating Rays of diverse natures, but
would not; how then has he manif^sted (...), the exceeding great Var^^^y of
his Wisdom and Power? For there cannot be so much as an Accidental Variety in
the Creatures, except there be somewhat Real produced in the One which is not
in the other; which cannot be, if all Being, all Entity whatsoever be exactly
of the same Specificall nature.

I grant therefore, an Integrall Unity; whereby all things are parts of the
same Aggregatum, the same World: I grant likewise a Genericall Unity* whereby
all things agree in the general nature of a Being: But if he cont^nd further
for an Identicall or an Hom^geneall Unity (whereby each is other, or of the same
Particular nature, without any other then a Graduall difference;) I must deny
both. And Mr. Sadler (his Lordships Champion) denies it with me: For so he,
Corporal Union in materials which ^^ [mis^^ll] (...) Identity, i^ at best but
a ^old touch in ^ point or ^^o, ^ most disdainful ^mbrace (at (...) dista^^^)
of those Beings which have much (...), but lit^l^ (...). If the Unity of all
things be Identicall, how is i^ [ miscalled] Identity* If Homogeneall, how is
there much (...) and ^^t little (...)*

His Lordships Reasons to persuade this Identity* come next to be examined* Why
(says he) may it not be so* since ^ All Being is derived from the same Vn^f^r^
Fo^^tai^; since 2 All i^ the same in nature ((...)) a Beam of that excellent
Light; And* All entertained in the same manner by every Individual Existence,
viz. By a Similitude and Union of nature*

If his Lordship speak of a Physical Identity, It is easy to say, This Soul
is not the Other Soul* This drop of water is not the Other drop* though both
produced by the same Uniform Agent, and in the same manner: This Beam of Light
is not the other Beam, though both shining forth from the ^ame Sun: Because
One (uniform) Agent may produce Two Effects.

If he speak of a Likeness in Nature, It will be said, That the same Agent may
produce not only Two effects, but Unlike effects. e. g. The same Sun
produces Heat and Light. Here these several Beings are 1 derived from the
same Fountain the Sun, which has either Virtually or Formally both* Heat and
Light; They are 2 both Beam^ issuing in the same manner from their Fountain;
and 3 Their Essence is in the same manner received, viz. by being what they
are, and Informing a Subject recipient: Yet can I not think that Light, and
Heat are either the Same Thing, or of the same (specificall) Nature: (However
some fondly dream that Light and Heat are the same:) For then whatsoever is
H^t, must also be Light (Lucide*) which holds not in scalding Lead: and
whatsoever is Light, must also* even in the same degree* be H^t, which holds
not in Snow, which is Lucide; nor in Ice, which being transparent ^i^ also
Illuminate.

Object. If you object a Disparity in the Example, because Light and Heat,
though they both proceed from the Sun, yet the one from the Suns Heat, the
other from the Suns Light, and that therefore their Fountain is not the same;
whereas in Gods Essence being absolutely Simple in it self, and Uniform in its
operations, we may not imagine several Fountains from whence several Streams
may proceed.

Answ. I answer, That Gods Essence, however Simple, is yet equivalent to an
infinite Variety: And though we cannot in God suppose to be Light distinct from
Heat, and Heat from Light; yet Gods simple Essence has virtually both Heat and
Light, and all things possible. His Essence therefore being equivalent both to
Heat and Light* why may it not produce Heat in one thing, and Light in another
thing, and so several Beings in several Creatures?

(Except you will suppose, that Gods Essence, being Equivalent to, and
Productiv^ of, all Essences possible* must of necessity exercise all this
Equivalency in the production of every Being, and actuate all his Efficacy in
every Product, and so agere ad extr^m^m virium, which in a Voluntary agent is
not Necessary; in an Infinite agent is Impossible.)

All the Radii or Semidiameters of a Circle proceed from the same C^^t^r, but
they tend not all to the some point of the Circumference: But the same
indivisible Center, which lies equally opposite to every point of the
Circumference, As it i^ supposed to lie opposite to one point, it sends ^orth
One Radius to it, As it lies opposite to another point, it sends forth Another
Radius to that other point, Though the Center remain indivisibly the same. Thus
Gods simple Essence quatenus productiv^ Angeli, or, as it virtually contains
the Essence of an Angel, may produce that Essence: And the same simple divine
Essence, as it contains virtually the Essence of a Stone, may produce a Stone.

And if you say, as Dr. Ames concerning the Divine Attributes, That these two
considerations Esse productivum Angeli, and esse productivum Lapidis, be
distinct ratione ratioc^^ata, perhaps there will be no great error; although
his Lordship admit not of Dr. Ames his opinion; p. 23. For (...) Esse
productivum Angeli, or posse producere Angelum is not the same with posse
producere Lapidem. For although it be the same simple Essence of God whereby he
is able to do both, yet this hinders not but that this simple Essence may be
by us apprehended per i^ad^quat^s conceptus, which is no other but distincti^
rationis ratiocinat^. The same Center considered as it is the beginning of One
Radius, is distinct ratione ratiocinata from it self considered as the
beginning of Another Radius. And so the divine Essence, quatenus productiva
Angeli, may perhaps be distinct, ratione ratiocinata, from itself quatenus
productiva lapidis, without any violation to its Simplicity. They are only
inadaequati conceptus ejusdem simplicis essentiae; and a Metaphysicall
Abstraction may be sufficiently consistent with a Physical Simplicity of
Essence.

Thus therefore may it appear, how the Unity or Simplicity of the Fountain,
hinders not but that the Streams may admit of Specificall and Essential
distinctions.

But he says secondly, All Being is also of the same nature, viz. a Beam of
that excellent Light. Therefore what? Is therefore all Being the Same? How?
Physically the same, (as if that Soul which is of the Same Nature with
another* must needs be that other Soul;) or Metaphysically, Logically, the
same; that is, of the same Nature? If he mean, the first; I see not how it
follows. If the second; His Antecedent and Consequent is the ^ame; and so he
Assumes what was to be proved.

But for the proposition it self, All Being, says he, is of the same nature,
s^il. a Beam of that excellent* Light. And this I grant; All Being is of the
same ( Genericall) nature; All Being is a Stream communicated from the Fountain
of Being, All Being is a Beam, etc. But ( Specifically*) All is not Such a Beam.

If his Lordship yet contend, That this Being is also Specifically the Same,
only with a Graduall Distinction.

I desire, first, to know Whence the great Variety in the Creature does
proceed, if all Being be absolutely Homogeneall? Add Water to Water, and it
remains Water still; In a greater Quantity indeed, but yet without any
alteration at all in its Essence, it is still but Water. Add Heat to Heat, it
remains Heat still; In a more intense degree indeed, but yet it changes not
its nature: Increase its Intension as long as you will, yet you shall never
make this Color to become Color. A Deaf man though he See never so acutely, it
will not help his Hearing.

Repl. If he urge, That the ^ame Light proceeding through diverse Mediums is
stained with diverse Colors; and why may not therefore this Beam of Essence,
though Homogeneall, being received by diverse Creatures, appear in a diverse
Form?

Answ. I answer, the Variety of those appearing Colors proceeds from the
Variety of the Medium: But here can be no Variety in the Recipient at all: For
if there be no Recipient but the Being Received, then will the Medium be every
way as Uniform as this Light or Essence received, and so cannot cause this
Variety. It must be therefore Various in it self, or else it cannot be
Variegated in the Recipient.

Secondly, If all Beings be but Gradually distinct: I demand Whether the
Essence of a Man, or the Essence of a Magnet be the more Intense degree? If the
Magnets Essence be the higher degree of Light, Why has not the Magnet the use
of Reason? If Man's Essence be the higher degree, Why has not Man the
Loadstones Magnetic faculty? For if there be only a bare Graduall distinction
in their Essence: then the Inferior Essence is actually included in the
Superior, with an addition of somewhat more: And if included, whence comes it
to pass that it cannot operate?

Again If the Body and the Soul be absolutely of the same nature ^which they
must be, if Being admit only of a graduall distinction*) Then the Essence of
the Soul (being the superior degree) includes in it the Essence of the Body,
and somewhat more* Therefore is it able to operate according to that Essence,
and to do of it self, whatsoever the Body can do. If so, then how comes it to
pass, that the Soul needs the service of the Body? Why may not the Soul
separate, perform all Corporeal Operation^, since it has in it Corporeal
Essence, and somewhat more. (Yea, why may not the Soul see, when the Eye is
put out?) For the adding of Another degree hinders not the Operation of the
Former degree, but rather perfects it. Yea what need is there of the Body* at
all? Non belle quaeda^ faci^^ d^o, sufficit unus Huic op^ri; as his Lordship
says, out of Martial.

To his third consideration, I must answer accordingly as to the second; All
Being is received in the same manner by every Individual Existence: That is,
Every Creature receives its Being, by being What it is: A Stone and a Plant
receive their several Beings, by being (severally) what they are. But come to
particulars, and the case is altered: A Stone receives its Being, by being a
Stone; and a Plant receives its Being, by being a Plant.

That which follows in the ensuing part of this Chapter (besides what I have
already touched by the way) I pass over as being Explicatory, rather then
Probatory. Only thus much; The doctrine of the Platonists, reducing all Being
to Number, must either be taken in a Metaphorical, Analogicall sense, or not
taken at all. And being so, it avails little to prove either a Physical or
Specificall Identity of Being.

Whence they had this doctrine, I inquire not, as not belonging to the present
matter in hand.

Neither will I stand to debate the controversy, concerning the Nature of
Number* whether it be a Real, or Rational Being; Which ^ conceive to have as
much Reality as a Relation has, and no more; that is, has Fundamentum i^ re,
but in its Formality, it is only ^^li^ the birth of Reason. And when I am
convinced, that Paternity, or ^iliation, are Essential to Humanity; that
Fatherhood, or So^ship do constitute Manhood* or Humane nature; I shall also
grant, that (...) est Prin^ipi^^ Essend^* rather then Consequent Essentians.
But, not to projudge the discourse of the next chapter, (wherein Unity is made
to be the Essence of All things, yea of God himself) I proceed rather to
consider the large (...) of Unity there expressed.

CHAP. VII. Whether Unity be All in all things, or, the Essence of all things.
ANd there we have it first proposed to consideration, Whether Unity be not in
nature so glorious, and of that dignity, that it is able to inform a Being,
Yea, to be the Essential Form of all things? It is prosecuted in the several
kinds of Beings. Uncreated, and Created, whether Spiritual, Moral, Physical,
or Mathematical. In all these, says he, you shall find Unity as it were the
Form of their Being.

And first, Whether Unity be not All in God? (The Humility and Reverence, which
his Lordship uses in proposing of it, may be a fit pattern for all to imitate,
in all approaches to a Deity; Not only in duties of Worship, but even in
Scholastic Discourses. And so neither to be peremptory in affirming, nor rash
in censuring: Since the vast disproportion between an infinite Object, and a
finite Faculty, subjects our Understanding both to Ignorance and Error;
Suntque oculit tenebrae per tantum lumen.) There is (says he) but One God; And
more there could not be, since there cannot be Two Infinites, two Eternities;
Neither could this One be otherwise, for then were he not Infinite. Unity then
being so inseparable, as without which God could not be what he is, May it not
be said to be Co-essentiall to him? And if of his Essence, then is it in him
All; for Gods Essence is All in God.

The Objection which his Lordship moves, viz. That there is the same reason for
all other divine Attributes, they being all Essential to God, as well as
Unity: Will bring the Question to this Issue, Whether of these Attributes may
be supposed in nature to be First? (For that every of them should be the
formalis ratio of a simple Essence is Impossible:) And so, whether Infinity,
etc. do arise from Unity, or Unity from thence?

I should rather say, That neither of these, or any other divine Attribute, may
be said to be formalis ratio, or the Essential form of the Deity; but somewhat
else, in it self Simple, and yet comprehending all these: Which because we
cannot apprehend at One Discovery, we are fain to take several Views of it per
inadaequatos conceptus.

But if we must needs seek for a Seniority in Gods Attributes; I suppose, I
might derive as clear a Pedigree of them from his Infiniteness, from his
Perfection, from his Absoluteness or Independency; as can be showed either
from his Unity, or from his Verity.

But not to be too extravagant, it shall be sufficient for the present to show,
whether his Infiniteness flow from his Unity, or his Unity from his
Infiniteness? whether he must needs be Infinite, because he is One; or One
because he is Infinite?

If we say, God must needs be One, because he is Infinite; his Lordship will
not only assent, but furnish us with a Reason, Because (says he) there cannot
be Two Infinites.

But if otherwise we say, That God must of necessity be Infinite, because he is
One; It is not so easily proved, since there is but One Sun, and yet that One
Sun not Infinite. How then can we say, That God is Essentially Infinite, or
That Infiniteness is Essential to him: If the Formalis ratio, the Essential
Form of Divinity, may consist without Infiniteness? Sed (...).

To his instances in Created Spiritual Beings. That all the Commandments are
comprised in Love, shows That there is somewhat General, that is common to
them all; or rather Love (as likewise Obedience, and the like) is a Collective
word, and an Integrum, whereof all those are Parts: But that Unity is either
the General form of All the Commandments, or the Particular of Any, it shows
not. The like may be said of the Saints which agree in the Common nature of
Saint ship, and do jointly make up the Body mystical, whereof Christ is Head.
Yea of all Creatures, They all agree in the common nature of a Being, and They
all make up one Universe; yet is not Unity either the General of all, or
Particular form of any Creature.

The Moral Virtues are said to be conjoined or concatenate, because they all
proceed from one Fountain, viz. The absolute Subordination of the Will and
Affections to the Understanding: which Subordination they call Prudence, (and
is of the same extent in Morality, that Obedience is in Divinity) whereof all
the moral Virtues are but Integrall parts. (But I had rather apply Prudence to
the Understanding only; as that whereby it is able to judge in all Practical
things, what is fit to be done; And the universal Conformity of the Will to
this universal Rule of Reason, I should call Justitia Vniversali^, Universal
Justice.)

And thus I understand that Axiom, That moral Virtues are concatenate in
Prudence: Because where there is this universal Subjection of the Will to
Reason, there will be an observance of it in all particulars. But if the rules
of some Virtues are observed, and not the rules of others; there this
observance is not a Virtuous action, as not proceeding from the subordination
of the Will to Reason, (which would have as well prevailed in others also) but
from some other Principle.

Now this shows perhaps, That the Moral Virtues are United in One general
Essence: But how appears it, That this Essence is Unity?

Physical Beings, as Water-drops (and other Connaturalls, either of the Same,
or Concordant Species; as the Loadstone and Iron) desire to preserve their
Union and Neighborhood one with another: But let us consider the ground; Do
they desire to preserve their Essence that they may be One, that is, United or
Joined together; or do they desire Union and Conjunction, that they may
preserve their Essence? This latter I suppose; And therefore a drop of water
does not desire to Be, to the end that it may be Conjoined with the rest, but
desires to be Conjoined for its Preservation, lest it should cease to be. But
how does this prove its Essence to be Unity?

In sum, All those instances in Nature (which doubtless are very many)
whereby it may appear that all things naturally do desire Unity (or Conjunction
rather) either for Conservation, or for Consummation of their natural
Perfection; That by Unity their Vigor is increased, quia vi^ unita fortior,
and the like; will show no more but this, That Unity is a Perfection of Being,
not a Principle of Being; or That Things of the like nature conjoined together
are able mutually to help each other in their Conservation or Operation. But
what is there in all this to persuade us, that Unity is their Essence?

As for the Mathematical Unity of Harmony, Proportion etc. It being only
Relative (for they denote but the Relation of one thing to another) can
confer nothing to the constitution of an Absolute Essence, as of Sounds, etc.

But how this should any way confer to the deciding of that question, whether
Quantity be divisibilis in semper divisibilia: seems to me a greater mystery,
then this Mystery that is to be cleared. For as long as Mathematical
Demonstrations shall be thought worthy of credit, it shall Never be granted,
that Continuum constat ex indivisibilibus. And however some Naturalists, that
know little what belongs to the nature of Quantity, make much ado to the
contrary, and thereby bewray their gross Ignorance in these things; Yet I am
confident, that not any One Mathematician (deliberately, and in a Mathematical
way) either ever did, or ever will assent to them. And I cannot without
Indignation (or Pity rather) read sometimes how fondly and vainly some
(otherwise) able Scholars think to shift off Mathematical Arguments in this
and the like cases; which will not be so easily baffled by an empty Verbal
Distinction, as some of their Idle Fallacies may. And if I make it not evident
(to those that are acquainted with Mathematical terms) that a Continuum
consists not of Indivisible Points, by as certain and infallible Mathematical
Demonstrations, as That 2. and 2. make 4. I will hereafter turn Sceptick, and
affirm confidently That we are sure of nothing.

If a Line consist of Indivisible points, each Point is supposed to be Minimum
possibile, by those that do maintain it; (or else how are they Indivisible.)
Then must all Points be Equal; (for if they be Unequal, they cannot all be
minima.) Then no Two Lines can possibly be (...), or Incommensurable; (for if
all Lines do consist of Points whereof each is equal to other, then are all
lines whatsoever measurable by this common measure of a Point; qu^ aliquoties
applicata, and hanc and illam commensurabit. Contrary to what has been often
demonstrated Mathematically, That some Lines are absolutely Incommensurable
with some other, admitting of no common measure, (as for Example, the Diameter
and the Latus of a Quadrate, (whose Proportion therefore cannot be expressed by
Rational Numbers. Now that two Contradictory Propositions should be true by
Mathematical Demonstration, is utterly impossible.

Thousands of the like Demonstrations might be brought to prove it; As, that
from hence, All Angles may be demonstrated to be Equal; The same Line, to be
Shorter, to be Longer then it self, to be equal to two or more conjoined, and
yet to be shorter then either; Yea, all Lines to be equal, All Circles of the
same bigness, The Equinoctial Circle to be no bigger then a Ciphar, All
Motions to be of the same swiftness, All Bodies of the same weight, and of the
same bigness: And yet in the mean time All these to be unequal, in Length,
Weight, Swiftness, etc. And infinite the like absurdities; as might be showed,
if this were the Question I had in hand. Take an instance or two.

Let two Circles be described upon the same Center, of what greatness you
please; Let a Thread be fastened at the common Center, and so extended that it
cut the Circumference of both Circles; Thus extended, the one end being fastened
at the Center, let the other end be moved round: Now while this Thread passes
over one Point in the Greater Circle, I demand how much it passes over in the
Lesser? Less then a Point it cannot be, because ex hypothesi, a Point is
Minimum possibile; For every Point therefore that it passes over in the
Greater Circle, it passes over a Point answerable in the Lesser Circle; There
be therefore as many points in the Lesser as are in the Greater Circle; and
these Points being all Equal, because every one is Minimum possibile, the
Lesser Circle must needs be equal to the Greater Circle, because it consists
of as many Points; and by the same reason, All Circles Equal.

Now the Thread thus moving, move it never so Slowly, it passes over a Point
in a Moment; and move it never so Swiftly, it passes but a Point in a Moment:
And therefore all Motions are alike Swift, as passing over equal distances in
equal time.

Again, Let two Lines concurring in the same Point make an Angle, (of what
greatness you please;) their Two next Points, joining upon this common Point
of concurrence, will terminate a Basis of Two Points, (not more, for then the
Subtendent would be equal to both the Crura.) The two Third points will
terminate a Line somewhat longer then the other, and therefore at least of
Three points; and so on, for every point added to the Crura, (be the angle
greater or less) you must add one point to the length of the Basis,
subtendent to that angle (and more then One it cannot be, for then the increase
of the Basis will be equal to the increase of both the Crura:) Whence it will
come to pass That all Angles (at an equal distance from the point of
concurrence) will have their Subtendents equal (the Basis or Subtendent being
thus measured by the length of the Crura, or lines containing the angle^)
Wherefore themselves also must be equal.

Now also it is sufficiently apparent to a Mathematician, that upon all lives
whatsoever, you may erect (as from a Basis) lines of the same length containing
an Angle; and therefore (both the Angle and the Basis being measured only by
the length of the Crura) not only all Angles may be equal, but also all
Lines, (as being Subtendents to equal angles at the same distance.) I need not
add more demonstrations to show the Impossibility of that Opinion which makes
every Continuum to consist ex indivisibilibus.

It is certain then, that Continuum non Constat ex Indivisibilibus: But, how
this doctrine of Unity serves either to confirm the truth, or to clear the
doubts; I see not.

But to return. His Lordship has been copious to show some Union, ^ome
Relation, of One thing to, or with Another, in the several kinds of Being.
From whence he is ready to infer, That the Essence of all things is One, that
it is Unity. But be it granted, That there be diverse particular Species under
the same Genericall nature; (as when all particular acts of duty are comprised
in One general name of Love, or Obedience:) Be it so, That many Effects may
proceed from the same Cause; (as all virtuous acts from the subordination of
the Will to Reason:) That there be many Combinations of Beings or Persons,
Natural, Voluntary* O^conomicall, Political, Logical, etc. whence may arise
One Aggregatum, One Praedicament, one City, or Kingdom, one World: Be there
S^pernaturall or Spiritual Societies, One Church, Paroch^all, National,
O^cumenicall, Visible, Invisible, one mystical Body: Be there also in Lines,
Bodies, Sounds, etc. (besides their Absolute Affections, Length, Bigness,
Lowdnesse, etc.) some mutual Relations of Proportion, Harmony, Discord, etc.
Be there in Physical Bodies, a desire of Union or Conjunction in One to
another; Yet will not this prove, That all things have One Nature, One Essence;
much less, That this Essence is Unity. If Iron desire Union, (or conjunction
rather) with the Loadstone, does this prove their Specificall Essence to be
One? Or (if it do) does it pro^e* that this One Essence is Unity? And so of
the rest.

All that can arise from hence, is, That God has so ordered the several
Natures of particular Creatures, as that his Wisdom does not only appear in
their Absolute and Simple natures; but has also put Relative or Respective
natures in them, whereby his Wisdom may appear in their mutual Oppositions,
Conjunctions, Similitude, Dissimilitude, Sympathy, Antipathy, Help, and
Hinderance of one thing to another; whereby not only Every thing ( Severally)
in its Absolute nature does set forth Gods glory, but also All things (
jointly) do (...), and work together in their respective Relations, as well
for the good of those that love God, as for their mutual advancing of Gods
glory. All which may be, though neither Unity, nor any One specificall Being,
be the formalis ratio, the essential form of all things; but each species have
a several kind of Being.

For my own judgment; I am as confident, that Unity is Nothing; as his
Lordship is, That it is All things. It Is a mere rational, nominall Notion,
that has no more Reality in it, then Darkness, then non esse. Yea, to be One,
is a pure Negative Proposition; and what Reality you can allow to a Negation,
so much you may allow to Unity.

It is true, Vnus, as it is opposed to Nullus, is Affirmative, and is the same
with Aliquis, or Nonnullus: But if it signify the same with Vnicus, and be
opposed to Multitude, (according as we now take it,) it is a mere Negation, and
no more.

Which to make clear, observe but this Syllogism, [Whatsoever is in England,
is in Europe; But in England there is Rex Vnicus, One only King; Therefore in
Europe there is Rex Vnicus; but One King.] Where you shall find no fault in the
Syllogism, save that the Minor is Negative in the first figure. Whence it is
apparent, That Unity, as it is opposed to Multitude, is a mere Negative term.

There is One Sun; but is this Unity Essential to it? Whether another Sun
be, or be not; it nothing concerns the Essence of this Sun, but only grounds
an external Relation, which is yet but Relati^ rationis.

Was not the Essence of Adam the Same, and he Equally a Man, before the
production of Eve, while he was Vnicus; and after both the Production of Eve,
and the Generation of sons and daughters, when he ceased to be Vnicus, there
being more beside him? Was there any Detraction, or Addition of Essence, or any
Reality, that concerned Adams person, at such time as his children were born?
or would there have been afterward, if all except Adam had been swept away?

Nay when two Drops of Water are separated, or conjoined, is there any
Essential or Real Mutation in either?

Surely, if Unity may come, and go, without any Real Alteration; then is
Unity so far from being Essential to all things, that it is not so much as
Real.

Object* You will say; But God is indeed One, Vnus et Vnicus; and not only
supposed to be One: Therefore his Unity must needs be Real, and not Imaginary.

Answ. I grant it; But what then? must therefore Unity be Positive or Real?
The Air, in the night time, is indeed Dark, and not only ^^^posed to be Dark;
Will you therefore infer that Darkness has a Real, a Positive Being, and is
not a privation of Light? When the Moon is eclipsed, it does Really and Indeed
want the Illumination of the Sunbeams, and is not only supposed to want them;
but you will not, I suppose, say that this Want of Light, has a Real Essence.
So here* God is indeed One, and not only imagined so to be, yet has not Unity
any Entity or Positive Being in it.

There is Negatio Realis, and Negatio Rationis; a Real absence and a Supposed
absence. Of the one you may truly frame a Negative Proposition* of the other
you cannot; there may be indeed in the Understanding concerning thi^, Negatio
actus, (which is all one with Abstraction) but not actus negationis, actus
negativus. When the Air, in the Night time, is Dark; there is a Real Absence
of Light: when, in the Day time, I conceive of the Air according to its
Essence, or according to some other Qualities, not at all regarding its being
Light; this is Negatio Rationis, or negatio Abstractionis, there is only a
supposed Absence of Light, but indeed a ( real) Presence.

Yea, ipsum Non-esse, is a Real Praedication though it be not a real
Praedicate (Like as Mendacium esse Falsum, is a Truth:) Therefore when I say,
Centaurus non est; I do not Forge this Proposition, or suppose a nonentity in
a Centaure where indeed there is none, but I affirm that nonentity to be,
which is; for a Centaure, Is non-ens, and not only Supposed to be Non-ens. And
of Negations, or Privations, That is only Negatio Rationis, when by
Abstraction Things are supposed to be separate, which are indeed conjoined:
Other Negations though they have not realiter Esse, yet they have realiter
Non-esse; their nonentity is not Imaginary. (I speak of Negatio Physica, not
Negatio Logica; for a Logical Negation, that is, a Negative Enunciation, is as
Real as an Affirmation.) A supposed Being is Ens rationis, and a supposed
Absence is Negatio rationis.

Negations and Privations are Non-Entia, and not Entia Rationis; for they have
not in themselves so much as Esse Cognitum, which is requisite to Ens Rationis;
And when as sometimes a Negation is said to be Ens Rationis* it is not to be
understood of its internal Entity, for so Darkness in it self does not
include esse cognitum, but when the Understanding considers of a Negation, and
so makes it Objectum Cognitionis, then of a Non-ens it becomes Ens Rationis.
But then (I say) it is ^^trationis, not Negatio rationis.

Yet all this hinders not but that Unity, and all other Negations, may have a
kind of Reality, as it is opposed to a Fiction. And therefore the Air ^^ really
Dark, God is really Vnicus, and not only supposed so to be: And yet Darkness
and Unity are not in themselves Real, but Negative term*

I purposely pass over several particulars, (as well in this Chapter, as in
others) which his Lordship lights upon by the way; to avoid tediousness: and
look principally at those things, to which his Lordships aim does especially
tend.

CHAP. VIII. The Nature of Habits Whether they be one with Truth or the Souls
Essence.
IN the eighth Chapter, he speaks somewhat concerning the nature of Habits. And
this is to be adjoined to the end of the 5. Chapter: the 6. and 7. Chapters,
(wherein he inferres a Corollary, concerning the Essence of All things* That it
is One, That it is Unity;) being inserted as a Parenthesis. He had in the fifth
Chapter affirmed That the Soul is nothing but Truth; Yet (says he) while I
affirm, that the Soul is nothing but this Truth, I do not refuse the doctrine
of Habits, either Infused or Acquisite.

But before I proceed, It is not amiss to give notice of a different
acceptance of Truth here, from that before. He spoke before of the Truth or
Light of Reason, which he contended, to be One with the Soul, and not a
distinct Faculty. This Light was an Innate or Connate Light, which has its
Original and its Period with the Soul: For when the Soul begins, the Light
of Reason begins, and this Light of Reason is no sooner extinct, then when the
Soul shall cease to be. But the Light of Habitual Knowledge, (whether Infused
or Acquisite,) is not an Innate Light, but an Advenient Light; subsequent to
the Souls first Existence, and really separable from it. Yet may it be
Antecedent to another degree of Advenient Light, viz. Actual Knowledge, which
may proceed from Habitual.

This Advenient Light of Habitual knowledge differs from Innate Light of
Reason; as a Habit in the first species of Quality, from Naturalis potentia, or
a Faculty, in the second species. And so, howsoever it may be true, That a
Faculty or Natural Power, may be so far the Same with the Soul, as that it
differ only ratione ratiocinata; Yet in a Habit, we must of necessity grant a
distinction ex part rei. For where there may be a Real Separation (and not
only Mental) there must needs be granted a Distinction in re. Now that in all
Habits there may be a real Separation, is apparent: For (though, it may be,
some Habits acquired or infused cannot be lost when they are once had, as
Grace, etc. yet) before the acquisition or infusion of such Habits, the Soul
was actually without them. Indeed it is true, That these Habits cannot subsist
without the Soul; and therefore they may not be imagined to be Really
distinct, as res and res; yet because the Soul may exist without these;
therefore they must have a Modall distinction in re, as res and modus. Thus the
Roundnesse of a piece of Coin, though, when it is, it is the same Thing with
the Silver, not being a Thing added, but only a Modification, a moulding or
fashioning of the Former thing; yet must it be Distinct from the essence of the
Silver, though not a Thing distinct: Otherwise when this Silver loses its
Roundnesse, it should loose its Essence and become somewhat else; whereas the
Silver in this form, is not really distinct from it self in another form, but
the same Metal, the same Silver.

There being then this difference between a Habit and a Faculty: Though Reason
should be One with the soul without so much as a Modall distinction; yet
follows it not, that a Habit has the same Real Identity, but that it may be
distinguished ex part rei.

Habits he distinguishes into Infused and Acquisite. When the soul (says he)
by virtue of its Being is clear in such a Truth; it is said to be an Infused
habit: when by frequent action, such a Truth is Connaturall to the Soul, it
may be styled an Habit Acquisite, though etc.

Whether or no this be the genuine distinction between an Acquisite and Infused
Habit, it is not material strictly to examine. If the soul by its Essence be
clear in such a Truth; that is, be ready to act according to such a Truth: I
should call this a Faculty or Natural power, rather then an Habit. Thus
Gravity in a Stone, whereby it is naturally prone to descend, I should not call
an Habit, but a Faculty. (Though Heaviness, in another relation, be neither a
Faculty nor an Habit, but qualitas Patibilis. And so perhaps may Knowledge, as
it is an accidental Form informing the soul, be referred to the same species
of Quality, though it can hardly be called by that Name: For a Habit quatenus
sic, is so called, not with any relation to the Subject, but in relation to
Acts, which slow from it, or are produced by it.)

This Pronenesse or Aptness for operation which is in any thing immediately
from its Essence, is a natural Power or Faculty; And a Habit, is a further
Readiness, and Pliablenesse, or Facility of working according to this Faculty:
A Habit therefore always presupposes a Faculty, as being but a Facilitation
of it. And when as by Reason a man has an Ability to understand: by Habitual
Knowledge, he has a Readiness to understand.

Now this Readiness or Facility, if it proceed from Often Acting; so that from
the iterating of former Acts it becomes more prone either to continue or
repeat those Acts; It is an Acquisite Habit: (Somewhat of this may be seen in
Natural things; A Wheel being once in motion, it will by a smaller force be
Continued, then at first Begun; yea for a while persist without help.) If this
Facility proceed from some Accidental Form produced in it by an External
Agent, it is an Infused Habit: The difference between an Infused and an
Acquisit being no other but only in respect of the Efficient. Thus the
Knowledge of diverse Tongues and the Ability to speak them, which was in some of
the Apostles by immediate Infusion, was an Infused Habit; whereas in others (as
in Paul) it was Acquisite; differing from the other, not in Form, but in the
Efficient.

A Habit therefore, whether Infused or Acquisite, being but a Facilitation of
the Faculty, cannot be a Thing distinct from that Faculty, but only a Modus of
it, which has not in it self a Positive Absolute Being of its own; but is a
Modification of another Being: And its Physical Being, Existentia Rei, must be
the same with the Being of that, which is thus Modificated; For it is not ipsum
Existens, but Modus Existendi: And this Manner of Existing has not an
Existence of its own, distinct from the Existence of that which does exist in
this manner: Yet its Formal and Metaphysicall Being is distinct. Yea and its
Physical Existence, such as it is capable of, that is, Existentia Modi; for
not being Res, but Modus rei, we must not expect that it should have any
Existence of its own besides the Existence of a Modus: and this Existentia Modi
is the actual Modificating of the Thing Existing after this Manner. The which
Existence though it be not Existentia Rei, yet it is a Real Existence, (
existentia in re) and not Mental: For the thing existent is not only supposed
to exist in this manner, but indeed does so, thus ordered, thus modificated:
and therefore that Modus does actually, and really modificate, and is not only
supposed so to do.

But if you will not admit (with Scotus) of any Modus entis, as a Medium
between Ens and Non-ens, Res et Nihil, a Thing and Nothing; you must then say,
it is Res: for Nothing I am sure it cannot be: For doubtless there is some
difference more then Imaginary between Knowledge and Ignorance, between a
Square stone and a Round stone, between Silver Stamped and the same Smooth and
Plain. This difference I should call Modall, accounting the Roundnesse etc. not
Res but Modus Rei; affirming, that when Wax etc. is put out of one form or
fashion into another, thereis no new Thing propounded; but that which before
was, is now otherwise ordered.

And thus it is most true which his Lordship speaks, That Habitual Knowledge,
is nothing but Light more or less glorious; It is Reason cleared; It Is only
Facultas facilitata, or facultatis Facilitas: And to this Facility or
Readiness to operate, I cannot allow a Physical existence of its own; as
neither to any Habit whatsoever, as being but Modi and not Entia; It Is not a
Being, but a Manner of Being; not Ens but aliquid Entis. And I should easily be
persuaded to grant the same concerning all Accidents whatsoever, which have
long since been called Entis Entia: And however an Accident has been accounted
to be Res, and so to have Existentiam Rei; yet not Subsistentiam Rei: Though it
have an Existence of its own, yet its Subsistence is no other but Subsistentia
Subjecti.

Yet I cannot with his Lordship subscribe to the Platonists, to make Knowledge
nothing but a Remembrance. (As if there were naturally in our Understanding,
the Pictures or Pourtraictures of all Truths, but so obscured and covered as it
were with dust, that these glorious Colors do not appear, till such time as
they be rubbed and washed over anew.) I approve rather of Aristotle's Rasa
Tabula, (then Plato's Reminiscentia) making the Understanding, of it self, to
have no such Idea or Picture at all, but capable of all. Or thus (I know not
how it can be better expressed;) The Understanding is not as a Table, wherein
the Kings Picture is pourtrayed in lively colors, but (hanging in the dark) it
appears not, that there are any such Lineaments, till it be Enlightened with
the Sun, and then it presents us with a Fair Description: But rather as a
Glass which is able to Receive and Reflect whatsoever Colors fall upon it,
though (before) it had none of them.

For I demand, What Principle is there implanted in nature to enform me,
Whether there ever were such a City as Troy? Whether it were so destroyed?
Whether this or that were Plato's or Aristotle's Opinion? What Principle to
enform, that it rained yesterday and is fair to day? Certainly, matters of
Fact have not such Idea's implanted in Nature; for then might they by Discourse
be known to have been or not to have been, without the help either of Sense or
Information. And if Historical Knowledge may be acquired without any
fore-implanted Idea's of those Truths so known; why also may not Discursive
Truth be also Known without a Reminiscentia, or a Review of Forgotten o^
Obscure Principles?

Next he tells us, That we may Seem by frequent actings to help the Soul, and
so to create Acquisite Habits; whereas indeed it is not so, but all Actings are
only new Discoveries.

But how this can stand with his former doctrine of Reminiscentia, I do not
see: For this takes away not only Plato's Reminiscentia, but all Remembrance
whatsoever. If all Actings be new Discoveries, How and When can we be said to
Remember?

But is it so? do Former Actings no way help our Subsequent Acts? I^ so, how
can a Learned Scholar be said to Know more then an Ignorant Peasant? For the
one is as capable of a new discovery as the other, i^ his former acts make no
preparation or fitness for future acts. How comes it to pass, that Learned
men shall apprehend those Truths at the first relation, which another cannot
without much ado be brought to conceive? Nay why should an Artist be more
skillful in his Trade then another? Why may not an Infant new born plead his
cause as well as the best experienced Lawyer? Certainly, if former acts do not
indeed produce an Habitual Knowledge (but only seem to do) in the one which
is not in the other, the one may as well act as the other, for there is the
same Reasonable Soul in a Child, which is in him afterward.

The difference surely must proceed from hence, That the Former Actings have
produced a Facility and Readiness for Future Acts: that so, what was before
more Difficult, becomes now Facile.

Nay more, That which before was utterly Impossible, becoms now both Feazi^le
and Easy. All the most refined Wits in the world joining their acutest
Discoveries, their strongest Judgments together, are not able without the help
of Historical Relation, ever to know such a thing as the Destruction of Troy:
Yet when this, or the like, has been either Seen by our selves, or Related to
us, it is then easy to tell afterward, what we have seen, what we have
heard, without a second view or a new relation. Now if the former Actings, do
no^ way prepare for a future Act; why might not the First discovery have been
made by our own light of Reason, without an External supply, from our Senses,
or from Information, as well as the Second?

Philosophers (says he) affirm this boldly of the Unreasonable Creature,
^teributing it to an Instinct or new Influence* Why then may we not conclud^
the same of Man?

That Philosophers attribute much to Instinct in Unreasonable Creatures, I
grant: But that by an Instinct, they meant a new Influence, I was not aware.
Certainly Memory has been accounted one of the Sensus ^nt^rni, and so
belonging to the Sensitive Soul, and therefore not to be denied to Brutes: And
doubtless daily experiments put it out of question, That Brute Creatures make
use of Memory, and by former acts, are fitted for following acts; not doing all
from a new Instinct.

I am called in the next place, to search out the difference between Reason and
Faith. They differ (says he) only in Degrees, not in Nature: For if Soul,
Understanding, Habits be all the same, then neither do Reason and Faith differ.

I grant that there is the same ground, why we should make Reason and Faith
the Same; that there is to make the Faculty and the Habit the Same. Reason is a
Faculty, Faith a Habit: Now a Faculty and a Habit, I have before said not to be
res and res, but res and modus. Their Physical Difference therefore (I mean,
if you consider Faith and Reason in the same man) is but Modall.

But it does not follow from hence, That they differ not in Nature. For though
an Habit have not Entitatem Rei, distinct from the Faculty; yet it has
Entitatem Modi; so that the Habit is not a Faculty, neither is the Faculty an
Habit.

To enquire of a Physical Identity, and of a Metaphysicall or Formal
Identity, are quaere's far distinct. The Faith of Peter is Really and
Physically distinct from the Faith of Paul; and yet their Metaphysicall Formal
nature is exactly the Same. Again, all the Modall Beings in the same subject,
though their Essence and Nature be never so distinct ( v. g. Duration,
Augmentation, Situation etc, in the same man) be Really the same; (for neither
of them, being Modi, have any Entitatem Rei, beside the Entity of their common
Subject, and so cannot make a Real distinction, because there is not res and
res:) Yet each Modus has a distinct Formal nature of its own: The nature of a
Figure, is not the nature of a Habit, though both in the same Subject.

But yet, though it do not follow from that Real Identity between Res and
Modus, that the Nature of Reason and the Nature of Faith be the same: Yet if he
change but the terms, and say (in stead of Reason) that Knowledge and Faith are
the same in nature, I will not contend: So that he mean Faith as it is an Act
or Habit of the Understanding, and not of the Will. For so, Faith is an Assent
to a Truth reveiled: and the same individual Assent to the same Truth, may be
both Cognitio Scientiae, and Cognitio Fidei* I will instance in the Creation of
the world: By Faith we know that the worlds were made, and Assent to it: And by
natural Demonstrations it may be proved, that the world was made; and these
also are sufficient to persuade assent. Now we from both grounds (jointly)
assent to this Proposition, That the world was made. The which Assent in
respect of the one Ground ( propter evidentiam rei) is an assent of Science or
Natural Knowledge; in regard of the other Ground ( Propter authoritatem
dicentis) is an assent of Faith, or Supernatural and reveiled Knowledge. The
assent of Science, and of Faith, differ not in their Form, but in their
Efficient.

But if he speak of Saving Faith ( quatenus Salvifica) as it does Save: so it
is an act of the Will, and not of the Understanding; and therefore differs from
Knowledge.

But, to conclude this: If we speak of a Physical difference or distinction,
Then all the Modi that belong to the same Thing, can admit of no more then a
Modall distinction: because having no other Entitatem Rei, but that of the
common Subject, their Entitas Rei must be Common; there cannot be Res and Res:
the difference must be either tanquam Res and Modus, or tanquam Modus and
Modus: And here is no consideration of the Nature of these Modi. In distinct
Things; The Modi are Really distinct and not Modally though these Modi be
exactly of the same nature; as the Roundnesse of several Circles; For they not
having Entitatem Rei besides the Entity of their Subjects; their Subjects being
really distinct, they must be really distinct also.

(Thus in the present case, The Faith of Peter is really distinct from the
Faith of Paul: But Faith in Peter from Reason in Peter is only Modally
distinct, tanquam Res and Modus; (viz. If you make Reason to be Res, or a
Faculty Really distinct from the soul:) and the Habit of Faith in Peter will
be distinct from all other Habits in Peter (v. g. from the Habit of Knowledge)
tanquam Modus and Modus.)

But if we speak, not of a Physical, but of a Metaphysicall Difference; Here
it little avails to enquire of their Physical Difference, or Identity. For
those things that are really distinct, as two Souls, may yet agree in the same
Specificall Nature: and those which are not really distinct (as several Modi
of the same Thing) may have their Formal Specificall differences.

Again, though it be granted that Natural Knowledge (attained by by the use of
Reason, without a supernatural Revelation) be of the same Nature with Faith;
Yet does it not presently follow, That their difference is Graduall, and the
one but a greater Degree of the same Light: For Skill in Music and Skill in
Metalls or Mineralls, are both Natural Habits; yet the Skill of a Musician,
and the Skill of a Chemist are not the Same (though of the same nature;)
neither yet is their difference Graduall; For the one is not the way to attain
the other and the other a Perfection of that former. And moreover a man may be
skillful in either of them without a knowledge of the other, whereas a Greater
Degree of Knowledge in the same Kind cannot be without the Lesser.

That which follows, concerning Falling from Grace, and the Freedom of the
Will, (as also what proceeds, How far we do acti agere, that is, How far,
and In what manner, the First cause does concur with the Second in its
Operations) require a larger discourse for the deciding of them, then to be
touched at in transitu, and by the way. I shall therefore say only this (and so
pass them over;) Liberty and Servitude are opposite; and both are Relative
terms. He that is Free from the Dominion of one Master, may be a Servant, a
Slave, to another. Thus the Will, though it be Free from any Natural
Necessity, either from within, or without; so that it be neither determined by
an inward Principle, as mere Natural Agents are; neither can have either
Compulsion, or Necessity, imposed upon it by the command of another Creature:
Yet is it not Free from the Command and Power of God, by whose Absolute Decree
it is determined. We must not so far affect to be Liberi, that we become
Sacrilegi; we must not vindicate our Liberty by committing Sacrilege,
exempting our selves from being under the Power of a Deity.

If I were now to examine the nature of Freedom, wherein it consists: I might
perhaps place it in a Spontaneity, that it acts without reluctance, Sponte
agit: Were it not that even Natural Agents (as a Stone falling) have such a
free action, without Constraint, without Reluctancie.

Or it might be placed perhaps in a Reflection upon its own Act; whereby it
does not only Agere, yea and Sponte (or volens) agere, without a Nolition, a
Renitentia; But also Vult agere: Whereas a Natural agent, though perhaps
Sponte or Volens agit, yet you cannot say Vult agere, because there is not a
Reflection whereby it Wills its Action. That which hinders me from placing it
in this, is, Because I allow not any reflex act of Willing in God, besides that
direct act of Working, who is yet a most Free Agent. For (beside other reasons,
that if need were, might be produced) it stands not with Gods Simplicity, to
admit distinct acts in God, whereof one should be the Object of another. Now
what strength there is in this, to hinder the placing of Freedom in this
Reflex act, I propose to be considered, rather then Affirm.

But I rather place the nature of the Wills Liberty, in a Freedom from
Servitude, that it is not under the command of any Creature, or a Natural
Determination of its own. And therefore though it be free from such servitude as
a Natural agent, or such as may be Forced, is subject to; yet it is not free
from Gods Command; Nor (perhaps) from the dictate of Reason neither, Or, if it
be, yet is not this its Freedom, but its Weakness.

And this is not far distant from the received opinion, which makes it consist
in Indifferentia. For the Will can agere vel non agere notwithstanding anything
to the contrary from the Creature; but it cannot agere vel non agere
notwithstanding the Decree of God; and therefore is not Free from that
Determination. And whereas other things are from God determined mediante causa
secunda, the Will is Immediately determined a causa prima.

And therefore what he cites out of Rutterfort, That granting all things to be
under an absolute Decree, it is fond to ask, Whether the Free Creature remain
indifferent to do or not to do; I willingly assent unto. But you must
consider withal, that This Freedom neither the Angels have, nor had Adam in
his Innocence.

And therefore, when Divines tell us, that by the Fall we have lost our
Liberty, or Freedom of Will, in Spiritual things, which yet we retain in
Moral and Civil Actions; I desire that they would more punctually set down,
What the Liberty is, which we retain in Natural things, but want in
Spiritual; What Liberty that is, which the Angels have, and Man once had, but
has now lost: And not speak of such a Liberty as neither Man or Angel ever
had, nor is it possible for any Creature to have; Nay not for God himself, For
God having once decreed, cannot with his Truth revoke it, nor is indifferent to
execute it or not; But, as They say of Jupiter, which make Him to be the Author
of their Stoicall unavoidable Fate (understanding it cum grano salis) He once
Commanded, and ever after Obeyed.

There follows in the next place, an Objection, How it comes to pass, if Faith
and Knowledge be One, that some who have more Knowledge have less Faith.

I need not recite his Lordships Answer, I will only propose my own. If there
be meant a Physical Identity, whereby two Modi of the same Thing do subsist
by the subsistence of their common Subject, it is not hard to determine: For
two Modifications of the same Thing may yet be independent of each other: And
therefore it is not requisite they should be both in the same measure, or
degree.

2. If by Knowledge be meant an assent to Natural truths, and by Faith, an
assent to Supernatural truths; neither is here any difficulty: For the
Knowledge of one thing is not inconsistent with the Ignorance of another thing.

3. ^f Knowledge and Faith be considered in relation to the same Object,
Spiritual truths, or Saving truth, and Faith be taken for an Intellectual
assent to them: Then is it not true, that there is in any (if you speak adid^m*
more Knowledge and less Faith; what any Knows to be Thus, he cannot Believe to
be Otherwise. For the Understanding is not a Free faculty, that it can either
Accept or Reject a reveiled Truth.

4. If by Faith be meant, not an Assent in the Understanding to the Truth
Known, but a Consent in the Will, an embracing of it (which is the Justifying
act of Faith:) Neither is this difficulty much greater then the former* For the
too too frequent sins, even in Gods children, against light, makes it over
manifest, That the Action of the Will does not always follow the Knowledge of
the Understanding.

And yet if this too clear experience be not able to prove it, but that you
still lay all the blame upon the Understanding, as not being clear enough in
its Apprehensions, or not sufficiently Peremptory in its Dictates; and so
excuse the Will of all Remissness: I demand then, what disability there is in
the Will of Man since the fall more then in the confirmed Angels and Saints in
Heaven? I cannot think but that the Image of God, by the Fall, is defaced in
the Will as well as in the Understanding; and yet if the Will do never disobey
the Light of Reason, which is its sole (immediate) Guide, I see not wherein
this disability does appear.

I grant that the Will does always Follow the Understanding, that is, it never
goes before it, or without it; it goes never but where the Understanding has
led the way, in discovering some Good, (more or less,) something Desirable.
For the Will is Caeca potentia* and Knows of nothing desirable, but what the
Understanding discovers. And Knowing nothing, can Desire nothing; Ignoti nulla
Cupido.

But yet I grant not that Proposition in this sense, The will Always follows
the Understanding; that is, It never stays behind. For to Omit what the
Understanding commands, requires not a discovery of some other Good, but only
an Impotency, a Backwardness, or Remissness to do its Duty. To go without
direction, requires a Positive Cause, because it is a Positive Act; But Not to
go when it is directed, may proceed from a Negative Cause (Negatio Causae,)
because it is a Negative Act, or a Not-doing. A lame man does not run, when
he knows, that he ought to run; yet here is no need of a Positive Cause to
stay him, but his Impotency (a Negative cause) suffices.

And thus far do I admit that distinction of Libertas Contrarietatis, and
Libertas Contradictionis, though in that way in which it is ordinarily made use
of, I do wholly reject it. There is not in the Will an Indifferency to choose
Good or to choose Evil; neither yet to Choose good, or Reject good (velle and
nolle;) both which they call Libertas Contrietatis. For the Understanding does
not show any Amiablenesse or Lovelynesse in Evil; nor any Odiousness in Good
(quatenus sic;) and therefore the Will cannot Desire Evil, nor Reject Good
(Nolle, or Velle non.) For Bonitas is Objectum formale Appetitus; and Malum is
the formal Object of Nolition. Now the Soul cannot velle quatenus bonum, that
in which no Good is apprehended; nor nolle quatenus malum (that is, velle ut
non sit) that wherein it apprehends no Evil. But for the other kind of
Indifferency, (which they call Libertas Contradictionis,) to Will good, or Not
Will it; to Nill Evil, or Not to Nill it; This I acknowledge to be in the
Will. For that by reason of its Imbecility, it is not so ready to execute its
Functions as it ought to be.

But yet I do not conceive the Liberty of the Will to consist in this; Or, that
this is any Perfection to the Will, To be able to Suspend its Act,
notwithstanding the Understandings direction to the contrary. (For this the
Angels Confirmed cannot do, nor the Saints Glorified; for if their Will could
act contrary to their Understanding, then could they Sin; And yet these
Agents are no less Free, then Man is: Yea God, who is the most absolutely-Free
Agent, yet cannot Will or Decree that which is contrary to his Sapience,
(intellectus divinus;) his Will never thwarts his Wisdom.) But I conceive it
to be an Imperfection or Weakness in man's Will; which, Before the Fall, was
not so Stable, but that it might Fall; and is Now become so Weak, that it is
Unable to Staud.

The common Opinion is, That, If the Will cannot disobey the Judgment of the
Understanding, then is it not a Free faculty but all its actions are determined
by the Understanding, while It dictates, that this or that is to be done or
omitted; and so Freedom should be placed in the Understanding and not in the
Will. I may add, (to help their cause forward) that there may seem to be no
Freedom at all: For the Will is determined by the dictate of the
Understanding, and therefore in it is no freedom, no Election; and the
Understanding (by general consent) is not Free, to judge this or that as it
pleases, but must assent or dissent according to its Light: so that Here will
be no Freedom neither. For this reason they say, That the Will is not
necessitated to follow the dictate of Reason; but when the Understanding has
declared what it can, it is yet in the power of the Will to Choose.

But then, least they should fall upon another rock, viz. That, if the Will may
reject the Understandings advice; then may it desire that which the
Understanding affirms to be Evil; contrary to that Principle, That Good is the
only Object of Desire: To avoid that danger, they have found out this
distinction of Libertas Contrarietatis and libertas Contradictionis, which they
apply thus; The Will has power indeed to disobey that which the Understanding
propounds: But yet not so, as if, of two Objects, whereof the Understanding
Allows of one, and Disallows of the other, it were free notwithstanding to
embrace Either; But when an Object is commended by the Understanding, though
the Will cannot Elect its Contrary, yet it may not-elect this, it may choose
whether or no it will Embrace it. And thus they think the whole matter is
salved.

This Answer may seem plausible, and has past for current: But yet (with their
leaves) the Wound, though perhaps skinned over, is not so easily Healed. For if
they may not admit the Liberty of Contrariety: they may not (in my judgment)
admit the Other. For when the Understanding commends an Object to the Will, as
that which Ought to be Desired, here are two opposite terms, to Embrace, or not
Imbrate; (agere, suspendere:) The Understanding says, Agendum est, it Ought to
be Embraced; The Will chooses rather not to Embrace it, but to Suspend its
Act. The Understanding advises One extreme; the Will chooses the Other
extreme. The Understanding says, It is Good to Act, and (consequently) it is
Ill to Omit, to suspend; the Will notwithstanding chooses to Suspend (which
the Understanding affirms to be Evil,) rather then to Act, which the
Understanding commends as Good. Thus that libertas Contradictionis, appears
upon trial to include also a liberty of Contrariety: and if it may Not-choose
the term commended, then it may choose the term Forbidden, yea it must choose
it, where the terms are Contradictory without a Medium.

All that can be said to help it, will be this; Willing and Suspending are
indeed Opposite Terms; and therefore when the Understanding advises to Will,
if the Will do [ Velle] suspendere, it chooses the term Opposite, and
(consequently) that which is proposed as Evil; But (they may say perhaps) the
Will does only Suspendere, and not Velle suspendere; and so this Suspending is
not an Object of Choice, but only the Absence or Negation of an Act; and
therefore though it do ire in contrarias parts, yet it does not contrariam
partem Eligere, it does not Choose, or Elect, the Opposite term, because there
is no positive Act of Election or Willing exercised about it.

And this answer I confess may seem to weaken the Objection immediately
foregoing; for thus the Will is not made to Choose an Oppos^te term; But then
let them consider, how this Answer will stand with their Opinion: They tell us
first that the Freedom of the Will is manifested in Suspending when the
Understanding commands to Act; and yet when it does Suspend, they say this
Suspension is not an object of Choice or Election; and (consequently) there is
no Liberty exercised.

If they think thus to evade, in saying, That this Liberty is exercised, not in
Suspe^ding when it might Act, because There is no Election, and therefore no
Freedom exercised; But in Acting, when as it might have Suspended. I answer,
That neither will this serve the turn. For as Suspension is not Objectum
Volitionis, an Object of Choice; so neither is Acting an Object of choice. And
as we say not Volo Suspendere, or Volo Non-velle, so neither do we say volo
Velle: For by the same reason that any may say Volo Velle, he may say also volo
non Velle. So that Willing can no more be said to be an object of Choice, then
Suspending.

Their Libertas Contradictionis therefore must either be also ibertas
Contrarietatis, and so by themselves rejected: or else it will be no exercise,
no manifestation, of Liberty, and therefore useless for their purpose.

I admit (as I said before) the distinction in this sense; That the Will,
though it cannot Elect a Contrary object, ye^ it may Not-Elect This. And thus
there is no Action (of Choice or Desire) in the Will, but tending to some Good
that the Understanding proposes; For what is not Known cannot be Desired: But
yet there may be a negligent Omission or Suspension, when it ought to Act Which
I do not account ^o be the Liberty, or Perfection of the Will, (for Angels
etc. have it not,) but an Imperfection and Weakness. Neither do I say, that
the Will does Voluntarily Suspend, or Velle suspendere, without direction, (for
that were a Positive Act;) but (either by Negligence, or Weakness,) does
Not-Will. For which there is no^ requisite a Positive cause, but a Negative, or
the Want of a Cause.

You will say, If this be so, then will there be only a sinful Omission ^^ the
Will, and not a sinful Commission: For Sin of Commission (doing or Willing
that which ought not) is Positive, and therefore cannot proceed from the Will,
when the Understanding dictates to the contrary. Whereas the Will does as often
fail in Choosing a wrong object, which the Understanding acknowledges to be
Evil; as in Not Choosing a Good Object.

I answer, it is true, the Will does often choose what it ought not: And yet I
affirm, that the Wills Error is only Negative and not Positive; It is
Omissive only, in not-obeying some directions of the Understanding. I shall
make it clear by an Instance. Pleasure and Virtue may be Competitors, and
Rivalls (as it were) both courting the Will; (As in an Act Pleasant, but
Sinful.) The Understanding proposes Pleasure as quid bonum, it is Good, it is
Desirable; It proposes Virtue as quid melius, It Is Better, it is more
desirable. Now the Will perhaps follows the first direction; it imbraceth
Pleasure as being Good, and so Desirable; (for Bonum Jucundum is Desirable as
well as Bonum Honestum:) But the second Precept, or Direction rather, whereby
Virtue is proposed as Better, and therefore should countermand the form^^, this
it hears not, it follows not.

If you say, the Understanding does indeed discover some Good (though a less
Good) in the Object; yet this is not to be accounted the Understandings
Practical Direction (dictamen:) But, that the Understanding having examined
the Good and the Evil that is in every Act, and comparing them together; upon
this Comparison, as it observes the Good or Evil to be more, so it prescribes,
to Do, or Not to Do, H^^ age, or Hoc non age: And if the Will do Act, when
the Understanding Forbids, it must be said to perform a Positive Act without
direction.

I answer* I admit not the Understandings dictate to be Imperative, but only
Declarative: It only informs, This is Good, This is Evil; but Commands not,
Do this, or Omit it. But the Will upon proposal of Good, Embraces it; upon
proposal of Evil, it Rejects it: Yet not so, but that, by Negligence, it may
Not-embrace Good, and notreject Evil. And thus the proposal of Pleasure, as
Good; is as truly declarative as the other; and this the Will follows: But a
further declaration, whereby it declares, that although Pleasure be Good, yet
it is Evil to embrace this Good, because there is a greater Evil annexed;
This direction, by omission, it imbraceth not. And this I conceive to be the
true nature of the Acts of the Will and Understanding.

If you would have the Will and the Understanding to be the Same, (and
therefore think these distinctions superfluous,) understand by the Intellect,
Anima Intelligens; by the Will, Anima Volens, or Anima quatenus Volens, and
then you are pleased.

And thus you see, How there may be more Knowledge (even of Spiritual and
Saving Truths) and yet l^sse Faith: Because there may be ^n Asse^t, a
Believing, in the Understanding, (which is Knowledge, or Historical Faith;)
without a Fiduciall Trust, a Reliance, and resting upon it; which is the
Justifying Faith, or the Justifying Act of Faith. (...) yea, (...), without
(...).

5. But if you speak of a Knowledge peculiar to Gods children, whereof others
partake not; Such a Knowledge of God whereby no man knows him but he that has
him; That Knowledge which is Life everlasting: This Knowledge, and Faith,
always go together; the more there is of One, the more also of the Other. A
Speculative Knowledge, whereby we assent to the Truth reveiled, is found even
in the Devils, and that in as large and ample measure (I suppose) as in the
Saints on Earth: For I cannot be persuaded, but the Devils ((...)) being
Knowing Spirits, do Know and Assent to the Truth of every Proposition that a
Child of God knows. But there is an Experimental Knowledge distinct from the
former, Knowledge of another nature, whereby we Know, what we know, in another
Manner: We do not only Know that it is so, but we Taste and See it to be so.

A Blind man Knows perhaps that the Sun shines, but he does not S^^ it: I Know
that at Midnight the Sun shines to our Antipodes, but I do not See it shine
to them: I Know that at such a time there is such an I ^lipse visible to such a
part of the World, yet do I not See the Eclipse. The Confectioner that
provides a Banquet Knows that this or that dish is Sweet, but they only Taste
the Sweetness that eat of it. A wicked man may Know that God is good, (as a
blind man knows that the Sun shines, by the report of others; or as an
Astronomer knows of an Eclipse before it come, by Calculation, or rational
Discourse and Illation;) ^ut he S^es it no^, he Tastes it not. Now we read of
(...), H^b. 5. 14. some that have their Senses exercised to discern of good and
evil; there is (...), Phil. 1. 9. a kind of spiritual Sense, whereby we do
(...), super^a S^pere, Relish those things that are above.

And where there is this spiritual Taste, this Experimental Knowledge; there
must needs be Faith also* For Truths thus clearly, and Sensibly (as it were)
rev^iled to the Soul, it seems no^ to be in the power of the Will to reject: No
more then it is in the power of the Ear not to be pleased with harmonious
Music; or in the power of the Palate, not to be delighted with the Sweetness
of a Taste.

And thus I suppose it may appear, How far, and From what Ground there may be
Knowledge without Faith.

That God is all mercy and sweetness to the Devils, is no Article of my faith,
Those miserable creatures, says he, cannot consent to it. No more can I: And
yet I deny not, that Mercy and Justice are One thing in God. Gods Simple
Essence is the same with both; yet are not They so properly the same with each
other. The Torment of the Devils proceeds from that Divine Essence which is
Love; (as likewise the Mercies of Gods Children proceed from that Divine
Essence which is Justice: for the Justice of God is equally himself as is his
Love:) Yet may we not say, the Torments of those are an effect of Love, no more
then that the Mercies of these are the effects of Anger; yet Both are the
effects of that Simple Essence, which is Both. It is a far different thing
therefore, to say, A Loving God does notwithstanding Punish; and to say, A
Loving God does therefore Punish: Punishment and Revenge are sufficiently
consistent with Love; but not the immediate effects of Love. Thus we say,
Musicus Aedificat; yet not his skill in Music, but his skill in Architecture,
is exercised in Building.

The Love of God (as likewise his Anger, Justice, Power, etc.) is (I confess)
the Divine Essence; we allow no Accidents in God at all: quicquid est in Deo,
est Deus. But I ask, Whether he think this Attribute Love (and so of the rest)
to be an Adequate expression of that whole Essence? If so, then is it all one
to say, God Loves his Children, and, God is Angry with his children, or God
Hates them: If not, then is it only inadaequatus conceptus, and there remains
somewhat to be expressed by other Attributes, which is not expressed in this.
The Attributes of God therefore (as likewise it is in other inadaequati
conceptus) may be all affirmed of the same Simple Essence; but not (Mutually)
of each other: And the Effects of each may be said to be the Effects of the
same Essence; but not (Promiscuously) of every Attribute: (unless we take them
Materialiter, not Formaliter:) And consequently, the ruin (of the damned) is
not (as he affirms) an effect of infinite sweetness (though of that (Essence)
which i^, Infinite Sweetness;) nor is God, (in this) merciful to them.

Again, What we Know, we are, (says he:) I assume; Sed deum scimus, Ergo Dii
sumus.

CHAP. IX. How Knowledge and Affection differ.
FRom what has been spoken in the former Chapter, without adding any more, may
appear what is to be said concerning his Ninth Chapter: How it comes to pass
that some of mean Knowledge have Large Affections. For a Speculative Knowledge
does not always Breed Affection, (because the Will does not always follow the
Understanding,) though neither does it Extinguish it.

It is true, there is an Affection, which is rather a Blazing (then a Warming,
Enlivening) Love, (as the Fools Mirth like the crackling of Thorns;) Which
arises either from a False Apprehension, or else from the Novelty, rather then
the sweetness, of the Object, (as the Smell of Flowers at the first approach
does most Affect the Sense, though they be as Sweet afterward;) And This
perhaps may vanish, at the presence of a more Clear or more Continued Light.
But the true Warmth of Zeal is not extinguished by the Light of Knowledge,
(though Speculative,) but feeds upon it as Fuel: And the greater Growth there
is in (especially Experimental) Knowledge, the greater is the Strength of
Affection from it: And, thus, they that Know most (experimentally) do always
Love most: Knowledge and Affection go together.

Yet are we not forced from hence to grant, that Knowledge and Affection are
the Same: Betwixt which I must needs allow the same difference (be it more or
less, that is, Real, or Modall) which is between the Understanding and the
Will: Knowledge is not Affection, and Affection is not Knowledge.

And that Objection which his Lordship from hence makes to himself, That
(since men of Largest Affections, do not always Know most of God, but some of
Weaker Affections may Know More;) it might appear from hence, That all Being is
not One, differing only in Degrees; but that there are even different Natures,
amongst which one may Excel, while the other is Deprest: This Objection, I
say, i^ of that force, that I see not how all which his Lordship brings, can
take it away.

The large Encomiums, which he brings for Affectionate Knowledge, preferring it
before Speculative, (which he prosecutes very Piously, very Judiciously, very
Affectionately;) though it prove, That Affectionate Knowledge is the more
Excellent; Yet does it not show That Speculative Knowledge is Nothing; or That
the Measure of Affection always follows the Measure of Speculative Knowledge:
One of which he ought to have proved, if he conclude that Knowledge and
Affection are the Same. A man may truly Know, that Sugar is Sweet, though he
neither Taste its Sweetness, nor be Delighted or Pleased with that Taste. And a
Christian is sometimes to live by Faith and not by Sense; That is, he is to
Trust, and Rest upon the Speculative Knowledge of Gods Goodness, and his own
Interest in it; even then when for the present he wants the Sense of it. He may
Know and Believe that the Lord is Good, though he do not Taste and See it. I
will wait upon God (says Isay) which has Hid his Face from the House Israel.
He that walks in darkness, and Sees no Light, must yet Trust in the Name of
the Lord, etc.

And thus much for the first Notion of Truth, or Reason, as it is the
groundwork of Rational Operations. In which, thus far I may go along with his
Lordship, That Reason is but the Soul Intelligent; That Intellec^u^ll Habits
are but Reason advanced; As likewise That its Operations are but Reason
actuated. The first, distinguished from the Soul at least ratio^e ratiocinata:
the two last, Modaliter. If he mean no more, I wish his expressions had been
clearer: For then the Notions are not new, but the Words. If he do aliquid
grandius moliri; I either Understand him not; o^ cannot Assent to him.

But you will tell me perhaps, that I am mistaken all this while; His Lordsh^p
by Truth intends not Reason, as I take it; For the very Title of his first
Chapter, calls it Truth Understood, and this cannot be Reason, for Reason is
not that which is understood, but that whereby we understand.

It is true, it does so: But (shall I speak it once for all?) the Titles of his
^hapters, and his Marginall Notes, do so often clash with the Text, that I
cannot believe they were done by the same Pen. I^ i^ like his Lordship, writing
it but as a Letter to a private Friend, by whom i^ i^ since published, did not
at first distinguish it into chapters, and give it that Analysis that now
appears; and since its first writing, as the Epistle tells us not having so much
as perused it, it is not like he has added them since; But the Publisher (as
in the like cases is frequent in Treatis^s of all sorts) not to trouble his
Lordship with so small a matter, did it himself. Who ever did it, it is like
(as else where, so here) he either did not Apprehend, or not Attend punctually*
his Lordships meaning. For it is clear enough, if we attend it, that that which
he there contends to b^ the some with the Understanding, cannot be Truth
understood; but the Rise or Groundwork from whence all actions and sayings, the
Effects of a Reasonab^e Soul, breathe forth. It had been more agreeable to his
Lordships mind, to have said, Intellectus and Principium Intelligendi are the
same; and not, that the Understanding* and Truth-understood, are one* And so
his Lordships method will be Exact, making the Soul or Understanding* One with
its Faculties, chap. 1. with its Habits, chap. 8. with its Operations, chap.
10. Whereas, how the Object of all these, should come first, and be that from
whence all these breathe forth, appears not.

CHAP. X. Whether the Operations of the Soul be the Souls Essence.
HAving done (in the former chapters) with the first Notion of Truth, as it is
the Fountain or Source of Knowing, as well Natural as Habitual. In this tenth
Chapter, he comes to the second Consideration, or Notion of Truth; denoting the
Streams proceeding from this Fountain: The Actions, and Effects of a
Reasonable Soul. Endeavoring to prove, The particular and various Workings of
the Soul, in Conclusions, simple Apprehensions, Negations, and Affirmations
etc. to be all One and the Same, both with each other, and with the Soul. The
Fountain and the Stream (says he) make but One River: I add, The Root and the
Branches make but one Tree. Yet the Root is not a Branch, neither are the
Branches the Root.

To prove this, he compares the Nature of the Soul or Understanding (For,
says he, we have proved them both one) with their Irradiations and Actings.
His Argument tends to this effect: The Souls Essence, says he, is no other
thing then Activity (Actus) and therefore must be either Potentia agendi, or
ipsa Actio; Actus Primus, or Actus secundus. And if it be Actus, either Primus
or Secundus, *which he conceives to differ only in Time) it must be still in
work, and Is no longer then it Acts: Which Act can be no other but a Work of
Reason; else how can it consti^ute a Rational Soul? And if so, then how does
it differ from Thought or Ratiocina^ion? The Operations therefore of the Soul
(Conclusions, Sayings, Actions) are the Being, the Form of the Soul.

Are they so? But, I suppose, the Soul at some times produces no ( Rational)
Act at all, (as in sleep: Does it then cease to be a Rational Soul, when it
cease to produce Rational Operations? (For when its Essence cease, It
self cease to Be. Does a Stone cease to be Heavy, when it cease to Fall
downwards? I think not.

But I will consider the Argument distinctly. He has proved (he says) that
the Soul and the Understanding are both One. This, though I would not stick to
grant, Yet (as I have formerly said) I see not any Argument, in his foregoing
discourse, to prove That the Soul and Understanding are all One; but what will
be of equal force to prove, The Soul and the Body to be all One. And if he
will allow between the Soul, the Understanding, and its Operations, a
distinction as Real, a^ Essential, as there is between the Body and the
Soul; I am confident there is no rational Man that will desire more.

The Nature or Being of the Soul (says he) is nothing but Activity. That the
Soul is Actus, is confessed, I grant, by all: But whether Activity may be
taken in the same sense, I question. This Actus (says he) whether Primus or
Secundus (which differ but in Time, and so differ not at all, because Time is
nothing) c^^ be no other but a Work of Reason: And so the Souls Operation will
be its Form and Essence. That Actus primus and actus secundus, (Gravity and
Descension) differ only in Time, I grant not: For this is not a Distribution of
Actus into its Species; but a Distinction of an Ambiguous term. Actus in the
first sense signifies Actuality (not Action) and it is opposed sometimes to
Potentia ad Esse, sometimes to Potentia ad Formam; sieve sit forma Substantialis,
sieve Accidentalis, (but never to Potentia ad Operari;) And thus Actus is no
other but that Essence, per quam res aut actu-Est, aut est actu-Tale. Actus in
the second sense signifies, not Actuality, but Action, or Operain; and is
opposed to Potentia ad Operari.

I say therefore, the Essenc^ or Nature of the Soul or Understanding is Actus;
It is Actus Primus; It is that whereby the Soul and actu Est, and est Hoc, or
est Tale (viz. in genere substantiae,) Such a Being, Such a substance. Its
Faculties (if distinct) are also Actus, (yet not Actions:) Which you may say to
be Actus secundi (as some do) because they are a secondary actuality, whereby
the Soul becoms, not a Being, or Such a Being; but a Being So qualified, So
adorned: Or rather I should say they be Actus Primi, because (though
Accidental, yet) they are not Operations (which I conceive to be the truest
meaning of Actus secundus, though I confess some attribute it to all
Accidents,) but Forms; Operative indeed, but not Operations.

If you ask What is the Form of this Activity (or Actuality rather) of this
Actus primus which is the Souls Essence, If it be not Rational Workings?
(Which is all one as if you should ask What is the Essence of an Essence? and
again, What is the Essence of That Essence? in infinitum. I answer, The Form
of this Actus is It self, Its Essence. What can be the Form of Rationality,
but ipsa Rationalitas? Humanitas you may say is Forma Hominis; but will you ask
again, What is that which is forma Humanitatis? If you do we must answer still,
that it is Humanitas, and stay there. Except you would have us invent one
Abstract upon the neck of another, and say Humanitatitudo. And thus I think
somebody has been trying practices; For if you ask what is the Form of
Honorificum, or Honorificabile, they can tell you It is Honorificabilitas, or
Honorificabilitudo; and ask again what shall be Forma Honorificabilitudinis,
they will tell you, It is Honorificabilitudinitas.) I say, we must not enquire
for the Form of a Form, or the Essence of an Essence: For every thing has its
Essence (positive) and its Hae^ciety, not from any other thing, but from It
self; Though it may have an External, a Relative, or Accidental denomination
from some Adjunct.

(And therefore to say, Materiae individuatur a Forma, as though the Matter of
a dead Corpse, were not the same matter that was in the living Man, is a
doctrine which I could never digest. For so all Generation, will become
Creation; For if it be the Form which makes this Matter to be This, then cannot
one Form succeed another in the same Matter: because if the Form precedent gave
it its Individuation, and made it to be this, and not other matter; when this
Form is abolished, the Matter which is joined with the succedent Form will not
be This, but Other matter: If This Form make it to be This Matter, then Another
Form will make it to be Other Matter. And if so, then is both Matter and Form
produced de novo; which must needs be Creation, because it is not made of any
thing prae-existent, nothing remaining of what before was.)

He proceeds thus, If the Form of this Activity (Actus) be not th^se
Reasonable Workings; then must it be either of a baser allay, or of a higher
stamp.

For answer, I will but demand in general, which his Lordship judges to be
most E^cellent, the End, or the Mean^? That which is willed, not for its own
sake, but for somewhat else, seems to be of less worth then That for whose sake
it is desired: And yet the Mean^, being the Ends Efficient, how can it be
Inferior? I say therefore that A^^us primus is the Efficient of Actus
secundus; and This the (partial) End of the other: And leave it to his
Lordships consideration, Whether he will esteem thee more Noble.

He tells us soon after, That if we distinguish between the Act and the Power,
the Act must ever be first in Order, Dignity, and Nature.

But (under his Lordships favor) I conceive that the Act is first neither in
Order, in Dignity, nor in Nature. The Cause is before the Effect, in
Excellency, because Causa (aequivoca) est Nobilior Effecto; for nothing can
produce an Effect more noble then it self. 2 In Nature, Causa est prior
Effecto; For that is defined to be Natura prius, A qu^ non redit essendi
consequutio; Now I demand, Whether of these two may be without the Other? The
Act, or the Power? And 3 in Order: For he speaks I suppose either of the Order
of Production, or the Order of Intention; If he speak of the first; The Order
of Production, is Ordo naturae Generantis, and so that which is first in
Nature, must be also first in Order: If he speak of the Order of Intention;
then the End (if it be the Sole end) may seem to be preferred before the means;
But this is a Moral Excellency, and a Moral Order; not a Natural or
Physical Excellency, such as we are now speaking of. But I demand withal,
Whether Action be the sole End of the Soul? that is, Whether the Soul in its
Essence might not be produced either for its Own Excellency or for the
Excellency of some Other end beside the Excellency of its Operation or Actus
Secundus? And if so, then can it not be concluded That even its Moral
Excellency, in genere Finis, is inferior to the Excellency of its Operation.

But his Lordship admits not at all of this distinction between actus primus
and actus secundus; so as that actus primus should be the Being or Substance,
and actus secundus the Product. But why? They forget, says he, that Omnis
Virtus consistit in Action.

Nay we Forget it not, but we Deny it. For if you speak of Moral Virtue, est
virtus tacuisse, etc. but* To hold ones peace, is no Action: If he speak of
Physical Virtue or Excellency, of natural Perfection; then do I deny, that
all Natural Exc^llency consists in Action; for the Essence it self is Bonum
Physicum: But if he speak of Physical Efficiency, then I grant, that Virtus
Efficientis, or Efficientis Efficientia, consistit in Action; The Efficacy, or
Efficiency of a Thing consists in its Operation: But what then? May not an
Essence Be without Action, because it cannot Act without Action? Must its
Essence be Action, because its Efficacy is Action? In ordinary Philosophy,
operatio Sequitur esse, Operation Proceeds from the Essence, and not
Constitutes it.

But, says he; What is this their Actus primus? What is the Form of it? (I
have said, Its Own Essence; It is It self its Own Form, and the Form or
Essence of the Soul: We must not enquire for the Essence of an Essence, nor
for the Essence of a thing out of It self:) What is with them, the Form of a
Reasonable Soul? Is it not Reason? (Yes it is) And this Reason i^ not Potentia
Ratiocinandi, But Ratio: (he means, I suppose Ratiocinatio, rather then
Ratio; for Ratio and Potentia ratiocinandi are all one:) For if you distinguish
between the Act and the Power the Act must ever be first, in Order, Dignity,
and Nature: (But this I grant not.) So then, what is the Form of this primus
Actus? is it not some Act? (Yes, but not an Action or Operation.) If it be,
then must it exist, else you allow it but a bare Notionall Being; And if it
exist, mu^t it not be that which you call actus secundus? I answer, It is
Actus, (aliquid actu) but not an Action; It Exists also, and yet is not Actus
Secundus, but the Form from whence actus secundus flows.

He proceeds; If it be not an Act (or action) then is it nothing else but a
Power or Faculty depending upon somewhat else (viz upon the Soul;) and if this
be the nature of the First, what shall the second Being (which is its Effect,
and so Lower) be but a Notion. (Yet he said even now, that the Act is before
the Power in Order, Dignity, and Nature* and yet the Act is the Power'^ Effect:
How then ^oth he now affirm, that the Effect is somewhat Lower then the First
Being?) I answer, It is not an Action; neither yet is it a Distinct (dependent)
Faculty, (if we make the Soul and the Facul^y to be the same;) but the Souls
Essence. But yet though we should admit Reason to be a distinct Facul^y, (as
some do) and so, not to be the Souls actus primus, but actus afficiens: Yet
does, it not follow that the Operation must be only a Notion. Heaviness is
not the Stones Essence, but an Accidental Form, a Power or Faculty of
Gravitation; yet is not its Descension only Imaginary but Real. Heat in water
is not its Essence, but a separabl^ Accident; yet its Calefaction, it Heating
or Scalding, is not merely Notionall, but Real. So might it be here: there may
be (notwithstanding this Argument) a Faculty or Accidental Form in the Soul,
which may be an Actus Primus in respect of its Operations, (though, no^ actus
primoprimu^ which is the Souls ^ssence,) from whence those Operations, or
Actus Secundi may proceed, which ye^ might be Real, and not Imaginary.

^^ he had (as he speaks) set that distinction of Substance and Accident*
(which he seems to challenge as an aged Imposture) upon the Rack; I would
willingly* have examined its forced confession.

^^ the mean time, I see not from what ground ^e can strongly conclude, That
this Activity (as he speaks,) this Actus primus, consists in Action; or That It
and actus secundus are the some; and both One with Truth.

You will ask me, What distinction therefore will I allow between actus primus
and secundus; between the Agent and its Action? I answer, The One is Res, the
Other is Modus; and so the distinction is Modall: Neither more nor less
distinction will I admit of. And so doing, I dissent not from the Opinion of
others: For (as I remember) Suarez (not to instance in others) makes Action to
be a Modus; And though he make a Transient Action to be Modus Patientis, (in
which I assent not to him;) yet an Immanent Act (such as are Rational
Operations) is with Him, Modus Agentis.

CHAP. XI. Whether Time and Place be only Imaginary.
IN the next Chapter, we are called to consider of the nature of Time and
Place: which his Lordship occasionally falls upon, by reason of an Objection,
That lays so strong a siege to his Opinion, that I doubt hi^ Lordships Answer
will hardly raise it. It arises from hence;

There a^e in the Soul various Operations and Workings, distinct in Time, and
distinct in Place: which Distinction, though it may have an external
denomination in respect of Time and Place; yet arises not from thence, but is
Internal or Intrinsecall to the Operations themse^ves; This Operation is not
the Other, and the Other is not This. And thi^ distinction would remain though
the distinct Operations were performed in the same Time, in the same Place:
Cas^r and Pompey were not the same man, though Contemporary. The Water which to
day runs down a River, is not the same water with that which yesterd^y ran in
the same Place, the same Channel. Two Angels, though coexistent at the some
Time in the same Place* the same part of the Air, are not yet the same Angel.
Thus Nutrition, and Volition, or Intellection, though at the same Time,
performed by the same Soul resident i^ the same Body, are yet distinct Acts.
And on the contrary, a man remains the same man to Day, that he was Yesterd^y;
at This place, that he was ^t Another place; though both Time and Place be
altered.

Now there being in the Soul various Actings, distinct both in Time and Place
(though they receive not their distinction from either are there not then so
many several Souls* (viz. if the Operations be the Souls Essence?) This is
the Objection.

His Lordship supposing all the Difference between these Acts to arise from
Time and Place, thinks that if he prove Time and Place to be Nothing, then
these Acts will not be Distinct, but the same,; and so may constitute the same
Soul.

But, whether Place and Time be any thing or nothing, whether they alter any
thing or nothing in this point; Yet sure we are that This Man is not the Other
Man. This Soul not Another Soul, This Action is not the Other Action: And so
the difficulty remains as hard; there will be various Operations still.

He brings several Simile's to illustrate it. Complexion Lineaments, Harmony,
though they be in themselves Diverse, yet they make up One pleasing Being,
which we call Beauty. A Flame arising from diverse Thorns is but One Flame. A
Stream supplied from several Springs, is but One Stream. I may add, Many
Members make up One Body; Many Creatures One World. (Yet still One Member is
not the Other; The water received from One Spring, is not the same water which
came from the Other Spring, though both run in the same Channel.)

But will he say, So is it in our case? That (in the same manner) several Acts
do constitute One Soul? Are these Actions its Integrall Parts, as the Members
are of the Body; and several Waters of One Stream? etc. Are they a Piece of
the Whole and make up the totum Compositum? Then is the Soul Divisible; Then
does it lose some part of it self, and becomes maimed at the cessation of
every Action.

But he makes not the Soul perhaps to be constituted of these Actions, as so
many Integrall Parts; But, says he, The Soul is One Act, distinguished to our
Notton by several apparitions.

If so, then his Simile's drawn from Integrall Parts constituting the whole
Compositum, will not hold.

But (secondly) I deny that all these Operations are but one Action in various
Shapes. They are all Actions of the same Soul, but they are not all the same
Action. The Soul, If you will may be called, One Soul under Various Shapes;
But these Various Shapes cannot be said to be One Shape. Like as Wax fashioned
successively in several Moulds, is the same Wax in several Figures; but that
these are all the Same Figure, we cannot say. Actions performed by the same
Soul, are all Modi of the Same Thing, of the same Soul; but they are not all
the same Modus. This is not the Other.

And this we may hold, whatever become of Time and Place for this Distinction
arises not from Them. A man is the same Man to day, that he was Yesterday,
though the Time be not the same. He is the same Man at York, that he was at
London, though the Place be not the same. Time and Place do neither make the
Same to be Two, nor Two to be the Same; One to be Two, nor Two to be One: Yet
what hinders but that Things and Actions may have an Intrinsicall Difference
one from another.

These various Beings, therefore, not being Differenced by these Circumstances
of Time and Place, (th^ugh Different in both,) It is less material for me to
enquire What they are? or Whether they be some thing or nothing? Only I desire
to know, wherein the strength of that Argument consists, which is by us so
often urged against Papists and Lutherans, concerning their Transubstantiation,
and Consubstantiation; viz. How Christ's body can be at the Same Time in
Several Places? For, that i^ might be successively in all these Places at
several Times, we deny not: Now, if at Several Times it may be in diverse
Places; why may it not be so, at the Same Time, if Time and Place be Nothing?
Again, Several Places at the same Time may contein several Bodies ( v. g
Bread, and Christ's Body;) now why may not the Same place con^^ine them, if
Place be nothing? Why not Together, as well as Successively, if Time be nothing?

All actions, says he are Nothing if Time be Anything; Because the Time
allotted for every Action, be it never so short, may be divided into several
parts, many subdivisions of Time. True. But is there not the same Reason of
Actions that is of Time? are not they divisible into as many parts, whereof
every parcel answers to a portion of that Time? There is the same reason in
every Continuum, be it Magnitude, Distance Time, Place, Duration, Motion,
Action, or whatever: They are all equally divisible in semper divisibilia. If
it be Actio Instantanea, it is dispatched in an Instant, not in Time: If it be
Actus Continuus, it is capable of as many divisions as is that Time in which it
is performed.

This not being well weighed says he, has raised that Question, [How God
should see All things?] If in their Existences* then they are Coeternall with
him: If only in their Causes, then are they not Present. Which difficulty, he
supposes, is dissolved, by making Time to be Nothing, and Al things to be
exi^^ent, in their Beings, with God from all Eternity. (Which of how dangerous
a consequence it may prove his Lordship is not aware.)

That God before the worlds Creation, did co-exist to this Instant; I do
confidently affirm; Yet, that all things present, d^d exist before they were
produced, I cannot assent; which I doubt not but to reconcile, (if I were now
discussing that question ex professo, and not glancing at it in transitu)
allowing notwithstanding to Time and Place, their due reality; not making
Temporal and Local difference to be only Imaginary.

As likewise, How Permane^cy in God may consist with Succession in the
Creature; and How Acts (of Creation, Preservation, Redemption, Decree, the
Execution of that Decree) may be Eternal, as they pr^ceed from God, though in
the Creature recipiantur in Tempore* In Place we make no scruple of it, to
affirm that anima est tota in toto and t^ta in qualibet part, that the Whole
Soul may be present to one Point, or part of the Body, without ceasing to be
Wholly present to another part; (Or, if possibly in the Soul, and Created
Spiritual substances, it may be questioned; yet doubtless, in God himself,
it must needs be granted, that he is Vbique Totus:) Now, if it be not repugnant
to be coexistent to one Point of Place, without ceasing to coexist to another
point though Distant; Why not to one Point of Time, without ceasing to be
present to another, though Successive?

The next Objection, Concerning the nature of Evil, is of less force against
his Tenet. For, That Good and Evil may coexist in One entire Act; That there
may be some Degrees of Goodness in an Action, and yet not that Perfection of
Goodness, that ought to be; may as well be granted, as That the Twilight has
not [So much] Light, and [So much] positive darkness, but that it has not so
[Much] Light as the Midday. But yet in the mean time it may be doubted, whether
the Nature of Evil be merely Privative. It is true indeed, The nature of
(Moral) Evil is a Nonconformity (or Difformity rather) to Gods Law: But why
may not this nonconformity arise ex praesentia non debiti, as well as ex
absentia debiti, or ex defectu debiti inesse? May not a Line disagree from its
measure, by being too Long, as well as by being too Short? The not
distinguishing between bonum Metaphysicum, and bonum Morale, may perhaps have
caused some error in this assertion. But I stand not now to decide it: You
shall find more of it in the next chapter.

But that which is assumed as a ground of this Assertion, is far more
improbable then the Assertion it self. viz. That Contradictions may be simul,
semel, and eodem respectu, in the same Subject.

What necessity his Lordship had to embrace this opinion of Anaxagoras,
Democritus etc. (as he says,) against Aristotle; I do not discern. Neither can
I see, wherein this co-existence of Contradictions does appear. For the
Presence of an Inferior Degree, and the Negation of a Farther Degree, are no
Contradictions, because they are not ad idem. And such a Coexistence Aristotle
and his followers will not deny; Else how can they speak of Qualitates
Remissae? Nay more, They will grant an Inferior Degree, to consist, not only
with the Negation of a Farther Degree, but even with the Presence of its
Contrary; For they deny not but that there may be Contrary qualities in the
same Subject in Remissis gradibus, (as Heat and Cold in warm water, though not
in gradibus Intensis.

But if Anaxagoras, or any other, will contend, That perfect Contradictions may
^t and together, That the Presence of an inferior degree, may stand with the
Absence or Negation of the Same degree; It will be in vain to dispute against
it. For when I have proved it to be False, they will grant it is so, and affirm
withal, That notwithstanding its Falsehood, yet may it also be True, because
Contradictions are not Inconsistent. (Another adversary perhaps would deal
more sharply with his Lordship upon this point: I pass it.)

He proceeds to show by diverse similitudes, How the same thing may take diverse
shapes in our Apprehension; And consequently, that the several Apparitions of
Truth do not forthwith evince the Variety of Truth. All which we deny not, For
otherwise we cannot acknowledge that there is any distinctio Rationis;
Rational distinctions being no other but inadaequati conceptus ejusdem rei.
That there is therefore a Rational Distinction, we deny not; But that there is
Only a Rational Distinction, and not also a Real distinction; this is that we
deny. Some things we acknowledge to be only Ratione distincta, but Other things
we contend to have a Real distinction. Which must be overthrown before he can
conclude, that all the actions of reason which seem several, are but on^, a
fixed entire Unity.

He touches lastly, upon Copernicus his Opinion, Which, he says, has been
confuted these many years by the three leading Senses. (And yet his margent
says, that sense is confuted by Him.) For we [See] the circumvolutions of the
Heavens: we [Feel] our selves upon a stable Foundation; We [Heare] not from the
Volutations of the Earth such a black Cant as her heavy rowlings would rumble
forth.

But (not to dispute the truth of Copernicus his Opinion) I think I may affirm
that Neither of these Testimonies of Sense do any way contradict his Assertion.
For, first, I deny that we [See] the Revolution of the Heavens. We discern
indeed, (and that Truly,) that the Stars at several times have several
Positions in respect of our Horizon; (and this is all:) But whether this
diversity of Position arise from the Motion of the One, or the Other, or Both,
our Sight determins not; Affirming only That there is such a diverse Positure.
2 Our sense of [ Feeling] assures us of thus much, That the Earth is such a
Foundation as upon which we rest; and, that we remain in the same Positure in
respect of the Earth and the Air circumstant; Which may be as well if all
jointly Move together, as if all jointly stand still. A man in a Ship under
Hatches upon a smooth water, supposes himself to sit fast upon his Seat, (and
he does so;) and he sees all things about him to remain at the same Distance,
in the same Positure, discerning no alteration: Yet this hinders not but that
He and They may be jointly moved Together, without being thrown from off his
seat, upon which he may sit as firm as if he were on shore. And 3 for the sense
of [ Hearing,] I see no reason, why it should be more blamed for not hearing
the sound of the Earths Volutation; then for not hearing the Pythagorian
Harmony. If the vast Celestial Spheres, whose almost every Star does far
exceed the Terrestrial Globe, be whirled about with such a silent motion, as
that the quickest Ear cannot discern it; Why may not the Earth, a farrelesser
body, pass as quietly, without such a dismal Cant, such an hideous Noise, as
his Lordship does suppose? For Noise does not arise merely from Motion; but
from the Crossing or Thwarting of several motions, from the Clashing and
Collision of one Body against another, by reason that the One ( standing)
interrupts the Other in its Motion, or Both moving according to several
motions do mutually hinder each others progress: Whereas, if all moved the
same Way, with the same Speed, (as is supposed in the Motion of the Earth, and
the things adjoining) there would be no such Clashing, or Interruption of one
another, and (consequently) no Noise.

The Senses Testimony therefore does not contradict the Opinion of Copernicus,
The Eye tells us, that the Stars and We are at several times in several
Positures, but, whether it proceed from Their motion or from Ours, it affirms
not. Our Feeling informs us, that we are not tossed from Place to Place, that
is, from one part of the Earths Superficies to another, but remain upon the
same part of its Surface: But whether we jointly move together, or jointly rest
immovable, it determins not. The Ear can tell us, That it hears no Noise, (for
how can it since there is none?) But it does not say, There is no Motion. These
Witnesses therefore can testify nothing in this cause; Except we should suborn
them, and put that into their Mouths, which is not within their Knowledge, Or
falsify the Records, by supposing them to say That, which they say not.

CHAP. XII. Concerning Falsehood in the Souls operations. Whether it cease to
Be, when it c^aseth to Act Truth.
IN the twelfth Chapter, he comes to another Objection If Actings of Truth, be
Truth, (that is, if Rational Operations be the Soul, the Souls Essence) then
when the Soul Acts not Truth, it cease to Be: and so when it entertaineth
or pronounces a False Position, the Soul is no more it self.

This Objection I conceive to have two branches; For the Soul may cease to act
Truth, either by Not acting at all, or by acting Falsely. For whether it act
Not, or act Falsely, it cease to act Truth; and therefore (if acting of Truth
be its Essence) it cease to Be.

His first Answer may be equally applied to both; That, granting the Soul when
it acts upon Falsehood, to be as when it acts not, and so is not; Yet shall we
advance nothing, till we prove the Succession of Moments to be Real and not
Imaginary. Where he presupposes, that when it Acts not, then it Is not; and,
though the same be granted in a False acting, yet neither That, nor This, will
prove of any force, since Succession of Moments is only Imaginary.

The ground of this Reply, I conceive to be this; If there be not any Real
Succession, If there be no prius and posterius Indeed, but be only supposed so
to be by our Imagination; Then any One Act of the Soul, is able to give it a
co-existence to all Eternity: (according to what he affirmed in the former
Chapter.) For of this One Act, being Real, it cannot be affirmed, That it Was
but Is not, or it Is but has not-been; but if it at all Be, it must Be
always; Because, if Succession be only Imaginary, then to Be and to Have been
is all one; then there was not a time when it Was not, neither will there be a
time when it Shall Not be.

But if the Issue of the Question depend upon this, Whether Succession be
Real, or Imaginary; I doubt not but this might be soon decided.

Therefore First, I ask, Whether there be not the same reason for Succession in
Time, that is for Extension in Place? Whether there may be Pars extra Partem,
Punctum extra Punctum, though not Momentum extra Momentum; or there be the same
reason of Both, and Both be Imaginary? If there be in Both the same reason,
(which I suppose he he will affirm;) Then must every Being have a Coexistence
to all Places, as well as a Coexistence to all Times; It must have an Vbiquity
as well as a Perpetuity. Then is it in vain to dispute Whether Christ's Body be
Really present in the Sacrament, Whether Peter were ever at Rome, etc. If every
Body, every Thing* be every where. For if difference of Place be nothing, then
that which has a real existence in any place, has a real existence in all
places; because This place and all other places have only an Imaginary
Difference, and are indeed all one.

Secondly, If one action give the Soul a Coexistence to all ^ternity, then
what does the Second and Subsequent Acts produce? do they give it a new Being,
a new Eternity?

Answ. You will say (I suppose) that there is not a Second Act, an Other Act,
but all Acts are One Act: And this One act, which appears to our imagination to
be First and Second, etc. gives the Soul One Essence, One Eternity.

Repl. If so, then what is the difference between an Act of Sinning, and a
Course of Sinning? What is the difference between the Once committing of a
sinful Act, and the Often Reiterating of it? Between David's One Act of Adultery,
and the lascivious persons Constant Practice? Why are we exhorted to Cease from
evil; if every Act be Eternal, and whatsoever succeeds can be but the Same?
He that stole, let him steal no more: To what end serves this counsel, if
there be no other Act feazible, but what Is already, and That to remain for
ever?

Answ. 2. If you would say, That the same Act is again Reiterated* Rep. I ask,
if the Iteration be somewhat more then the first Commission? If not, then to
commit it Once, and to Iterate it often, is all One: If it be somewhat more,
then is it either a Real addition, or Imaginary: If Imaginary, then are we
where we were before; If it be Real, then why may there not be a real act
distinct from the former, as well as a real Commission (of the Same act)
distinct from the former? Thus you see if Time be Nothing, If Succession be
only Imaginary; then is it all one to commit Many sins, and to commit One
Sin.

Thirdly, if Succession and Difference of Moments be only Imaginary, if all
Duration be Eternal, all Simultaneous; Then what is the difference between the
long life of the Aged, and the few days of him that dy^th in his Youth? For the
Real Existence of One as well as the Other is equally Eternal; Since the
Length and the Shortness of Time is but Imaginary, all Duration being indeed
Simultaneous. Thus the youngest Child (if he do but Think so) has lived as
long as the most Aged.

Again, 4. If Succession and Difference of Time be only imaginary; Then why do
I not N^w know, that which I shall know To morrow? What hinders but that every
man should be praescius futuri? I shall Know it to Morrow, because I shall See
it; but why should I not Now both Know it and See it as well as to Morrow,
since it is Now as really present as it will be Then? Why do we dispute
concerning matters of Fact; as whether Peter were at Rome, and the like? Can we
not see whether he be there or not? For if he were there, then he Is there:
since Then and Now are all one: And if he Be there, why do not I see him there?
For I am as really there as he is: For if I be any where, then am I There,
since There and Here are al one; Time and Place making only an Imaginary (and
not Real) difference.

Ans. If you say, Things that seem to be Future, are even Now as really Present
as they shall be Hereafter, but they appear not to be present, and therefore
are not now Known and Seen, (like Colors in the dark;) But when they shall
receive a new Luster, they shall both Appear to be, and be Seen to be.

Rep. I reply, If they shall appear, then they Do appear; because Then and Now
are all one. Again, If there be Apparet and Apparuit, why not Est and Erit? If
there be a prius and posterius in Appearing why not in Being? Or 3 I ask,
whether Appearing and not-Appearing be a Real or only Imaginary difference?
If a Real difference, then will there be somewhat Real Then, which is not
Now; and consequently all Reality will not be Simultaneous, there will be
somewhat Real afterward which before was not: If Appearing, be only
Imaginary; what shall I have to help my knowledge Then, which I have not Now?

Ans. 2. If you say, Things Future are both now Present, and we Know them so to
be, but do not Seem to know them, or Seem, not to Know them:

Repl. Then I reply as before, If we Shall Seem to know them, we Do Seem to
know them; because Then and Now are all one.

So that if Succession of Time be only Imaginary; Then do we already know,
whatsoever we shall know, (whereas Christ himself Increased in wisdom, Luke
2.) And the Foreknowledge of things to come, would not be such a (...), as
might distinguish between the True and False Gods.

And thus (if I mistake not) I have sufficiently showed (though much more might
have been added) that there is a Real Succession, a Real Priority of
Duration, and not only Imaginary. And therefore (notwithstanding his first
answer) the Soul must really cease to Be, when it cease to Work, or to work
Truth; if these Workings of truth be the Souls Essence: And the soul must be
(during that Cessation, or Error) as truly Non Ens, as before its first
Production; for the precedent and subsequent workings cannot ( Then) give it an
Existence, as not ( Then) being.

His second answer, to the Objection propounded in the beginning of this
Chapter, touches not at all the first Branch of it, wherein it is objected,
That if particular Actings of Truth, be Truth, or the Souls Essence, How is it
that the Understanding should not cease to Be, when it cease to Work; (for
this in his first Answer he seemed to grant:) But it is applied to the second
Branch of it, viz. That If particular Actings of Truth be Truth, or the Souls
Essence, then the Soul entertaining a False position should be no more it
self. To which he answers, By denying that the Soul does at all act upon
Falsehood: and that upon this ground, Because Falsehood is not a Real Being upon
which the Soul can work. For its nature being Privative, and no Real Being,
how can the Soul or Truth work upon Nothing?

I might answer here, That it is not requisite to the Souls Act, that its
Object should have a Real being: (As appears by the Souls apprehending Ens
rationis; which Apprehension is a positive Act, and yet has no Real Object.)
For the Object of Intellection, is not Reale, but Cognoscibile. And therefore,
That Falsehood wants a real being, is not enough to show, that the
Understanding cannot work upon it.

And this (in effect) he grants soon after. For, it being Objected, that the
Soul while it pronounces a False position, does Really act, (vere agere; He
replies, That there are in this Action two things, a Thinking, and a
So-thinking. To think is a positive Action, a good Action, But the formalis
ratio of So-thinking lies in Thinking an Error, which is Nothing; and so a
Not-thinking. When (mistaking) a man catches at a shadow; In catching he does
truly Act; But to Catch a Shadow, is to catch nothing; Now to catch nothing,
and not to catch; to act nothing, and not to act, is all one. So to Think is
Real, but to Think Amiss is Nothing, and all one with Not-thinking.

He grants therefore, that the Soul pronouncing or Understanding a False
position, or thinking Amiss, does really Think, really Act: Now I ask, while
it does really Think, What does it think? What does it Act? (or Upon what
rather?) Certainly it must either be Falsehood* or Nothing: (For what else it
should be, neither does his Lordship show, nor can I imagine) If it Act upon
Falsehood* the false position; then may Falsehood be the Object of a Real act;
If it act upon Nothing, then what hinders, but that Falsehood* although it be
Nothing, may yet be the Object of this Act?

Object. But he will say, If the Soul do act upon Falsehood, then must it
become Falsehood, that is, a Vanity, a Ly, a Nothing: For I conceive (^aith he)
the Agent it self, together with the Subject acted upon (the Object) to be One
in the Act.

Ans^. But this supposition must I deny; For if so, Then when the Soul acts
upon God (by Knowing, Loving, etc) then does it become God: And if so, why does
his Lordship (at the end of his Preamble) blame those for mounting too high,
who, confounding the Creator with the Creature, make her to be God?

But for the better clearing of this whole discourse, concerning Falsehood and
Error in the Souls working; I shall desire you to take notice of a
Distinction, which all Know, and yet but few Think of, when they have occasion
to use it. The non attendency whereof, has produced much Obscurity, much
Error, and inextricable perplexities concerning this and the like Subjects. It
is, to distinguish between Verum Metaphysicum* and Verum Logicum; between Bonum
Metaphysicum, and Bonum Morale: To distinguish, I say, Metaphysicall Truth and
Goodness, from Moral and Logical Goodness and Truth: To distinguish the
Truth of Being from the Truth of a Proposition; the Goodness of Being, from
the Goodness of an Action.

Now this being premised, let us examine the truth of some Tenants which are
almost generally received by all.

1 The nature of Evil, say they, is Privative, not Positive; Evil is Nothing.
And why? Because Ens and Bonum convertuntur, and therefore Malum must needs be
Non-Ens; now Non-Ens is Nothing.

Be it so; Evil is Nothing. But what Evil do they mean? Evil in
Metaphysics* or Evil in Ethics? Goodness, in Metaphysics, is no other th^n
Entity, (for none ever acknowledged a greater distinction between Ens and Bonum
then a distinction of Reason,) and therefore Malum (in Metaphysics) must be
Non Ens. But will they say that Moral Evil is so too? If they do, then must
they say also, that bonum Morale is convertible with Ens; (otherwise their
Argument will not hold:) that All Being is Honesty, or Moral Goodness; and
all Moral Goodness is Being or Entity. I ask therefore, whether moral
Goodness, or Honesty, ^e the Essence, the Entity of a Stone? If not, then is
not every Being, Bonum Morale* I ask again, Whether Silence be not Morally
Good, at such a time as when a man ought to hold his peace? Yet to ^ Silent, or
not to speak, has no Metaphysicall goodness, no goodness of Being, for it is
a mee^ Negation. There may be therefore Moral goodness, where there is no
Metaphysicall goodness, no positive Being; and there may be Metaphysicall
goodness, goodness of Being, without Moral goodness or Goodness of
Honesty. Now if Malum Metaphysicum, a Negation, a Non-Ens, may be Bonum Morale,
what shall be the Malum Morale opposite to this Bonum? shall that be also a
Non-En^^ If it be, then how can it be contrary to the other? Since that Nothing
cannot be opposite to Nothing, but Something to Something, or Something to
Nothing.

I say therefore, that Metaphysicall Evil, is merely Privative, as being
opposite to the Goodness of Being; and it is no other but Nonentity* But
Moral Evil is every way as Positive as is Moral Good.

For what is the nature of Moral Good, or Evil? is it not, a Conformity, or a
Difformity to a Moral Precept? Then the Goodness or Evil of it is not in the
Being of the Action, but in the so Being; It lies not in the Positive or
Absolute Entity of the Action, but in the Relative nature. Moral Goodness
therefore, and Moral Evil, have not an Absolute Essence, but a Relative; An
Agreeing, or Disagreeing; a Likeness, or Unlikenesse, to its Rule. Now if
Likeness be a Real Relation; why may not Unlikeness be also a relation
Real? If Simile be Real, why not Dissimile? If the One be Positive, why not
the Other?

Object. They will say perhaps, That the nature of Moral Evil, is not a
Difformity but a Nonconformity, to its Rule; not to be (positively) Unlike,
but only Not to be Like.

Answ. If so, then not to be is a Sin; for not to Be, includes not to be
Like, or not to be Obedient. If the blessed Angels had never been Created, they
had been eo ipso Sinful: For if they had never Been, they must of necessity
Not be Obedient; (though not Disobedient;) For how can they be Obedient, if not
at all Being?

A Stone must then be Sinful, when it does not-understand the Nature of God,
as a man does and ought to do; For though it be not Disobedient to the precept
of Knowledge, (because this precept was not made to a Stone but to Man,) Yet
you cannot say that it is Obedient, and therefore must of necessity be
not-Ob^dient, or not-be Obedient; wherefore if a bare not-obedience, or a not
conformity to the command be a Sin, then does a Stone Sin. Scire Deum is
morally Good, and therefore (if moral Evil be only an Absence of Good) since
there is not in a Stone this Scire Deum, how can it be but that a Stone must
sin?

God commanded Moses to go down into Egypt, etc. and Aaron to offer Sacrifice:
Do I Sin therefore when I do not-obey this command made to them? How is it
possible that I can obey the command for Moses his Journey, or Aaron's
sacrificing; for My going is not Moses his going, nor is my sacrificing,
Aaron's Sacrificing; Yet do I not sin in not-obeying.

When Moses made the Brazen Serpent, he did not (in that) obey the precept of
going into Egypt, (for to go into Egypt, and to make the Serpent, is not the
same,) Yet was it not Sinful to make the Brazen Serpent, though it were-not an
Obedience to that Command, for neither was it a Disobedience; for that Precept,
did neither enjoin nor forbid it.

Thus every Action, though never so Good, will be a Sin; For there is in the
most perfect Act, a not-Obeying of many precepts, (yea of all precepts, except
that which injoyns this Action,) though there be not perhaps a Disobedience of
any.

The nature of Sin therefore, or Moral Evil, is not barely a Not-Obeying*
but a Disobeying; It is not a Not-Conformity, but a Difformity, a Crossing or
Thwarting of some Command. Therefore the Stone sins not, because there is no
Disobedience in its not-Knowing, because it was not Commanded; Moses his making
the brazen Serpent, was not a Breach of his former Injunction, although not an
Obeying of it; for in his Commission to go into Egypt, his making the brazen
Serpent was neither Forbidden nor Commanded. The Act of one Moral Virtue, is
not an offense against the rest; for it is no Breach of their Rules, though it
be not an Observance of them: It is Praeter, but not Contra.

Ans. 2. But if I should say on the contrary, That the nature of Moral Good,
were not a Conformity, or positive Likeness; but only a not-Difformity, a
not-Disagreeing, or not crossing its Rule; Might not this be said with as good
probability as the other? You would think it strange perhaps, that Evil should
be Positive, and Good Negative: But (if I m^stake not) there is more truth in
this, then is in the other. For a bare not-agreeing does not make an action
Sinful, but a not-disagreeing does make it Lawful, and so Morally Good; For
where there is no Law, there is no Sin. If I walk for my refreshing in one
part of the Garden to day, and in another to morrow; or in that other to day,
and in this to morrow; I sin not in either: Not because I have a Command to
walk in this first, or in the other part first: But because neither is
Forbidden, therefore is neither Unlawful. I ask therefore, whether the
Lawfullnesse of this Action, in walking first in this part of the garden and
not in the other part, do depend upon its Conformity to some Rule, or its
not-disagreeing from any? Now, what is the Lawfullnesse of an Action, but its
Moral Goodness?

Ans. 3 Yet Thirdly, I affirm not the nature of moral Good or Evil to be
Negative, but both equally Positive; If by Good, you understand, That which
Ought to be, not, That which May be. And therefore I make three sorts of Moral
Beings; Bonum, Malum, Indifferens* Good, which must be done; Indifferent, which
may be done; Evil, which may-not be done. The first, Commanded; the last,
Forbidden; the other, of a middle nature, neither Commanded, nor Forbidden;
which being Indifferent, is often called Good, but never Evil. The first
consists, in a Conformity to its Rule; the last, in a Difformity; the other in
a bare notdisagreeing. The first and last are of a Positive nature; the other
of a Negative. (And yet sometimes this Positivenesse, whether in Good or Evil,
is rather Positivum Logicum (the Praedicat of a Positive or Affirmative
Proposition,) then Positivum Reale. For an Omission, Negatio act^s, may be Good
or Evil: which having in it self no real Being, cannot be the Subject of a
real Relation.)

Yet does not this contradict their Opinion who affirm, That non datur actio
Indifferens in individuo. For by Good and Evil, they mean Licitum and
Illicitum, Lawful and Unlawful; including under the name of Good, or Lawful,
not only that which Ought to be done, but whatsoever May be done; as when (in
civil matters) we say, it is Lawful for me to give such a portion of my
Estate to such a Man, not because the Law of the Kingdom Injoins me so to do;
but because it does not Inhibite me. And thus Licitum will be a Negative term,
and Illicitum a Positive, (though by the Grammatical Notation it might seem
contrary;) for Illicitum affirms, that there is a Law to the Contrary; Licitum
denies only that there is such a Law to Forbid it, but whether there be any to
Command it, it affirms not.

And thus much concerning the nature of Evil. (Wherein if I may seem prolix,
it being but a Digression in this place: Yet because I was called to it in the
former chapter, where his Lordship gave me occasion to handle it; I thought it
more fit to refer the discussing of it to this place, where I meet with more
questions of the like nature.)

2. Now, as it is in Good and Evil, so also in Truth and Falsehood. Falsehood,
says he, is a Vanity, a Lie, a Nothing And why so? Because Ens and Verum
convertuntur, and therefore Falsum must be non-Ens.

To this I say, as to the former; Truth of Being, or Metaphysicall Truth, is
Positive, and of the same extent or latitude with Entity, or Being. And this
Truth I have formerly said to be Cognoscibility, making Verum in this
Metaphysicall acceptance to be all one with Intelligibile.

I affirm also, that Ens and Verum (or Intelligibile) convertuntur. And
(consequently) according to the manner of Being, must be the manner of
Intellection. That which has a real Being (as Ens Reale) may be Known to Be;
that which has an apparent, or supposed Being, may be Supposed to Be.

I affirm likewise, that Falsehood in this sense cannot be understood, or that
the Soul cannot act upon (Metaphysicall) Falsehood: For how can that be Known,
which is not Cognoscible; or Understood, which is not Intelligible?

But, When I affirm, that Verum and Ens are Convertible; I restrain it not to
Real Entity; For there may be Esse Cognitum, where there is not Esse Reale:
But I proportion its Cognoscibility to its Being; and therefore if it have not
a Real Being, but only Imaginary; it may be Supposed, but cannot be Known, to
be.

Neither yet do I So proportion the reality of Intellection, to the reality of
the Object, as if when there is no Real Object, there could be no Real Act:
For it is Cognoscibile that is convertible with Ens, and has its reality
proportionable to the reality of Being; not Cognos^itivum. The Understanding,
whether it Know to be, or Suppose to be, does yet Really Act; And his Lordship
also grants, that when the Understanding does act Amiss, it does yet Really
Act; The Opining, or Thinking, (says he) is a good Act. But where the Object
is not Real, there the (...) Cognosc^, cannot be Real; for how can a real
Relation be founded in a Nonentity? Yet the (...) Cognoscere is Real; for the
Reality of ^t, depends not upon the reality of the Object, but upon the reality
of the Act. That therefore which is so understood, is the Supposed Object of a
Real Act.

But now Logical Truth, the Truth of a Proposition, which is opposed to
Falsehood, ^o Error, has nothing to do with the Reality either of the Object
or of the Act; For a True Proposition may be framed concerning an Imaginary
Object (as when we affirm a Chimaera to be Ens Rationis, or only Imaginary*)
And an Act Metaphysically True (a Real act) may be Logically False.

Logical Truth and Falsehood (like as Moral Good and Evil) have not an
Absolute Being, but Relative. They consist not in the Being or Not-Being of the
Act; (For when the Understanding does act Falsely it does vere Agere, though not
agere Vere; it is vere Actus, though not Verus Actus:) but in the Agreeing, or
Disagreeing with the Object. For when the Intellect does Understand, it frames
an Idea, a picture, or representation of the Thing understood* which Picture,
or Idea, is a Real Picture, (it has the Truth of Being) whether it have the
Truth of Representation or not; that is, whether it be Like or Unlike, whether
it Agree or Disagree, with the copy or object which it represents. A Picture in
a Painters Shop is truly a Picture, it has real Colors and Lineaments; But
perhaps it is a False Picture, it represents not that Visage by which it was
drawn. When the Understanding conceives an Ens rationis, the Idea or Conceptus
is not this Imaginary Being, (for this Conception is as Real as the Conception
of a Real Ens,) But the supposed Object of this Conception; there being indeed
no such thing as this Conceptus does represent. When a Painter describes in a
Table some Antic Shapes or strange Chimaera's; his Description, his Draught,
is not a Fiction, but as Real as the true Pourtraicture of a living Man: But
that which by this description is represented, that is the Fiction, there being
no such Antic Forms, no such Chimaera's, as he expresses. When the
Understanding draws a Real Picture, a real Idea or Conceptus, without a Copy,
without a Pattern; it is Ens rationis: When, endeavoring to imitate a Copy, to
represent the nature of things, the Truth of Being; it yet misseth of it, not
making its Picture agreeable to its Pattern; this is a False Apprehension. And
this is the difference between Ens rationis, and Error Intellectus: Both in the
mean time being real Acts.

The Logical Truth and Falsehood of a Conception or Proposition, are but
Relations of Likeness or Unlikenesse, Conformity or Difformity, in the Act to
its Object; and are both founded in the Reality of the Action, or its Truth of
Being: And are both equally Real, equally Positive* For Falsehood is not a mere
not-Conformity, or not-expressing of things existent; But a Difformity, a
Crossing or Thwarting of them. For else, when a man cease to Think or Speak
of this or that Truth, he there by Erres, and Lies: For when he Thinks not at
all, he cannot think Conformably; when he Speaks not at all, he cannot speak
Conformally, either to the Existence of Things, or to his own Opinion of them.
Yea every Proposition, every Thought will have so many Falsehoods in it, as
there be other Truths which it does not express: For if the not-expressing of
a Truth, be Falsehood: then to affirm that the Sun shines, is a Falsehood,
because it does not express the Fires hea^, or the Charcoals burning: And thus
that proposition which expresses not every Truth, is a False Proposition; yea
contains Infinite Falsehoods, opposite to the Infinite number of True
Propositions possible.

Object. If you say (to avoid this) that it is not the not-expressing of One
Truth, the not-conformity to One Existence, that makes a Proposition False; but
the not-expressing of Any Truth: whereas the Conformity to, and the Expressing
of any Truth, makes the Proposition or Conception True:

Ans. I answer first, that this is contrary to the general Proposition, which
affirms, that Perfectio oritur ex Integris, Imperfectio vero ex Particulari
defectu: Which is applied to several kinds of Imperfection; That Action is
Good, whose every Circumstance is rightly ordered; That Proposition True* whose
every Branch does agree with the Thing, etc. Whereas One Bad circumstance, One
false branch makes the Action bad, the Proposition False. The contrary to which
must have been affirmed, if the expressing of One Truth, make the Proposition
True; and the concurrent not-expressing, or not-Conformity to All Truths be
requisite to make it False.

2. Again, If there be requisite a not-expressing of Any Truth to make it
False; then must this (and the like propositions) be True, if I affirm Virgil
and Homer to be Greek Poets, If I affirm a Stone to be a Reasonable Creature:
For it expresses One Truth, viz* that it is a Creature although it be not
Reasonable, (as likewise the One was a Gre^k Poet, though not the other:) and
the not-expressing of a further Truth, does not hinder its expressing of This.
Then must that Action be Good whose One Circumstance is Good; If the Intention
be right, though the Formality of the Action be never so unlawful, yet will
not the Act be Blamable.

Logical Falsehood therefore is as positive, as Logical Truth; the one
consisting in a positive Conformity, the other in a positive Difformity to the
Things. Yea, of the two, the nature of Truth is rather Negative, the^ the
nature of Falsehood; For a not-conformity makes not a Proposition False; but the
not-difformity makes it True. For that is a True proposition that is not
Opposite to Any Truth* though it do not Express All Truths.

Neither can there be a Medium between Truth and Falsehood, as there is between
Good and Evil; For though there may be an Indifferent Action, which is neither
Good (positively) nor Evil; yet is there not an Indifferent Proposition which
is neither True nor False. Truth and Falsehood in Propositions, are opposed as
Lawfulness and Unlawfulness in Actions, (whereof Lawfulness, as I have said,
is Negative;) rather then as Good and Evil, Laudabile and Vituperabile.

Yet if we desire a Medium, I can show you one; But then it must not be Actus,
but Negatio Actus. And that is, in Abstraction; when the Understanding
conceives of one Thing, without considering of another* for then it does
neither Affirm, nor Deny, and so that Conception is (thus far) neither True
nor False; as likewise the Proposition expressing this Thought. When I conceive
of the Air, not regarding whether it be Light or Dark; of a Man not considering
whether he be Learned or Ignorant: This Abstracting, or considering the Air
without considering Light in it; considering Aristotle to have been a Man, not
considering withal that he was Learned; is neither True nor False: According
to that, Abstrahentis non est Mendacium: whereas if I affirm the Air (in the day
time) to be without Light, or Aristotle without Learning; the proposition is
False.

Falsehood and Truth therefore being Relations, equally Real, equally Positive*
the Understanding may be said as well to Act Falsehood, as to act Truth, while
it produces that Absolute Act, in which these Relations are founded.
Otherwise* what will be the difference between Ignorance and Error, between
Silence and a Lie?

3. There is yet another Question, to which by his Lord. I am invited; The same
(says he) may be said of Pain; which he conceives cannot act upon the Soul,
nor the Soul upon it; because it is but a bare Privation. And therefore
subscribes to the Opinion of Dr. TWISSE, (whom if Anagrams may be credited, you
may style WISEST;) that it is better to be in perpetual Pain, then not to be
at all; Because if Pain be a bare Privation, then is Any Being more desirable,
then for fear of a Privation (a Nothing) to become no Being. His ground you may
easily perceive; Because if Misery be but a Privation of Happiness; then is it
better to have the Goodness of Being, without the Goodness of Happiness,
then to want both the one and the other.

But I cannot with his Lordship (saving always the deserved respect due to that
Reverend Divine) subscribe to the Opinion of Dr. Twisse in this particular. For
(beside that thus Paena Damni, and paena Sensus will be all One) I conceive
Pain to be as real as Pleasure. Motion has been accounted by all (if I
mistake not) to be Positive, and Rest (quies) to be only Privative, Negatio
Motus. Now in my Opinion, Ease, and Pain or Torment, are opposite in the same
manner that Rest and Motion. And so I conceive Pain or Torment (whether you
speak of dolor Corporis, or dolor Animi; the Grief of mind, or bodily Pain) to
be Real; the Negation whereof is called Ease; and its Contrary, Pleasure or
Delight.

Neither does it at all trouble me, that Ens and Bonum convertuntur; that all
real Entity, has a real Goodness, or the goodness of Being: For nothing
hinders but that Bonum Metaphysicum, may be Malum Physicum* that which is Real
may notwithstanding be Inconvenient; that which is, in se Bonum, may not-be
Bonum huic, whether you speak of bonum Jucundum or bonum Vtile.

Goodness of Being (Metaphysicall goodness) is but a common Subject capable
either of (Physical) Good or Evil; (like as the same Real Action may be
Morally Good or Evil.) And according as the Physical Good, or Evil (annexed
to Being Metaphysically Good) does exceed, so is that Being Desirable, or not
Desirable. Otherwise, How could it be better for that man (which betrayed our
Savior) that he had never been born?

I urge not the judgment of Sense in this particular; because his Lordship
appeals from Sense to Reason: I shall therefore examine what Reason can
allege, why credit should not be given to the judgment of Sense. For, ^having
a Judgment confessed in the Court of Sense; I must suppose* it to be in force,
till such time as I see it revoked by Reason: And when Reason has reversed it,
I will grant the former Sentence to be Void.

Object. You will say Being, though Miserable, has some Goodness: whereas
Not-Being has none: and therefore Being, though with Misery, is more desirable.

Ans. I reply, Misery has much Evil, not-Being has none: Therefore Misery is
more to be Shunned then not to Be.

But if this satisfy not; I desire to know whether there be not the same
strength of Reason in This Argument, that is in Theirs. viz: A Sinful Act has
in it the Goodness of Being; and its Sinfullnesse i^ only a Privation of
further Goodness, the goodness of Conformity to Gods Law. Therefore, it is
better to Sin then not to Act; to commit a Sin then not to commit it: For
if I Sin, I produce ^ome Good; because it is a real Action, and so has the
Goodness of Being; But in notacting, not-committing, I produce no Goodness at
all. Therefore it is better to Sin, then not to Sin: because Acting, though
Sinful, has Some good, but Not-acting has None.

Now if this Argument do not hold good to prove it Better to Sin (be the
Sin as great as can be possible) then not to Act, not to Sin: Then must I
needs think that their Argument, being exactly in the same form, is of as
little force, to prove Misery (though never so great) to be better then
not-Being.

But let us hear his Lordship plead at Reasons Bar, for the revoking that
Sentence which has past in the Court of Sense. Reason tells us (says he)
that Pain must be Something, or Nothing: If Nothing, then it is but a
Privation; ^f Something, then must it be Good or Evil; If Good, it cannot hurt
us; If Evil, it is either a Nominall Evil, or Real* If Named an Evil and is
not, it will not be disputed; but if it be a Real Evil, then is it Nothing*
for Evil is only a Privation of Good.

I answer to this discourse; That Pain is Something, It is Evil, It is a Real
Evil, (Malum Physicum.) And this Real Evil is also Posi^ve, and not a bare
Privation of Good: For I conceive not a Stone to be in Pain, though it have not
Pleasure, (bonum Jucundum;) nor to be Greived, though it do not Rejoice.

There is one great rub that yet remains against what I have said, concerning
these three last mentioned Questions; which I have referred to the End, that so
once mentioning might suffice, without particular repetition in the discussing
of each Question. And it is this.

If Falsehood and Evil, whether Moral or Physical, have a Being, (if it be
Real) then must we with the Manichees make two Sources of Being; or else God
must be the Author of it, which none will affirm.

For answer to this, I intend not ex professo to handle at large that question,
Whether, and In what Sense, God may be called the Author of Sin, of Evil, of
Falsehood. For, if I durst to encounter that difficulty, which has troubled
able Divines; yet would it be too tedious to insert here, especially when I
have already transgrest with over much prolixity. Only thus.

All Relations, you know, have their Original, not from any peculiar Act
whereby they are produced, distinct from that Act by which is produced that in
which they are grounded; But arise and flow from that Absolute Being, upon
which they depend, per nudam Resulta^tiam, by a Resultation from it, without a
new intermediate Act. The Father does not by One act beget his Son, and by
Another act (He, or his Son) produce Filiation: But the terminirelationis
being once produced, the Relation does unavoidably follow: Two white things
being produced, it is impossible (etiam per divinam potentiam) but that they
must (in this) be Like.

Now Falsehood and Truth, Good and Evil, being (as I have said) Relations; and
consequently having no other Production, but their Resultance from their
Foundation; I leave it to others to judge, How far God does concur with the
operation of the Creature in producing that Act, which is Good or Evil, True
or False; and How far the Efficient of this Act may be affirmed the Cause of
that Relation which does result from it.

CHAP. XIII. The Consequents of this Assertion, that All things are one Truth.
Whether useful in Practicalls.
I Have now done with his Lordships Thesis laid down in the full extent in the
several branches of it. The Chapters ensuing are but a declaration of the
Consequents, the Vsefullnesse of this Position. Which, says he, if we
consider, viz. That all things are but one Emanation from divine power; It
would make our lives more cheerful, more Christian, both in the Practical and
Theoreticall part.

That all things are but one Emanation, if he speak of unum per aggregationem,
I grant; and so I suppose will all else. God alone has his Being of Himself,
and gives Being to all his Creatures: (...). And whatsoever Being they have, it
is only a communication of that Being which he has in him self. But that the
Parts of this One Aggregatum are not Really distinct from each other; has not
yet been so clearly proved as to convince me.

His Arguments, if they prove any thing, will prove, That God cannot produce
Creatures really distinct. For if it be enough to prove, All things that now
are to be really the same, Because the Fountain of them all is God; the thing
Communicated, their own Essence; and the Recipient, Themselves; (because the
Essence produced, receives of God (...) Esse:) Then is it impossible for God
to produce any thing that shall not be the same with these: For whatsoever can
be possibly produced, If God be the Author of it, Then must He be the
Fountain, and It self the Recipient, receiving from God (...) Esse.

This being premised, I ask, Whether this One Emanation which his Lordship
seeks to establish, be Really distinct from God or no? If not, then must not
his Lordship blame those that confound the Creator with the Creature, making It
to be God. But if this one Emanation be distinct Really, If this Fountain have
sent forth One Stream really distinct from it self, What hinders but that it
may send forth More Streams? Has God (like Isaac) but One Blessing? Or Can he
produce more but Will not? If he Can; then is it Possible that Two Emanations,
Two Creatures, may be really distinct, though receiving their Essence from the
same Fountain. And if Any Creatures may be possibly distinct from other, Why
not These Creatures that now are? there being no more to be alleged for their
Unity, then for the Unity of all Possible. Gods (...), his Power also, and the
Emanation of it, is So Uniform, as that it is equivalent to an Infinite Variety.

He proceeds to this purpose. In the Practick part of our Lives (says he) If
we knew that all things were One, with what Cheerfullnesse, what Courage,
should we undertake any Action, any Difficulty; Knowing The distinction of
Misery and Happiness, to have no Being but in the Brain; That Misery is
Nothing, and cannot hurt us, That every thing is Good, and Good to me, Because
I and It are Beings and so Good, And these two Goods falling under no other
difference but of Degrees, Good and Good must needs agree, that which is Good
is Good to Me: Yea how void of Envy at another good, and of thoughts of
Revenging Injuries; Since I have a Propriety, a Possession of that which is
Another, he and I being One; Injuries are Nothing and cannot hurt; Good
things, though another, do serve me.

That all things are one; That the difference between Happiness and Misery is
only in the Brain; That Misery, That Injuries, are Nothing and* cannot hurt;
That whatsoever is Good must be Good to Me; and (which is the ground of it)
That Good and Good, Ens and Ens, admit of no difference but of Degrees: I have
already denied. I will only add, That by this discourse you prove the Devils
as happy as the blessed Angels: And if it be a Good Consequent of this
Position. That it will make us no^ be afraid of Misery and Danger: I am sure it
is as Bad a Consequent, That it will make us not afraid of Sinning. The Devils
are Beings, and therefore Good; Every thing that is, is Good, and Good to them,
For both They and It being Good, and admitting of no difference but of Degrees,
Good and Good cannot but agree, and so, be Good to them: The Happiness of the
blessed Angels does serve Them, since (as his Lordship speaks) it is not only
(...), but (...), They have a Propriety in it: Their own Misery and Torment is
nothing, and cannot hurt them; And (which is the only difference which you can
imagine) if they Think otherwise (I use still his Lordships expression) this
must be a Lie, and cannot hurt. And if this be Hell; who will be afraid to
Sin?

My judgment cannot assent to make the Torments of the damned, only
Imaginary; To make Hell a Fancy. Yea to affirm, That it is Good to sin,
Because the Act of sinning is a Real Good; and its Evil, only Imaginary, a
Lie, and cannot hurt.

CHAP. XIV. Whether Knowledge and Sciences receive benefit from this Assertion.
HE proceeds to show the Usefulness of Unity in Theory; and complains, that
Learning is broken into so many Sciences: wishing that it were all like the
Chain fastened to Jupiters Throne, All of a piece. And indeed I wish as
heartily as his Lordship, (whether All things be One Emanation, or Many) that
Comenius his design, (of which his Lordship speaks) of reducing all into one,
might proceed: Of reducing, I say, all Knowledge into a Body, all Sciences into
one System; (for This is it Comenius designs; he never fancied his Lordships
Unity.) And great pity it is, that so worthy a design is not prosecuted at a
public charge, that such a shining Light should be extinct for want of Oil; if
there may be hopes of effecting it.

He shows what a Multitude of Inquiries we must needs make for the perfecting
of Knowledge, whilst we acknowledge a distinction in Things; which labor might
be much contracted, If we could be content to see all things to be but One,
bearing only different Shapes. But though this were allowed; Yet must we then,
either look at all things with a Confused Eye; or else shall be as much
troubled in taking notice of Different Shapes, as we are now in observing
Different Things.

He reckons up many doubts, as not yet determined, concerning the Existence of
Beings; What things there are, and What they are; Qu^nam sunt, and Qualia (vel
Quid) sunt. But I see not how his doctrine, of Unity in all things, will
resolve any of these. For granting all things to be One, Yet how shall I know,
whether there be an Vnicorn^, a Phoenix a Mermaid, or Ebur F^^^il^? Whether the
Philosophers Stone, or a Perpetual Motion, be possibile? Whether Dictamnum be
a Sovereign Balm? Whether Tobacco be hot or cold? What are the degrees of Heat
or Cold in this or that Simple? If then this Opinion serve no way to inform us
concerning these Questions wherein we doubt; How can he commend this opinion,
as Useful, from the manifestion of our Ignorance in these particulars? If he
would exhort us, not to enquire; this he may do though they may be Many; If he
would have us search, whether or no there be these several Shapes, How does
their common Unity help forward the Enquiry? You see (says he) in what a Maz^
you are Meandred, if you admit of any Division. I wish we could see how to help
it, by allowing his Unity.

Yet notwithstanding their multitude) he accounts the knowledge of Existences,
and the Being of things, to be Necessary; although those things are all of one
Nature, variegated only in our apprehension. (But for ought I see, it is as
little labor for us to find, that there are so many Things, as for his
Lordship to find out so many Shapes.) But to enquire the Causes of these
Beings, is (in his Lordships opinion) to become Majestatis rei* for prying into
th^se Arcana Imperii.

In my judgment, there may be as great a Vanity and Emptiness in the curious
enquiry after the Being of Things, as in the too nice search of their Causes.
Vain Philosophy may be as well in the Historical as in the Discursive part. A
modest inquiry both into the Beings, and into the Causes of Things, is both
Lawful and Commendable; a nice Curiosity is blamable in Either: It will prove
but Vanity, if not Vexation; Weaving a Spiders Web, if not Hatching a
Cockatrices Egg. T^las quasdam doctrinae pariunt, t^nuitate fili operisque
Admirabiles, sed quoad usum Frivolas and Inanes. Bacon. L^ke a Razor of too
keen an edge; As Seneca speaks of Chrysippus, Magnum ^^hercle virum, sed cujus
acumen nimis Tenue retunditur, and in se saepe replicatur* etiam cum agere
aliquid videtur, Pungit, non Perforat.

CHAP. XV. Whether confusion in the knowledge of Causes be redressed by this
Unity.
OF Causes* he tells us) there are Two lie open to our view, The Universal
Efficient of all things, God; and the Materia prima, (...) common Essence;
Other Causes (says he) are better known by Name then in the Natures of them;
(as Efficient, Final, Material, Formal, etc.)

We are ignorant, I grant, in the particular causes of diverse things; and
therefore when we have no other but those two Generals, we must rest there. But
if the other appear and Show themselves; we need not shut our Eyes for fear of
Seeing them. It is not like to cost us so dear as Ovid's, or Act^on's sight, or
as those that saw Medusa's Head.

Till Numeri Platonici (says he) cease to be a Proverb, in vain shall any
undertake to teach him How and Whence it is, that the various Rowlings of the
Tongue should send forth so many articulate Voices, and so many several
Languages.

We say already, That the different Articulation of Sounds, arises from the
diverse Figuration of the Organs. If his Numeri Platonici can give us a better
account, I would be glad to hear it.

Till then, he will give no credence to any who promises an account of the
Estuation of the Sea; Whether from the Moon, etc.

That Numeri Platonici will furnish us with a better reason; I will then
believe, when I see it. In the mean time I see nothing to hinder us from an
Enquiry after a Physical cause. And I doubt his Lordship will have a hard task
to give a reason in Numbers, why the Sea ebbes and ^lows.

CHA^. XVI. Whether divisions in other parts of Learning be remedied by it.
NExt he shows us many doubts in Moral Philosophy, as well as those precedent
in Natural Philosophy. But I do not see that his Lordships Position will help
to clear any one of them whatsoever.

Whether the Understanding and the Will be Really the same, or distinct, is
nether Material nor Determinable, in Moral Philosophy: It belongs only to
Natural Philosophy, viz. to that part of Physics that treats de Anima.

How the Will may sometimes omit the prosecution of the Understandings
direction; I have already showed, without making the Will an Understanding.

He glanceth at Aristotle's maintaining the Eternity of the World against
Hermes, Orpheus, Anaxagoras, etc. For my own part, I would be thankful to him,
that would solidly demonstrate the Worlds Creation from principles in Nature,
and make it appear from Natural Light, that the World could not have been from
Eternity. For though I deny not, but that there may be in Nature, Demonstrative
Arguments; yet I confess, I have not as yet seen those (and yet I have
examined many) that have given me so full satisfaction as I desire concernng an
absolute Impossibility; but that I have seen (at least seemed to see) some just
exception.

But if his Lordships Opinion be True, I shall have more cause to doubt then I
have formerly had. For if all things did exist in their Beings with God, ab
omni aeterno; and their Temporal Existence be only Imaginary, to our
apprehension: (as his Lordship affirms in his 11. Chapter, page 99.) I cannot
imagine any hinderance at all, Why that which did really exist from all
Eternity, might not be without a beginning; Why that which Was ab aeterno,
might not (though it did not) ab aeterno Appear to be, and be Apprehended. I
will not therefore blame Aristotle for maintaining the Worlds Eternity as a
disputable Problem, till I see some Light which might have convinced him,
whilst he enjoyed not the benefit of Revealed Light; at least, till this
opinion of his Lordship be rejected.

In the next place, I grant to his Lordship that there are doubts also in
Metaphysics, in Logic, in Mathematics. But I perceive not how this opinion
dissolves them.

There be doubts also in Divinity, (though I do not see how this does clear
them*) Whether Faith, or Repentance be precedent: Whether Faith be a particular
application of Christ to my self: or only a bare spiritual belief, that
Christ is the Son of God.

I as^ent not, to place (the Saving Act of) Faith, either with Mr. Cotton, (as
his Lordship cites him) in the laying hold of, or assenting to that Promise,
That, He that believes that Christ is the Son of God, shall be saved; Nor
yet in a Particular application of Christ to my self in Assurance, or a
believing that Christ is mine: (For though these also be acts of Saving Faith,
yet they are not the Saving Act of Faith.) But I choose rather to place it in
an act of the Will, rather then in either of these forenamed acts of the
Understanding. It is an Accepting of Christ offered, rather then an Assenting
to a Proposition affirmed. To as many as [Received] him, etc. that is, to them
that Believe in his name, Joh. 1. God makes an offer of Christ to all, (else
should not Reprobates be condemned for not accepting of him; as neither the
Devils are, because he was not offered to them) Whosoever Will, let him come,
and Take of the water of Life freely Rev. 22. 17. Whereupon the Believing Soul
replies, I will, and so Takes him. When a Gift is Offered to me; That which
makes it to be Mine, is my Acceptance, my Taking it; Not the Knowing that it
is Offered; nor the Knowing that it is Mine; For the one of these precedeth,
the other follows, the appropriating it to my self.

If you call this Taking of Christ, (or consenting that Christ shall be my
Savior* a Depending, a Resting, or Relying upon Christ for Salvation; (if you
speak of an Act of the Will:) It is all One. For, Taking of Christ to be my
Savior, and Committing my self to Christ to be Saved, is the same: Both of
them being but a Consenting to this Covenant* I will be your God, and you shall
be my people; I will be thy Father, and Thou shall be my Son.

And if you make this the Saving act of Faith; then will Repentance (so far
as it is distinct from Faith) be a Consequent of it. Confidence also or
Assurance that Christ is mine arises from it: For Christ must first be Ours,
before we can Know him so to be.

Then also that, Whether Faith be a believing that I am Saved; (he means, in
statu salutis.) or a depending upon God for Salvation, (to be put into such a
Condition of Salvation,) will be easily resolved, and Bellarmins Dilemma soon
answered. viz. If Belief be to Believe that I am saved, (that Christ is mine,)
then was* I saved without Faith: If it be, to believe that God will give me
Grace to be saved, then do I believe before* I have Grace, before I have Faith.
I say, It is easily answered, by making the Saving act of Faith, an Acceptance
or Taking of Christ: For although the Gift be mine, before I Know; or am
Assured, that it is mine; Yet is not the Gift mine, before my Accepting of it,
but by my Acceptance it becomes Mine.

If (with Mr. Cotton) we should make Faith to save us, only Declarative (which
we must by no means admit;) Then, Why is it said, that we are saved by Faith,
and not by Works? Why do we allow, that Faith does concurrere effica^iter ad
salutem, but deny the same to Works? Seeing that Good Works do save us
Declarative, as well as Faith.

That we are saved not only in the eternal Decree without faith, but even in
the Execution, is strange Divinity. For if without Faith, then without Christ;
for Christ is no further Ours, then apprehended by Faith. As for the Eternal
Decree (of Election, he means,) it is true, we are not* through Faith, Elected
to Salvation; but we are Elected, to Salvation through Faith. Faith is not the
Cause of the Decree, but Faith is decreed to be the Cause of Salvation.

To that Question, whether there be a prescript Form of Church Government, I
shall say nothing; For it being a Question maintained both ways, I will not
oppose either of them, unless I had leisure, to confirm what I say, to
prosecute what I affirm. Only to his Argument I may lay an exception.
Church Government, (which he presumes to be enjoined in the second
Commandment,) is not of the nature of Moral Precepts, because not of
Perpetual Continuance: (For such a prescript Form, as by which the Church
since Christ should be governed, had not its beginning till since Christ: And
therefore not commanded in the second Commandment any otherwise then by
Consequence; (as particular temporary duties are.) However, it is like, Church
Government is not more expressly commanded in the second Commandment, then
Civil Government in the fifth; and yet none ever inferred from thence, a
prescript Form of Civil Government. If he ask therefore, Do they leave us any
latitude in any other Commandments? I say, Yes: and I instance in That. He
must search for a Prescription, in the Evangelists, and Apostles writings, if
he would find it, not in the second Commandment.

(Only, by the way, I wish his Lordship would do us the favor, from his
doctrine of Unity, (which he makes the Salve to cure all Controversies,) to
demonstrate to us, Whether there be a Prescript Form, and What it is. And I
should then judge his Opinion well worth embracing, though for nothing else.
Wherein yet I shall wish him to beware, that he say not of this as of the
division of Quantity, page 42. that all must at last be reduced to an Unity;
Nor, as page 98. that it is divisibilis in infinitum. Lest we establish
Episcopacy* (which himself likes not;) or become Independent; which others
like as ill.)

The distinction between Scientia simplicis Intelligentiae, and Scientia
Visionis, if it be taken only for distinctio rationis (and I suppose none ever
took it otherwise) may well enough be admitted. By the One, God knows the
Nature of All things Possible: By the Other he Sees, that These things Are. The
Object of the One, is All things Possible, all things Intelligible: the Object
of the Other is only, Things Existent, either past, present, or to come

But (says his Lordship) If Gods Power, and Will be all one; If God be p^r^^
Actus and not Potentia; Then all things that ever Shall be, Were ab aeterno
under ^ Decree; and so what God Could do, he Did do, and Can do no more.
(He had said before, page 99. That all things did exist [in their Beings] ab
omni aeterno; And are they now but under ^ Decree?) But for answer.

I grant, that God cannot do, what he has not decreed; for then were his
Decree either Void, or Imperfect: And, supposing such a Decree, the Power of
God is limited by his Will. But a Conditional, and Hypotheticall
Impossibility, does not infer an Absolute Impossibility And therefore we
affirm, that Deus Potest ea quae non Vult. He Can do More then he Will, (in
sensu diviso, not in sensu Composito.) God is able (says Christ) of these
stones to raise up children unto Abraham; Yet he does not. Know thou not
that I can pray to my Father, and he will send ^e more then twelve Legions of
Angels? But neither did Christ pray, nor the Father send them. The God which
we serve is [Able] to deliver us (said the three men in Daniell;) yet they
were not certain that he Would do it.

And if Media Scientia, (whereby God is supposed to know an Hypotheticall
Proposition; as That the men of Keilah would deliver up David, if he stayed
there) had no other hinderance but this; It might well enough be admitted.

CHAP. 17. Concerning Curiosity in the search of Causes. With a Close of all.
ANd now he returns again to his former complaint, of too much curiosity in the
search of Causes. There is (he grants) a secondary intermediate Being, which we
may call a Cause; Which does precede and produce another: The Observation of
which, says he, is very ^itting, so that we search, and puzle not our selves
with the grounds and reasons of this precedence. As, to observe, That Fire,
applied to combustible matter, will burn it: Without inquiring How the Fire
does work upon the Wood, etc.

He would have us therefore observe What is the Cause of this Effect, and What
is the Effect of this Cause; without any curious search How this Cause comes to
produce such an Effect. There is no General Rule, can be prescribed in this
case; Sometimes it is needless to inquire so much as, By what Cause this or
that was produced: Sometimes again it is useful to Know, not only What did
produce it, but also How it did produce it. Thus far I allow, Curiosity in
searching Trifles, also How it did produce it. Thus far I allow, Curiosity in
searching Trifles, hinders the finding of more solid and profitable Truths; for
(as he speaks) Intus existens prohibet alienum.

What his Lordship has, concerning the Holiness of Time and Place, I assent
to; That they are not capable of any other Sanctification, then a holiness of
Separation, a Relative Holiness: And the contrary Opinion is disclaimed, by
him on whom his Lordship fastens it.

That the Heart also should be always in such a holy frame, as that it be fit
for a Sabbaths employment, fit for a Sacrament; I hold for an an undoubted
Truth. Yet are we not always to be employed in such services of Gods Worship;
For even Adam in Paradise had a Particular calling, besides his General
calling; and the exercise thereof, being done in obedience to Gods command, was
no doubt pleasing and acceptable ^o God. Nor can I assent that All things are
Ordinances, though in All things we should acknowledge God.

The rest of the Chapter is but a Recapitulation of his Position, and its
Consequents; which needs no further consideration, besides what I have already
given you in the Examination of those several Particulars. I need not make
answer to the Conclusion, having already delivered my judgment concerning the
Premises. But leave it to another to pass Censure.

And thus, (Sir) I have finished that Task, which at your request I have
undertaken: Which, beyond my expectation, is grown into a far larger body
then I intended. You expect not Accuratenesse, in that which is drawn up in so
short a time: Nor the Judgment of Authors in these Points; for that was not
the task imposed, to give you account of Others opinions, but of mine own. I
have therefore spared the labor of turning over any other books, save his
Lordships own; nor have made any farther use of any, then as my present memory
did supply* I may seem too prolix perhaps in some Digressions, prosecuting
somewhat largely occasional questions, lighted on by the way: But if I have
discovered any Truth, though with some breach of Method; If (with Samson) I can
impart to my friends some Honey, though I step a little out of the way to fetch
it; If, (as he found that Honey in the conquered Lion, which yet was not of it,
but only accidentally there, so) I in the examining the main question, have
withal cleared some doubts, which though not directly contained in it, were
yet occasioned by it; I hope a small error in Method will be passed over.

Sir, I am sorry it so falls out, that the first occasion, wherein I should
have to do with so Noble a Lord, should be by way of Encounter. But being
partly enjoined by your request, which is to me a Command, (whom therefore it
concerns, to excuse my presumption to his Lordship;) and having also so fair an
Invitation in Mr. Sadlers Epistle prefixed to his Lordships Treatise; as being
that, then which nothing could be more grateful to this Noble Lord; I have
adventured to commit this, with my self, to be at your service.

J. W.

A Postscript.
SIR,
I Sent you (a while since) certain Animadversions upon my Lord Brook's
Treatise concerning the Nature of Truth. Which (briefly) tend to this purpose.

By Truth, or Light, his Lordship understands, that Light whereby the Soul and
Understanding is able to See or Understand: Which can be no other then the
Light of Reason. Which he considers first in It self, then in its
Operations: that is Truth in the Fountain, this in the Streams; (that the
Spring, this the Offspring.)

Propositio 1. Arg. 1. Chap. 1.
Which Truth or Light (of Reason) he contends to be the same with the
Understanding, Because the Understanding in Man is that Ray of the Divine
Nature, enlivening the Creature, or making it Rational, whereby it is
conformed to the Creator, who is the Primitive Light, or Fountain of Knowledge.
Now that which does thus enform Animal Rationale, enlivening it, or making it
Rational, is Reason; And therefore Reason (which he calls Truth) is the same
with the Understanding.

But this (if I mistake not) none will deny; for Reason and the
Understanding-faculty are all one, Ratio and facuitas Ratiocinandi is the same.
It Is true, they say sometimes, that Reason is in the Understanding, or that the
Understanding is endued with Reason: But then by Understanding, they do not
mean, the Understanding-Faculty, but the Soul it self quatenus intelligens.
And so this proposition, Intellectus est Subjectum Rationis, is the same with
this Anima intelligens est Subjectum Intellectus. Anima, Intellectus, and
Ratio, are not Three.

Arg. 2. Chap. 2, 3 4.
His second Argument to prove it is drawn from hence, That there is required to
the constitution of every Being, an Essence received* a Fountain imparting, and
a Channel receiving. The which Channel or Recipient must be the same with the
Essence received; because every thing is the Recipient of its own Essence;
nothing can receive the Essence of a Stone, but by being a Stone, for to be
Stone, and to have the Essence of a Stone, is all one. Therefore the
Understanding being the Recipient of Truth, must needs be Truth, that is,
Reason.

Propositio 2. Chap. 5.
Which Truth, or Reason, Whether it be in the Understanding, or be the
Understanding; yet it cannot make the Soul to be Rational, unless it be also
in the Soul: For how can Reason make the Soul Reasonable, if it be not in ^t,
but in somewhat else. And if it be in the Soul, then must i^ be the Soul:
Because to be in the Soul, and to be the Soul i^ all one; every thing being
its own Recipien^. Thus Truth, or Light (of Reason) will be the same with the
Understanding; And both That and This the same with the Soul.

But I hope his Lordship will not deny, but that there is another kind of
Receiving* beside that Receiving that he speaks of. (They tell us in Logic of
^cto modi habendi; and there are as many manners of Receiving, as there are of
Having.) To receive the Essence of a Man, and to be a Man, is all one; To have
the Essence of Money, and to be Money, is all one; But yet, I hope, a Man may
receive Money, without being coined, and made Money. To receive the Essence of
Water, and to be made Water; to receive the Essence of a Vessel, and to be a
Vessel, is all one; yet a Vessel may contein Water, without being made Water.
Thus a Substance may receive an Accident, a Subject may receive a Form, without
being made that Accident, that Form. Thus datur Animae esse Animam datur
Rationi esse Rationem, (each being its own Recipient:) But withal datur Animae
Habere Rationem, though the Soul be not Reason, nor Reason (in this sense) its
own Recipient.

If there be any strength in this Argument, it lies in this, That if Reason (or
Truth) be only in the Soul as an Accident, and not the Souls Essence, then it
cannot make an Essential Difference between the Rational and Irrational
Soul.

And to this we must answer, (if we maintain Reason, and the rest of the
Faculties, to be distinct from ^he Soul) That it is not the Faculties, it is
not Reason, that makes the Essential Difference; but the Substance or Essence
of the Soul from whence these Faculties proceed as Essential Consequents.
Like as it is not Heat, and Cold, and the rest of the primae Qualitates, which
make the Essential difference between one Element and another; but that
Essence or Form, from whence these Qualities do proceed.

Corollarium. 1. Chap. 6.
From hence he proceeds to a further Corollary, That not only the Soul, but
All things else, are also the same with Truth. But why so? Because every thing
is its own Recipient? If it be; it does not follow that every thing is the
Recipient of Truth. If every thing be the Recipient of its own Essence, must
therefore this Essence needs be Truth? If his Lordship had well considered, that
Truth, as he has formerly spoken of it, is but the same with that which others
call Reason; he would scarce have made this Consequence, unless he could think
to persuade us, that all things whatsoever are Reasonable Creatures* There is
therefore too great an hiatus, to make this proposition, a Corollary of the
former.

But indeed his Lordship is by this time fallen off from his former acceptance
of Truth. For having (as he supposes) proved Reason to be the Souls Essence,
the Souls Entity; he begins to take that word (which formerly signified
Reason,) to signify Entity, or Being: So that Truth now, must be the same with
Entitas. And the Emphasis of this last assertion lies in this, not that the
Essence of all things is Truth, or Entity, (for that were no great news,) but
that the Essence of all things is this One Truth: meaning, that all Entity is
Homogeneall and of the same nature.

He was proving before, that Truth or Reason was the same thing with the Soul:
He hence infers, not that all things are the same thing; (for I cannot
understand him to speak so harshly, as that one drop of water were the same
drop with another drop of water, though Homogeneall; that the Soul of Peter is
the Soul of Judas, though of the same Species;) but that they are alike
things, or things of the same nature.

The Consequence, (that all things must be of the same Species, because the
Soul and its Faculties are the same Thing) will not hold. The thing it self,
has only this ground (so far as I can discover,) Because all Being
proceeding from God, who is in his actions Uniform, must therefore be Alike: For
the same Agent, acting in the same Manner, cannot but produce like Effects. But
this Uniformity in God' is Equivalent to an infinite Variety; and God can by
one act in it self simple, produce effects variously distinct* And if his
Lordship grant, that this Uniformity hinders not but that God may produce
various Shapes, I see not why he may not produce various Species.

Corollarium. 2. Chap. 7.
But from hence he draws a further consequent. He is not contented to say, that
the nature of all things is One, but that it is Unity. And here is as great an
hiatus as the former. The Essence of all Souls is One and the same; but that
this One Essence is Unity, I have not formerly heard, nor do yet believe. And
I am so far from thinking that Unity is the Essence of All things, that I
esteem it self to be Nothing. Unity, is but a Negative term, a Negation. Vnus
indeed, as it is opposite to Nullus, is positive, and is the same with
Nonnullus, or Aliquis: But Vnus, or Vnicus as it is opposed to Multitude, (and
so we now take it) is Negative. Else, where is the fault in this Syllogism?
Quod est in Anglia, est in Europa; Sed Rex Vnicus est in Anglia; Ergo Rex
Vnicus (veltantum Vnus) est in Europa.

Propositio. 3. Chap. 8. 9*
He returns next, to his former discourse; And what he had said of the Light of
Reason, he says also of the Light of Knowledge, both Habitual and Actual.
He allows not that Habits, either Infused or Acquisite, are any thing new
brought into the Soul, but only former principles enlightened: And therefore
rejecting Aristotle's rasatabula, he imbraceth Plato's Reminiscentia, Which may
be thus expressed; He supposes the Soul to be as a Table, wherein be many
rare lineaments, and lively colors described, but hanging in the dark they
appear not till such time as they be illustrated by some advenient Light;
which Light does not bring with it any new colors, or more lineaments, but
only illustrateth those that were formerly there but appeared not: Whereas
Aristotle rightly supposes it as a Table prepared, void of any, yet capable of
all; Or rather as a Glass, which having of it self none of those Colors, is
yet fit to receive and reflect all those Rays or visible Species, which from
the adjacent Objects fall upon it.

And indeed, as for Historical Knowledge, I suppose, his Lordship himself, if
he well consider of it, will not affirm that to have any Idea's originally in
the Soul: It being utterly impossible by discourse to find out a bypast
History, without Historical Relation. And if there may be new Idea's of
Historical truths imprinted in the Soul which were not there before, why not
also of Discu^sive Knowledge.

But his Lordship stays not here, dissenting from us in the Nature of Habits,
whether they be new Idea's, or the illustration of former Idea's* but in
effect, he takes away all Habits wholly. Telling us, that we Seem only by
frequent acts to help the Soul, and create new Habits, but that indeed all
actings are but new discoveries.

Now this is not to establish Plato's Reminiscentia; but to take away all
Memory whatsoever. How can we be said to remember? how is one said to be
learned, another ignorant? what is the benefit of study, and of experience? if
former acts do not at all help future acts, but only seem so to do* How comes
it to pass, that we are able out of our own memories to furnish our selves
with Historical truths formerly heard or read, without a second relation,
which at the first we could not do? if our former acts do not at all help
latter acts, but all things be new discoveries.

Proposition. 4. Chap. 10.
And what has been said of Natural and Habitual light of Reason and
Habitual Knowledge, he now affirms of Actual Knowledge. The several
Operations of the Soul, in apprehensions, affirmations, negations, etc. the
several Actings of Truth, are also the Souls Essence. And why? but because the
Soul is Actus primus, and therefore its Essence must be Action; This Action
likewise must Exist; which what else can it be but Rational workings? and so
the same with Actus Secundus.

But his Lordship is much mistaken to think that actus primus is Latin for
Action. Actus is of as large an extent as Potentia: Now there is potentia ad
Esse, and potentia ad Formam, as well as potentia ad Operari. When Ens in
potentia becoms Ens Actu, when that which was possible, is actually produced;
its own Essence o^ Being is that Actus, which makes it Ens Actu, which was
before Ens in Potentia: and this we call actus Entitativus, and it is better
translated Actuality, then either Action, or Activity. Again the Matter is
capable of this or that Form, which we call potentia ad Formam (substantialem;)
whereby it is potentia tale (in genere substanti^;) as materia putris is in
potentia ad formam vermis: Now when this Form whereof it is capable is actually
introduced, that which was before potentia tale, becoms now actu tale (in
genere substantiae;) and this Form is called actus Substantialis* (but not
Actio Substantialis,) or actus primus; and (thus) the Soul is Actus. Again, a
Substance of this or that Species, constituted by this or that form, is capable
of this or that Accident, and is therefore potentia talis, accidentaliter; or
in potentia ad hanc formam ac^identalem; as Water is potentia calida, when Heat
is produced, it becoms Actu calida, and the Heat is this Actus whereby it is
actu talis; and it is actus primus accidentalis, (though perhaps some would
call it actus secundus: Yet none call it Actio) This actus acciden alis, or
forma accidentalis, if it be Operative, stands in a double relation; to its
Subject, and so it is actus informans; and to its Operation, and so it is actus
operativus (but not Operatio) and belongs either to the first, or the second
species of Quality, it is either a Habit or a Faculty; this, if you please, you
may call Activity, though not Action* Now a Subject endued with this actus
operativus is in potentia ad operandum: When this power is reduced into act, it
is actu operans; and this actus whereby it does actu operari, is properly Actus
secundus, Actio, or Operatio, and belongs to the Praedicament of Action. But
such an Actus the Soul is not, and therefore its Operations cannot be its
Essence.

Objectio. 1. Chap. 11.
But now least by making the Souls Operations to be the Souls Essence, he
should make so many Souls as there be Acts; (which is indeed a good
Consequence;) he is put upon another invention, to make all these operations to
be but One; the second action is but the same with the former: (So that with
him, one sinful Act is all one with a continued Course of sinning.) And
therefore tells us, that actions performed in distinct Times and Places are not
therefore distinct actions, because Time and Place are Nothing, but merely
imaginary.

But this p^aister is not large enough to cover the sore; For, it is true
indeed, different actions may receive an external denomination from difference
in Time and Place, but they receive not their difference from hence, but from
themselves: Time and Place can neither make different things to be the same,
nor the same to be different. A man is the same to day that he was yesterday,
the same at London that he was at York* yet both Time and Place be different:
Again, two Angels being at the same time coexistent in the same place are not
therefore the same Angel. So that whether time and place be any thing or
nothing, yet this Man is not the other Man, this Action is not the other Action.

But if difference of Time and Place be only imaginary; then why do we deny to
the Papists, that Christ's Body is corporeally present in the Sacrament? since
if it be any where, it must be every where, all places being indeed the same,
admitting only of an imaginary difference. Why do we cry down the Lutheran
Consubstantiation, as absurd? for if several bodies may be in several places,
then may they be in the same place, if difference of Place be only imaginary:
If the same body may be at several times in several places, why not at the
same time? since difference of Time is only imaginary.

Object. 2. Chap. 12.
There is another Objection as strong as this former: If Acting Truth be the
Souls Essence, then what becomes of the Soul when it does either not Act, or
act Falsely?

To the first he applies his former remedy; Any one act is able to give the
Soul a Being at all times; for succession of moments being only imaginary,
that which at all is, must be always, and whatsoever has at all a Being, is
indeed coexistent to all Eternity; succession, beginning, and ending being
only imaginary: (So that a Child that is new born, had lived as long as the
most aged, if he could but think so.

And as for the other, he denies that the Soul can at all act Falsehood, because
Falsehood is only Privative, it is Nothing* now to act nothing and not to act
is all one.

Which he affirms likewise of Evil, and of Pain; And tells us, with Dr.
Twisse, that it is better to be Miserable, then not to be: Which is grounded
upon this, that Evil is only a privation of Good, and therefore to have the
goodness Being without the goodness of Happiness, is better then to want
both the one and the other.

But withal I wish them to consider, whether the same Argument do not prove,
that it was better for David to commit adultery, then not to commit it; For the
substance of the act, in its Physical Essence, was positive, and therefore
Good; the fault was only the want of a further good, to wit, the goodness of
conformity to Gods will; now to produce the goodness of an Act, without the
goodness of Conformity, is better then to produce neither the one nor the
other.

Corollaria. Chap. 13. etc.
This is his Lordships Opinion. Which he commends to us as useful to make our
Christian life more cheerful both in the Theoreticall and Practick part. For
if we knew, that All things are one, what need we fear either difficulty or
danger? knowing, That Misery is nothing and cannot hurt us, and has no Being
but only in the the Brain; That whatsoever is, is Good, and good to Me, Because
both I and It are Beings, and so Good; And these two Goods falling under no
other difference but of degrees, Good and Good must needs agree, that which is
Good is Good to Me. Yea, how void of Envy at another good, and thoughts of
Revenging injuries? since that I have a Propriety, a Possession, in that which
is another, he and I being One: Injuries are nothing and cannot hurt; Good
things, though another, do serve me.

But to this Good Consequent of his Lordships Tenet, I can oppose another every
way as Bad: For as it would make us not afraid of Misery, so withal, not
afraid to Sin. It proposes such an Impunity to Sinning, as that it makes the
Devils as happy as the blessed Angels. For thus we might argue; The Devils are
Beings, and therefore Good, because Ens and Bonum convertuntur: Every thing
that is, is Good, and Good to them; for both They and It being good, and Good
admitting of no other difference but of degrees, Good and Good must needs
agree, and so be good to them: The happiness of the Angels does serve Them,
since (as his Lordship speaks) it is not only (...) but (...), They have a
propriety in it; all things being One. Their own Misery and Torment is nothing*
and cannot hurt: And (which is the only difference can be imagined) if they
Think otherwise, (I use still his Lordships expression) this must be a Lie, and
cannot hurt. And if this be Hell, who will be afraid to Sin?

My judgment cannot assent, to make the Torments of the damned only Imaginary,
to make Hell a Fancy; yea, to affirm, that it is good to Sin, because the act
of sin is really Good, and the Evil of it is only Imaginary, a Vanity, a
Nothing, and cannot hurt.

As for the Theoreticall part; it is confessed, that there be many doubts in
Natural Philosophy, concerning the Being, the Nature, the Causes of things;
There be doubts also in Moral Philosophy, in Metaphysics, in Mathematics, in
Divinity: But in telling us this, his Lordship advances nothing for the
commendation of his new invention; except he could show us how this Tenet will
resolve them.

And thus Sir, I have given you a short account of the chief things in his
Lordships Treatise, and my Reply, so far as concerns the state of the main
Question controverted: Wherein you may take a brief Survey of what is there
more largely prosecuted. Which may give some Light for the better discovering
the principal intent of his Lordships Tenet; and may be a guide in your
pe^using the larger Discourse that you loose not your self in the prolixity of
the prosecution, and the variety of digressions. When I first undertook the
Task, I intended no more in all, then some such brief notes as these, to
satisfy your desire: But being once entered I have not always the command of
my own pen; variety of matter carrying me beyond my intended bounds. The faults
if you will be pleased to pardon, and to accept the rest, I shall commit the
whole to be as I am, that is

Yours to command,
April. 10. 1641.
FINIS.
DUm haec qu^ praecedunt sub praelo erant, subiit animum cogitatlo ea quae
sequuntur prioribus subjungendi; (Theses nimirum aliquot aliquando in Academia
habitas:) partim quod subjecto sint non adeo dispari; partim quod, ut ut
puerilia, ejusmodi tamen sint quae ^on ab omnibus attendantur. Non tanti
(fateor) sunt, ut in Iucem prodeant; nec (forsan) tan^illi tamen, ut nemini
placeant. Sicui displi^^a^t, excuset ut puerilia; sicui placeant, fruatur.

Propositio Singularis in dispositione syllogistica semper habet vim
Vniversalis.
NIhil in^e^icius est iis in e^iis (si Scaligero credamus) quae mordi^us
sentiunt, majores nostros nihil ignorasse; quae* que pettinaciter tuentur
errores, quos ii qui commisere, si viveren* emendarent. (...). Unde mihi
nunquam absurdum visum est, a communi sententia cum ratione dissentire.

Propositio Singularis, apud Logicos, vel pro Particulari, vel pro no^^ quadam
specie semper habita est: cum mihi tamen ad Universalium classem pertinere luce
meridiana clarius semper vi ^m est.

Cujus in examine pro lemmate habeatur; Formalem rationem propositionis
constare in compositione praedicati cum subjecto? Quod statuit Smiglecius,
disp. 12. qu. 7. (quae compositio sive nexus p^aecipue in copula attenditur.)
Ex va^io igitur modo compositionis horum extremorum, alius atque alius
prepositionis modus oritur. Ubi itaque compositio seu nexus praedicati cum
subjecto Vere fit, and ut se res habet, propositio Vera est; ubi nexus seu
applicatio False fit, e^ Falsa est propositio, sint parts ^. e. termini
simplices, sive verae, sive falsae: Unde haec propositio [Hircocervus est
quoddam con^latum ex hirco and cervo] vera est, licetuterque terminus falsus,
falsitate scilicet simplicium terminorum, h. e. Non-ens, sive Ens rationis; ens
enim and verum convertuntur: Illa vero [lapis est homo] falsa est, licet
termini very veritate simplicis app^ehensionis, quia falso applicantur. Item,
quum Necessarius est nexus terminorum, propositio Necessaria est; sint licet
termini entia contingentia: and sic in reliquis affectionibus propositionis.

^um autem compositio sive ne^us terminorum, in qua constat formalis ratio
propositionis in Vinculo atte^datur, hinc sequitur, affectiones propositionis
judicandas esse, non ratione terminorum, sed poti^s respectu vinculi. Unde
axioma affirmatum a Ramo definitur, cujus vinculum affirmatur; Negatum, cujus
vinculum negatur; sive termini sint affirmat^ sive negati, parum interest. Haec
propositio igitu^ [omne non rationale est non homo] est propositio affirmativa,
licet extremum utrumque sit negans* Hoec vero [lapis non est homo] est
propositio negans, ex terminis utrisque affirmativis. Idem dicendum est de
propositione Simplici, and Composita; ad vinculum scilicet attendendum esse.
Unde Gutberlethus hanc propositionem [animal est vel homo vel brutum] inte^
axioma simplex esse statuit, non disjunctivum, cum uno verbi vinculo
contineatur; licet posterior terminus sit disjunctus; Hanc vero propositionem
[omne animal vel est homovel est brutum] credo illum inter inter axiomata
composita numeraturum.

Hinc colligo* Ut alias propositionis affectiones, ita etiam Universalitatem
and Particularitatem sumendas esse, non a terminis, sed a terminorum
compositione and nexu. Affectiones enim formam sequuntur, non materiam. Male
^gitur a plerisque Logicis distribuitur axioma, seu propositio, in Universalem,
cujus subjectum est Universale; Particularem, cujus subjectum est particulare;
and Singularem, cujus subjectum est singular: cum distributio petenda esset a
modo compositionis, quod est Formale in propositione, non a quantitate
terminorum, h. e. a part materiali. Propositio ergo Universalis, est in qua
applicatio praedicati ad subjectum est universalis; Particularis, in qua
applicatio est particularis: nec alias species agnosco.

Quid a^ tem velim per praedicationem vel applicationem universalem and
particularem, mel^us ex graeca Aristotelis appellatione, quam ex latina
Interpretum, elucescet. Quod enim nobis est Universale and Particulare, illud
Aristoteli est, (...) and (...), de toto, and part, sive secundum partem, h.
^. de subjecto vel toto, vel secundum partem; non autem (...) and (...), de
omnibus and quibusdam. Quare non minus recte interpretaretur Totalis and
Partialis praedicatio, quam Universalis and Particularis; nisi quod mos aliter
obtinuerit.

Universalis ergo praedicatio est quando praedicatum dicitur (...), de toto
subjecto, (^otum intelligo praedicationis, sive totam ejus latitudinem and
ambitum praedicandi,) quando scilicet praedicatum totaliter attribuitur
subjecto, non partialiter cum restrictione ad aliquam subjecti partem, seu ad
peculiare quiddam intra subjecti ambitum comprehensum, tunc nimirum quando de
quocunque dicitur subjectum, de eodem dicatur etiam and praedicatum. Igitur
haec propositio [omnis homo est animal] est universalis, quia nihil continetur
sub ambitu Hominis, seu de nullo dicitur Homo, quin et de eodem dicatur Animal:
Haec autem [aliquis homo est doctus] particularis, quia non de tota hominis
specie dicitur, sed (...), secundum partem aliquam, h. ^. de aliquo individuo
sub ea specie. Non autem ideo universalis est prior propositio quia nota Omnis
praefigitur, and posterior particularis quia ei praeponitur Aliquis, (uti
nonnulli, ex tyronibus praecipue, arbitrantur:) Non enim propositio ideo
universalis est, quia notam habet universalitatis, sed quia universalis est,
ideo nota praeponitur, ut agnoscit Dounamus. Nota igitur universalitatis
designat aliquando universalem propositionem, non autem facit. Idem dic de nota
particularitatis.

Iam vero, ut ad praesentem controversiam accedamus; In propositione Singulari
necesse est ut praedicatio sit (...), de toto, cum subjectum singular (...),
sit and indiuiduum in parts; (subjectivas intelligo, loquimur enim de toto
p^aedicationis, non integrali;) Impossible enim est ut aliquid (...) secundum
partem dicatur, de illo quod (...) est and parts nullas habet. Neces^e igitur
est, ut quicquid de individuo dicitur, sive subjecto singulari, dicatur de
toto; and per consequens propositio singularis semper erit (...).

Atque hoc ipsum est quod vult Aristoteles; and qui aliter Aristotelem
exponunt, detorquent non interpretantur. Audiamus igitur Aristotelis mentem de
propositione universali, sive, quod idem est, de dicto (...), de omni and de
nullo: (...) Quid dissertius dici posset pro causa nostra? Tunc demu^ (...)
(non (...)) de omni sive de toto dicitur aliquid, quando nihil subjecti
accipere licet, de quo alterum h* e. praedicatum non dicetur. Assumo; In
propositione singulari affirmante, nihil subjecti sumere licet, de quo
praedicatum non dicatur. Concludo igitur; Propositio singularis affirmans, est
(...). (Eodemque modo propositio* singularis negans erit (...).) v. g. Si
dixeris [Socrates est doctus] quaero, quidnam illud est intra ambitum Socratis.
c^ quo non dicatur Doctus? Si nihil, igitur erit (...) per Aristotelis
definitionem* At vero cum Socrates de uno solo homine dicatur, and de illo
etiam dicatur doctus, nihil aliud Socratis superest, de quo negetur, ut patet.

Idem licet concludere ex ipsius Rami definitione; cum definiat Axioma Speciale
(quod postea subdividit in particulare, and proprium) esse, quando consequens
non omni antecedenti attribuitur. Sed quam been convenit haec definitio
axiomati Proprio, quod tamen illi est altera species axiomatis Specialis? Si in
axiomate proprio consequens non omni antecedenti attribuatur, ostendat quaeso,
^ui non: si autem hoc ostendi non possit (ut quidem non potest) qua ratione
dicat non omni attribui non video, cum non omnis and quidam non idem valere, ex
regulis Aequipollentiae certissimum est. Vel igitur ostendat Ramus axioma
proprium affirmans Alicui non attribui, velego illi negabo, non Omni attribui,
and per consequens definitionem axiomatis specialis non convenire axiomati
proprio; Mala igitur definitio illa sit necesse est, quando definitio generis
non convenit utrique specie. Imo ve^o, si rem expendamus, inveniemus alteram
speciem, s^. axioma Particulare, quod contradi^ti^guitur axiomati proprio,
ejusdem prorsus esse latitudinis cum genere, sive axiomate speciali. Nam axioma
speciale est, quando consequens non omni antecedenti attribuitur; Particulare,
quando consequens particulariter antecedenti attribuitur. Tantum igitur distant
axioma speciale and particulare, (h. e. genus and species) quantum non omni and
particulariter: quod quantillum sit, ex Gutbe^letho discas, qui explica^urus
quid velit Ramus per particulariter, expressis verbis confundit;
particulariter, inquit, h. e. non omni. Patet igitur, quam leviter agant
Ramis^ae, dum genus a specie illis vocabulis distinguant inter quae ne ipsi
quidem ullam agnos^unt differentiam.

Sed ad Aristote^em revertor: Qui duos tantum agnoscit modos praedicandi, de
toto, and de part, (...), universalem and particularem. Nec quidem potuit
plures admittere: Quicquid enim de alte^o dicitur necessarium est ut vel de
illo toto vel de ipsius part aliqua dicatur; Quicquid etiam ab altero
removetur, vel a toto vel a part tantum remov^a^ur necesse est. Nec enim
possibile est medium invenire, quod de altero dicatur, nec tamen de toto, neque
secundum pa^tem. Pro certo igitur and indubitato principio pona^ur, Omnem
propositionem (categoricam intelligo) quaecunque demum ipsa sit, vel
universalem esse, vel particularem; h. e. vel (...), vel (...).

Atque hinc patet, perperam fecisse Ramum, ipsisuque sequaces, dum praeter
syllogismum generalem and specialem, proprium adjunxe^in^. Quum enim
propositiones proprias seu singulares non potuerunt particularium regulis
co^ree^e, commenti sunt novam quandam syllogismi speciem alis antea inc^gnitam,
quam Proprium appellant: and axiomata p^op^ia, quae illi inter specialia
numerabant, a reliquis specialibus discrepare videntes, ab omni syllogismo^um
specie antea nota abhorre^e arbitrati sunt; nescientes interim, saltem non
advertentes, iisdem quibus general^a regulis contineri.

Patet etiam, quid judicandum sic de quadrupli^i propositionis divisione, in
Universalem* Particularem, Indefinitam, and Singularem; nimirum, species sine
necessitate multiplicari; cum singularis semper reducenda sit ad universalem,
indefinita vero nunc ad hanc, nunc ad particularem. Atque hoc secundum mentem
Aristotelis; qui quadrifariam illam divisionem nusquam (ni fallor) tradidit.
Nominat, fateor, indefinitam propositionem, praeter praedictas duas species,
universalem and particularem, non autem acsi quid esset ab utrisque distinctum,
sed quod ex ipsis propositionis verbis vix satis constet, ad utram duarum
reducenda sit (cum signum indicem non habeat appositum,) and pro subjecta
materia nunc ad hanc nunc ad illam referenda sit, semper tamen ad alterutram.
De singulari vero propositione ne verbum habet; nec opus est, cum semper
reducenda sit ad universalem; perperam vero a Logicis plerisque intruditur
quasi nova species, omnino contra rationem, mentemque Aristotelis.

Atque hactenus probata est thesis nostra a priori, and quidem demonstrative;
Subnectam and argumenta a posteriori nonnulla. ut lucidius appareat veritas.
Sed praemonendum est, eorum aliqua universaliter concludere de omni
propositione singulari: alia vero particulariter, ita tamen ut quod illic
concluditur de una, potuit de qualibet; atque haec inductione facta idem
valerent ac si* concluderent universaliter: alia denique ducta esse ab ejusmodi
proprietatibus quae solis universalibus convenient non autem omnibus, unde n^c
omnibus singularibus; quae lice t vi sua probent tantum aliquas singulares
universalium vim habere, cum tamen hoc concesso pauci sint qui reliquum
negarent cum nulla sufficiens ratio assignari possit cur quaedam sint
universales non autem aliae, valebunt and haec argumenta non multo minus quam
si essent universalia.

Primo igitur. Major in prima and secunda figura semper est (...), (ut a
pluribus antehac demonstratum est,) at aliquando est singularis; ergo aliqua
saltem singularis est (...). Vel sic; Quaecunque propositio potest esse mayor
in prima vel secunda figura, ea est (...). Sed quaelibet propositio singularis
potest esse major and in prima and in secunda figura. Ergo. etc. Insto in
prima, in Barbara.

Bar- Augustus fuit Imperator. ba- Octavius fuit Augustus. Ergo ra. Octavius
fuit Imperator.

In secunda, in Camestres.

Came* Virgilius fuit Romanus. es. Homerus non fuit Romanus. tris. Homerus ergo
non fuit Virgilius.

Et idem fieri posset in quibuslibet modis utriusque figurae: imo in quocunque
modo cujuscunque figurae assumta quacunque propositione singulari in locum
universalis; ut experienti videre erit cuilibet.

Secundo, Ex puris particularibus nihil concluditur, at ex puris singularibus
aliquid concluditur: Ergo Singularis non est particularis; and, per consequens,
est universalis, cum antea probatum sit nullam posse fieri praedicatione^ quin
erit vel (...) vel (...). Major in confesso est. Minor exemplis supra adductis
probata est.

Non solum autem ex singularibus puris concluditur aliquid, sed ex mixtis
singulari cum particulari, non minus quam ex universal and particulari: sed
(ut illic) semper concluditur particulariter, cum particularis propositio sit
debilior pars. v. g.

Da- Virgilius fuit doctus. r^- Aliquis poeta fuit Virgilius. i. Ergo, Aliquis
poeta fuit doctus.

Item,

Fes- Virgilius non fuit Graecus. ti- Aliquis poeta fuit Graecus. Ergo no-
Aliquis poeta non fuit Virgilius.

Ubi notandum obiter, hos syllogismos and hujusmodi alios* constantes ex
singulari and particulari in praemissis, ad nullos Rami modos reduci posse, cum
tamen consequentia and satis firma sit and perspicua; nostra tamen hypothesi
posita facile ad Aristotelis modos reducuntur. (In tertia figura non insto; cum
enim intertia figura idem sit subjectum in utraque praemissarum, fieri non
potest ut altera ^^t propositio singularis, altera particularis, quoniam de
subjecto singulari non potest praedicari particulariter.)

Tertio, Tres ponuntur gradus necessitatis, (...). Confessum est etiam apud
omnes, super^orem gradum necessitatis semper etiam includere inferiorem* unde
propositio (...) est etiam propositio (...), propositio vero (...) est and
(...) and (...). At propositio singularis saepe est (...) ergo and (...). v. g
[Socrates est animal, Plato est substantia, Bucephalus est equus;] sunt
propositiones essentiales in primo modo dicendi per se: sunt ergo (...).

Quarto, Omne genus praedicatur universaliter de suis speciebus, (ut and
essentialiter;) at Individuum (saltem secundum Ramum) est species; ergo de
individuo praedicatur genus universaliter. Au^* si non sit species, tamen u^ se
habet genus ad speciem ita species ad individuum; at genus praedicatur
universaliter and (...) de sua specie; ergo and species de individuo*
Potestergo individuu^ universalis propositionis esse subjectum.

Quinto, probatur e^ regulis conversionum. [Socrates non est equus] est
propositio negans, eaque vel universalis, ut nos dicimus, vel particularis, ut
alii: non autem particularis; Ergo etc. Probatur minor* Quia propositio
particularis negans convertitur tantum^odo per contrapositionem; at haec
propositio convertitur, primo conversione simplici, [nullus equus est
Socratis,] secundo per accidens [aliquis equus non est Socrates.] Utroque hoc
modo convertitur universalis negans, (eaque sola,) neutro vero particularis
negans: est ergo haec propositio non particularis sed universalis. Patet etiam
ulterius ex hac ipsa conversione; convertitur enim singularis negans in
universalem, at in conversione nunquam augetur quantitas, saepe minuitur.
Iterum, [Socrates non est Plato] convertitur [Plato non est Socrates,] at
particularis negans non convertitur nisi per contrapositionem.

Sexto, Ex regulis reductionum. Propono enim hunc syllogismum;

Ces- Qui interfecit Hectoremnon supervixit bello Trojano. a- Omnes Graeci
reduces supervixere bello Trojano. Ergo re. Nullus Graecorum reducum interfecit
Hectorem.

Dico hunc syllogismum esse in C^sar^ ex majori universali, duplici ratione:
Primo, si major esset particularis, conclusio esset particularis, (quia semper
sequitur debiliorem partem;) at non est; Ergo. Secundo, per modum reductionis,
r^^ucitur enim ad Celarentt per simplicem conversionem majoris; sic

Ce- Nullus qui supervixit bello Trojano fuit interfector Hectoris. la- Omnes
Graeci reduces supervixere bello Trojan^* Ergo rent. Nullus Graecorum reducum
fuit interfector Hectoris.

Hic syllogismus si esset ex majori particulari, non esset in ullo modo; nec
usquam apud Ramum invenietur hujusmodi syllogismus, (cum tamen and verissimus
sit and utilissim^s,) Imo nec (posita illorum hypothesi, scil. quod sit
particularis) reduci posset ad alium modum. Alium accipe,

Ces- Author Epistolae ad Hebraeos non fuit auditor Christi, Heb. 2. 3. a-
Omnes duodecim selecti fuerunt auditores Christi. Ergo re. Nullus ex duodecim
selectis fuit Author epistolae ad Hebraeos.

Impossible autem est in ullo ex Rami modis per hoc medium probare hanc
conclusionem.

Septimo, Hunc syllogismum propono,
Omnes magnanimi sunt fortes.
Thersites non est fortis. Ergo
Thersites non est magnanimus.
Hic syllogismus vel est in Camestres ex minore and conclusione universalibus,
vel in Baroco ex iisdem particularibus. Sed non esse in Baroco, sic probatur.
Syllogismus in Baroco non potest reduci nisi reductione per impossible; at hic
syllogismus reduci^ur ad Ceiarent reductione ostensiva, eo modo quo Camestres,
scil. transpositis praemissis* and minore conclusion^que simpliciter conversis,
hoc modo,

Ce- Nullus fortis est Thersites. la- Omnes magnanimi sunt fortes. Ergo rent.
Nullus magnanimus est Thersites.

Erat igitur in Camestres ex minore and conclusione universalibus, non in
Baroco ex iis particularibus. Infinitus essem si singulis insisterem quae hac
in redici possent: Unico argumento concludo.

Octavo igitur and ultimo, Propositio singularis nec fortiorem nec debiliorem
vim habet quam universalis; ergo eandem and aequalem. Non fortiorem, quia ex
praemissis universali and singulari aliquando concluditur singulariter, quod
non esset si universalis esset debilior, quia conclusio semper sequitur
debiliorem partem. Ut in hoc and similibus innumeris.

Came- Omnes magnanimi sunt fortes. es- Thersites non est fortis. Ergo tres.
The^sites non est magnanimus.

Nec debiliorem habet, quia ex singulari and universali, aliquando concluditur
universaliter, (quod non esset si singularis esset pars debilior:) ut in hoc
syllogismo, and aliis,

Ces- Interfector Hectoris non supervixit bello Trojano. a- Omnes Graeci
reduces supervixere bello Trojano. Ergo re. Nullus Graecorum reducum fuit
interfector Hectoris.

Cum igitur nec fortiorem, nec debiliorem vim habeat Singularis quam
Universalis, sequitur necessario Propositionem singularem eadem vim in
disposition^ syllogisti^a semper habere quam habit universalis* Quod erat
demonstrandum.

Corollaria, and Objectiones.
HInc sequitur primo, Propositionem singularem affirmantem and negantem opponi
immediate, hoc est, contradictorie. Nam sublata universalitate affirmantis
ponitur negans (...), quoniam praedicatio partialis non potest esse de eo quod
est (...).

Sequitur secundo, Propositionem universalem affirmantem converti conversione
simplici, and particularem affirmantem convertibilem in propositionem* (...)*
quoties praedicatum convertendae est individuum. Posito enim praedica^o in loco
subjecti, quicquid de individuo subjecto dicitur, dicitur (...).

Sequitur tertio, Conclusionem in tert^a figu^a esse (...) (contra quam docent
Logici,) quoties minor terminus syllogismi, h. e. praedicatum minoris, est
individuum. Quia praedicatum minoris in tertia figura est subjectum
conclusionis, quod cum sit individuum, de eo quicquid dicitur, dicitur
universaliter.

Objiciet forsan aliquis; An igitur [Socrates est doctus] perinde est ac [omnis
homo est doctus?] Non est. At, inquie^, quidni? cum utratraque propositio sit
universalis. Recte. Sed replico; An [omnis homo est rationalis] idem valet ac
[omne animal est rationale?] Negabit credo. At, inquam, quare? annon utraque
est universalis? Est certe. Conjicio quid responsurus est; utraque propositio
est quidem universalis, non tamen aequipollent, quia in altera rationalitas
universaliter attribuitur homini, and recte, in altera vero universaliter
attribuitur animali, sed male. Pariter ego, non (inquam) perinde est Socratem
doctum dicere and omnem hominem; subjectis enim differunt, quamvis utraque
propositio sit universalis. Doctus universaliter praedicatur de Socrate non de
homine.

Urget, Dici universaliter, est dici de multis. Fateor, in praedicatione
simplicium terminorum, non in praedicatione propositionis. Aliud est dici de
multis, in tractatu de Praedicabilibus, aliud dictum de omni, in tractatu de
Propositione. At nunc agitur non de quantitate simplicium terminorum, sed de
quantitate propositionis, and terminorum nexu. Universale, seu vox communis,
potest est subjectum propositionis particularis; and Individuum pariter, seu
vox singularis, subjectum propositionis universalis.

Fatendum tamen est, Propositionem singularem leviculam aliquam discrepantiam
habere ab aliis universalibus (ut in corollariis videre est) non tamen talem
quae illas ex universalium numero eximat. Tria sunt, nec scio plura, (and
ple^ique forsan ne haec attenderent,) quae discrepant^ae speciem exhibent:
ubique tamen provenit a materia propositioni substrata, potius quam a formali
propositionis dispositione; nusquam tollitur illud in quo formale propositionis
universalis consistit, quod hoc est, ut nihil inveniatur intra subjecti ambitum
de quo no^ dicatur praedicatum. Exp^ndam singula.

Primum hoc est* Universalis propositio affirmans and negans opponuntur
contrary: earum utraque potest esse falsa, harum non ita. Siquis hinc
argueret, propositionem singularem, vim universalis non habere,

Respondeo primo, Eodem argumento probari posse non esse particularem; quia
neque propositio particularis affirmata and negata opponuntur contradictorie,
sed subcontrarie, and earum utraque potest esse vera, harum non ita. Sicui
Ramus videatur satis cavisse, dum syllogismum proprium diversam speciem
constituit tam a generali quam speciali: Regero, 1. ad hominem. Male pro Ramo
arguitur ex iis quae ipse pro nugis habet, and ex Logica sua exulare fecit:
ille enim de Oppositione, Aequipollentia, and Conversione propositionum nihil
habet, ut nec de Reductione syllogismorum: 2. Novum praedicandi modum facere
non potest, cum impossible sit aliquid de alio dici, quod tamen nec de toto
necsecundum partem dicatur. Ut supra fusius explicavimus.

Respondeo secundo. Non singularibus tantum hoc accidit, sed and aliis
universalibus quibusdam. Nam 1. in materia necessaria and impossibili, ex
negatione and affirmatione universali, altera semper vera est altera falsa.
Unde regula illa, quod contrariarum in materia contingenti utraque potest esse
falsa. 2. Idem accidit in propositionibus factis per Omne collectivum; quas
tamen universales esse, nemo quem scio negavit. (Possent tamen, fateor, eadem
ratione qua negant singulares; sunt enim revera universales, cum praedicatum
non nisi uni antecedenti attribuatur.) Hujusmodi namque propositiones [Omnes
apostoli sunt duodecim, and, Omnes apostoli non sunt duodecim] item [Omnes
planetae sunt septem, and, Omnes planetae non sunt septem,] non minus sunt
contradictoriae, quam [Virgilius est poeta, and, Virgilius non est poeta.] Si
igitur illas pro universalibus agnosc^nt, cu^ non and singulares.

Respondeo tertio. Ratio hujus contradictionis inter propositionem singularem
affirmantem and negantem, pendet ex necessitate materiae, potius quam ex ipsa
propositionis natura and forma. Quoties enim subjectum universalis
propositionis est divisionis capax (ut in distributivis, and de materia
contingenti,) and praedicatum sigillatim applicatur subjecti partibus,
affirmans and negans universaliter, non opponuntur immediate and
contradictorie, quia licet aliquid de Toto non recte affirmetur, de part
forsan affirmari poterit, ergo nec de toto negabitur: Ubi vero materiae
necessitas particularem praedicationem omnino prohibet, and necessario requirit
ut quod de illo subjecto dicitur dicatur de eo toto, ut in materia necessaria
and impossibili, and in universali collectiva, ut and in prositione singulari,
* ibi praedicatum vel de toto dicitur, vel de toto negetur, cum de part dici
de part vero negari non posset propter (...) and indivisibilitatem subjecti.

Respondeo quarto. Consequitur hoc ex nostra thesi, non oppugna^. Si enim
quicquid de individuo dicitur dicatur (...), impossible est ut secus esset
quin affirmatio and negatio sint opposita immediata, particularis enim
intermedia eo ipso excluditur.

Nec aliunde patet ratio hujus oppositionis immediatae, quam ex hoc fundamento.
Vel enim semper (...) praedicatur (prout nos afferimus) vel semper (...), vel
aliquando de toto aliquando secundum partem. Si semperde part* licet de una
part dicatur, quid impedit quin de alia negetur, ita ut and affirmatio and
negatio sint simul verae? cum affirmatio particularis quoad unam partem non
impediat negationem partialem quoad aliam partem. Si aliquando (...) aliquando
(...), (prout Ramistarum doctrina videtur innuere, qui quoties una praemissarum
propria est eam pro particulari habent, non autem si utraque sit propria;) Si
sic, inquam, (quamvis gratis dictum sit, nec ulla appareat ratio cur haec and
nonilla sit universalis, imo cur eadem promiscue nunc sit universalis nunc
particularis,) oppositio nec sic esset immediata: licet enim affirmatio (...)
falsa sit, posset tamen quoad aliquam partem (si aliquando partialiter
praedicetur) vera esse, unde nec negatio (...) vera; possent ergo and negatio
and affirmatio simul esse falsae, and non contradictorie oppositae. Necesse est
igitur ut, si opponantur immediate, ideo sit quia singularis propositio semper
est (...), unde vel de toto dicetur vel de to^o negabitur. Confirmat igitur
thesin nostram, non oppugnat, quod videbatur prima front debilitare. Et hoc
telo repercusso eadem opera repercutientur and reliqua.

Secundum sequitur. Propositio particularis affirmans converti aliquando potest
in singularem. Unde singularis videri posset non majorem habere quantitatem
quam habet particularis, quia in conversione non augenda est quantitas. v. g.
[Aliquis homo est Socrates] ergo [Socrates est homo.]

Respondeo. Vi conversionis, sequitur [Hominem] dici de [Socrate:] necessitate
materiae, dicitur (...), quoniam de (...) nihil praedicatur (...)* Hinc
sequitur, necessitate consequentis, Convertens (...) Conversae (...).

Idem fieri necesse est, quoties propositio singularis affirmans convertenda
est in singularem. v. g. [Virgilius est Maro] ergo [Maro est Virgilius.] Quae
conversio non est ex particulari in particularem (ut plurimi autumant,) nec ex
universali in particularem, sed ex universali in universalem. Ubi, necessitate
consequentiae sequitur, Virgil^um de Maron^ dici, necessitate vero
consequentis, sequitur dici catholi^e.

Respondeo. 2. Eadem esset difficultas, si pro particulari haberetur: Nam
singularis negans convertitur in universalem negantem; v, g. [Socrates non est
brutum] ergo [nullum brutum est Socrates;] quare, si prior esset particularis,
in conversione augenda esset quantitas.

Singularis igitur negans convertitur simpliciter (ad modum Universalium) nunc
in singularem, nunc in universalem. v. g. [Socrates non est Plato] ergo [Plato
non est Socrates:] Item [Socrates non est brutum] ergo [nullum brutum est
Socrates:] sicut e contra [nullum brutum est Socrates] ergo [Socrates non est
brutum.] Sin essent hae propositiones negant^s particulares, non essent
convertendae nisi per contrapositionem.

Respondeo. 3. Non in singulares tantum, sed and in alias universales aliquando
convertitur particularis. v. g. [aliquot homines sunt omnes Apostoli] ergo
[omnes Apostoli sunt homines] vel [omnes Apostoli sunt aliquot homines.]

Hactenus vidimus, quomodo singulares differant a reliquis universalibus in
affectionibus propositionis, Oppositione, scilicet, and Conversione; and istius
differentiae rationem reddi non posse, ni ex nostra these* propugnat igitur
thesin nostram, non adversatur. Utut autem maxim nobis adversaretur, Ramistas
tamen nequaquam adjuvat, (quos habeo (...) opponentes; reliqui tacit
adversantur dum in paradigmatis modorum propositiones singulares ponunt pro
particularibus;) Ramistae namque Oppositionem, Conversionem, etc. Nihil curant:
Si igitur in reliquis, de quibus ipsi agunt, cum universalibus conveni^ent
satis est cur ipsi saltem nostram thesin admittant.

Tertium sic est. Proposi^io universalis non concluditur in tertia figura, (h.
e. secundum Ramum, in syllogismo simplici contracto;) at propositio singularis
hic concluditur.

Sed neque hoc Ramistis opitulatur magis quam priora, Illi enim rem negant, nec
admi^tunt conclusionem Propriam in syllogismo contracto: Qui definitur a Ramo,
Quando argumentum pro exemplo ita subjicitur particulari quaestioni, ut
utramque partem antecedens, and assumptione affirmatum intelligatur; (si ergo
quaestio semper sit particularis, cer^e nunquam Propria secundum illos:)
Explicat hoc Dounamus; Quaestio, inquit, debet esse particularis, non
generalis, aut propria; Item, rationem reddens cur syllogismus proprius esse
dicitur ex ut^aque prop^ a non autem ex omnibus propriis, hanc assignat, Quia
in contracto syllogismo conclusio semper particularis est, etiam quum utraque
pars antecedentis est propria. Hoc igitur a Ramistis non urgendum muni dici
praedicatum, nondum constat an ea praedicatio universalis sit an particularis,
quoniam utriusque capax est.

Dari vero conclusiones singulares in tertia figura certissimum est (lic^t vix
quisquam hoc adverte^it.)

Ba- Da- Maro est poeta. ras- rap. Maro est Virgilius. Ergo ta. ti. Virgilius
est poeta.

Item,

Ce- Fe- Maro non fuit Ovidius. las- lap- Maro fuit Virgilius. Ergo ten. ton.
Virgilius non fuit Ovidius.

Etiam quum neutra praemissarum sit singularis. v. g.

Ce- Fe- Nullum brutum est Socrates. lip- ris- Aliquod brutum est Bucephalus.
en. on. Bucephalus ergo non est Socrates*

Item,

Ba- Da- Omne brutum est animal. tip- it is. Aliquod brutum est Bucephalus. Ergo
a. i. Bucephalus est animal.

(Ubi, si major esset particularis, nihil conclude^et, esset enim ex puris
particularibus.) Hoc toties fiet quoties praedicatum minoris est Individuum.
Consequentiae horum syllogismorum ex se satis patent: Quod si non, possent (si
opus esset) ad primam figuram reducendo demo^strari. Sed neque hoc officit
nostrae assertioni; Nam

Respondeo, (ut prius.) Vi consequentiae sequitur de [ Bucephalo] praedicari [
Animal] affirmative [ Socratem] negative, etc. necessitate consequentis
praedicantur (...), quoniam subjectum est (...).

2 Sed and in aliis quibusdam universalibus eadem est difficultas. v. g.
deseptem planetis,

Hi septem sunt stellae erraticae. Sed
Hi septem sunt omnes planetae. Ergo
Omnes planetae sunt stellae erraticae.
Triplex igitur haec differentia in propositione singulari ab aliis
universalibus, neutiquam enervat assertionem nostram, nec debilitat quicquam,
(nisi propositionem singularem ideo diceremus universalem non omnino esse, quia
semper est,) sed supponit and confirmat. In singulis enim instantiis, posito
(vi consequentiae) de tali subjecto fieri praedicationem, supposito interim
quicquid de hoc subjecto dicitur dici (...), infertur hujusmodi praedicatio
universalis: Quod ubi subjectum est vox communis secus accidit, posito enim de
subjecto communi

Propositio ergo categorica, vel est (...), vel (...). Haec (...) quae non de
subjecto toto dicitur sed quoad partem aliquam subjectivam: Illa (...), quae de
subjecto dicitur quoad totam ipsius latitudinem praedicandi. h. e. de partibus
singulis subjectivis. Cujus subiectum si sit vox communis and multis
applicabilis, iis omnibus applicatur etiam praedicatum, prout in plerisque
universalibus; sin vox sic singularis and uni tantum applicabilis, huic uni and
praedicatum applicatur; prout in singularibus, and in propositionibus per Omne
collectivum; (non enim eodem modo dicitur [omnes planetae sunt septem] and
[omnes planetae sunt stellae*] alterum enim collective dicitur, alterum
distributive: Omnes distributive idem est ac Singuli; Omnes collective est
singulorum collectio, at singulorum collectio est singularis, est que totum
(non universale* sed) integrale; planetae sunt septem, at planetarum (...)
unica est: Omne distributivum est syncategorematicum, Omne collectivum est
categorematicum, est que pars subjecti; Unde non recte concluditur, [Omnes
planetae sunt septem, Sol and Luna sunt planetae, Ergo, Sol and Luna sunt
septem,] nisi assumeretur [Sol and Luna sunt omnes planetae] non enim [
Planetae] sed [ omnes Planetae] est subjectum majoris, essetque praedicatum
minoris, su^itur enim collective.) Sive autem de singulis quibus attribuitur
subjectum universale, sive de uno cui attribuitur subjectum singular, dicatur
praedicatum, ^trobique tamen nihil subjecti accipere licet de quo non dicetur
praedicatum, quod secundum Aristotelem est formalis ratio propositionis
universalis; quare and propositio de subjecto singulari est praedicatio (...),
sive Dictum de Omni. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Quantitas non differt realiter a re quanta.
AD quaestionis resolutionem, necessarium est de Distinctio. nibus in genere,
aliquid praemittere. Distinctio ergo est vel Realis, Rationis, vel Modalis.
Realis, quando extrema differunt ut res and res, sine aliqua intrinseca
dependentia unius ad aliud; unde statuuntur vulgo per divinam potentiam posse
mutuo separari. Modalis, quando differunt quidem ex part rei* ita tamen ut
alterum includat essentialem* respectum seu con^exionem ad alterum; unde non
possunt separatione mutua (h. e. ut utrumque separatum existat) separari; est
que inter rem and modum, vel (secundario) inter modos ejusdem rei, (modi tamen
plerumque separari possunt mutuo, ab invicem, non a subjectis.) Distinctio
Rationis, quando unum aliquod a part rei, concipitur ab intellect^ ut
diversum; est que vel rationis ratiocinantis, vel ratiocinatae; haec ^it per
inadaequatos conceptus ejusdem rei, and fundamentum aliquod habet in re; illa
vero quando quid intelligitur sub diversis conceptibus sine fundamento in re.

Per rem quantam, intelligo Materiam, quae est adaequatum subjectum
quantitatis, cui primo in^ae^et, sic Thomas. 1. q. ^. a. 2. Forma nempe
substantialis non est per se subjectum quantitatis, neque extenditur aut
dividitur per se, sed ad extensionem and divisionem materiae, non secus ac
existentia, and praesentia localis, aut situs, aliique modi, ut and accidentia
absoluta, Calor, color, etc. (unde vel est modus substantialis, vel in hoc
saltem imitatur naturam modorum. Siquis mallet totum Compositum dici subjectum
quantitatis, mihi non nocet.

Assertio prima* Quantitas non diff^rt a substantia quanta plus quam modaliter.
Probatur ex natu^a Modi, quam assignat Suarez. disp. 7. sect. 1 number. 17. Ubi
supponit in rebus creatis praeter enti^ates earum quasi substantiales and
radicales (ut appellat) inveniri quosdam m^dos reales, quae and sunt aliquid
positivum, and afficiunt ipsas entitates per seipsos, dando illis aliquid, quod
est extra e^istentiam totam ^^ individuam and existentem; hi tamen modi sunt
ejusmodi entitatis ut non addant propriam entitatem novam, sed solum modificant
praeexistentem: and sect. 1. n. 10. tam essentiale est, inquit, modo esse actu
affixum and modificantem rem cujus est modus ut repugnet de potentia absoluta
conservari sine illa re, seu aliter quam actu modificando illam. E contra vero,
quae realiter differunt ut res and res, possunt saltem per divinam potentiam
separari, ut n. 22. and seq: Unde sic disputo, Quae non possunt per divinam
potentiam separari separatione mutua, e^ non differunt realiter; Sed quantitas
and substantia quanta etc. Ergo. Major patet ex supra dictis. Minor probatur;
Repug^at enim* quantitatem separatam a re quanta existere, propter intrinsecam
dependentiam quantitatis a materia; sive enim essentia quantitatis consistat in
mensurabilitate, sive in divisibilitate, sive in extensione and positione
partium extra parts, semper tamen manet necessaria connexio cum partibus
materialibus; quomodo enim erit pars extra partem, ubi parts nullae sunt?
quomodo mensurabitur aliquid aut dividetur ubi nulla extensio, nullae parts?
quomodo dabitur figuratio and situatio seu partium positio ubi parts non sunt.
Dices, dantur parts quantitativae, licet non materiales. Sed contra, vel
parts extensae sunt parts materiales, vel materia non est quanta: sin per
quantitatem materia est quanta, erit quantitas extensio partium materialium,
quod qui fieri potest ubi non est materia? Iterum, figura and situs necessario
conjunguntur; hinc Suarez d. 52. s. ^. ^. 10. Figura ut sic non est positio
(seu situs) sed illa dispositio totius in ordine ad locum secundum talem
ordinem partium ex qua sequitur talis figura; (quis non hic videt parts
figuratas and sit^atas easdem esse?) si ergo figura sequitur ad situ^, non erit
ubi non est situs, situs autem cum sit modus substantiae non potest esse ubi
non est substantia, and per consequens nec figura, ergo nec quantitas, quae
sine figura non est. Dices, quidni quantitas possit esse sine figura? h. e. res
sine modo? Respondeo, potest esse quantitas sine qualibet figura, non sine
omni; sicut and corpus potest esse sine quolibet particulari Ubi, non tamen ita
quin sit Alicubi; nec tame^ ubicatio definit esse modus; Possunt ergo modi
quilibet in actu exercito abesse a re modificata, non semper in actu signato,
nempe quoties formaliter resultant ex it sa natura rei posita: data vero tali
extensione and dispositione par tium per quantitatem resultat talis figuratio
v. g. tribus lineis taliter dispositis, resultat protinus figura ^ringularis.

Argumentum secundum. Quorum modi non differunt realiter ea nec ipsa differunt
realiter; At modus substantiae and modus quantitatis non differunt realiter,
Ergo nec ipsae. Majorem suppeditat ^uarez, d. 7. s 1. n. 25. ubi statuit duos
modos ejusdem rei differ modaliter, duos autem modos diversarum rerum
differ realiter; Modi, inquit, in re distincti, ut sunt praesentia localis v.
g. and subsistentia humanitatis* aut comparantur tantum ut sunt in ^adem re,
and sic distinguuntur solum modaliter, qui quum ex se non habent propria^
entitatem, etiam ex se non habent unde plus quam modaliter distinguantur, neque
ex re quam afficiunt plus distinguuntur, quia supponimus esse eandem, non
habent ergo majorem distinctionem quam modalem, and confirmatur, quia
unusquisque eorum habet identitatem aliquam cum illa re quam afficit, ergo in
illa and per illa^ habent aliquam identitatem inter se, ergo retinent solum
distinctionem modalem; at vero si inter se comparentur modi afficientes res
diversas, sive illi modi sint ejusdem rationis ut duae subsistentiae duorum
hominum, sive diversarum rationum ut sessio unius and subsistentia alterius,
sic distinctio est realis, non ratione ipsoru^, sed rerum in quibus sunt, nam
unusquisque habet identitatem aliquam cum re quam afficit, and illae res
distinguuntur inter se realiter, ergo and modi ratione illarum. Haec ille.
Realis igitur identitas modorum arguit realem identitatem rerum modificatarum.
Ad Minorem devenio, quod modus quantitatis non differt realiter a modo
substantiae; insto in Figura and Situ. Figura enim est modus quantitatis, and
situs modus substantiae, nec tamen differunt realiter. Quod figura sit modus
quantitatis, in confesso est apud omnes; Sic Smiglecius, Figura non est
terminus quantitatis, sed terminorum quantitatis dispositio. quid hoc aliud
quam modus? Scheiblerus in Metaph. Figura, inquit, est qualitas modificans
quantitatis terminos, unde ^^ non convenit quantitas, ei consequenter nec
figura, quae modus illius est, convenire potest. Scaliger etiam ait, Figuram
non esse quantitatem, sed in quantitate. Suarez item disp. 7. s. 2. n. 10. Est
ergo figura modus quantitatis* Situm esse modu^ substantiae non minus patet.
Smigl. Situs est dispositio partium corporis in loco; quid hoc aliud quam
modus? Scheiblerus, Ex^stimo, inquit, situm non significare peculiarem
entitatem, sed significare modum quendam in ^a re quae denominatur, neque enim
apparet indicium unde sumatur realis distinctio; Unde definit situm, accidens
secundum quod corpus habet ordinem suarum partium in Ubi. Suarez, relinquitur,
inquit, ut dicamus situm seu positionem esse aliquem intrinsecum modum corporis
situatia quo sic denominatur sedens au^ jaciens aut aliquid simile. Est ergo
situs modus substantiae. Figuram vero and situm non differ realiter patet;
nam eadem partium dispositio quae in ordine ad totum dicitur figura, in ordine
ad locum dicitur situs; quod cum sit tantum respectus rationis, non sufficit ad
distinctionem ^ealem, imo vix rationis ratiocinatae. Hinc Smiglecius, est
situs, inquit, figura quaedam corporis prout existit in loco, eademque figura
ut respicit corpus in seipso est figura corporis pertinens ad qualitatem, ut
vero est figura corporis in ordine ad locum se^ figura positionis partium
corporis in loco, ita pertinet ad praedicamentum situs. Nec aliter Suarez; quum
enim inter species situs enumerasset asperum and laeve, hinc, inquit, videtur
sequi etiam curvum and rectum, prout praecise oriuntur ex positione partium in
loco pertinere ad praedicamentum situs, quia etiam illae differentiae dicunt
quandam dispositionem totius consurgentem ex positione partium, quod, inquit,
admittere non est magnum inconveniens, nam revera statio and sessio ratione
rectitudinis and curvitatis maxim differunt, non quod ipsa figura ut sic sit
positio (seu situs) and pertineat ad hoc praedicamentum, sed illa dispositio
totius in ordine ad locum secundum talem ordinem partium, ex qua sequitur talis
figura. Figura ergo and situs, quorum illa quantitatis, hic substantiae modus
est, non magis differunt quam ratione; quare nec eorum subjecta.

Argumentum tertium. Entia realiter distincta non possunt fundare ^undem modum;
sed Substantia and quantitas fundant ^undem modum. Ergo. Praecedens argumentum
processit de subjectis adaequatis, quod duo modi in diversis subjectis realiter
differant, hoc procedit de subjectis partialibus and inadaequatis, quod duo
entia realiter distincta non possint esse subjecta partialia ejusdem modi; sed
substantia and quantitas sunt subjecta partialiae ejusdem numero modi. Ergo.
Majorem ponit Suarez, d 7. s. 2. n. 16. Patet etiam: sic enim idem realiter
differ^et a seipso: nam situs v. g. si fundatur in substantia simul and
quantitate, cumutrisque identificatur, quae si realiter distinguantur, ^a, quae
cum his sunt realiter eadem, realiter inter se differunt, and situs, si
utrisque idem, a seipso differet: Dices, unio formae cum materia est modus,
fundatur tamen in utroque extremo quae realiter differunt, nam materia and
forma uniuntur, quare and idem modus in rebus realiter distinctis. Respondeo,
unio qua uniuntur materia and forma non simplex est, sed duplex, una in materia
per quam ipsa unitur formae, alia in forma per quam ipsa unitur materiae. Sicut
in relationibus, v. g. Socrates and Plato sunt similes (puta in albedine) non
tamen per eandem similitudinem sed per diversam, relatum enim and correlatum
referuntur ad invicem per relationes diversas; nec enim relatio patris ad
filium eadem est cum relatione filii ad patrem; and licet in relationibus
ejusdem nominis res non sit adeo perspicua, ratio tamen eadem est, habent enim
distincta fundamenta; sic similitudo Socratis ad Platonem fundatur in albedine
Socratis, similitudo Platonis ad Socratem in albedine Platonis, quae fundamenta
cum sint realiter distincta, ita and relationes quae cum fundamentis
identificantur: ut autem Socrates and Plato sunt similes per duas realiter
distinctas similitudines, ita materia and forma uniuntur per duas realiter
distinctas uniones (si saltem ipsae materia and forma realiter distinguantur.)

Minor sequitur, Insubstantia simul and quantitate fundatur idem modus. Quod
enim fundatur in subst^^tia quatenus qu^ta, and resultat ex ips^ quantitate,
illud fundatur in substantia simul and quantitate; Sed sic figura, and situs.
Ergo. Quod Figura sit modus quantitatis, supra ostensum est; Quod non ultimatim
fundetur in quantitate quin and substantiam modificet, patet ex ipsa
descriptione quam habet Suarez, disp. 42. s. 3. n. 15. quod sit, ``modus quidam
resultans ex corpore ``ex terminatione magnitudinis; est ergo modus in corpore
resultans ex qua^titate, substantia^ pariter and quantitate^ modificans* Nec
enim negari potest, ipsum corpus, ejusque parts substantiales and entitativas
(quas vocant) eandem figurationem and eosdem terminos habere quos habet
quantitas. Idem de Situ dicendum est. Quod ^itus sit modus substantiae ita
notum est ut nihil magis; quod autem non in substantia pura fundetur, sed in
substantia quanta* aeque patet. Smiglecius, restri^gitur (inquit) situs ad
corpus; ad situationem enim requiruntur extensio, and multitudo partium
materialium, at extensio and materialitas non reperiuntur nisi in materialibus.
Duo nempe requirit ad situatione^, extensionem, quae est a quantitate, and
parts materiales, a substantia; fundatur ergo situs in substantia simul and
quantitate. Pariter Suarez. disp. 61. eadem ratione negat situm substantiis
incorporeis, nempe quia parts non habent sed sint^otae in toto and totae in
qualibet part* Figura igitur quae est modus quantitatis, and situs, qui est
modus substantiae, non fundantur vel in substantia sola, vel in sola
quantitate, sed in substantia simul and quantitate, seu in substantia quanta;
Cum autem idem modus non fundetur in diversis realiter subjectis ne quidem
partialibus sequitur, substantiam and quantitatem non esse realiter diversa.
Nec dicendum est, unum esse situm substantiae, alterum quantit^tis: si corpus
enim tuetur a proprio situ sine quantitate (idem valet de extens^one, positione
partium extra parts, and reliquis officiis quan^i^atis) quid opus est alia
situatione a quantitate? imo substantia esset quanta sine quantitate, situs
enim ponit parts extra parts in toto, quod est formale quantitatis*
Confirmari posset ulterius ex ^o quod figura sit modus quantitatis, situs vero
modus substantiae, figura autem and situs non differant realiter, nedum
modaliter, and quidem vix ratione ratiocinata; idem ergo modus in substantia
fundatur simul and quantitate; Sed de his supra. Atque hactenus Assertio prima.

Assertio secunda. Probabile est neque modaliter differ substantiam a
quantitate, sed tantum ratione ratiocinata. Ad distinctionem rationis
ratiocinatae requi^itur distinctio conceptuum cum unitate and indistinctione a
part rei: Hinc Suarez, d. 7. s. 2. n. 28. ut distinctio (inquit) judicetur
rationis and non rei, satis est ut praeter distinctionem conceptuum nullum
inveniatur signum ad distinctionem modalem aut realem cognoscendam, nam cum
distinctiones non multiplicandae sint sine causa, and sola distinctio
conceptuum non sufficiat ad inferendam majorem distinctionem, quandocunque cum
illa distinctione conceptuu^ non adjungitur aliud signu^ majoris distinctionis,
judicanda semper est distinctio rationis and non rei: hinc infert,
``quandocunque constat aliqua, quae in re unita and conjuncta sunt, ita esse in
conceptibus objectivis distincta, ut in re and individuo sint prorsus
inseparabilia, tam mutuo quam non mutuo, tum magnum and fere certum est
argumentum non distingui actu in re sed ratione ratiocinata. Haec ille. Cum
ergo in materia and quantita re nullum appareat signum realis aut quidem
modalis distinctionis, separationis mutuae vel non mutuae, tam ex potentia
ordinar^a quam absoluta, cum quantitativa extensio formaliter resultet ex
partibus entitativis; probabile est, non differ plus quam ratione. Atque hoc
concedit Suarez paene, nisi quod mysterium Eucharistiae impediret, did. 7. s.
2. n. 10. per mysterium (inquit) Eucharistiae certius nobis constat,
quantitatem esse rem distinctam a materia, quam per cognitionem naturalem
constare potuisset. Videmus ergo unde Jesuitarum pertinacia de reali
quantitatis distinctione, ne scilicet periret mysterium Transubstantiationis;
quod illi de fide tenent, nos pari confidentia negamus. Adjungam argumentum
ipsius Suarez, quo probat ille durationem non distingui ex part rei ab
existentia rei durantis, did. 59. s, 1. n. 8. quia existentia inseparabilis
est a part rei a duratione* and ^ contrario duratio ab existenti^, and in
unaquaque re utraque est aeque variabilis vel invariabilis, ut si existentia
sit omnino necessaria, etiam duratio; si illa corruptibilis vel
incorruptibilis, haee similiter; si altera permane^s, etiam altera; si una
successiva, etiam altera; ergo a part rei non distinguitur. Haec ille, de
existentia and duratione. Pariter ego desubstanti^ and quantitate, ubi materia
ibi quantitas and contra, si materia non existat sine quantitate (ut fatetur
ipse, d. 7. s. 2. n. 11.) nec etiam quantitas sine materia (quicquid ille
contra garriat in Transubstantiatione,) si materia ingenerabilis and
incorruptibilis sic quantitas, si in augmentatione acqui^itur aut in diminution
deperditur aliquid materiae sic and quantitatis, si in raresactione and
condensatione manet eadem materia sic and eadem quantitas, si in his motibus
variantur termini materiae sic and quantitatis, denique cum sint aeque
separabiles aut ^nseparabiles, aeque variabiles and invariabiles, nullum
apparet indicium cur plus quam ratione ratiocinat* distinguantur. Concludo
igitur, quod materia and quantitas non distinguuntur inter se realiter, ut res
and res, and (probabiliter) neque modaliter, sed tantum ratione ratiocinata, h.
e. ut inadaequati conceptus ejusdem rei.

Alia prae manibus erant quae put^ssem annexuisse; sed editio posthuma, esto
and abortiva.

FINIS.

