CERTAIN REASONS WHY THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER BEING CORRECTED SHOULD
Continue.

BY I.W.

LONDON, Printed by A.N for Richard Lownds, at his shop adjoining to Ludgate.
1641.

TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
THe Motives that have induced me to publish these common Reasons (how mean
soever you find them coming but from a common subject) has proceeded partly
from my frequent observing an irreligious, illegal, and wilful contempt of
diverse misinformed and misguided people, in refusing to come into our Church or
Congregation on the Lords day, while any part of the Book of Common Prayer was
reading, though it were the express word of God contained therein, (a thing
indeed, which has justly given much cause of grief and offense to many true
hearted Subjects to the law of God, and of the Land, and may prove in the
conclusion (with those opinions and practices that are accompanied with them)
not only dangerous to the disturbance of our happy peace, the subversion of our
Protestation, and our religion, but also the loss of our lives and liberties,
and all we have) As also from the over-confident presuming expressions of some
others, that the Book of Common prayer should be utterly abolished; which
together with that sincere affection that I formerly have declared, and still
bear unto them, and to the maintaining of the truth and peace of the Church
and Commonweal (though to my great reproach and prejudice) has the rather
pressed me on hereunto. I am not ignorant what envy and uncharitable censures I
have already endured, and must expect from those obstinate despisers and
depravers of them, and of Authority, and of those that conscionablie affect
and frequent them. But they may please to take notice, that it will be found
not agreeable to that true religion which they so much profess; for it will
not endure a Trial, either by the law of God or Man: yet I am the rather
content that they are become my enemies for speaking and justifying so
necessary a truth; nor is it any new thing with me to suffer for the
maintenance of the Law and liberty of the Subject, God I trust in his due time
will clear my synceritie therein.

Neither is it my case alone: for they spare none that comply not with their
distempered humors, be they never so great or good. That true reformed
Protestant Religion which I endeavor to practice teaches me otherwise, and to
pray to God to forgive (them) my enemies, persecutors, and slanderers, and to
turn their hearts; and to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred
and are deceived. However I am resolved to remain a hearty lover of truth,
and peace, and of uniformitie in the reverentiall fear and service of God, and
will continue to pray that they to whom God has committed the stewardship and
dispensation of justice, and maintenance of our true religion and laws (now
after Trial) may seasonably settle, confirm, and unite us in them, our
Protestation, and our due and decent worship of God; lest the irreconciliable
and bloody adversaries of them and us take the advantage of the distractions to
hinder our true, expected, and prayed for Reformation, and in stead thereof to
bring us all into miserable and remediless confusion.

I.W.

SOME REASONS WHY The Book of Common Prayer being corrected should continue.
First, because it was composed and approved of by godly reformed professors
and Martyrs, and reverently used and frequented by devout Protestants, in the
times of religious Princes, the happy instruments and Propagators of the true
reformed Religion.

IT adds much to the due respect and esteem of them, that they have such a
reverend forming and consent of grave and orthodox Divines, Martyrs, and
zealous Protestants; And why should we not believe, that the godly and
religious Professors of those times (who had seen and felt the fury of the
contrary religion, and best knew the inconveniences, and differences in matters
belonging thereunto then chiefly in agitation) did seriously and faithfully
endeavor a sincere reformation? they were no ways hindered in effecting their
desires, for they had the approbation of their Prince, and countenance of
authority thereunto: why then should we not conceive, that the Spirit of truth
did guide them? Certainly if they had known any better way for the due and
decent service and honor of God, they would have propounded it, and it would
have been as well established. And questionless if there had been any such
errors in them as are supposed, and slandered on them, some of them would have
made some recantation and acknowledgement thereof at their sufferings, and not
have made use of them, and commended them to others at their departure out of
the world.

Secondly, Because they have been at several times enacted and established as
Laws of the Land, in the times of most Religious and reformed Princes.

They were first enacted in the fifth and sixth year of King Edward the sixth.
They were repealed in the first year of Queen Mary her reign, That repeal
was made void, and the act of Edw. 6. was re-established, and confirmed in the
first year of Queen Elizabeth her reign. The due resort unto them on
Sundays according to the aforesaid act of Qu. Eliz. was revived 3. Iacobi. He
then that makes opposition against such wholesome and re-established Laws,
enacted by the prudent, Religious, and mature deliberation of several
Parliaments, ought to have more then ordinary grounds, and bring substantial
and absolutely necessary Arguments for the repeal and abolishing of them: and
seeing it is our happiness that we have them established and confirmed by law,
If we know our own good, we shall endeavor by all lawful means to continue
them under a law still.

Thirdly, Because that which gives the offense therein is not matter of faith
and salvation, But discipline, and the Ceremonies of the Church.

It is not to be denied, that authority has power to order and settle
Discipline and Government, as well in Ecclesiastical as Civil affairs, being
not contrary to the written word of God; which once being settled, that which
was formerly indifferent in its own nature, cease now to be indifferent to us
as subjects being under that settled law; and truly methinks if there were no
other argument but this, it were sufficient ground for a good Christian subject
to conform himself unto them. Again, nor man's conscience ought to be
troubled at that which is contained in the sacred Scriptures the express word
of God, or evidently grounded thereon, But rather for the not performance of
the same.

Why then do we charge and burden our consciences with those things which are
not imposed upon us by the command of God? why do we stumble at straws, and
leap over blocks? Tithe Mint and Comin, and let the greater works of the Law
undone? shall we agree in the substance, and in the greater, in matters of
faith and salvation, and shall we contend for shadows, and disagree in the
lesser, in things indifferent in their own nature, and neglect things lawfully
commanded by Authority? God forbid. The reason why some schismatic and
seditious professors are taken notice of to be so guilty of not walking
according to the commandments of God, the doctrine and rules of our Religion,
is, because they so much overbusie themselves in opposing the lawful
discipline and ceremonies of the Church, and (thereby thinking to give
satisfaction to themselves and their erroneous consciences) in the mean time
neglect the honor and duty to their Governors, their charity and love to
their neighbors, which are the express command of God in his word.

Fourthly, Because they have endured opposition, and the greatest number of the
opposers have been either weak and ignorant Christians, misled and
misinformed, or perverse, seditious, and inconformable to the established
government.

That there are many weak Christians (though honestly affected to the true
Religion) and that there is in the nature of man a perverse and froward
disposition, and a spirit of contradiction in some, none that truly knows
religion, the nature of man, and the times, will deny. Solomon goes further,
and tells us that there is a generation that are pure in their own conceit, and
yet they are not washed from their silthinesse, so that then, there may be
diverse and several ends in opposition, some may only seem to oppose by way of
trial, and inquiry to the end that the truth may be manifested.

Some may oppose out of simplicity and ignorance.

Some out of an intemperate and indiscreete Zeal.

Some may have sinister ends and by respects in their opposing.

Some oppose them in envy and malice to the truth and our happiness therein.
But although God only sees and knows every man's heart and end in opposing,
and ponders all their doings, yet it is not unknown but well observed, That
some endeavoring to shake off government, and to free themselves from their
due obedience (out of pride or ambition, or out of a blind and intemperat
Zeal, or from the effect of them both) when they have been lawfully checked by
the reins of Authority, they have endeavored and have sown the Tares of
Sedition and division in the Church and commonwealth; and further, such is the
extraordinary perverse and arrogant disposition, and self conceitednes of some
transported humors, that rather then they will acknowledge their errors though
never so apparent, the very state and law it self must be condemned and
condescend to their distempers.

I will not therefore condemn any thing, merely because it is opposed;
Because that the most sacred Scriptures, the word of God, and our true reformed
Protestant Religion, has received no small opposition from time to time; and
that good and godly Governors and Christians have not wanted opposition and
p^^secution too, even when they have best deserved, and the best men and best
things have been and are still subject to calumny and misinterpretation. And
it were to be wished that it were not observed in these days, that those that
were and are accounted and known to be religious and zealous Protestants,
constant in the maintenance of the truth, and of their reverentiall fear of
God, and that make conscience also of their duties as Christians, to declare
their affections to truth and peace, and to perform their duties of a subject
to their Prince and wholesome Laws, that these which deserve commendation and
imitation, had not so much opposition and such uncharitable censures, of being
only formal, carnal, and moral Christians, and sometimes worse detractions
too frequent in men's mouths and writings, Moreover, That which the Apostle
calls pure Religion and undefiled before God, and that which is the Trial of a
good Christian and Subject, some slanderously and censoriously oppose, and judge
Pharisaicall and formal, etc. It is true (as they say) that it is possible for
a moral honest man to go to Hell; But it is most certain that none shall go
to Heaven, unless they have righteousness joined to their holiness; he that
makes not conscience of performing the duties of the second Table, there is
just cause to suspect his syncerity in the performance of the first. The
Apostle says in the fifth of the Galathians, That all the Law is fulfilled
even in one word; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, and this is that
second great Commandment that Saint Matthew speaks of, which is the trial
of the first, according to that Assertion of Saint John, He that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen:
Again, without faith it is impossible to please God: now the main trial of
true faith is by the lively operation and expression of it in good works, show
me thy faith by thy works, says the Apostle. For as the body without the
spirit is dead, so faith without good works is dead, James 2.26. and none shall
ever be saved by a dead faith, Iam. 2.14.17. It were happy therefore if we
would see or suspect the policy of the Devil or his agents, who envy our
happiness, and take advantage either of our judgments depraved, or natures
corrupted, to make us their instruments to break our blessed unity and peace
in Church and Commonwealth, and so while we are striving and contending for
shadows, we may be deprived of the substance, and brought into irrecoverable
confusion.

Fifthly, Because the oppositions have been diverse times fully answered by
learned and Religious Protestants, but especially so fully determined in a
conference on mature deliberation by our late renowned King James of blessed
memory.

This manifestly appears by a Proclamation, for the uniformity of Common
Prayer, and the decent service of God, dated the fifth of March, in the first
year of K. James, and is prefixed before the Book of Common Prayer, part
whereof I will mention, the rest (wherein you may receive further satisfaction)
I refer you unto to peruse at your pleasure. The words are these.

In the month of October last we gave intimation of a conference intended to be
had with as much speed as convenientlie could be, for the ordering of the
Church, which accordingly followed in the month of January last at our Honor
of H^mpton Court, where before our self and our privy Council, were
assembled many of the grave Bishops, and Prelates of the Realm, and many other
learned men, as well of those that are conformable to the state of the Church
established, as of those that dissented, among whom what our pains were, what
our patience in hearing and replying, and what the indifferency and
uprightness of our judgment, we leave to the report of those who heard the
same, contenting our self with the synceritie of our own heart therein. But
we cannot conceal that the success of that conference was such as happens to
many other things, which moving great expectation before they be entered into,
in their issue produce small effects. For we found mighty and vehement
informations, supported with so weak and slender proofs, as it appeared to us
and our Council, that there was no cause why any change should have been at
all in that which was most impugned, the Book of Common-praier, containing the
form of the public service of God here established, neither in the Doctrine
which appeared to be sincere, nor in the forms and rites which were justified
out of the practice of the Primitive Church; notwithstanding, etc. And
concludes in these words, And last of all we do admonish all men, that
hereafter they shall not expect nor attempt any farther alteration in the
common and public form of GODS service from this which is now established,
For that neither will we give way to any to presume, that our own judgment
having determined in a matter of this weight, shall be swayed to alteration by
the frivolous suggestions of any light spirit; neither are we ignorant of the
inconveniences that do arise in government by admitting innovation in things
once settled by mature deliberation; and how necessary it is to use constancy
in upholding the public determinations of states; for that such is the
unquietness and unstedfastnesse of some dispositions, affecting every year
new forms of things, as if they should be followed in their inconstancy would
make all actions of state ridiculous and contemptible, whereas the steadfast
maintaining of things by good advice established is the weal of all
Commonwealths.

In the Preface of the Book of Common Prayer printed 1627, it is declared that
all uncertain Ceremonies were left out, and nothing ordained to be read, but
the very pure Word of GOD the holy Scriptures, or that which is evidently
grounded upon the same.

In the Declaration of Ceremonies why some be abolished and some retained, it
is manifested, that without some Ceremonies it is not possible to keep any
order or quiet Discipline in the Church, and though some were thought worthy to
be cut off and clean rejected, others there be which though they have been
devised by man, yet it is thought good to reserve them still, as well for a
decent order in the Church, for which they were first devised, as because they
appertain to edification, whereunto all things done in the Church, as the
Apostle teaches, ought to be referred; and although the keeping or omitting of
a Ceremony in it self considered is but a small thing, yet the wilful and
contemptuous transgression and breaking of a common Order and Discipline is no
small offense before God, Let all things be done among you, says Saint Paul,
in a seemly and due order, the appointment of which order appertains not to
private men, therefore no man ought to take in hand, or presume to appoint, or
alter any public or common order in Christ's Church, except he be lawfully
called and authorized thereunto, etc. as therein more at large appears.

He that desires satisfaction of the particular answers to the several
objections against the Book of Common Prayer, etc. may read and receive it in
that learned Work of Master Hookers Ecclesiastical Politic, and in Master
Robert Abbot his Trial of our Church-forsakers, and in many other.

In the mean-time they may inform their judgments, and allay their rash and
scandalous Censures by the perusal of these following places of Scripture,
Numb. 6.23, 24, 25, 26. David's set forms of Psalms for several special
occasions, Joel. 2.7. Matthew 6.9. Luke 11.2. Ecclesiast. 5.2.

Sixthly and lastly, Because they are and have been so Common Prayers amongst
us.

Thanks be unto God, the time is not now as it has bin with our Forefathers in
this Kingdom, and with other Christians at this day in several places of the
World; We need not hide our selves in Dens, and frequent the Caverns of the
Earth, to serve the true God in. The Bible which was shut up in an unknown
tongue from the Generality is now become common in our own mother tongue and
language of the Kingdom, and we all have not only liberty by Proclamation to
enjoy it, but we have several established Acts of Parliament, to confirm our
common use of it, our Religion, and our Book of Common Prayer also, and
therefore God grant that that which is so great a mercy and happiness unto us,
we make it not our misery, by turning the cause of our thanksgiving into
murmuring and repining, depraving, and contemning of that and those who legally
and conscionably affect and frequent them. There was a time when the children
of Israel surfeited of their Manna; I pray God that our loathing of the
Hony-combe does not argue too full a stomach in us. Do we not think that by
our contemning of them, and by our ingratitude for the free and peaceable
enjoyment of them? we do not provoke God to deprive us of them? yes surely we
do; when plenty makes us wanton and ungrateful, scarcity is not far off. Thus
God deals with us in the abuse of our healths, our estates, our peace, and
liberty, and he deals not so with us only in temporal Blessings, but in
spiritual also. We account our selves (as all other Nations esteem us) happy
in our good and Common Laws, we enjoy our Common prayers, not only by Common
Law, but by a Title of Common also, so that now they are truly become ours in
Common, and they are our common good, our custom and freehold; in the public
good and welfare whereof, and of our Protestant Religion, every subject in
England has an interest and propriety. They have been our common orders for
the due and decent worship of God, and God is the God of Order and Unity; they
have been our premeditated and authorized forms of Discipline in our
spiritual warfare, in fighting against the Flesh, the World, and that great
and subtle Commander of the Air the Devil; the potent adversaries of Mankind,
who have assuredly received many a deadly wound by these ancient and approved
and experienced Battaliaes, and shall we now break ranks and order, when our
victory goes on so prosperously, and our warfare so nigh to an end, and so
hazard an inrode, and rowting, and a confusion amongst us? God forbid.

To conclude, it were to be heartily wished, that in matters that truly
concern so much the glory of God, the honor, peace, and welfare, of the
Church and Common weal, that all single sinister and prejudicate opinions
might be laid aside (much less so scandalously published) and that in
contending for the truth we do not forget our duty, and the unity that ought
to be amongst Protestants: For it^^ most certain there can be no true
contending for the truth, but that which is accompanied with sincerity,
humility, and charity, that so the goodness of our cause may be manifested in
our religious and Christian demeanours therein.

And for as much as the Book of Common Prayers has been so religiously begun,
intended, and used by our forefathers, to the glory, and due, and decent
Service of God, and has at several times been established as Laws in this
Land in times of Religious Princes, and reforming Magistrates, and has been
often maintained against all oppositions, and so maturely determined, and so
long peaceably and prosperously enjoyed, devoutly frequented, and has been so
common and necessary for us, let us be thankful to God, and our Governors,
for the free and common use and continuance of them, and according to that
prudent and religious advice of authority, let us quietly attend the
reformation intended, without any tumultuous disturbance of the worship of God,
and peace of the Kingdom.

In the mean time, and ever, let us remember the Apostles counsel to pray for
all those that are in Authority, that we may live a godly life under them with
all peace and quietness, to which my heart and tongue, and all true hearted
protestants will ever say, Amen.

FINIS.

