A WORTHY SPEECH MADE IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS this present Parliament, 1641.

1 That Parliaments are the only way for advancing the Kings affairs.

2 That the restoring of the property of goods and freedom of the Subject is a
chief means to maintain Religion and obedience to his Majesty.

By Mr. WALLER.

LONDON, Printed for John Nicholson, 1641.

Mr. WALLERS Speech in the House of Commons this present Parliament. 1641.
Mr. Speaker, J will use no Preface as they do who prepare men to something to
which they would persuade them and move their affections, I will only propose
what I think fit for the House to consider, and shall be no more concerned in
the event then they that shall hear me. Two things are considerable which I
observe in his Majesty's demands; First, the Supply: Secondly, our speedy
dispatch thereof, touching the first his Majesty's occasions for Money are too
evident; For (to say nothing) how are we neglected abroad, or distracted at
home, the calling of this Parliament and our sitting here is an effect which
no light cause could in those times have produced, and enough to make any
reasonable man believe that the Exchequer abounds not so much in money as the
State does in occasions to use it, and I hope we shall appear willing to
disprove those who thought to dissuade his Majesty from this way of
Parliaments, as doubting it uncertain, and to let him see it is as ready and
more safe for the advancement of his Affairs then any new (or pretended old
way) whatsoever.

2. Now Mr. Speaker, for the speedy dispatch required* which was the second
thing, which not only his Majesty but (Res ipsa loquitur) the occasion seems
to importune no less, nec^ssity is come upon us like an armed man, and yet the
use of Parliaments heretofore (as appears by the Writs which call us hither)
was to advise with his Majesty of things concerning the Church and
Commonwealth; and Mr. Speaker, it has ever been the Custom of Parliaments by
good and wholesome Laws to refresh the Commonwealth in general, yea to
descend into the Remedies of particular grievances before any mention made of
supply, look back on the best Parliaments and still you shall find that the
last Acts are for the free gift of the Subjects on the peoples part, and
general pardons on the Kings part, even the wisest of Kings have first
acquainted their Parliaments, with their designs and the reasons thereof, and
then demanded the assistance both of their counsels and purses.

But Mr. Speaker, Physicians though they be called of the latest, must not
stomach it or talk what might have been but apply themselves roundly to the
cure. Let us not stand too nicely upon circumstances, nor to rigidly post the
matter of supply to the healing of our lighter wounds, let us do what may be
supplyably done with reason and honesty on our parts, to comply with his
M^jesties desires, and to prevent the eminent evils that threaten us.

But consider Mr. Speaker, that they who think themselves already undone can
never apprehend themselves in danger, and they that have nothing left can never
give freely; nor shall we ever discharge the trust of those that sent us
hither, or make them believe that they contribute to their own defense and
safety, unless his Majesty be plea^ed first to restore them to the propriety
of their good and lawful liberties, wh^reof they esteem themselves now out of
possession. I need not tell you, that the propriety of our goods is the mother
of courage and nurse of Industry, which makes us valiant in war and good
husbands in peace, the experience I have of former Parliaments, and my present
observations of the care ye Country has had to choose persons of worth and
courage makes me think this House like the Spartans whose forward valors
required some faster Music to allay and quiet their spirits, too much moved
with the sound of Martial Instruments. It is not the fear of imprisonment or
(if need be) of death it self that can keep a true hearted Englishman from
the care to leave his part of the Inheritance as entire to posterity as he
received it from his Ancestors. This therefore let us first do (and the more
speedily) that we may come to the matter of supply, let us give new force to
the many Laws which have been heretofore made for the maintaining of Rights
and Privileges, and to restore this Nation to the fundamental and vital
liberties, the propriety of our goods and freedom of our persons; no way
doubting but that we shall find his Majesty as gracious and ready as any of
his Royal progenitors have been to grant our just desires therein, for not
only the simplest do think but the wisest do know; that what we have
suffered, we have suffered for his Ministers, but the person of no King was
ever better beloved of his people, and that no people were ever better
satisfied with the ways of levying of moneys are two truths which may serve to
demonstrate the other, for such is their occasion to the present courses, that
neither the admiration they have of his Majesty's inclination to Justice and
clemency, nor the pretended cont^nt of the Judges could willingly submit
themselves to this late tax, and such is their natural love and just esteem
of his Majesty's goodness, that no late pressure could provoke them nor any
example invite them to disloyalty or disobedience. But what is it that has
bred this misunderstanding betwixt the King and the people, how is it that
having so good a King we have so much to complain of? Why Mr. Speaker, we are
told of the Son of Solomon that he was a Prince of a tender heart, and yet by
the advice of violent Counselors, how rough an answer he gave his people, that
his finger should be heavier then his Fathers Loins. I dare say, that it was
not his own but the voice of some persons about him, that wanted the gravity
of moderation requisite for the Counselors of a young King. I love not to
press Allegories too far, but the Resemblance of Iobes story with ours holds
so well, that I can not but observe it to you: it pleased God to give his
enemies to afflict him, and yet he was no^ provoked to rebel against him so
much as with his tongue (although he had no good example of one that lay near
him) and felt not the half which he suffered. I hope his Majesty will imitate
God in being near it too, and as he was severe to Job only whilst he
discoursed with another concerning him, but when he vouchsafed himself to
speak to him, began to rebuke those who had mistaken and misjudged his case,
and to restore the patient man to his former prosperity: so now his Majesty
has admitted us his presence and spoken face to face with us, I doubt not but
we shall have fairer days and be as rich in the possession of our own, as
ever we were I cannot but wonder at those who seem to doubt the success of
this Parliament, or the misunderstanding betwixt the King and the people should
last any longer now we are so happily met.

His Majesty's wants are not so great but that we may find means to supply
them nor our desires so unreasonable or so incompatible with government, but
that his Majesty, may well sat^sfie them, for our late experience I hope will
teach us what roc^ to shun, and how necessary the use of moderation is, and for
his Majesty he has had experience enough, how that prospers which is gotten
without the concurrent good will of the people, for never more money was taken
from the Subject, nor never more want in the Exchequer, if we look upon what
we have paid it is more then the people of England ever did in such a time, if
we look upon what has been effected therewith, it seems we have acted the
Belides part, whose punishment was the filling of a sive with water: whosoever
gave advise for these courses has made good the saying of the wise man, Qui
conturbat domum suam possidebit ventum, by new ways they think to accomplish
wonders, but in truth they grase the wind and are in the mean time ambobus
Achilles, cruel to us and to the King too, for let the Common wealth flourish
and then, he that has the Sovereignty can never want or do amiss so as he
governes not according to the interest of others, but go the shortest and
safest ways to his own and the Common good with regard how they stand in
order to any private man's desires or preservation,

The Kings of this Nation have always governed by Parliaments: if we look
upon the success of things since Parliaments were laid by, it resembles that
of the Grecians, Ex illo fluere and retro sublapsa referri Res Danaum,
especially in the Subjects part, for though the King has gotten little the
subjects have lost all; but his Majesty shall now hear the truth from us, and
we shall make to appear the errors and wanderings up and down of our Divines,
who would persuade us that a Monarch can be absolute, and that the King may do
all things ad libidinem; receding not only from their text, though that be a
wandering too but from the way which their own profession might teach the^
Stare super vias antiquas, and remoove not the ancient bounds and land marks
which our Fathers have set. If to be absolute were to be restrained by no
Laws, then can no King in Christendom be so, for they all stand obliged to
the Laws of Christians, and we ask no more, for to this Pillar are our
Privileges fixed, our Kings at their Coronation taking a solemn Oath, not to
enfring them. I am sorry these men take no more care of informing our faith of
those things which they told us for our souls health whilst we know them
manifestly in the wrong, in that which concerns the liberty, and privileges
of the Subjects of Engl^nd* but they get promotion and preferment, and then it
is no matter though they neither believe themselves nor are believed of others:
but since they are so ready to let loose the consciences of our Kings, we must
be the more careful to provide for our protection against the Pulpit Law, by
declaring and reinforcing the municipall Laws of this Kingdom. It is worth
the observing, how now this opinion or rather this way of rising is ever
amongst themselves and, yet Mr. Hooper who sure was no refractory man (as they
term him) thinks that the first government was arbritary, until it was
found that to live by one man's will, became the cause of all men's miseries, and
that this was the original of inventing Laws; And Mr. Speaker, if we look
further back, our Histories will tell us that the Prelates of this Kingdom,
have often been the mediators between the King and his Subjects and to present
and pray for redress to their grievances, and had then as much love and
reverence from the people as now they want* but these Preachers are more active
then their predecessors, and wiser then the Laws, who have found out a better
form of government, The King must be a more absolute Monarch then any of his
predecessors, and to them he must owe it though in the mean time they hazard
the hearts of his people and involve him into a thousand difficulties; For
suppose the form of government were convenient (yet this is but a supposition)
for these 500 years it has not only maintained us in safety, but has made
us victorious over other Nations: but, I say, suppose they have another Idea of
one more convenient, we all know how dangerous Innovations are, though to the
better, and what hazard those Princes run that enterprise the change of long
established government.

Now Mr. Speaker, of all our Kings that have gone before, and of all that are
to succeed in this happy Race, why should so good and so pious a King be
exposed to this trouble and hazard besides that Kings so diverted can never do
any great things abroad. But Mr. Speaker, whilst these men have bent their wits
against the Laws of their Country, whether they have neglected their own
charge, and what Tares are grown up in the field, which they should have
tilled, I leave it to a second consideration, not but that Religion ought to be
the first thing in our purposes and desires; but that which is first in dignity
is not always to preceed in order of time* for well being supposed a being,
and the first impediment which men naturally endeavor to remove, is the want
of those things without which they cannot subsist.

God first assigned unto Adam maintenance of life, and gave him a title above
the rest of the creatures before he appointed him a Law to observe, and let me
tell you, that if our Adversaries have any such design, as there is nothing
more easy then to impose Religion on people deprived of their liberties, so
there is nothing more hard then to do it upon Freemen; and therefore (Mr,
Spe^ker) I conclude with this motion, that an order may be presently made, that
the first things this House will consider of, shall be the restoring this
Nation in general to its fundamental liberties, the propriety of our goods,
and the Freedom of our persons, and that then we will forthwith consider of
the supply so much desired, and thus we shall discharge the trust reposed in us
by those that sent us hither, his Majesty will see that we will make more then
ordinary haste to satisfy his demands, and we shall let all those know, that
seek to hasten the matters of supply, that they will so farred ^^lay it, as
they give interruption to the former.

FINIS.

