Alter Britanniae Heroes: OR THE LIFE OF THE MOST HONORABLE KNIGHT, Sir HENRY
GAGE, Late Governor of OXFORD, Epitomized.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1645.

Alter Britanniae Heroes: OR, THE LIFE AND DEATH OF The most Honorable Noble
Knight, Sir HENRY GAGE, etc.
TILL I began seriously to consider the perfections of man in such excellent
Persons as are men indeed, I took that saying of the great Aquinas to taste more
of Passion, then Divinity; Wherein he averrs, That were not those well
instructed by Faith, who duly weigh man, what gifts and graces God has endowed
him withal, what Wonders he has done to make him great and happy, what
Beauties he has instilled both into Soul and Body, and what supereminent
delight he takes to be doing good to this Noble Creature; They would conclude,
That Man were the God of God himself.

But now though Faith be to me a precious allay to that extreme Conclusion,
yet I confess the sentence to be a certain truth. This I was compelled to
acknowledge, when I did survey exactly the Excellencies of a Smith, or Gage, to
recount examples to my self familiar, and such as I may speak of safely under
the Character of a grateful virtue; Censure her self granting it a Solecisme
to flatter the dead.

Pardon my generous ambition of two such Noble Mottoes as Fidelity and
Gratitude afford: whereto that I want not some pretense, I call you to
witness, O great and happy Geniees of the two forementioned Heroes. To
peerlesse Smith, I have already for both those Titles done that homage, which
now I am about to pay unto admired Gage. Wherein may affection supply what the
want of leisure, instructions, and the times abridge.

This gallant Gentleman was borne at London, about the year 1597. of worthy
and exemplar Parents, both of generous and noble Families, his Father being a
principal Branch of the Gages of Sussex: a house for Antiquity and merit,
nothing less then obscure; They were both intent to breed him, with the rest
of their Children, as Gentilely and Civilly, as the Exigence of their Estate,
Consumed, and Exhausted, by the severity of that difficult time would permit.

And to this end at ten years old, sent him with his Brother into Flanders, to
receive Education, where Mr Henry Gage, with singular satisfaction, past
through the several Schools of Humanity. Which accomplished, he was sent by
his Father through France into Italy, where under that famous Scholar
Picolhomini, Uncle to this great General, the Duke of Amalfi, he heard his
Philosophy, and with great applause did publicly defend it. Thus having laid
stately Groundworkes for such Magnificent Structures, as after he raised upon
them, and being ready to write Man, he begins to consider in what Channel of
the Ocean of this World he had best steer his Course toward the Land of
Promise. At length the divine directions work upon those Noble faculties of his
Soul; innate Fortitude, and desire of Honor: insomuch that between them a
firm resolution is begotten to Sail toward Heaven over the most turbulent
part of the Sea, in a Man of War. He designs himself for a Soldier; and
considering that Travail did much conduce to that end; To Flanders, France,
and Italy, which he had already viewed, he adde^ Germany, and returns that way
to the Netherlands. But least you may judge that of his Travayles he made only
a present delight, and fed his Curiosity, I must assure you his observation was
so strong, and punctual, that all men did admire the exact account he was able
to render of all things deserving serious memory.

Mars had now read many bloody Lectures to the Belgians, and that Country of
all others in Europe, was held his proper Academy. Where immediately upon his
arrival at 22 years of Age; The Gages glory, enters himself a Soldier in
Antwerp Castle; There for a Twelve-months space he trayl'd a Pike, where his
Noble, discreet, and gallant Carriage, brought him such endearments with the
Governor and Garrison, as was very singular, and seldom gained by strangers
in so high a manner from the Spanish Nation.

Here his reputation shines with such a splendour, that the Earl of Argyle
being about to raise a Regiment, seeks to win him to him: and offers him a
Company. His Governor to Congratulate his advancement, Feasts him in a
Princely manner, and well presaging what he would arrive to; publicly glories
to have been Tutor to so brave a Soldier.

Bergen ap Some, is the first place where he enters into Action, at which Siege
being diverse times Commanded to assault the Enemies Trenches, he gallantly
performed it, till at length he was by one of their Mines blown up toward
those immortal Regions whither his Noble Soul aspired. But it pleased God
strangely to preserve him, so that his hurt was not so dangerous, but that
admitted of a short recovery. The next year, the Famous Marquess Spinola
lays siege to Breda* in all which long and tedious action, our youthful
Captain comports himself, with so much Valor, and such Resolution, that he
merited special notice from that Renowned General. This Siege completed, the
English Regiments were both reformed, so that for two or three years he
remained without further Charge, and betook himself, if it were possible, to a
more excellent employment, The Theory of War; for his judgment told him,
practice without Contemplation, was an accident without a substance. Sometimes
for recreation he cast an eye upon Heraldry, and soon therein became a great
Proficient. Sometimes he bestowed himself in translating Books, which he
exceeding well performed, witness the Siege of Breda, written by the elegant
Hermannus Hugo; and Vincents Heraldry, the first whereof he translated out of
Latin into English. The latter out of English into French.

In this Vacation he began to cast about to find a Consort, on whom to place
his noblest affections, and at length he discovers one Mistress Mary Daniell, a
Gentlewoman, whose worth and beauty made her a deserved object for the Love of
so excellent a Person. It seems nature had long before designed her for him,
as we may almost conclude, by a memorable accident happening, when with her
Mother she long before came over to see London, the Epitome of this Kingdom.
Amongst other places in the City, which their Curiosity surveid was St
Jamese's, where in a Gallery adorned with diverse Pictures, they saw one of Sir
John Gage's Knight of the Garter, and great Grandfather to the Gentleman that
now I write of; who in Queen Mary's days had been Lord Chamberlain of the
Household. Of this Picture, the young Gentlewoman took special notice, as that
which only pleased her, and several times reviewed it; presaging as it were
that from that strange sympathy and liking would come some strange result, as
after proov'd by her Match with one descended of his Loins. However then it
made so firm an Impresse on her tender fancy, being then scarce twelve years
old, that after being married, and her Noble Husband passionately complaining,
that he could not after curious search and labor, find the Picture of this Sir
John Gage, which he had sought for with great desire: she presently repeats
the former Story, and so directs him thither, where since he did procure it.

By this Gentlewoman he had a gallant Fortune, and was blessed in the process of
those nineteen years they lived together with a dozen Children, whereof six
are still living, two Sons and four Daughters. The firmness of their love,
and happiness was such, that those who lived for most part with them, and
exactly noted what past between them, never could observe from either the least
glance of anger ordistast: but still discover their endless affection in the
highest Meridian. As he was a most tender Husband, so there never was a more
indulgent Father, which Indulgence he managed with such an high discretion,
that he preserved in them so great a reverence, that a beck or cast of his eye,
was a sufficient command or check unto them. But he taught them this filial
piety, not only by precept, but example also, as appears by a memorable act
of his about this time, for his Father through his great misfortune, was
brought unto the hard condition of Confiscation of his whole Estate, and long
imprisonment, having only his life left him, and that only upon courtesy, by
the Kings reprieve after Condemnation. In this case he had not only outlived
his own remainder of subsistence; but also the several annuities his Noble
Allies and Kindred had bestowed upon him, some for 20, some for 30 years, in
pure Compassion to see his endless Sufferings.

But his Durance has survived all, and no relief is left him, but the
generous piety of his Worthiest Son, who to relieve his Fathers Exigence,
voluntarily demises the reversion of a fair Estate at Croyden, called
Haling-house, waving all respect of wrong to himself, or prejudice to his Wife
and Children: so far did the force of his unequalled piety to his Parents,
transport his Noble nature.

Having past now two or three years* without any active or public employment,
and furnished his Contemplation with the best Maxims of War, he thinks fit
to fall again to practice those choycer Meditations wherewith he had enricht
his mind. In the year 1630, Sir Edward Parham raising a new Regiment of
English, makes Sir William Thresham Sergeant Major, and Mr Gage Captain
Commendant, in which condition he remained, ^ill by Parham's death, Tresham
came to succeed as Colonel, and Captain Gage as Sergeant Major, in which
employment he was, when the States besiedged Mastricht; where the Marquess de
Sanct^ Cruce won, with the gallantry, and prudence of the Commanders, in these
desperate times did so re^ye upon that Regiment, that he gave them the guard of
his own Person.

The next year he was in the Field, with the Marquess de Aitona, in that
which they called the running Leaguer, by reason of the States and their
continual motion. Where the forementioned Marquess, with the Duke de L^rm^,
took such ^^^ciall notice of him, that they persuaded him to raise a Regiment
of his own: and to that end gave him a Commission. But by reason of some
difficulties in England, it could not be thoroughly effected, till a little
before Sir William Threshams death. When he having raised above 900 effective
men, the others death intervening, had his Regiment completed by addition of
the old unto it; which his Highness the Prince Cardinal bestowed upon him.
But these favors and endearements amongst Strangers he obtained not by any
sinister means, but merely with the eminence of his Virtue, for he could not
be won to do any thing ungrateful to his natural Sovereign: or inconsistent
with the interest and honor of his Nation. Witness his fidelity expressed by
his speedy repair to England out of Flanders, (where he was in actual Service
by license of his Sovereign) as soon as our King had broken Peace with Spain,
and called his Subjects home. This I am confident you may find once or twice
attested upon record, by such Ministers of State as then were resident in
Flanders. A good testimony of his Loyalty and obedience, who upon the first
Summons of his King did not dispute the matter, but readily left his whole
Fortunes behind him, yea his Wife and Children as well as his Command there,
which was always honorable.

What I hence infer, was confirmed by another president, which I shall wrong
his memory to omit. For when the English Regiment in Flanders, was Commanded
into Germany; the prudent and gallant Colonel sensible of his Countries
Interest, stoutly refused that employment; alleging it to be unseasonable for
English Subjects to maintain a War in the Palatinate, against the Nephews
of their own Sovereign. And this asseveration he fortified with such evincing
reasons, that he prevailed to have that Command repealed: an Argument that
nothing was more dear unto him, then his duty to his Prince and Country.

Whilst he was Colonel, his Regiment was every Summer in the Field, and put
upon the most important Actions; As for the Siege of St Omers, his memory in
those that make relation of it, must needs be very eminent; since it is held
Confessed, that his Trudence and Valor, did not only make good the Towns so
long resistance, but also was the load* star, which guided Pi^olhomini to
that prosperous success in their relief.

Three Summers successively, was he employed to succor Gueldres, before which
the States Army lay, whence still he returned with prosperous and deserved
success. After the Spaniards had lost the Bartaile of Re Croyx, he was sent
with his Regiment and 1400 other Horse and Foot to secure Guelderland, against
the Hollander, who was thought likely to take the advantage of that defeat, and
endeavor to effect something there. But they having notice who was designed to
attend them, waved their design, and returned back with their Army into
Flanders: which was likewise done by this prudent Commander, who returned with
such unexpected celerity, that he came happily to join with Don Francisco de
Melos Army, before the Enemy was able to effect any thing. Afterward, Don
Andreas Cantelmo took him* and two other Mrs De Campo, and marched out of
Flanders with them, to the Skirts of Holland, where after they had every where
given strong Alarmes, in their return home Cantelmo sent him to take in a
Castle possessed by the States. Which he did, forcing the defendants to render
upon discretion; notwithstanding which he used them with so much generosity,
that during their Captivity, he entertained the Officers every day at his own
Table, and procured moreover for them and the Common Soldiers, who were above
100* in number a da^ly allowance* from the Country, which noble Courtesy of
his, moved the Prince of Orange, to use diverse principal Officers Spaniards,
tal^^^ at the latter end of that years field, with like Civility.

Whilst thus he was growing every day in esteem and reputation, amongst the
most judicious and eminent of those that knew him, and being now looked upon by
all such as he converst with as a most accomplished Gentleman, and complete
Soldier. This horrid and unnatural Rebellion breaks forth at home, which
from the beginning he did so much resent, that with all possible industry he
employed his utmost power and abilities in Flanders, to further and advance the
quarrel of his distressed Sovereign; and to supplant the Rebels. As he
convinced by his many painful and costly endeavors, which at sundry times
deprived the Rebels of near 30000 Arms, and afforded His Majesty 8000 of
those that were intended to be borne against him; nay had been doubtless had
not Noble Colonel Gage diverted the intention, seized them to a better use,
and made the action an eternal Argument of his Loyalty and Prudence.

But this was not the only instance he gave of his affection to his King,
whose service he tendered so much, that although his Regiment was then much
weakened, and he deprived of hopes to recruit it, never any Soldier of his, who
could give him any probable hopes of attaining His Majesty's Army, but he
cheerfully gave him his pass, and encouragement to depart. Whence I dare
safely affirm, that since these Ciyill Wars, that Regiment has afforded His
Majesty at least 200 Officers of several degrees.

Notwithstanding all this, he did not conceive he had done his part as he
ought, unless he came in Person to serve his Sovereign also* which
consideration he so deeply apprehended, that neither his present employment,
assurance of future preferment, a reputation so eminent, a revenue so sure and
^^nstant, nay nor his Wi^^ and Children could deta^^e him: but he taken leave
of the Netherlands and repaires to England, resolving to contribute all that
Magazine of (...) abilities wherewith his breast was stored to the re^^oring of
his Countries happiness.

(...) he comes not emp^y handed, Arms, and diverse Soldiers of quality gave
some addition to the welcome of that most worthy and endearing Person of his.
He was received with joy at the Court, and (every one presaging he should
shortly do his Nation some eminent Service) intert^ined here with a welcome
Omen. Where his prudent, civil, and gallant Conversation, added such a L^^tre
unto his other Virtues, and seated him so much above the region of envy, that
malice her self durst not barefact choose but fawn upon him. Soon had he
fortified himself in the judgment of the King and the ablest men about him,
as also wedded the Peoples opinion. And now every ones impatient, till by some
gallant action; he has paid tribute for the great esteem, and reputation they
had fixed upon him.

Whil^st every one is casting about for some employment worthy of him, His
Majesty considering the exigence of his own present Condition, and the
importance of Oxford, his Principal Garrison, is necessitated to engage the
Colonel jointly with the Governor Sir Arthur Ashton, in the defense and
preservation of it. In the Interim of which employment, what great and
memorable things he did, in the subsequent discourse I will relate. No one is
ignorant, that knew any thing, what excellent things he did propose for the
Fortifying, Cleansing, Storing, and preserving the City. How many grievances he
publicly removed in the Officers, and endeavored to reform: and what worthy
endeavors he did use to regulate* and moderate the reciprocal abuses, and
excesses that were so obviously committed.

Whilst we are thus busied within our walls, the industrious Rebels seek to
environ us on all sides, and so by Famine force us to surrender. Wherefore to
this end they clap a Garrison into B^rstall house, within six miles of us on
that side whence most of our Provisions came. Besides this, whilst His Majesty
was absent in the field, they fortify Abington, besiege Banbury, and straiten
^s every way, so that we are compelled for our necessary subsistence to
endeavor their repulse on some side. After Consultation, B^rstall is thought
the fittest to be attempted, and Colonel Gage must be entrusted with the
manage of that business.

They allow him a Competence of men, and other necessaries, and the 10th of
June he sets forward, where after his arrival with his own Personal Valor,
he put such Courage into his Followers; and with his prudent ordering of all
things so amated the conscious Enemy: that he soon brought them to a Parley.
His Carriage in the business deserving a more exact relation, I will take
leave to descend to partioulars. The 11th day in the morning, he sat down
before the House, immediately sending word to the Lady, that she and others of
her Sex might depart thence with leave and safety: promising to see her safely
convoyed to any place she had a mind to. His excelling courtesy was such, that
though this Lady did nothing less then merit such an offer, he could not
dispense with the goodness of his own nature, to deprive her of this
civility. As Soon as he had notice that the Ladies were gone, the House was
presently environed by his Command, and the Soldiers fell on with such a
well-governed fury, that they soon possessed the Church and other out
buildings, which the ^nemy endeavored to defend: but thence repelled, and
seeing the House attempted with hot assault, Conducted by so much discretion,
and exemplary Courage of the Commander; they demand a Parley, and offer to give
up the House, with the Victual, Ammunition, and Ordnance, so that they might
march away with their Arms and Horses. Which though it might by some that
weigh not the several circumstances be esteemed too specious adeparture for
them, yet this prudent Gentleman considering the House was strong, that it had
cost some men already, and that he could not force it, but at dearer rates,
chose rather to yield to their demands, then hazard the lives of any more;
which were more precious to him then the Arms of the Rebels. Upon their
surrender, he so punctually observed his Conditions, and convoyed them with
such civility, that themselves confessed they had fallen into the hands of an
honorable and gallant Enemy.

His success here procured him fresh employments, he is sent to disturb their
new garrison at Abingd^n, to effect which he marched out in the night, and
presuming of the intelligence of those who had employed him concerning the
Forces of the Enemy, He falls upon them gallantly in the morning, and charges
up to their turnepikes and ascends their works, but finding the enemy power
upon him in such unexpected numbers, he begins to think of a retreat, and give
immediate order for it: As being the only thing they could hope for, if that;
considering as well the enemies strength and readiness as the thinnenesse of
their own numbers, their distance from hom^, their amazement and repulse: but
such was his valor dexterity and discretion, that notwithstanding the enemy
pursued him like a torrent, he made an honorable and safe Retreat.

This added much to his esteem in the judgment of every knowing and discreet
man. So that what employment of exigence and necessity this Summer afforded
here, was almost all imposed upon him; Basing Castle, the dwelling house of the
Honorable and Loyal Marquess of Winchester, had now endured a second Siege
for two and twenty weeks: and was now brought to that necessity for
Provisions, that unless it were supplied by a speedy relief, it must be
forced to surrender. This once certified to the Commissioners at Oxford added
much trouble to the exigence of their present condition. For they saw no
sudden assistance could be expected from His Majesty, they considered the
importance of the place; the quality and gallant behavior of the defendants,
together with their own inabilities to assist them; which concurrence of
difficulties made them very anxious, till consulting with the famous Gage, they
find him beyond expectation proffer himself voluntarily to run the hazard of
all obstructions, and undertake the business. Though here they considered that
Abingdo^, Ailysbury, Reading, and the Leaguer it self, did severally afford
greater numbers then they could send with him, though they waighed the length
of the March, and difficulty of the passes; yet such was their opinion in him*
and confidence in his Courage, and experience, that they resigned all to his
discretion. The action was so eminent and so deserving memory, so Soldier like
and fortunately attempted, and performed, that I cannot pretend to honor his
Noble Genius, should I omit a punctual relation of it.

Upon Monday the ninth of September, that at ten a clock at night, he Marched
out of Oxford toward Basing. with 400 Foot, 250 Horse. 12 barrells of Powder,
1200 weight of Match, passes by Wallingford, where he received an addition of
80 Horse, with as many Foot, on Tuesday Morning they rested and refreshed, and
then he dispatched an express to the Governor of Winchester Sir William Ogle,
d^sirine him, according to his former promise to Sir Edward Nicholas to draw
out with his Forces, and to fall into Basing Park, in the rear of the Rebels
Quarters, betwixt four and five a clock the next Morning, being Wednesday the
11th of September: whilst he with the Oxford Troops assaulted them on the
other side, and the Lord Marquess from the House, plied them with a fierce
Sally. Having finished this dispatch, he Marched forward, with as much speed as
the Foot Soldiers could make, toward Aldermerston, where he intended to
repose again. They past through the Country for Parliamenteers, with Orange
tawney Scarfes and ribands, till a Wallingford Captain (who was sent before
with his Troop, together with the Quarter Masters of each Regiment to
discover, and have provisions in a readiness against the Soldiers arrived)
found in the Town, some of the enemies Scoutes, and forgetting his disguise
fell foul upon them, took some Prisoners and so discovered themselves. This
evening the Foot were extremely wearied (having had scarce 3 hours rest since
they went out of Oxford) which the prudent Colonel perceiving* alighted
himself from his Horse, by whose example and entreaty, the other Officers, and
Troopers did the like, and walked three miles, whilst the tired Foot refresht
themselves in their Saddles; By which means, he came to Aldermerston about
eight in the evening; seven miles from Basing, and rested till eleven, when
again he set forward and Marched all night, though the Foot were faint and much
dejected. So that being come within two miles of the place, they began to lie
down as not able to advance farther, whereupon he caused all his Horsemen
every man to take one of them up behind him, himself giving the first example,
which u^wo^^ed (...) so took them, that they wholly forgot their former ^^^gue,
and with hopes of Pillage, and promise of Many when they returned to Oxford,
were so encouraged, that they desired nothing more then to attaque the Rebell^.

In the interim, arrives a Lie^^e^ant from Wi^chester, who a^^^res them, the
Governor by reason of the Enemies Horse, which lay betwixt him and Basing,
(...) not draw ^^t to assist them. Whereupon the Colonel was compelled to
enter into new Counsels; wherefore seeing himself deprived of that
assistance, and presuming the Enemy having notice of his coming, would draw to
a head, he resolves contrary to his first resolutions, with united Forces to
fall strongly upon them in one place. In order to which he Commands the men to
be put in readiness, riding up to every Squadron, gave the word, which was
Saint George, chearing them with what possible encouragements he could, and
Commanding every of them to tie a handkerchiefe on their right arms above
their elblow, for a distinction to be known as well to one another, as to the
Lord Marquess his men, if they should chance to make a Sally, and for want of
such a signal fall foul upon one another.

After this preparation, they marched on, the gallant Colonel alighting from
his Horse, armed only with his Sword, led up the Foot, and being come as he
conceived, within hearing of the House, he Command his Drums and Trumpets to
cheer the besieged with the news of his long wished arrival. The Rebels
having notice the day before of his coming, and of the place he was like to
fall on, had drawn forth all their best men, all fresh and pampered in number
far exceeding his, with these they possessed the Passes, with some cross
hedges of advantage, lining them with Musketeers.

Here stood the rest of the Horse and Foot in Batagli^ ready for him, and
answered his Drums and Trumpets with their own, which he perceived were very
near, though clouded under the wing^ of an obscure mist. Our Forces had
advanced not many paces further, before they discovered a Body of the Enemies
Horse, consisting of six Troops, standing in very good order ready to receive
our charge. Which though we hastened to acc^st them with, before we came at
them, we were first saluted from the hedges by a smart Volley of Musket shot,
though accompanied with more Terror then Execution: for notwithstanding this,
the right wing of our Horse, commanded by gallant Colonel Webb: Charged the
Enemy so home, that ^^ (...) they all turned head and ran away. The left wing
(...) ^^ after the^ followed the Chase* till the Rebels were got into a place
of safety. In this pursuit, we took a Cornet of theirs, which since is known
to be Morleyes. Upon the Rout of the Horse, Colonel Gage advanced with the
Foot toward the hedges, where after two hours dispute, he beat them from
hedge to hedge, till at last he brought them to abandon all their holds on
that side, and give him free entrance to the House. Where after he had
delivered the Munition he brought with him, and paid my Lord Marquess the
respects due to a Person of his quality, leaving 100 Soldiers of his own with
him, he marched with the rest of the Horse and Foot to Basingstoke; a good half
mile distant thence, and with small resistance possessed himself of it; whence
all that day he continued sending to the Garrison, as much Wheat, Malt, Salt,
Oats, Bacon, Cheese, Butter, and other Provision, as he could get Carts or
Horses to transport it. There he found a little Magazine of 13 Barrells of
Powder, with some Muskets, which also he sent in: together with 80 head of
Cattle, and 100 sheep. Whilst these things were doing at Basingstoke,
according to his directions, they in the House Sallyed into Basing Town, beat
thence the Enemy, killing 50, and taking two of their Captains, and 33
Soldiers Prisoners in the Church.

By this time the day was near spent, and the Enemy having received some fresh
supplies of Horse, appeared much more numerous, and gay then in the morning,
and made show of a desire to fight with ours again. Advancing to that end over
a large Champaine, almost within Musket shot of our Horse, standing in a field
without Basingstoke, betwixt two large Hedges, which were lined with Foot.
There they stood facing each other an hour or two, till the Colonel perceived
his Squadrons of Horse to grow thin, many of them slincking away by reason of
the extreme fatigue and fasting, wherewith most of them both Horse and Men
were oppressed. Whereupon he gave order they should retire by degrees, and pass
through the Town toward Basing house, whilst he with the Foot made good the
Avenues and Passages, on that side the Tow^^. When he understood the Troops
had past the Town, and were put again into order on the other side toward
the house. He likewise with most part of the Foot, retired likewise, leaving a
Captain with 70 Musketeers to make good the Avenue; who also when he saw the
Colonel retired up to the Horse, drew off also, leaving only a Sergeant with
20, to dispute the Passage, till the rest were retired into the House. Whither
they also had order immediately to draw off, which they did, the Enemy not once
attempting to enter the Town: but retreating soon after, they perceived our
Horse to give back. The reason why this provident Commander refused to lodge in
the Town, was the consideration of the many Avenues to be defended, against
the Enemy now recruited with new additions of strength; which could not without
difficulty have been done, in regard our Horse and Men were so far spent, and
our Soldiers so apt to hide and disperse in several houses, there to fall to
drinking and disorders.

The next day early he sent out a Lieutenant Colonel to the Town with all the
Horse and Foot, as well to refresh themselves as to be sending Provisions all
that day into the Garrison. In the mean while this accomplished Soldier spent
that Thursday in contriveing his retreat to Oxford, and sending out several
Spies to observe the motions of another Enemy, who was drawing to a head from
Abington, Newbury, and Reading, to hinder his retreat homewards. And he found
by the unanimous relation of his several Spies, that they of Abington were
lodged at Aldermarston, they of Newbury at Thatcham, and they of Reading at
Padsworth, Towns lying upon several passes of the River Kennet, over which He
was necessitated to go; in his retreat Norton with his Horse and Foot which
lay in Basing Park, was to follow him in the Rear, whenever he began to
move, which they conceived he could not do, but they should have notice of it.
The Colonel resolved therefore in his own breast, without acquainting any man
whatsoever with it, to make his retreat that very night, having in that little
time he had been there slain sixescore, taken 100 Prisoners, with 150 Arms,
and out of the adjacent Towns, put in a Months Provision into the House. As
also drawn in two pieces of the Enemies Artillery; The one, a goodly
Demi-Cannon, which had been formerly engaged, and neither Party had adventured
to fetch them off.

But now the better to amuse the Enemy, and give them cause to think that He
thought of nothing less then of so sudden a retreat, he sent out Warrants to
Sherborne and Sherfield, (presuming they would come to the Enemies knowledge)
to bring in suddenly a certain quantity of Corn to the Garrison upon pain,
if they refused, of sending 1000 Horse and Dragoones before the next day noone
to set their Towns on fire. Having thus disposed of all things within
himself, and judging that he was not able with longer stay to do my Lord
Marquess any further service: though by delaying his return, he might have
endangered the loss of those Forces committed to his Charge. A little before
night, he sent Orders to Basingstoke, for his men to retire, as they had done
the night before, and to march to the House, but not to enter, till they had
further Order from him: whither when they were arrived, he told my Lord
Marquess of his resolution to depart that night, and the necessity of it;
begging of him two or three good Guides, and so takes leave of his Lordship,
marching away quietly without sound of Drum or Trumpet about eleven of the
clock that Thursday night. He gives Orders to all his Scouts both in the Van
and Rear, that if they met with any of the Enemy, they should likewise give
themselves out to be Parliamenteers, marching from the Camp before Basing, to
the River Kennet, to lie in wait for the Oxford Forces that were to retire that
way; Thus as you see his judgment and prudence was excelling, so his Success
was equal. For finding the Rebels had pulled down Burfield-Bridge, he found a
way to foard the River, every Trooper taking up a Musketier behind him.

So having happily past the Kennet, and having certain notice they had pulled
up both Henly and Reading Bridges; about eight a clock on Friday morning, he
did again foard the Thames at Pangborne, and so marched to Wallingford, where
he rested and refresht that night, arriving safe the next day at Oxford, with
the loss only of eleven men. Where he was received with extraordinary
applause, and acclamations* though he showed as much discretion and modesty
upon that occasion, as he had done Valor and Prudence in the Action that
procured it. For when upon notice of his approach, most of the people ran out
into the fields to meet him, and all Persons of quality almost with their
Coaches went to honor his return, he steals away by them, and after he is
entered the Town, rides up a private way to his lodging, as if he had been
nothing concerned in these expressions of joy; and as if this triumph had had
no relation to him. Which the people reflecting upon, when as the Soldiers
entered the Town, they saw him absent whom they stood gazing to behold; I mean
the wise Conductor of this great and fortunate enterprise, who privately had
withdrawn himself. Which turned their applause to wonder, and hence they
doubly magnified so admirable a Person.

But whether this great Action were undertaken with greater magnanimity,
performed with more Courage, Prudence, and Skill, or finished with more
modesty, I dare not presume to resolve. Yet I dare affirm, that if you
consider all circumstances and difficulties, this Expert Gallant Commander past
through in the performing of it: as for example his fighting with a strength so
far superior to his, at so great a distance, from friends and home, upon
their own ground, and notwithstanding all treacherous endeavors to the
contrary, to manage and perform it with such secrecy and Success: nay, after
all though way laid in sundry places, with such vast numbers, who had broke the
Bridges, and possessed the Passes, to make such a Gallant and safe Retreat. This
weig'd, I say you needs must grant the whole Action to have been for wise
Conduct, gallant and skillful manage, the most Souldier-like piece these Wars
have ever yet afforded.

Few weeks are past after this, before Banbury also is brought into the like
exigent condition, and must needs be releived by such a time or else
surrendered. Wherefore to him again they have recourse, as to the only person
that could effect it. He to convince the world, that his zeal and love to his
Majesty was the chief motive of his undertaking, and to evince them who
attributed his cheerful undergoing the last action, only to his respect and
affection to that most noble and loyal Lord, the Marquess of Winchester.
Embraces this employment also though he esteemed it a piece of greater
difficulty then the former, as then he told the Lords Commissioners, by reason
now it was with the same number to encounter an Enemy doubly equal to the
other; notwithstanding which, their confidence and opinion of him is such that
he must needs attempt it, and and to engage him further, they assure him the
King will send the Earl of Northampton with 400 Horse to his assistance, and
that punctually at such a time and place they should come and meet him. He
wisely considered that the force of Oxford joined with them, were not
considerable to fall upon an Enemy triple their number, if either ski^l or
resolution did attend them. Wherefore he concludes by some stratageme or other
to amate them, and lay a foundation whereupon he might probably raise the
desired success; to this end he counterfaits the hand of Brown Commander of
the Rebels at Abingdon, and directs a letter to Fines at Banbury, assuring him
the King was come with a formidable Army to Newbury, and that he was sending
the Earl of Northampton with 3000 Horse and Dragoones which were to pass by
Abingdon, and to join with Gage, and the Oxford Forces in raising that Seidge.
Wherefore he Counsels him to depart, and draw off in time, for by reason of
the neernesse of the Kings Army, he could not afford him any assistance. This
letter was by his contrivall handsomely delivered, and so amuzed Fines, that he
called a Council of War upon it, which sat some hours. The hand persuaded
them that Brown had sent it, only one of them creates a doubt in the
smoothness of the style, and insists upon that, which causes them before they
resolve any thing, to send a Post to Abingdon to know if any such letter were
sent thence, where all was disavow'd, Brown protesting nothing came from him.
This answer made them again secure, but so that they kept strict watch upon all
quarters to discover any motion of ours. Not many hours after the Earl of
Northampton cames with about the first mentioned number, and noble Colonel
Gage according to their pact goes out with some Foot, two Drakes and what Horse
the Town afforded to meet him; upon this the Enemies Scouts at their approach
run in, and assures them that the Earl and Colonel were now coming indeed;
immediately they apprehend themselves betrayed, and conclude, that the number and
other circumstances in the supposititious Letter, were all true. Whereupon they
draw off their Cannon, and possessed with a panick fear, send them away in the
night: staying themselves till morning, for the honor to be so soundly beaten,
that they could not lay claim to the credit of a Cowardly retreat. But flying
give way to them, whom they might have devoured* had they stoutly stood and
closed boldly with them, but the Success next after Almighty God is due to the
discreet contrivall, and manage of this handsome device of his.

Shortly after his return from Banbury, His Majesty repaires to Oxford, and as
an earnest of His Princely gratitude for these gallant Actions makes him a
Knight, and treats him with very endearing respects, assuring him, that He
would never forget his merit and singular Service: but study to advance him to
such honorable employments as He might thence perceive how much He did value
and esteem him. Which He shortly after performed, by making him Governor of
Oxford; Sir Arthur Aston, by reason of his unfortunate mischance being become
unable for such an active and toilsome Charge. It is incredible what a general
Contentment all men took in his Promotion, and how few repined at his
advancement. And it is no less difficult in those that did not see it, to
conceive how admirably well he managed that place, for those few days he lived
to possess it. What noble and wise Designs he laid, with what admirable
dexterity he endeared himself to all Courtiers, Scholars, Townsmen,
Soldiers, all affording him honor and affection. It Is really a wonder, how
insensibly he fortified himself in every ones opinion. He wins the Statesman
by his Prudence, the Courtier with Civility, the Scholar by his Respect to
Arts, and Eminence therein, the Townsmen by C^rtesie, as also by falling half
his own Pay, and easing them of many unnecessary Taxes. Lastly his Care,
Countenance and Gallantry endeared him wholly to the Soldiers.

He was no sooner confirmed in his place, but he began to let the World
perceive, that he meant to govern the Town indeed, he takes an exact survey
of the Fortifications, Magazine, together with the number and discipline of the
Soldiers, and determines to see them all supplied, representing them seriously
to His Majesty's Council, he does not only expose the necessities and
defects, but also proposes the means how to supply and correct them. He
demands Horse to Command the Country, secure the Markets, and to fetch
Provisions to his Garrison, and propounds the manner how to raise them, and do
all this. He takes order for store against a Siedge, thence descends to the
accommodation of the Soldier, and the repair and preservation of their Arms.
Diversely contrives the Townesmens ease, and yet performs it with content to
the Soldier, and means of their better subsistence. Having done this at home,
he begins to cast his eyes abroad, and thinks how to secure the Country, as
much as was within the reach of possibility, whilst the Enemy holds Abington:
to the end, that they might be better able to Contribute and afford Provisions
to Oxford. Wherefore he resolves to break all the Bridges upon the Tame, and
the other Rivers near, and to make redoubts upon the Fords and Passes, so to
preserve all the East and North side of the City entire from annoyance, and in
other places to make Garrisons in places convenient; These, and an hundred
other excellent Designs he had, which if God had granted him Life, he would
have accomplished. All which, as all his other business, he had chalked out for
execution, in a gallant discreet method, which did the business home, and yet
left him in all without anger or aspersion from any. Which in a moment, got him
such an excess of love and authority together, that all concluded, never Town
could be more happy then this was like ere long to be. But scarce had we
possessed this admirable Man three weeks, and solac'd our selves in such a
treasure. When the Heavens envious of our felicity, or angry at our desertlesse
happiness, in love with those beauties and excellencies of his, were pleased
to deprive us of him; making use of this occasion. He seeing the exigence of
securing the East side of this City, to urge the demolishing of Columb Bridge
near Abington, over which the Enemy made daily incursions into the Country to
Plunder, gather Contributions, and spoil our Markets: Resolved upon the
enterprise and gives instruction to his Lieutenant Governor for the execution
of it, he determining himself to attend his Government at home. But it was the
will of God to bereave us of him, his Autumn was come, and he must dye in the
Bed of Honor. In order to which decree, those transcendent gallant Spirits,
who went in that Action out of their extraordinary esteem of him by power and
entreaties, woo him contrary to his own principles to leave his domestique
charge, and expose himself in that fatal attempt.

Wherefore he draws out of Oxford, with 600 Horse and Foot, accompanied with
the two Princely Brothers, P. Rupert, and P. Maurice, together with sundry
other gallant Spirits, who upon Saturday the 11th of March, came thither about
seven in the morning, where this worthy Commander leading the men himself,
possessed the Bridge. Making it good a long time against the hot assaults of the
enraged Enemy, who endeavored to preserve the freedom of so important a
Pass; which conduced so much to their subsistence, and our annoyance. The
dispute was so sharp on both sides, that the place was won and lost no less
then twice on each side; the noble Colonel seeing the difficulty, had drawn
himself to a place convenient to survey and consider in such manner the
situation, and accesses of advantage, that he might the better thereby attain
his end. Where whilst he was designing how to pursue with success, what he
had with such difficulty begun, a wandering Bullet hits him on the side, and
transpierces his Body: with which mortal wound be immediately falls to the
ground, and together with him the whole enterprise, which was presently
deserted.

Shortly after this ^sho^ishment of this mortal Summons was past over, he
comes to himself, and being taken up to be conveyed away, recollects his
powers, to prepare himself for his approaching end. Which with great piety and
prudence he performed, with no little edification to such as observed him. At
this instant he gave an ample testimony of the sincerity and resolution
wherewith he came to serve His Majesty, and his Country in this just Quarrel.
For being demanded what he would have done concerning his temporal Estate, he
replied; I thank God, that, to my comfort is already settled, only Commend me
to my dear Wife, and put her in mind, that if it can be, she see my Sons
brought up according as she and I had agreed, so many years at School, where
they are, and after send them to LA FLESH in FRANCE, to hear some part of
their Philosophy, and to learn those other necessary and becoming qualities
of Gentlemen. Tell my Children, that their dying Father sends them his
Blessing. Except these few words in all the time of at least two hours, which
he lived in perfect sense and memory after that unfortunate wound: he was not
heard to open his mouth to any other end, then to breath forth Heroike acts of
Devotion, attending wholly to reconcile himself to his Lord and Savior, into
whose divine hands with unspeakable resignation and repose he yielded his happy
Soul.

The news of this sad disaster coming before, prepared Oxford to entertain
his Body with such a face of sorrow, as I am deceived, if ever formerly had
been seen such a general dejection, and lamentations so universal in that
City, amongst all degrees of Persons. And it was well observed, that the most
generous and noble Spirits did most passionately express their affection, and
resent the loss of this renowned Gentleman. But this appeared most abundantly
in the Confluxe at his Funeral on the 13th of January, where the Court, the
Camp, the University, the City, did even contend who should express the
greatest affection, and yield him the greatest honor. The Court honored him
with Prince Rupert, the Duke of Richmond, the Lord Treasurer, the Lords
Chamberlaines Secretaries, Comptroller, the Lords of the Privy Council; and
most of the Nobility and Gentry besides. The Camp sends Deputies of her
affection, most of the great Commanders in the Kingdom. The University and
City, afford both their representative Bodies in the Vice Chancellor and Mayor,
with their several Trains of followers. Somerset and Chester Heralds were
sent by His Majesty to attend, and order the solemnity, which was indeed
worthily performed. The Soldiers did guard the passage from the thronging
multitude, whilst four Trumpets in mourning went before, beating the air
with the doleful Echoes, you may imagine this sad occasion did afford, which
they continued, till they had brought to Christ-Church (to use the Heralds
words) The most Honorable Sir Henry Gage Governor of Oxford, who in the North
Angle in the Body of the Church, was at length deposited, his Grave being
honored with the Tears and Sighs of our whole Nation Epitomized in this
City. Amongst which my affection does perforce oblige me to preserve the memory
of my affliction for this irreparable disaster, in the following Elegy.

An ELEGY.
AS flowers, whose lovely tinctures most invite
Our eyes, and feed them with the chaste delight
Of naked beauties, which our senses chain
With choicest odors nature does contain:
Charming our sight more strongly to behold,
The Bodies that these rarities enfold;
Entice us nearer, which does also woo
Us both to handle, and to cull them too:
Neglecting others which were these away,
Were worth our notice, and a like survay.
So men whose fair perfections best proclaim;
The fountain whence those excellencies came
With life and vigor; insomuch thereby
That Atheists urged confess a Deity:
Such whose Heroike minds and nobler souls
The worlds great axe-tree out of both the poles
Would cast, in contestation to inthrone
Justice and virtue, though they lost their own.
Men in whose bosoms shines immortal light,
Enricht with all that is not infinite.
No sooner these does lustful Heaven spy,
But fixes on them an enamored eye:
And eager lovesicke. This disease to cure,
Purloynes them from us, ere they be mature.
Thus thus alas Great GAGE, from earth was culled,
Long time before the hand of nature pulled.
Blessed Genius, if thou be not quite dissolved,
Into that endless essence which involved
All essences, or if thou still descry
Within the mirror of the Deity,
Our words and actions: if thou take delight
To live preserved from Cymmer^an night
In humane bosoms. Heark^n to the vow,
Unto thy happy Ghost I offer now,
By all the love I bore thy precious breath,
By all the tears wherein I mourned thy death,
By all the honors that thy virtues Crowned,
By all the joys wherein thou do abound,
By all that bliss thou do possess and see,
By all those glories that invelope thee,
I here protest, thy name shall never dye,
Whilst any thing is mortal, that is I.
Nay my immortal part, shall ever pay
Homage to thee in that Eternal day
Of endless time, in which thou shall descry
My love as fresh as immortality.
Ed: Walsingham. I have hitherto insisted upon what this noble Gentleman did
his Life and Actions; give me leave now in brief to tell you what he was, and
give you a scantling both of his inward and outward man. Sir Henry Gage, was of
a fair and goodly Stature, in Body as in mind, above the ordinary pitch of
other men; To this height he had in all parts a beautiful proportion. He was
of a fair Complexion, very Comely, his Comportment was Courteous, Gentile, and
his Presence full of Reverence: His Speech discreet and civil, his
Conversation pleasant, very modest, and accommodated happily to places, times,
and Persons. In fine his gracious outside, did every where proclaim what a
rich and noble Soul was lodged within.

Those that were pleased to take notice of what he said and did, continually
discovered new proportions of Virtue in him, and the stricter their observation
was, so much the more did they admire his Virtues and Abilities, of some
whereof at least, I have engaged my self to give a short account. What was
most singular in him was his perpetual industry, and that even when he was not
in actual Service in the field, by exercising his Soldiers in the use of
their Arms, cutting out Towns and Forts in Turfe, and teaching his men even
by way of recreation how to become expert; how to Approach, to Scale, Retreat,
how to gain a Town by Assault, or by a famishing Siedge, how to make their
Trenches, and secure themselves, with a Thousand such Souldier-like employments.

He had an excellent Pen, and that strangely enricht by the variety of the best
Languages whereof he was Master; Latin, English, French, Italian, Spanish,
were familiar unto him; he was not ignorant in Greek, and though he was in
Dutch not elegant, yet he had enough to treat with the Peasants there, and such
as understood no other language, all which is an extreme argument of a strong
memory. His ability in this kind made him imcomparable grateful to all, for
being in a Country where all Languages were spoken, he was able to entertain
every one for the most part in his own Tongue. Which made him eminent in a
high degree, as appeared at the Siedge of St Omers, at which time by reason of
a Puesto he had Charge of there, he having frequent occasions to send sundry
Orders and dispatches in several Languages, Prince Thomas of Savoy; took
special notice thereof, and perceiving they came always in the same hand,
enquired who was his Secretary. Answer being made, that he used none, he
admired it so far, that to be further assured, he sent a Walloon Cavalier,
called Monseiur Lanoy, with some pretended business to stay with him; though
the true end was to take notice whether or no he was his own Secretary, being
that his Style and Language was still so excellent good. The truth is, there
are not many that are able in so several Languages, without affectation to
write such naturally elegant and gentile Letters, with so much facility and
dispatch.

How patient he was of labor, and how careful of his Charge, I need go no
further for an instance then his last employments, the Government of Oxford;
which appeared remarkable to all the Inhabitants; for after he had so great a
trust committed by His Majesty unto him, there was no night in which he slept
four hours in his Bed, for being busied all day he took the dead of the night
to write and contrive his Affairs. Which those prudent and Souldier-like
instructions he left behind him worthily demonstrate. Yet all this serious
attention to warlike affairs did not so much possess him, but they left him
enough of himself to attend to Conversation, which was so affable and Courtly,
that those who were strangers to him, dreamed often of nothing less then that
he was a Commander of so much Courage, Experience, and Repute.

As none in the Summer was more active in the field in the times of his
employment then he; so none in another kind more industrious in his Winter
Garrisons. For then he was at Court perpetually soliciting in behalf of his
Soldiers, for their Pay, accommodations in Garrisons, recruits, and the like.
You might see him also frequent in the Courts of Justice, soliciting his right
in Law in behalf of his Wife and Children; wherein he was so knowing, that all
his Lawyers for the most part ingenuously still confessed, that he needed no
better Council then himself had given unto them, by way of information in his
Case. And however many able men hold it action enough to follow any Suit in
Law, yet he was more industrious then to wast his whole day in this, or his
Regiments affairs, and would steal besides three, four, or five close hours
to his Book and Pen, bestowing himself now in reading History or Philosophy,
then in translating some profitable Books, and sometimes in writing something
of his own; which as they highly deserve, may chance ere long to be exposed in
public, and communicated to the World. But his chief Study was to make
himself Master of the Theory of War, wherein though his practice was already
eminent, yet I may well affirm that none desirous of Philosophy ever studied
Aristotle more intensely then he did Fortifications, Siedges, Mannaging of
Battles, and in general the whole Stratagetick part of War.

Nor was he yet so narrow, as with all this action to be Commensurated, he
found time enough, besides twice or thrice a day to Comply with the obligations
of a devout Christian, and most hours of the day with a great dexterity of his
ready Pen to dispatch Military orders, and correspond constantly with diverse
Friends as well remote as near unto him. Insomuch that some wise men stick'd
not to affirm him a man made for as much Action, as was necessary to manage
the affairs of a great Empire. Which may be confirmed by the greatness of his
mind, and strange liberality, which even since his coming hither he has
sometimes practiced. Once he was known when he had but three and forty
shillings in all, and knew not how at present to compass more, he sticked not
to give forty of it to a decayed Gentleman, that begged of him, whereupon being
advised to husband better his money, till his employments would afford him more
plenty, he smiling answered, When I begin to love money, I shall desist to be
any more a Soldier, for he that loves money loves his life, and by consequence
fearing danger, is unfit to be employed in any gallant Action.

But this was not the only generous way he spent his means, for he laid out
very much in Correspondence, having excellent good weekly from most parts of
Christendom, which although it was chargeable to him, yet he was wont to say;
What others spent in Cards, Dice, and other vain exercises, be might well
allow himself in this, which was so useful to him, and of so great
contentment. The Honor of his Nation he had still an eye upon, when he was
abroad as well as his own, and although his Revenue was not great, yet no
Italian, Spaniard, or other Cavalier appeared more neat and gallant both in
Field and Garrison then he, who kept always a constant Table, fit at any time
to receive the greatest Commander. Which was always graced with extreme
Courtesy and freedom. These discreet gallantries, gave a luster to his
greater merits and esteem, and that not only here at home, as the World saw
with His Majesty, the Nobility, and all sorts of People, but also in the Court
of Bruxells, and the whole Country. Where by reason of his Affability,
Prudence, Valor, and other great endowments, he was reputed the flower of all
our English that had appeared in those parts. Though his worth and Person were
admired and grateful to all, yet to none more then those three Famous
Generals, Prince Thomas of Savoy, the Duke of Lerma, and Count Fountain, all
which held with him an extraordinary familiarity and dearnesse, won by that
cheerful calmnesse and composure in him, which invited all men to admire his
constant smoothness so great, that the highest incitements would hardly add a
wrinkle to the severity of his mind, to make his passion legible to such as
studied him with most attention.

Thus I have given you a brief survay of the Famous Gage, though I confess, I
have afforded you but a glimpse of his inward man, and have willingly concealed
the greatest perfections and excellencies of his richest Soul. I have done
nothing in saying, all men knew him an expert Soldier, a great Commander, and
that his Friends knew him a perfect Linguist, an excellent Humanist, a sound
Philosopher; and competently seen in diviner Studies: in sum a complete
Scholar, insomuch that it may well be doubted, whether he was abler at his Pike
or Pen. I have added little by affirming him an exact Courtier, nay a prudent
Statesman; as some able judgments have not sticked freely to acknowledge:
unless I did treat of his more inward Virtues, and disclose his singular
Piety. But seeing my self unfit, unable for to speak him further, I here
conclude; and offer this imperfect Votive of my affection to his happy memory,
glorying that by this, Posterity shall know me so, as at least to rank me
amongst the admirers of this excellent Man.

FINIS.

