X. Solid and Serious QVERIES: Concerning the power of Church Discipline
pleaded by some of the Clergy to be in them Iure Divino, and by the will and
appointment of Jesus Christ.

With a threefold distinction of power; Human Rational, and Divine, flowing
from the Parliament, the consciences, and the Spirit of God, unto which all men
are bound to submit.

Also an Admonition to the Par1iament to promote the Restitution of true
Religion, and Reformation of Gods Church, to the Abandoning of all Popish
Remnants, both in Ceremonies and Regiment, and also to bring in, and place in
Gods Church, those things only which the Lord himself Commands, with the
platform of a Church Reformed.

Composed by many Learned, Religious and godly Ministers, and proved out of
Gods Word.

And a view of Popish abuses remaining in the Prelacy with the Copies of some
private Letters written; and sent to some of them worthy His Majesty's
consideration.

by R. Gualter. T. B. and. Ministers of Gods Word.

A wonderful, and horrible thing is committed in the land, The Prophets
prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and My people
love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?

Jerem. 5. 30, 31. Yea that are near acknowledge my might.

The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites,

Isay 33.13, 14. LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke at Gras-Inne-Gate, 1646.

Ten Solid and serious Queries; Concerning the power of Chruch discipline,
pleaded by some of the Clergy to be in them, jure Divino.
1. Quere. WHether those Clergy, and others do not fall into the same Error
which Bellarmin did, (in his 5. book, and 7.Chapter,) who hold that because the
Ecclesiastical, and Civil power make but one body in a Commonwealth,
therefore as the soul is not governed by the body, so are not matters of
Church discipline to be ordered by the Par1iament, or by any lay Commissioners
by them Authorized, but that rests in the Clergy. Seeing that unto Princes,
and Majestrates, is committed the Chiese care of Religion, and Gods worship,
and to watch over Eeclesiastica1l Ministers, that they may lead a quiet, and a
peaceable life. 1 Timothy.2.3.

2. Quere] Whether, because Azariah the High Priest drove Vzziah the King out
of the Temple, and caused him to, dwell a part. 1 Chronicles, 26. therefore is there
now any Divine Right in the Clergy to assirme to themselves the sole power of
suspention from the Lords Supper, seeing that Christ our high priest is come
himself, now did they compel the King to go forth, till by the leoprosie that
rise up in his face, they saw it plainly appear to them that the Lord had
smitten him. I Cor.26.20. and for this, they had their particular Instructions.
Leviticus 13.46

3. Quere] Whether; they do well Allege with Betlermin, what the erroniously
teaches, Capt.8. That because Jehoida depose Athallia 2. Kings II. Therefore
they of the ecclesiastical function have the solepower of Ecclesiastical
discipline given to them by God, when as though Johoida knew that Athalia was a
wicked Tyrant yet of himsefe he would presume no hing (but declaratively by his
own power, and referred all to the Parliament,) viz. the Fathers and Princes
of the Land, 2 Chronicles.23. verse 1.2 though the action was in it self, commanded
by the word of God yet not for the Priests to act by their own authority: now
then to reach what was the mind of God therein.

4. Quere] Whether the Office of the Pastors be not to feed the Flock of
Christ, I Peter 5.2, who so are overseers to them for spiritual diversion, and
the Civil Magistrates chief for administration of Justice; norwithsranding
all that Boniface 8. alleges against it, in his decretall, extra commun. lib.
1.tit. 8.

5. Quere] whether there be a sword of power belonging to the Ecciesiasticall
function, as to the Civil Majestrates, as Boneface would have it in the
foresaid place, (agreeing with-the arrogance of many now; because the Apostles
said to Christ, Lord behold here are two swords, and Christ answered them it is
enough, Luke 22.38. when as those were material swords, and Peter himself was
reproved for handling one of them, ver, 20.

6. Quere] Whether, those who are not subject to the power of Parliament
(though of the Ecclesiastical function and in Church discipline for matter of
sorme only) in resisting that power do not resist the Ordinance of God, Romans
13.8.

7. Quere] Whether Paul's saying, That the spiritual man judges all things, I
Cor. 2.15. gives power to the Clergy to be Judges, seeing that the Apostle
speaks of spiritual minds, and not of spiritual Ministers.

8. Quere] Whether those Ecclesiastical men that assume to themselves a divine
right of temporal jurisdiction to belong to them do not set up themselves
above Christ; and assume a power not of right (seeing Christ himself took
upon him no such thing, neither directly, nor indirectly, be refused to be a
King, John 6, Neither would be execute the office of a Judge Luke 12:13. He
paid Pole money, March 17. He submit to the judgment of Pilate and the
Disciple is not above his Master.

9. Quere] Whether the Ministers of the Word; and by divine right to be Lords
of the Church, and Judges of their Brethren, and may ingrosse all power of
Church discipline into their hands without being called to account by the
Parliament, when at the Apostle bids them, feed the flock of Christ, not by
constreint but willingly, not as Lords over the Lords inheritance, I pet. 5. 3.
Contrary to the minds of those who would have power put into their hands to use
all forsing, constraining; and Tyrannical means; imprisoning, murdring, and
devouring all those that shall not obey them. And whether those who seek thus
to tyranize over the Saints, are not lims of Antichrist.

10. Quere] Wnether it be not a Vassadre to the Gentry of England to enslave
themselves under those who (if advanced) would trample upon Emperors, Kings and
Princes, Pope Alexander caused King Henry the second to do penance for Beckets
death. Innocent the third caused King John to kiss the feet of the Bishop of
Canterbury; Alexander the third did tread upon the Emperor Fredericks neck.
Pope Innocens caused the Emperor Frederick the second to be poisoned, and his
son Convedus to be beheaded, and in England, before the fitting of this
Parliament, many Nobles and Worthy Gentlemen were curbed, and tyrannized ever
by some base Clergiemen of mean parantage, not to be endured, who can but
think of serious ambition, that rebuked Frederick the first for holding his
stirrup on the wrong side.

11. Quere] Whether the Clergy are not (without complaining) to observe that
Church discipline which the Parliament does prescribe, so long as it is
consistant to the preaching of the Word of God, and dispenssion of the
Sacrament according to the rule of Jesus Christ where as it was the custom of
the Primitive Churches to submit to the seculer powers. August Exposit. Quer
and Propos ex Epist ad Roman, Epist Leodiens contra Paschal Agathon; Eqist
Synod.6. general action, 4. Did. 8. cap. 1. Did. 10. cap.9. Distinct. 97.
Clement. 5. exirav. Commun. lib. 5. tit. 7. cap, 2. Hierom, censur orient,
eccles cap. 16. Agapetns to Justinian, number. 63 Agapitos, number. 68. Francisc.
Titelman, deside and Religion. Aetheop. Harm. sect. II. page 374. Cansanns con,
cord lib, 2, cap-7. Esponsaus, digres. 10. in tit. page 1567.

A three sold distinction of power, unto which all men are bound to submit.
Man is subject to three powers, the first Human, the second Rational and
the third Divine. The first is the Laws of Nations, the second is the dictates
of Reason, the third the word of God. In England the King and Parliament is the
fountain, of the humains Conscience, the fountain of the Rational, and goes
on spirit the fountain of the Divine.

1. The Parliament makes human Laws, But they have their rise from a Divine
power, and wbesoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, Romans
13.2

2. Conscience is the mind of God brought to man's Reason, teaching him how to
put forth himself in acts of piety to God and love to man, and according to
his own actions to pass sentence on himself. This power is more spiritual
then bumaine, but acts in both, in simplicity, and Godly sincerity, not with
slesisly wisdom, but by the grace of God, having its conversation in the
world, but more abundantly toward the Saints. 2 Corinthians. 1. 12.

3. Gods holy spirit, makes divine Liwes, none else are jure divino, and the
power there of tends all to love joy, peace, long-sussiring gentleness
goodness, faith, mseknesse, Temperance, against such there is no law. Gallath.
5.22.23. And all statutes, and Acts of Parliament, all discipline and worship
ought to submit to this Rule. All power which does so or beyond the Law of God
is a usurpation.

The Parliament have declared every Law, Ordinance, Privilege. Custom or
Prerogative which does exalt it self above the Laws of God reasons or peace,
to be void, and what men for ever they be that will dare to presume a higher
prerogative of power to themselves, are led by the spirit of pride, and
Antechrist, and against all such the Parliament may exercise their power,
because they will not submit to the powers that be ordained of God. Romans 13.1.

FINIS.

