SERIOUS OBSERVATIONS LATELY MADE, Touching his Majesty Charles the Second,
KING OF England, Scotland, France and Ireland.

King Charles Stuart, in Hebrew thus:.

Translated into English, is thus, The King has prepared a Refreshing, he
has Crushed it out of the Rock by Degrees.

Published to inform the People,

Per H. Walker. S. S. T. S.

LONDON, Printed for R. I. and are to be sold by William Gilbertson at the
Bible in Gilt-spur-street. 1660.

Serious Observations Lately made, Touching his Majesty CHARLES the Second,
KING OF England, Scotland, France and Ireland.
HIs Royal Majesty Charles the Second, by the Grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, is both in the Hypostasis, and in the Prosopon,
(under God, and our Savior Jesus Christ) in this juncture of the time of his
temporal life, our true and Sovereign Lord, rightly possessed of the Crown and
Government; according to the mind of God revealed in his word, and the Laws and
Customs of these Nations; And we ought to be subject to him, not for fear,
but out of Conscience; and God has declared damnation against those that
resist him, Romans 13.

1 His Majesty has the Hypostasis, that subsistence to which God has formed
him to King-ship, in whose breast alone is (for us) the Royal Abstract: God
has qualified him to use him as his Instrument for the Government he has
appointed him to, over us; we cannot think that the Kingly heart mentioned 1 Samuel 10.9. is at this time in any breast fitted for these Nations, but in the
bosom of his sacred Majesty.

His Royal Father (in whom it was till death) had treacherous servants that
conspired against him, and slew him at his own House, since which, that
dispensation of the Spirit descends upon his Majesty that now is, whom we
are obliged to honor and bless God for, as the Jews did good King Josiah, who
reigned in his Fathers stead, 2 King. 21.23.

2 His Majesty is the Prosopon, that person in the Concrete, upon whose sacred
brows the Royal Diadem is rightly seated; however others have brooded upon the
Crown, to flatter their ambition, or fancied themselves Urinals, to delude the
senses, or assumed the Robes on their own backs, to terrify others, with a
pretense of the Plague in it; and dared to remove the Diadem, and take off the
Crown; yet God has over-turned, over-turned, over-turned it, that it should
be no more, until our gracious King Charles came, whose right it is, and to
whom God has given it, as he promised, Ezekiel. 21.26, 27

Besides these Observations, there are many other peculier rays of glory that
shine about the Throne of his Majesty, to demonstrate to all the world, a most
clear manifestation of the Lords wonderful presence with, and owning, and
blessing of his Majesty's Reign over us.

I. His Majesty has an eminent seal from God, by healing the Evil. For the
Lord Jesus has declared in the holy Scriptures, that, to be one of the signs
that shall follow them that believe; They shall lay hands on the sick, and they
shall recover, Mark 16.18. His Majesty does lay hands on great numbers sick of
the Evil and they do recover; By Prayer he prevails with God to give an
effectual issue to his touching of them; None, that in his Royal absence
assumed the Government, could do it; all their strokings and prayers to
accomplish it, would become vain, but, Where the word of a King is, there is
power, Eccles. 8.4.

II. His Majesty's Name and Title, King Charles Stuart, written in Hebrew thus
has a notable signification, and answers the fulfilling of an excellent
Prophecy, and glorious Promise, in which the Lord Jehovah, graciously stands
engaged to his Church: The plain translation of the said Hebrew into English is
this, The King has prepared a Refreshing, he has crushed it out of the Rock
by degrees. The Lord by him has fulfilled that great blessing promised to his
people, Isa. 3.1, 2. Behold! a King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes
shall rule in Judgment, and a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind,
and a covert from the tempest, as rivers of water in a dry place, as the
shadow of a great Rock in a weary land.

When we were scorched worse than Israel, in a barren, starved,
Wildernesse-condition, when storms fell about us, and we had no shelter, when
all waters, and means seemed to fail; Religion, Government, Trade, Food, Peace,
Hope, all our Springs were dried up; then the Lord called our Royal King
Charles the Second, to Reign in Righteousness, and rule in Judgment, to be
an hiding place, and a covert for us; who is become our Moses, and has
prepared a refreshing banquet for us in the Wilderness; he has smote the
Rock, and given us drink out of the great depths, he has crushed us out
sweetness, and made rivers of refreshing streams to glide pleasantly in the
midst of us, like that, Psalm 78.15, 16.

Government is (blessed be God) by his Majesty's Reign over us, restored to
its basis, Religion and Piety is by him countenanced and encouraged,
Profaneness, and Debauchery, by him reproved and shamed; And it is much upon
his Royal endeavors to contrive admirable expedients to reduce our
differences, to repair Trade, supply Food, and establish Peace and Truth: So
that our hopes are great in the Lords restoring of his Majesty to us, who has
already made us to suck honey out of the Rock, and oil out of the flinty rock
(as that) Deuteronomy. 32.13.

III. Those whom God calls to honorable and choice Places and Employments at
their age of thirty years he usually poures down upon them a more than
ordinary manifestation of his gracious presence, to make them very eminent.

Devout Joseph was thirty years old when God advanced him to that great dignity
wherein he stood before Pharaoh, who took off the ring from his own finger and
put it on Joseph's hand, arrayed him in fine Robes, with a Gold chain about his
neck, and made him to ride in a stately Chariot; And they cried before him, Bow
the knee; And he was Ruler over the Land of Egypt, Genesis 41.41, to 47.

Holy David, a man after Gods own heart, was thirty years old when he began to
Reign King over Israel, to whom all the people of the Land came to Hebron,
saying, Behold we are thy bone, and thy flesh; and King David made a league
with them before the Lord; And they anointed him King over Israel, 2 Samuel 5.
and 4 last verses.

When the Levites were called to the Ministerial Office, to enter into the
service of the Lord, to do the work of the Tabernacle, they were appointed by
God to be thirty years old, Number. 4.

The Lord Jesus Christ himself, when he began to be thirty years old, then was
he baptized and anointed into the Priestly Office, when praying, the Heaven
was opened, and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him
and a voice came from heaven which said, Thou art my beloved son, in thee I am
well pleased, Lu. 3.21. etc

And this is the age of our gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, in
which, through Divine Providence, by the wisdom, power and goodness of God,
his Majesty is come to the Throne, and established in his Royal Government.

IV. The Lord says of those days wherein he shall arise, and the glory of
Christ shall be seen, Isa. 40 2. That Kings shall come to the brightness of
his rising, and the people shall flock with them, ver 3. etc. And this has God
fulfilled in our eyes, making the King, and many that were banished into
strange Lands, to return and minister unto us, and build up our broken walls.
And God that in his wrath had smitten us, has thus mercy on us, according to
his promise, ver. 10. And those that affl^cted us, bow themselves down at his
Majesty's feet, whose bosom the Lord has made a refreshing to us; the Lord
make him an eternal excellency, and the joy of many Generations.

V. The Lord has promised that in Christ's exaltation in the midst of his
Church, Kings shall see and arise, and Princes shall worship, because of the
Lord that is faithful, and the Holy one of Israel, he shall choose them, Isa
49.7. Thus has God shown his faithfulness to our gracious King, whom he has
raised up, and chosen to be a nursing Father, to bring us in his arms, and on
his shoulders, to an happy estate, as it is ver. 22, 23.

VI. Many have spoken and written of glorious times expected to be, from what
they have gathered out of Gods word, under eminent and choice Rulers, Monarchs,
and Powers, which God shall establish among his people; And the times computed
by the most of them, do begin about this present, being the Year of our Lord
1660. and so on to 1670. So much has been said of this, not only by R. Hillel
Hannasi, and other Rabbis. Anonymus and other German Drs. But the Lord Nappier
of Scotland, Brightman of England, and many of these Nations. Yea, those called
the Fifth Monarchy men, have made this their common Theme; little thinking who
the person should be that those sayings pointed at, Our gracious K. Charles,
whom the Lord Jehovah is (we may hope) making so great a Monarch, in this
period of time.

VII. It may be said of his Majesty and these revived Nations of England,
Scotland and Ireland (that are like dry bones raised from the dead) as it was
once said of David and the people of Israel, Psalm. 144.10, etc. It is God that
gives salvation unto Kings, who has delivered his Servant our Sovereign
Charles the Second our gracious King, from the hurtful Sword, that has rid
him out of the hands of strange Nations, and brought him to his Right, to Reign
in great splendour over us; That our sons may be as plants, and our daughters
as polished stones, that our garners may be full, our sheep bring forth
thousands, our Oxen be strong to labor; that there may be no breaking in,
nor going out* that there be no complaining in our streets.

Happy are we now, a people in such a case; happy are we who have such a
King; yea, happy are we whose God is the Lord. And while we have breath let
us say,

God save King Charles the Second.
AMEN.
FINIS.

