DUPLYS For the Lord of Seualtoun, and others the late Magistrates of the Burgh
of Irwine, to the REPLYS given in by the present Magistrates against them.
THe Lord of Seualtoun, and the other late Magistrates of Irwine, who were
nominat by a Letter in anno 1687. (conform to the then custom of the Time) to
be Magistrates of the said Burgh, to prevent the utter ruin of the same, being
over-burdened with great Debts, and so impoverished that they were not able to
pay the Cess, nor repair the Harbor, Bridge, Kirk, and several others
belonging to them, which were almost ruinous. The said late Magistrates did by
advice of Lawers, and the consent of the Town Council and Neighbors, procure a
Gift of a Plack upon the Pint of all Ale and Beer, etc. in favors of the Burgh
for Nineten years, for the ends and uses foresaids, and for preventing of the
total decay of the said Burgh. And in order thereunto, upon the Credit of the
Burgh, did borrow Five Thousand Merks for defraying the Dues and Expenses in
procuring of the said Gift.

The present Magistrates did give in a Complaint to the Lord High Commissioner
his Grace and Estates of Parliament, against the Lord of Seualtoun and the
other late Magistrates, craving that they as Granters of Bonds, and their private
Fortunes may be liable for the said Five Thousand Merks, and that the present
Magistrates and Town may be free thereof, for the reasons following, 1. Because
the late Magistrates were imposed upon the Town by an Arbitrary Power, and that
the Gift was illegal, against the privilege of the Subject, and Claim of
Right. 2. That the Gift was procured after the report of his present Majesty's
coming to Britain, and the emitting his Declaration against imposing of
Magistrates, and granting such Impositions. 3. That the late Magistrates Granters
of the Bonds were not representers of the Burgh, not being elected by them, and
so can only oblige themselves and not the Burgh. 4. That the Magistrates
Granters of the Bonds, after the Money was borrowed, did by a posterior Act of
Council ordain the Money to be brought back from Edinburgh where it was lying,
to be applied for the uses mentioned in the said Act, so that they were
thereafter in mala fide to apply the Money for any other use, much more for
paying of the said Gift.


To which it was Answered for the late Magistrates, to the first, That albeit
Seualtoun and the other late Magistrates do not vindicat the imposing of
Magistrates in late times, nor the granting of Impositions contrair to the Claim
of Right, and Privilege of the Subjects; yet it is uncontroverted that it was
the common course of the time, taken by the Government through the whole
Kingdom, and that the considerable Burghs of Scotland obtained the like Gifts,
so that thereby it is clear that that can be no ground to make the late
Magistrates, and their own private Fortunes liable for the Debts contracted by
them, in procuring of the said Gift, which was done with consent of the most
part of the wwole Neighborhood, and particularly of their same present
Magistrates, which they cannot refuse; who not only before the Revolution, but
even since the Revolution, have declared themselves for the said Gift, and if
need were, time and place, and persons could be condescended upon to witness
the same, and their present Magistrates, and others of the Neighborhood, who now
complain against the late Magistrates, were then so far from it, that they did
acknowledge the late Magistrates, who were so far from being uneasy to the
people, that they very heartily concurred in the calling of their present
Minister from Holland, and in building of their Meeting House, and did
willingly contribute out of their own private Pockets not only for building of
the said Meeting House, but also for the Ministers maintenance, during the
wants of his legal Stipends, and did readily condescend to all their just and
reasonable desires, for which they did not expect, and far less deserve to be
troubled with so unkind and dangerous a Process, wherein if their present
Magistrates were to prevail, it would not only ruin the Lord of Seualtoun the
then Provost his Family, but fifteen or sixteen others therein concerned, who
never saw, nor had a six pence of profit by that five thousand merks; and for
any reflections the present Magistrates are pleased to put upon the late
Magistrates, as being imposed by the late Government upon the Burgh, or
otherways. It is Answered, that they themselves were very desirous to share in
the Government of the Burgh at that time, and to make the samine evident, John
Hamilton the late and present Clerk, studied to influence the late Magistrates
to that end; and it is presumed he had warrant from them for that effect, and
for these and other good deeds, they have continued him in his Office. And it
were of a dangerous preparative to declare all the Acts and deeds done by
Magistrates, imposed upon Burghs in the late Government, void and null upon that
ground, nor has it ever hitherto yet been pretended by any Burgh in Scotland.

To the 2d. it was Answered, that the same is neither relevant, nor true; for
the Gift is opponed, which was long before his Majesty's landing in Britain, or
emitting any Declaration: as also conform to the Acts of the Town-Council, the
procuring of the said Gift, was settled and agreed upon, several Months before
the Gift was procured, and long before it came to the late Magistrates hands.

To the 3d. it was Answered, that the first Answer is opponed, whereby it is
clear, that they were nominat according to the course of the Government for the
time; and so they being according to the Custom and Dialect of these times,
legally established, they had the sole power of Administration as Magistrates,
and consequently to procure the said Gift, as other Burghs had done, and which
was looked on at the time, not only by themselves, but also by these same
present Magistrates, and other Neighbors of the Town, as tending highly to the
Interest, Benefit and Advantage of the said Burgh, for the ends and uses
foresaids, and for preventing the ruin thereof.

To the 4th it was Answered, that the reason for making that Act, for bringing
back that Money from Edinburgh, was, that the procuring of the Gift was delayed
so long, that they were altogether hopeless thereof; but immediately thereafter,
the Gift did come to their hands, and past the Great Seal, and the Money so far
as was not advanced at the beginning of the Bargain, was paid and approven of,
by an Posterior out of the Town-Council.

Whereunto it was replied by the present Magistrates, that the alleged consent
of Neighbors, to the procuring of the Gift, is so great a falsehood, that it is
offered to be proven, that the Neighbors, did both dissent and oppose, the
procuring of the said Gift.

2. That the Gift was paid: for after his Majesty's Declaration was abroad,
and the news of his Arrival every hour expected, and when no man at that time,
could value the Gift worth a Groat.

3. That it is the constant Custom of the Burgh, that no Debt could lawfully be
conteasted by their Magistrates, without consent of the whole Neighborhood, and
Community.

4. That the Provost of the Town of Drumfreis, for the time (though a Papist)
when he had the like Gift in his offer, yet he first called the Community, and
because they dissented, he would meddle no further in it. The foresaid
Complaint, being remitted to Commission of Parliament, for reducing of Fyns and
Forfeiters, and it being invidiously suggested to them, that the money was
Imbazell'd and not given out in procuring the said Gift, they ordained Robert
Wallace, one of the late Baillies, to give in a Declaration, to whom they paid
the money, which accordingly he did: and therefore they before Answer, did
ordain Mr. Thomas Wallace, of Eldersly, and George Drummond, who received the
greatest part of the money, for procuring of the foresaid Gift, to compear
before them, and declare what Sums they received thereanent, and granted
Diligence for that Effect, and accordingly they were Cited, and did not
compear; so that the Commission gave their Opinion, that the late Magistrates
ought to be liable, reserving to them Repetition, from those that received the
Money.

The present Magistrates being charged with Horning for payment of the said Five
thousand Merks, at the Instance of John Craig, and John Bryce, from whom the
same was borrowed, they did suspend upon this Reason, that it was Lis pendens
before the Parliament; and therefore the Lords of Session could not meddle with
it, before the matter were determined by the Parliament; which Dilator the
Lords of Session sustained, and now the said Creditors, have given in a
Petition to the Parliament, representing that they bona fide having lent their
Money, upon the Faith of the Magistrates and Council, who were then in
possession of the Government of the Burgh, they neither did nor were obliged
to know any thing of the Illegal imposing of these Magistrates and Council upon
the Town, nor did they know what way the Money was employed, but did only lend
their Money upon the Credit of the Town of Irwine, by their receiving Bonds for
the samine, after the constant and usual manner of the Burgh; nor is it
pretended by any other Burgh in the Kingdom, who had Magistrates Imposed upon
them in the like manner, nor did ever contravert any Deeds done by these
Magistrates: And if it were otherways, that a Creditor who lends his Money to a
Burgh should be concerned whether the Elections of the Magistrates be legal or
not, and should run the hazard of losing his Money, if it were found, that they
were not elected legally, then there would be few Burghs in Scotland, who would
have Credit to borrow Money; And consequently the credit of all the Burghs in
Scotland would be thereby ruined. And therefore, craving that his Grace, Their
Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Estates of Parliament, would be pleased to
take the Premises to their Consideration, and to remit to the Lords of
Session, to discuss the foresaid Suspension, and notwithstanding of any Action
depending before the Parliament.

To which Petition, their present Magistrates have given in their Answers
following. 1. That imposing of Magistrates upon Burghs by the late King, were
inconsistent with Law, and consequently no Deeds done by them can be obligatory
upon, the Burgh, especially in this Case, where the Money was applied for the
foresaid gift which is a Crime, and to which the foresaid Creditors, give their
Assistance by furnishing the Money after they were desired not to Lend the
same. 2. That the foresaid gift was obtained contrair to the advice of many of
the Eminent Burgesses of the Place, who opposed the samen.


As to all which, and in Answer by way of Duply, to all that is above
represented, it is humbly Desired and Entreated, by the Lord of Seualtoun, and
the other late Magistrates, that his Grace, Their Majesty's High Commissioner,
and Estates of Parliament, would take unto their serious consideration, these
Points and Grounds following, 1. That the late Magistrates, were cled with the
Authority of the Burgh for the time, and consequently, had power to do such
Acts and Deeds in favors of the Burgh, which at that time, would so much have
tended to the Profit and Advantage of the Burgh, and it is known, to several of
the Members of Parliament, that the said Burgh of Irwine, was at that time, and
is yet in such a deplorable and poor Condition, that nothing but a remedy, like
unto the foresaid Gift (which would have proven very advantageous to the Burgh,
if not Repealed by Law) can in all humble probability, yet prevent the total
decay of the said Burgh, notwithstanding of the great pains taken, by the
present Magistrates, to recall their Predecessors, Deeds, which by appearance is
not the way, to prevent further decay to the Burgh, but by the expenses of such
needless Pleas, may be a mean to add to the samine. 2. It cannot be pretended,
that ever the late Magistrates did Inhanse or Imbazle a six pence of the Towns
Goods, but upon the contrair, they were so careful and tender of the Credit of
the Burgh, that what was spent in Relation to the Towns Affairs, was for the
most part, out of Seualtouns own private Money, and the Towns Revenues were set
apart, for payment of the Towns Debts, which consists with the knowledge of
their present Magistrates, who cannot deny upon their Oath, that they gave their
Advice, Concurrance and Consent, so far as they were concerned at the time, for
procuring of the said Gift, and any pretending Opposition, made by the other
Neighbors against the procuring thereof, it was only done by the Brewars and
Venters of Ale, themselves. 3. The Bonds granted for the foresaids five
Thousand Merks, did only oblige the Town and the then Magistrates, and their
Successors in Office: So that it is contrair to all Law, by the Conception of
these Bonds, to oblige the Subscrivers thereof, as private Persons, who are
functi officio, to pay the samine. 4. The late Magistrates, can never be said to
have Misimployed the Money, in procuring of the foresaid Gift, because there
was an absolute necessity of some help to the Burgh, for preventing the utter
ruin thereof. And Gifts of the like nature, being at that time usual in other
Burghs, and the Gift it self would have been so beneficial, that in a very
short time, it would have liberat the Town of all Debts, and that it would have
repaired the Harbor, Kirk, and others, for which it was designed, whereby it
is clear to any impartial Man. That the late Magistrates did act most Heartily
and Profitably, for the good of the Burgh for the time: And it were a very hard
matter, that because the Gift was by Law taken away, that the Magistrates who
procured the samine, and were acting Frugally and Advantagiously for the good
of the Burgh, for the time, should be Sufferers thereby. 5. It is calumnious to
allege, that the Burgh of Irwine was never in use, to grant Bonds without the
Consent the whole Neighborhood, for their constant Custom, and former Bonds
granted by them, are opponed. And as to that pretense, that the Neighborhood
of Dumfreis, having disassented from procuring of the like Gift, and thereupon
that Provost (though a Papist) did forbear to meddle further therein. It is
Answered, that the samine is both Frivulous and Calumnious, because the
remanent Magistrates and Town-Council of Dumfreis, having opposed the said Gift:
Therefore, the Provost by himself would meddle no farther therein, and the hail
other grounds of Complaint, against the late Magistrates, are sufficiently taken
of by the Answers abovementioned.


In Respect of all which, the Lord of Seualtoun, and the other late
Magistrates, who reaped no Advantage by their Office of Magistracy, but Acted
Faithfully and Heartily for the good of the Burgh, without the proposal of the
least Advantage to themselves, but upon the contrair, did spend of their own
Money upon the Towns Affairs, they ought therefore to be assoilied from such an
unkind and groundless Complaint, which would tend so much to the prejudice of
the late Magistrates, and would ruin the Faith and Credit of the whole Burghs
of Scotland; and if any Difficulty remain with the Parliament upon the
Circumstances above Represented which may afford a long and Cotentious Plea; by
leading of Probation and otherwise: And which may be an inlet to many other
such Pleas of the like Nature. It is hoped that His Grace and the Estates of
Parliament will remit the whole Affairs to be decided in Law by the Lords of
Session.


