CORDIFRAGIVM, OR, THE SACRIFICE OF A Broken Heart, Opened, Offered, Owned, and
Honored.

Presented in a SERMON At St Paul's London, November 25. 1660.

By Francis Walsall D. D. Chaplain to his Majesty, and Prebendary of St. Peter's
Westminster.

(...).

Rabbi David Kimchi, in Psalm 51.

LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller, for John Sherley, at the Golden Pelican in
little Britain. 1660.

Brown Mayor, Martis 27o die Novembris 1660, Annoque Reg. Caroli, etc. 12o.
IT is Ordered that Dr Walsall be from this Court desired to Print his Sermon
at St. Paul's, on the last Lords, day, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
this City.

Weld.

To the Right Honorable Sr Richard Brown Knight and Baronett, Lord Mayor of
the City of LONDON. WILLIAM BOLTON, AND William Peake Esquires Sheriffs: ALL
The Aldermen, and all the other Officers of that Great and Noble Body.
My Lord,
GOD has shed such a Glory upon the Success of your Undertakings, for the
best of Kings and Causes, ( for like your famous Predecessor Wallworth, you did
not only stab the Rebels, but gave the deaths wound to Rebellion it self) as
has ravished me into such a high and passionate veneration of your Lordships
Person and Parts as well as Place and Power, that I think it little less than a
sin to think the least of your desires less than Commands, as appears not only
in Preaching this Sacrifice, but Sacrificing this Preaching by Printing this
broken Discourse of a broken heart; setting it up as a mark to be shot at with
Basilisks eyes, and shot through with Adders tongues, which are like to do the
more sudden execution, because it comes so weak into the world, being by your
Lordships command delivered before its time; it is abortive, though not
still-born, and therefore there had bin no great miscarriage, if it had dyed as
soon as it was born. The truth is, my Lord, it was a due debt to, and designed
for St. Peter's Westminster ( to which I owe all my little parts and greatest
pains) so that I did but rob Peter to pay Paul, in Preaching it to you; as a
punishment of which guilt, I might justly fear a severer sentence from your
Bench, then that it should be judged to be pressed to Life. But since your
Lordship and your Court will have it so, be it so, let it live, let it live,
by, and for, and in, and with, and within, and without you and them, that is in
your lives. The life of the Sermon is the Sermon of the life: we may Preach
well, but it is you that must make the good Sermons, by making the Sermons
good, by Preaching the use of our Doctrine in your Lives. Then are Sermons
delivered to the hearers in a Gospel-way, when Romans 6. 17.
the hearers are delivered to (or into) the Sermons. This is the sense of the
Apostle, Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which was
delivered to you: it is in the Greek (...), to which ye were delivered. The
Cornelius Agrippa in Occulta Philosophia.
Hebrew Doctors say, that there is a stone in every man, which they call Luz,
of such an unpenetrable, indissoluble hardness, that it dastards and desies
the fury and force of all the Elements, as being the Garrison, that defends the
being of the Individuum; its immortal seed, and the life out of which man
springs up again in his entire nature to the harvest of the Resurrection: and
the Poet seignes, we are made of stones, Inde genus durum sumus --. This is the
Constitution of every natural man; and those that be still in their puris; or
rather impuris naturalibus, in their natural hardness of heart, I know will not
like a Discourse of a broken heart, because they are not like it: for likeness
breeds liking: and they are not like it: at least they are not it, that is,
broken hearted, and they that are whole, as they need not, so they care not for
the Physician --. Whereas to those whose hearts were broken before this Sermon,
or by it, it will be as pleasing a service to their eyes, as to their ears, and
to both, as a broken heart is a pleasing sacrifice to God. But be it what it
will, what ever it is, it is your Lordships, for not only the season, but the
Subject of this Discourse owes it self wholly to your Lordship: For I had
pitched upon another Theme that had spoke more home, and more handsome to the
Times, had I not bin taken off by your Lordships Officer, intimating your
desire not to meddle with Government, etc. I must needs say, it was a sharp
Sarcasme of Luther to his querulous and critical Melancthon, Desinat Philippus
esse Rex mundi, Let God, and those that govern the world under him, alone with
governing the world under them; and it was a great truth, though spoken by him,
that was the eldest Son of the Father of lies, that deified Swine Mahomet,
(...) God is his own Master of the works, that is eminently the Reiglement of
the world, and therefore the same Impostor calls God (...) Dominus Mundi, and
yet the same God has given a large Commission to his Ambassadors in Cases
where the Laws of man are built upon, or built up to the Laws of God, as all
should be. But I will not swell an Epistle into a Treatise on that Subject; it
is enough, that your Lordship sees I did comply with your desires in it, even
though the times were so happily fruitful, as to afford a large crop of
excellent matter, that would prodesse and delectare, to entertain you with
profit and pleasure in the blessed change of Government, from the worst of
Tyrants, to the best of Princes: And I the rather chose to resolve my self into
the obedience of your Lordships dictates, because the last piece I Printed was,
The Bowing the Hearts of Subjects to their Sovereign, and I could hardly do
less (since it did not go before it) than follow it, with Breaking the heart
in sacrifice to God: For that heart is never sweetly bowed in subjection to the
King, that is not savingly broken in sacrifice to God.

Your Lordship has the honor of aeternizing your name, by being an Active
Instrument in digging the Church and State from under those heaps of Ruin and
Rubbish, the Ambition and Covetousness of a Popular Tyranny, had long buried
them under, in the blessed Restoring of his Sacred Majesty to his Suffering
Subjects, for which Generations to come shall bless your memory. Go on, my
Lord, go on to plant whole Groves of Laurel, to crown your Self, your City,
your Posterity with unperishable glories, by a Generous and Charitable
Reflection upon that Aged heap of Ruins, once the wonder of the world, and the
Crown of this Queen of Islands, I mean the Church of St. Paul, in a Canton of
which this Sermon was delivered to you. When I first came into that eminent
Monument of Ancient Piety, ( and Modern Impiety) for Gods service and yours,
though I may be easily imagined to have bin so full of the great work I was to
do, that I had little room to entertain other thoughts; yet I must
ingenuously confess, that sadding Object (which looked like the Picture and
Emblem of the Church of England, in its late ruinous posture) broke through all
my other notions (that were then upon wing and fluttered to get out) and stormd
my hear^, till at length it retreated to my eyes, and went out where it came in
with a wet Prayer in David's language, Psalm 102. 13, 14. Arise o Lord and have
mercy upon Zion, for the time is come that thou have mercy upon her, yea the
set time is come, and why? thy servants think upon her stones, and it pitties
them to see her in the dust. Pardon my Zeal (my Lord) if it swallow down my
Discretion, it is for the House of God, and that eat up David and the Son of
David: I owe my Birth and Breeding to the Neighborhood of that Mother Church
(to me in a more eminent way) I have many precious Pawns deposited under her
dear walls, besides my living Relations, that I must say with David, For my
Brethren and Psalm 122. 8.
Companions sake I wish thee prosperity: And so I know does your Lordship, and
let the world know it too, by a seasonable lending your successful hand to
raise up our Aged Mother out of the Dust. It is a labor worthy such a Hercules
to purge that Augaean Stable, it is sad to call it so, but it was so, and
blessed be God we may say it was so. You know when a Den of Thieves made it a
Stable for Horses: and so or worse they would have used all our Churches: They
would have destroyed all the Houses of God in the Land, destroyed them at least
from being any longer Houses of God, at least these Mother-Churches, to spoil
the breed, and to that end they said, let us take the Houses of God in
possession, they said, that is, it was resolved upon the Question: but God
repealed their Act (if it be worth that name) and turned their Ordinance upon
themselves, and as it follows there, made them like a wheel, turned it from
Regno to sum Psalm. 83. 12, 13.
sine Regno. And who knows but that as God has bin pleased to honor you with
a great part in this glorious work of Restoring the King to his House, but that
it is intended by it, to prompt you to restore God to his House, the House of
God to the God of the House. Let me say to your Lordship as Mordecay said to
Esther, who knows whether thou art come to this honor for such a time as
this? Never was Lord Mayor wellcomed into his Office with more general
alacrity and acclamations, which as they did loudly speak the good you had
done, so they did lovingly bespeak the good they would have you do. And
therefore let me be so bold to say to your Lordship as David did to his Son
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22. 16.
who was designed for such work, the building of the Temple, arise therefore
and be doing, and the Lord shall be with thee. You cannot want encouragement,
for besides that, the wishes of Prince and People concenter in it, God has
blessed London with a prudent Bishop, cut out as it were for all manner of
Church-work. Therefore I will say no more, but, that, when I see two such
benign stars in conjunction and vertical over this great City, I cannot but
prophecy ( prognosticate is too fallible a term) great blessings, and I pray
that I may be a true Prophet, as I am truly

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant in the work of our great Master,
Francis Walsall.
Westminster, Jan. 1. 1660. Juxta Comput. Ecclesiae Anglis.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. in Margin, after Job 16. 14. add (...) confractione coram
confractione, with one breach in the sight of another, like the waves of the
Sea, one upon the neck of another, or like his own messengers of ill news, one
upon the heels of another, p. 3. l. 15. against Genesis 15. 10. in the Margin add
these Verses, Tunc piceae mactantur oves, prosectaque partim
Pectora, per medios partim gerit obvius Idmon.
Val* Flac. Arg. l. 2. Vid. plura in Analect. sacra doctissimi Doughteij nostri.
p. 8. line 15. r. foyles, p. 10. l. 7. r. lies, p. 11. l. 15. r. broken into
two pieces, p. 15* l. 22. r. (...) ibid. l. 30. (...) and ibib. r. (...), p.
18. in Marg. r. (...), p. 29. l. 12. after above, r. Genesis 7. 11. l. 13. r.
deep, p. 34. l. 10. r. (...), p. 38. l. 2. r. (...), p. 38. l. 19. r. his grace
is his meal.

PSALM. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and contrite
heart, O God thou will not despise.
WE have had our share in broken and breaking Times, the Lord has broken us,
as Job says, with Job. 16. 14*
Breach upon Breach; every thing has been broken but that which should be, our
hearts: and though we think we have now a clear Prospect into the end of our
miseries, and the healing of our Breaches, by this miracle of mercy, the happy
return of the Soverainge repairer of our Breaches, and restorer of paths to
dwell in: Es. 58. 12. Jer. 14. 19.
yet we have heard of those that looked for healing, and behold trouble.
Whether the great Physician will at this time make a through cure of our
ruptures I cannot divine, but yet I may safely as sadly say, if he do not, we
may thank our selves for it, we may thank our own thanklessness; if we be any
more broken, it is because we are no more broken; as we have been broken so
much, because we have not been broken enough, we still want this Breaking in
the Text, Heartbreaking: for all our other outward breakings, we are
heart-wholl still (as we use to say) our hearts are not broken, our hearts are
indeed sadly divided, but not savingly broken: we are not broken for sin, we
are not broken from sin; but like the smiths anvill we are rather hardened than
broken by all our strokes, we are word-proofe, and swordproofe; we neither
hear the rod of the Word, nor the Word of the rod; we laugh under the rod and
the proud flesh grow's under the Sword; we are not so much as pricked at the
heart, if we were, we should be in their posture, Act. 2. 37. When they were
pricked at the heart they said unto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, men
and brethren what shall we do? But do we so? surely no; we do not so
because we are not so; were our hearts truly and throwghly broken we would make
more have to the great Physician who is only able to bind up the broken heart,
who heals the broken in heart and gives Ps. 1^^. 30.
them medicine to heal their sickness. But I will not anticipat an application
with a preface: only give me leave to breath out a short ejaculation, and so to
our work: the Lord give us broken hearts, break us that we may be broken; and
break us that we may not be broken, and give us contrite spirits that we be
not reserved to fall under the weight of that sad and ancient Porphesie
Conterendj -- Polychr^^icon
that we may be contriti, that we be not Conterendi. -- But to the words Beza.
(and our learned Fuller approves his judgment) says that the Apostles (...),
Fulleri miscell. p. 224. lib. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 15.
rightly dividing the word of truth, is a metaphore that alludes to the Priests
dividing the Sacrifices under the Law, and probably enough, because in
preaching the word the Minister chooses and singles out a particular Text out
of all the ^^ock of Scripture to be consecrated for that use as a Sacrifice, by
dividing it part for God, and part for his people, and to the people their due
share in their due season: therefore the business of my Text being Sacrifices,
I shall open it as they used to open the Sacrifices under the Law, (...) that
is the meaning of St Paul's, (...) Heb. 4. 17. (...). All things are naked and
open (so we read it) but it is rather opened as they used to open the
Sacrifices of the Law, throwgh the middle, from the neck downward, as we see it
cleared in the practice of Abraham. Genesis 15. 10. And he took the Sacrifices and
divide them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another, and this
bears a huge proportion with our Text: for (...) and (...), an iron sinew in
theneck, and a stone in the heart speak the same thing in Scripture, and must
be both alike Sacrificed and broken: so shall I Sacrifice my Text by so
breaking of it, that is just in the midst, into two parts, and lay the the
parts one against another thus.

The two parts are. 1. Sacrifices offered. 2. Sacrifices owned and honored.

1. Sacrifices offered; the Sacrifices of God, that is offered to God, are a
broken spirit and a contrite heart.

2. Sacrifices owned and honored a broken heart and contrite spirit (for I
must put both into both) God will not despise.

1. Sacrifices offered, the Sacrifices offered to God, a broken spirit, and a
broken and contrite heart: here are two participles in the Hebrew which make
two weighty Epithets upon which lies the whole stresse and burden of the Text,
and they are (...) and (...) the one signifies to break whole things all of a
piece, and the other signifies to break hard things all to pieces, that is
(...) a word of a higher streine, to break a thing to powder. So Psalm. 94. 5.
They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, (...). So Job 19. 2. How long will ye
vex my soul and break me in pieces with words, (...) Atteretis me, will ye
grind me to powder? So that put both together and you have here Heart, a whole
Heart broken in pieces, and a Heart, a hard Heart beaten to powder: things must
be whole or they cannot be broken to pieces; and they must be hard, or they
cannot be beaten to powder: so that this breaking, this beating speaks
violence, the macerations and martyrizations of repentance, that holy violence,
and force that Heaven is taken with. Therefore a Heart so used is called a
broken and a contrite heart. Thus it signifies a soul truly humbled, beaten,
and broken and ground to powder; in this sense it is applied to Christ, Es. 53.
10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief, the Hebrew
is (...) to break him in pieces; thus in the same sense you find contrite and
humble put together twice in one Text, Es. 57. 15. For thus says the high and
lofty one that inhabits eternity, whose name is holy; I dwell in the high and
holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit to revive the
spirit of the humble and to revive the spirit of the contrite ones: A broken
heart then is a spirit duly and deeply humbled under the sense of sin for the
School gives a distinction between Attrition: and Contrition: the object of
Attrition is the evil of punishment* but the object Contrition is the evil of
sin. So that a broken heart is a heart bleeding under the sight and sense of,
and sorrow for sin.

2. Part is the Sacrifices owned and honored, and to this you rise in state by
three stepps. 1. Sacrifices. 2. Sacrifices of God. 3. Such Sacrifices as God
will not despise.

1. Sacrifices in the Plural Number, all Sacrifices, as if all other sacrifices
were either nothing at all to this, or without this, or all in all in this, of
a broken heart: when we beat or break hard things into minute parts or
powder, we call it the flower of it: a broken heart is slos cordis the flower
of the heart and that is the Flower of all Sacrifices, and the finer the flower
(that is the more beaten or broken) the fitter offering for God. Thus truly
pulvis sanctus, is pulvis cardia^us, the Heart powder is the holy powder.
Besides the ordinary Frankincense for common uses, the finest and fittest for
Gods Rev. 2 17. 1 Pet. 3. 41.
service and sacrifices; the Physicians call Manna thuris, the Broken and
Contrite heart is Manna cordis, the Hidden Manna of the Hidden man of the
heart: the Broken heart is not only for all services, but for all Sacrifices,
nay is all Sacrifices. Every ragg, every shiver, every grain, every atome of
the Broken Heart is a whole burnt offering, nay a hecatomb of Sacrifices.

2. The satcrifices of God, it is a frequent Scripture Phrase to raise the
price of things of excellence and eminence above others by adding the name of
God to them, as the waters of God, the mountain of God, the Cedars of God, and
so here the Sacrifices of God, that is, the most excellent sacrifices. We have
it in the new Testament, The Peace of God, that is, such a Peace as does not
only pass other Peaces, but all understanding Phil. 4. 7. But I conceive there
is more in it than so, the sacrifices of God that is, the sacrifices that God
does most own and honor and is most interested in: as if he had said, all
other sacrifices are but the sacrifices of men: Bullocks and Rams, Sheep and
Goats: Turtles and Pigeons; Beasts and Birds; Fruits and Flowers; these were
but the sacrifices of men; but my son give me thy heart sais God, that is the
Prove. 23. 26.
sacrifice he only delights in: all the rest without this are an abomination to
him; these alone are the Sacrifices of God, for here as he did to Abraham, God
Ezekiel. 36. 26.
himself provides the Sacrifice for himself, for he alone that is the
heart-maker is the heart-breaker: it is Gods prerogative royal to take out the
heart of stone and put in a heart of flesh: it is no wonder if he liks his own
choice and accepts what himself provides. He is the feast, the guest, the
welcome, and therefore, sure, he will not despise his own cheer, and tha is
thet

3d Step by which we rise to Gods owning and honoring these sacrifices; that
God will not despise them.

You will say this is but a very thin and low and slight way of honoring a
thing not to despise it.

Heb, 13. 16. With such sacrifices God is well pleased, so v. 17. The same
chapt. Obey them that have the Rule over you. etc. For it is profitable for
you: this is but a short expression, and reaches not home to the Apostles
meaning; for according to his own Doctrine it is not only profitable to do it,
but it is damnable not to do it, because it is to be done for Christ's sake and
consience sake: so 1 These. 5. 20. Despise not prophesying, here is our word
again; the Apostles meaning here is that we should honor prophesying, though
he sai's only despise it not, and though this Text in the lowest sense has been
so long too much despised (even under high pretenses of doing it honor (yet,
certainly, he that would have honor and double Honor given to the Ministers
for their works sake; would not have less given to the work it self. Thus
these sacrifices God will not despise, that is God will accept them, own them,
honor them above all other sacrifices in the world.

The result of all these clearings of the sense is this, that a Broken heart is
the most acceptable sacrifice to God, which he most own's most honors. A
principle that needs improving more than proving, and therefore the wheels and
hinges my discourse shall move upon shall be these four only.

1. What a broken and a contrite heart is.

2. Some (...), Characters or rules by which a man may be able to pass a
judgment upon his heart, whether it be truly broken.

3. Some whets to sharpen your desires and endeavors after a broken heart.

4. Some arguments to quicken your Care and Caution that you give not over your
pains, till you be sure the work is done; that when all is done, you be not
deceived in this important duty.

1. What is a broken and a contrite heart? and here because Contraria inter se
posita magis elucescunt, Contraries are the best fyles to set off and to set
out one another. I will pave my way to a Broken heart out of the qua^ry of a
hard Heart: you may please to know then that there is a threefold hardness of
heart.

1. A natural. 2. An acquired. 3. A Judicial hardness of heart.

1. A natural hardness of heart which every man brings into the world with
him: we are all born Prodigies and Monsters with stones in our bosoms nether
millstones in our hearts: thus the Apostle characters the Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.
18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
hearts, (so we read it) but it should be, because of the hardness of their
hearts: so says the margin, and so should have said the Text, for, besides
that blindness is understood, in the words before, having the understanding
darkened, and the words following through the ignorance that is in them, is in
the Greek, (...). Which very expression you have translated hardness of heart
elsewhere. viz, Mark. 3. 5. Being grieved for the hardness of their hearts And
yet it is, (...), etc. And that it must be hardness and not blindness the
derivation of the word speaks. For the Greeks derive (...), from the stone
(...), the nature of which is to harden by the sticking to of viscous and
glutinous waters, as the stone hardens in the Reins and Bladder. And so (...),
signifies hardness, and is by a kind of Catachresticall metaphore used for
those tophi or hard swellings, of purulent matter grown into a callous or
brawny substance in the joints or Lunges, as Arist. tells us in his historia
animalium and that (with all reverence to the memory of the learned
Translators) this is not my Conjecture only, but the sense of the Spirit. I
shall give you a Text where both these words are used in their proper sense
distinctly, Joh. 12. 40. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts,
that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts,
etc. (...) he has blinded and he has hardened. This is that natural hardness
of heart which I am speaking off, not so much blindness as a Consequent and
effect of it, a hardness that grow's from blindness: it is hard as well as
blind, nay hard because blind (to lap up both in one English word) it may be
stone-blind, for it speaks an affected ignorance, blindness in spite of light
and sight.

2. There is an acquired hardness. Heb. 3. 13. least any of you be hardened
through the deceitfullness of sin. Sin cheates us into custom and custom out
of conscience. Sin is like some waters that have a natural petrifying quality,
and will harden any thing into stone that lays any time in them. Let a godly
manly in any sin any time, neglect duty and give himself a loose to the world,
and he shall see in how short a time a crust will grow over his heart, a
scirrus upon his conscience; that will make him both unwilling to duty: and
unweildy in duty: his faith will take wind and be apt to taint when he keeps
not close to God in duty: Delicata res est spiritus sanstus; the spirit of God
is a dainty tender thing and soon snibd; no marvel therefore if that heart be
hard that has driven away the softning spirit.

3. There is a judicial hardness of heart; a hardness that comes or rather is
sent, upon the heart by the just judgment of God, to punish those other
hardenesses: the Lord does many times turn (as it was reported whether true or
false I know not) our hearts (as he did the people in Tripoly) into stone in
judgment: as we see Es. 63. 17. O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy
ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? O this is the saddest of all
judgments when God does (not only punish sin with sin, whip one sin with
another, but) punish putrefaction with petrifaction by hardening us in sin
steeling the conscience and brassing the countenance not only to continuance in
sin; but confidence in sinning: O a seared conscience is a sealed condemnation.

2. What is a Broken Heart then? that comes next having done with a hard one.
When a thing is broken it is broken into some parts greater or lesser, more or
fewer: what then is this Heart broken into? to give you all the little parts
and Atoms, a broken heart is crumbled into, were a task as endless (and
needless) as that Venus (in Apuleius) laid upon Psyche, to number and
distinguish a heap of petit grains. Therefore I will only give you the prime
leading parts, the lesser, inferior, and more subordinate only, as they offer
themselves in our way.

This broken Heart then is broken into pieces.

1. Low thoughts of himself.

2. High thoughts of God.

These parts (to speak properly) though the heart be broken into, yet it is
not made of: for as we say of a line, that it is divided into, not made of
points; so this heart though broken into, is not made up of these pieces, as
ingredients; they divide, not constitute; they do not make it, but rather
speak it broken; for the blood of Christ alone is the Balm of Gilead, or
rather the Gilead of Balm, that alone makes up a broken heart.

1. Then what are these low thoughts of a man's self, into which it is broken?
Here I shall b^g the favor of you to help me out a little with your fancy:
the Prophet speaking of God Jer. 31. 18. Says I have heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus. Suppose now you were behind the hanging, and heard Job, David,
Peter, Paul, Augustine, Anselm, Jerome, Bernard, or any other humbled Saint of
God, at his confession: what do you think, would such mortified souls, such
broken hearts break out into? I will head a few short hints of a Broken
Hearts, low thoughts of himself in seven broken sighs; thus.

1. The Broken heart bleeds out a sigh over his emptiness of all good, in St
Paul's complaint Romans 7. 18. I know that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no
good thing. Strangers that are at a distance from me, and know me not, intus
and in cute, or in cute only, my outside, only, may perhaps cry me up for
Piety, parts, and pains; perhaps those that have any Relation or Obligation to
me, may find out a pretty Inventory of goods in me to praise in their judgment.
But O the Lord knows, and I know my self, and so would others too, did they
know me as well as I do, or should, and (I thank God) would know my self, that
there is no good in me, but that I desire to see and weep the evil that is in
me: and that is his

2. Sigh, not only that I am empty of all good, but full of all evil; and here
he breaks out into lamentations, not only for all the evils that have broke out
in him, but for the evils that lie hid and dormant in him, and may break out,
his latent as well as his patent evils.

1. For the ils that have appeared in him, O! says the Broken heart, the
Devil could not suggest, nor the damned in hell commit worse evils then I have
done; and here he lanches into that black sea of sin, and runs over those three
beadrolls of evils. Romans 1. From verse 29. to the 32. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. And that
catalogue of the works of the flesh Gal. 5. from verse, 19. to the 21. I have
sinned so and so and so. The Sun in Heaven does not warm, nor the fire in hell
does not burn a more false, filthy, foul, base, debauched sinner than I am:
Gods mercy never saved, Gods justice never damned a more unthankful,
unfaithful, unfruitful, wretch than wretched I.

2. For his latent evils, for his (...) 2 Cor. 4. 2. The hidden things of
dishonesty, or rather the hidden things of shame; so the Greek, and more
properly; his secret sins, sins that are so hidden from the world, that they
are almost hidden from himself, though he cannot with Caesar call every
Soldier that fight's against his soul in this formidable Army, that quarters
in his heart, by name: yet he has discovered a vast Army of corruption in
ambush there, that makes him cry out upon that discovery with St Paul Romans 7.
24. O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
I have a body of sin in me; sin in a corporation, not only sin in arms, but
sin in an Army, sin in a body, sin in a Garrison, sin in a strong hold; I have
all the sins in the world in my base heart. Philosophy may flatter me that I
have the seeds of all vertves in me, but I see that I have the seeds of all
sins in me, even of that fearful sin against the holy Ghost: And that these
sins have not broken out into open defiance against God and man, it is no thank
to any goodness in me, but the goodness of God alone; it is nothing but the
overruling power of Gods grace that has kept me from being outwardly and
openly, as vilely wicked as the basest, the beastlyest of sinners. O I am a den
of wild beasts, a bed of Serpents, a cage of unclean Birds, a sink of sin: I
am all toade, all beast, all Devil: and if God have caged up these birds,
charmed these serpents, tied up these wild beasts that they have not broken
out to the loathing of the world; I am beholding to the goodness of God, not
only for that little good I have done, but for the great evils I have not done.

3. He breaths a sigh, not only over his bondage to sin, but to the creatures:
who was ever more ensnared with dotage on the creatures than I? how am I
brought under the power of mean and low things; things which God has designed
for no higher ends than to be helps and seasonings and sweetenings of my
Pilgrimage, as meats and drinks, relations, recreations. St Paul would not be
so; he would not be brought under the power of any 1 Cor. 6. 12. But several
creatures are Princes and Gods over me: and many times when I have been
convinced of my duty to do the will of God, and have been willing and ready to
do it, and even setting upon the work, these petty Divinities, these
creature-deitys have exercised such a rugged Empire over my heart, that I durst
not obey God, because I durst not disobey them, nay I have chosen rather to
obey them than God: O what a slave has my Idolatry to a little painted flesh,
or shining earth made me? It has not only unchristianed me, but unmaned me,
befooled me, bebeasted me, bedrudged me, bedeviled me.

4. He sighs out his unworthiness of any of Gods dealings with him: his
unworthiness. 1. Of any mercy from God. 2. Of any relation to God. 3. Of any
Correction by God.

1 He sees his unworthiness of any Gods mercies to him. Jacob breathes out the
language of a broken heart. Genesis 32. 10. I am less than the least of thy
mercies. q. d. I have done my best (that is) my worst to sin away thy mercies
by sinning with, and against thy mercies; I have deserved that thou should
curse thy mercies and blast thy blessings to me, or take them from me (...) I
have lessened my self from thy mercies, and made my self unworthy of them: I am
less than the least of all thy mercies. And yet thou art pleased to continue
thy greatest to me: thy mercy is my miracle, that thou can find in thy heart
to do any good to a thing that is so bad, so base, so wretched as I am. Lord
what is man that thou art mindful of him? Ps. 8. 4. It is not (...) wretched
weak miserable man, so the word signifies, and I the most miserable of all
men? Lord what am I miserable sinful I, that thou should yet look upon me?

2. He sees himself unworthy of any relation to God. Lord (says the broken
heart) I pretend indeed to be thy child and that thou art my father: I say our
father with them that understand it but Deuteronomy. 32. 5. Ge^. 37 32
little, but none deserves it less: O I profane that holy prayer of my
Savior: I blaspheme that gracious name, and blast that glorious Relation: I
thy son? no; no, my sin is not the spot of thy children: is this thy sons coat
that is besmeared and spotted with uncleanness, rolled in blood, particolored
with schimes, sects, errors, heresy, divisions, anger, malice, slander, etc.
The Spaniards that called themselves the sons of God, when they baptized whole
sholes of Indians in their own blood, had as just a title to thy sonship as I:
if I be thy son, I am such a son as Absalom, a rebellious child, that run that
sword atilt at his fathers breast in a horrid rebellion, that came newlyreeking
out of the blood and bowels of his brother; that tongue, those hands, I sin
against man with, I fight against God with. If I be a son I am a Simeon and
Levi, of whom their father said after they had murdered the King and the people
of Sichem, ye Genesis 34. 30.
have made me to stink among the inhabitants of the Land, the name of God has
been blasphemed through me, therefore according to thine own Divinity, John. 8.
44.
my father is the Devil, for his works only I have done: no, no; I am not thy
son I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son. Luke 15. 18.

3. Nay Lord I am not only unworthy any mercy from thee, or any relation to
thee; but even of any correction by thee, as holy Job in the midst of his
heartbreaking expostulates it with God. Job 7. 17, 18. What is man that thou
should magnify him? and that thou should set thine heart upon him? And
that thou should visit him every morning and try him every moment! I am
worthy indeed of of punishment to destruction, but not to correction: Indignus
sum quem vel percutias, as he said: what God sais to proud sinners; Es. 1. 6.
Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more: That a broken
heart says to himself; why should the Lord take the pains to chasten me? why
should he loose a correction upon me? I am neither worthy to be stroked nor to
be struck; neither Gods Jacobs hands, his softer hands of mercy, nor his Esaus
hands, his rougher hands of justice could do any good upon me.

5. He sighs over his own inability (as well as unworthiness) to draw near to
God in any duty. O says the broken heart, the time was, I thought my self some
body, nay like St Paul, an Almighty man, that I could do all things, I thought
Phil. 4. 13.
I could have heard, read, prayed, lived up to means and mercies, lain at the
foot of God in submission, when I lay under his hand in affliction, and in some
measure have performed all the duties the Lord requires of me; but now I feel
my self fit for nothing, but to sin against him. I do not live the life of
faith, and therefore I cannot breath the breath of prayer: thus the Publican
stood afarr off and would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven: as being
unworthy Luke 18. 13.
to look up to the throne of that great King, whose Laws he had so often
broken: even in his very addresses to God, when his broken heart ( laboring
and panting for the life of grace,) gasps after nothing more, than to enjoy him
in a close and choice communion; Luke 5. 8. (...), so Job 7. 16. (...), out of
the sense of Gods Majesty and his misery.
he is ready to cry out with Peter depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O
Lord. When he thirst's after nothing more than that God would draw near to him,
in his drawing near to God, yet the sense of his own vileness puts such a check
upon his spirit, that he is ready to say, depart from me, when he is most
ardently desirous of his presence. Lord I shall poison thee, wound thee, murder
thee, in thy most saving means and mercies, I have such a venomed contagious
soul; therefore I must say, though I hope thou will not do so; depart from me
O Lord, for I am a sinful man.

6. When he compares himself with others, he bewails himself as worse than any;
nay worse Me tanquam signiferum peccatorum profiteor. Clarius.
than the worst of sinners: so said St Paul 1 Timothy 1. 15. Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. I know that learned
Grotius, and some others of great name (whose judgment I must beg pardon, if I
cannot close with in this) will have this humble confession of the great
Apostle to be nothing but an excess of modesty, he knew (say they) there were
ten thousand worse than he; but in pure modesty makes himself worse than all:
but we must becare^ull we do not make the Apostle to deliver lies; he did not
use to complement with God or the world: and therefore (doubtless) the sense of
his own vileness made him speak so of himself. It is a true rule that a broken
heart will be vile in its own eyes: and as true it is that he that is highest
in Gods eye is always lowest in his own eye.

Paul turned Saul again?



1. From the kind of his sin, it was a sin of the first magnitude, a sin of
malice, the worst of sins, a devil-sin.

2. From the end as well as the kind of his sin: for his end in blaspheming the
gospel, was only to establish the righteousness of the Law, which being a sin
so diametrically opposite to Christ, made him a greater sinner then all the
harlots and Publicans in the world.

3. The Apostle compares himself only with the worst of sinners that were saved
in his time, because those means prevailed for their conversion that did not
for his. Publicans and harlots were converted by the preaching of the Gospel,
nay even those that crucified Christ: but if the Lord himself from heaven had
not appeared to him, and in a most miraculous manner spoken to him himself,
dazeled him into light, and blinded him into sight, and frighted him into
obedience, it is but too probable he had died in his sin.

4. Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem. One may commit the very same sin
another does, and yet there may be more malice and pollution in the one than in
the other, as being heightened by many aggravating circumstances, as committing
the sin against more light and stronger covictions, with a stronger bent of the
will, and earnestness and eagerness of affections: and St. Paul here judges
how much of his spirit went out in his sin. Surely no man's soul was ever drawn
out with a more mad zeal to persecute Christ, than his was: So that lay all
together, and it will lessen the wonder that he should judge himself the
chiefest of sinners that Christ came to save, and he means no other; though I
am not convinced but that a great Saint may say, he is as great a sinner as any
of the damned in hell, and I could make it good had I time, or were there need.
But I will say it is very proper and proportionable to a broken heart to think
so; for he cannot be thought to think too low of himself, that thinks himself
nothing. And that is the

7. Broken sigh, that in any thing, in every thing, the broken heart thinks
himself lost and nothing without Christ.

And he may be said to own himself nothing in four respects.

1. In respect of his own righteousness.

2. In respect of his own pains and parts.

3. In respect of his own aims and ends.

4. In respect of his own comforts and contentments.

1. The broken heart is nothing in respect of his own righteousness. He dares
not stand up in his own justification, and plead his innocence before Isa. 64.
6.
the Tribunal of God; but rather falls down upon his face, acknowledging with
the Prophet, that he is an unclean thing, and all his righteousnesses filthy
rags: all his righteousnesses: his pretty formalities of, and pretenses to
holiness: his pluralityes of righteousness are but rags, tattered and torn
things that will not cover his nakedness, and filthy rags, such as defile
rather than adorn him; with the Leper he lays his hand upon his mouth, and his
Lev. 13. 45.
mouth in the dust, cries, Unclean, unclean. This low posture you find the
great Apostle in, Phil. 3. 9. That I may be found in Christ, not having mine
own righteousness. The whole ninth Chapter of Job is full of this holy
emptiness, and humble disowning his own righteousness: How shall I be just with
God? I cannot answer one of a thousand: If I justify my self, mine own mouth
shall condemn me: If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse: And I
know thou will not hold me innocent. All which being summed up, amounts but to
David's total, in that confession he makes, Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into
Judgment with thy servant O Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified. Nay there is a thread of this renouncing and disclaiming our own
righteousness, runs quite through the whole web of Scripture, which shall
supersede any farther proofs: only take notice, that here is the great stick of
an unbroken heart, you shall discover his ignorance and infidelity in this
point mainly, that he is always hammering at and fixi^g upon his own
righteousness, something in himself. This is the language of ordinary people,
their good prayers, and their good works, what they have done, and what they
will do: Or if they be not altogether so gross, they will yet mingle the
righteousness of Jesus Christ with their own: They will not take all to
themselves, nor yet give all to Christ; but part stakes with him, Nec meum, nec
tuum, sed dividatur, nor mine, nor 1 King. 3. 25.
thine, but let it be divided; like Salomons harlot, and it was a whores trick,
and it is the trick of the great whore at this day. But take notice, it was the
mother of the dead child that would have the living child divided; -- -- at
least if they may not share and club with Christ, they will have Christ in a
way of their own: not to make an Idol of Christ, O have a care of that: Whereas
he that truly finds he is any thing in Christ, will as truly find he is
nothing in himself without Christ. It is the character of a Christian (which I
am sure a man can never be till his heart be broken) that he is nothing, a very
nothing, a thing that is not: His very being is not to be at all; this same
miracle of men, and mystery to men a Saint, is not a man, nay is not at all.
See how the Apostle cleares this truth, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. God has chosen the
foolish things, and the weak things, and the base things, etc. and the things
that are not, to bring to naught the Homines nibili Erasm. in loc.
things that are. Certainly these things that are not, are the Saints, that is,
that are not in themselves; but that being they have, is in another, not only
naturally, as St. Paul quotes the Poet, Act. 17. 28. In whom we live, move, and
have our being; but that supernatural being of a Christian is wholly from and
in Christ: From him they have their nature, as well as name, and therefore
called Partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. So (...) significat causam
primariam, ut Romans 11. 36. (...). Theoph. Eras. Gro^.
1 Cor. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, that ye are at all, it is not
at all of your selves, but of him, that is Christ: By the grace of God I am
what I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Otherwise I am not. Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me. You have this spiritual man (that is a heart broken
from the world, and dead to it) painted to the life, by the Pencill of the
Spirit in that Phaenix of the old world, E^och, Genesis 5. 24. Enoch walked with
God, and was not, for God took him. I am not ignorant that St. Paul takes this
in the literal sense, Heb. 11. 5. but I hope I may fasten a spiritual sense
upon it; it may have one meaning in the letter, and another in the spirit: Not
that I mean it in that gross (yet thin, slight) way, some of our late
Allegorists have fancied it, (notionall Divines) that have spun Religion into
so fine a thread, it will not hold the wearing* in practice, slight and light
Cob-web-Laun-Divinity, which as it has much of the art of the Spider, so it
has not a little of the Venom. For the former part of it, that Enoch walked
with God, is wholly spiritual; that is, as the Apostle elsewhere interprets
himself, He walked not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; and why may not
the Romans 8. 1. Cum Jove vivere ^ers. Assumptum (...) ait Basil. Sell. sic alti
de Elijah.
other part be so too? He was not, for God took him; that is, he was not in
himself, but God took him to himself in a sense of grace, as well as glory. He
was not, or he was nothing, but what he was he was in Christ: in the Hebrew it
is (...) and he was not he, very patt to the phrase of the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. I and not I: Ego non sum ego, I am
not I, I am nothing in or of my self.

2. A broken heart is broken not only all to pieces, but even those pieces
annihilated and made nothing, at least to his own eye, in respect of his own
pains and parts, abilityes, and endeavors. He sees himself such a barren soil,
that all the manuring and husbandry of art and nature will make no tilth of
him, bring nothing out of him without Christ, as Christ says, John 15. 5.
Without me ye can do nothing. Such a man has an excellent wit, a stupendous
memory, a most comprehensive judgment; but O if he have nothing of Christ, all
these excellencies are but flowers and ribbands upon a dead Corpse, ut majore
cum pompa descendat ad inferos, that he may go to hell in more state. Christ is
the standard of every man's value: A man is worth just as much and no more, Jo^.
15. 5.
as he has of Jesus Christ: Without me ye can do nothing, without me ye are
nothing. A broken heart is sensible that he wants Christ, not only for the
great work of salvation, but for every particular lesser act of a Christian. He
cannot hear a Sermon without Christ; he cannot read a Chapter without Christ;
he cannot lift up a prayer without Christ. The very expression of lifting up a
prayer speaks weight, and it is such a weight, as the lifting up our hands
cannot lift up alone: And therefore the Apostle says, Romans 8. 26. (...), I
appeal to the learned whether this may not be the sense of (...). Jam. 5. 16.
the Spirit helps our infirmities, but in the Original propriety; the Spirit
joins as it were a shoulder to ours to help to lift up this Heave Offering of
prayer. O the deadness of duties, when men throw themselves only upon the wings
of their own abilities! How are their mouths stopped many times in the middle
of a duty? How narrow, how short do they fall in prayer? What dead Sacrifices
do they offer to the living God? as Mary said to Christ, Lord if thou had
been here my Brother had not died, Joh. 11. 21. So certainly the reason why we
offer such carcasses of duties, is because the Lord is not there. This is that
which makes our wheels move so heavily in any services, because the Spirit is
not in Ezekiel. 1. 20.
the wheels; that good Spirit that raised Jesus Christ from the dead, does not
raise us from dead works, to serving the living God in a living way.

3. A broken heart thinks himself nothing in respect of his own aims and ends.
He is clearly rasa Tabula, white Paper not scribled, and blurred, and blotted
with the business and projects of the world; he is wholly resolved into his
Masters dictates; he bids do and he does it. He has no plots but how he may
best serve Christ, and makes all other ends truckle under that of serving God
in his generation. All other people but those whose hearts God has sweetly and
savingly broken, have ends of their own, and serve themselves upon God, even in
their pretenses of serving him. Jehu will have all the world believe he does
Gods work in destroying the house of Ahab; and that it may be taken notice of,
2 King. 10. 16
he blows a Trumpet before it, Come and see my zeal for the Lord; but all was
but to serve his own ambitious ends: and therefore when God comes to reckon
with him, and pay him his wages, he calls it murder, and revenges blood with
blood, Hos. 1. 4. I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu.
The Pharisees did Gods work indeed, and it was good work, to pray, and to give
alms, etc. but they did one Chair for their Master, and two for themselves;
they served their own base pride and covetousness to be seen of men, and to
devour widows houses: And it is worth our observation, how God proportions
their wages to their works, they serve him with works that are outwardly duties
and inwardly sins; and he pays them with wages that are outwardly rewards, but
judgments within: They have Matthew. 6. 2.
their reward says Christ; but what is that? They pretended my praise, but
intended their own praise, and they have it; they have the honor of man, but
shall never have any of the glory of God. I do not go about to catechize you in
this point. I am much taken off from enquiring into the ends why you came
hither, with the joy to see you here: But yet let me tell you, it were very
good if you did ask your selves that Question which God did Eliah, What do
thou here Eliah? Sure I am upon such an enquiry, a 2 Kings 9 9. Psalm. 39. 8.
broken heart would return an Answer to this Question by another Question, Lord
what are my ends? And give that Question David's Answer, And now what is my
hope, truly my hope is even in thee? So are my ends only in thee; thou art my
Alpha and Omega: my terminus a quo, and my terminus ad quem; my beginning, my
end, and my all: Lord what are the ends of my faith, and prayers, and hearing,
and works of mercy, are they not to honor thee my dear Redeemer! Curse them,
curse them, blast them Lord, if they savor of any interest but that of Jesus
Christ. My own heart is a witness to me, and thou art a witness to my heart,
that I come not with Herod for curiosity, or with the people for loaves, but
for a dear affection, which draws me to thee with a magnetic energy. Thy love
is (...) better then wine, Cant. 5. 1. And as the Spouse there goes on verse. 2.
Because of the savor of thy good ointments, etc. therefore do the Virgins love
thee. Draw me and I will run after thee. That ointment, that oil of gladness
which thou art anointed withal above thy fellows, and that which thou do
anoint thy fellows withal, that is, those that be in fellowship and communion
with thee, it is that that draws me, and I must run after thee. Alas! I am a
dull heavy piece of iron, I have no motion of mine own, but thou art my
loadstone, and my loadstar: I am but a poor inconsiderable Straw, good for
nothing but the fire, but thou art the lovely Jett, that forcest me to leap up
to thee, as the Apostle says, The love of 2 Cor. 5. 14.
Christ constrains me, for of my self I am nothing, and good for nothing.

4. A broken heart is nothing, in respect of his own Comforts and Contentments:
he can take comfort in nothing, till he sees God reach out the mercy to him: he
dares not be his own Carver to snatch at any thing, but waises with patience
and satisfaction, till his Father give it him: so that he may say of all his
enjoyments, as Jacob said of his Venison but more truly, the Lord thy God
brought it to Genesis 27. 20. Genesis 2. 22.
me: he owns no comfort in Wife or Children, health or wealth, or any of those
things that we are apt to call goods, and think mercies, but as he sees they
are from God: As Adam took Eve when God brought her to him: These are the
Children which the Lord has given thy Servant, Genesis 33. O this is the mercy of
a mercy, the comfort of a comfort, the Crown of a broken heart in his saddest
condition; this is that which raises, refreshes, ravishes his soul when he can
see God in a mercy: this is that Elixar of a broken heart, turns all to Gold,
Psalm. 37. 16. A little that a righteous man has, is better than the riches of
many wicked. Many wicked, as if he had said, all the riches of the wealthy
wicked ones in the world, will not amount to such a Sum, nor rise to such an
Income of comfort, nor swell to so vast a Revenue of contentment, as those
little pittances that the Father is pleased to give with his own hands to his
own Children. When God shall convey a blessing to a man through the Covenant of
grace, when it flows in to him through Prayers and Promises, these are the
eldest Sons of mercy that are the heirs of the Promises: Oh there is a
hidden Manna in those mercies that are reached out by the hand of Promise,
reached at by the hand of faith, given by the hand of Providence, and taken by
the hand of Prayer. All my springs are in th^e, says David, Psalm. 87. ult. All
springs, there is their Universality: my springs, there is their Propriety; in
thee, there is their Eternity. All my springs, my springs of Axa, my upper
springs, and my lower springs, my springs of grace, my springs of Peace here:
my springs of joy, my springs of glory above, (...) all those living fountains
of that great depth of Eternity: All my springs are in thee. Carnal hearts have
their muddy ponds, and stinking puddles, out of which they think they can fetch
waters of comfort; but, alas, when they taste them, they prove but waters of
Marah, bitter waters, they come from, and flow into the dead Sea, there are
snares in them, there is death in the Pot: at best, they are but broken
Cisterns (as God calls Jer. 7. 11.
them) that will hold no water; whereas, this broken Jer. 2. 13.
Cistern of Gods making, a broken heart may freely fill himself with that,
which alone can fill, the fountain of living waters. For God as he is the
Father of mercies, so he is the God of all comforts, who only can give comforts
as a God, that is, such 1 Cor 1. 3.
comforts as man cannot give, and such comforts as man cannot take away. All
are miserable comforts and comforters, (as Job says) that are dig'd out of the
Job 16. 2.
Creature: Consolatiunculae Creaturulae, as Luther delights to diminutive it. A
broken heart would taste a great deal of sweetness in that one delicious
promise that flows with milk and honey, wine and oil, marrow and fatness, Esaias
58. 11 And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
drought (it is in droughts in the Original, in the hottest hardest season) and
make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a spring
of water, whose waters fail not, Hebr. whose waters lie not, or deceive not. O
all these lower springs are such, not filling and yet failing, not lasting and
yet lying, deceiving as well as decaying waters. All the life of the toyling
worldling (in the midst of his pleasing dreams and gay hopes that flatter him
with golden Indies as the return of his drudgery) is (if really and rationally,
as well as religiously considered,) but like the sad trade of the poor
Israelites in Egypt, to go up and down to seek straw, to take a great deal of
pains to make up their Bundle, and when they have it, it is but a bundle, and
that bundle is but straw, and that straw but to make Brick, to put an edge upon
their affliction, and with a great deal of wit and labor to add new weights
to that which is but too heavy without it. Methinks the business of the world
is most meltingly emblemd in that passionate expression of the poor Widow to
the Prophet. Behold 1 King. 17. 12.
I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress a little Cake for me and
my son, that we may eat it and dye: take a great deal of pains, to take a
little pleasure, and dye: and many times when a man has made up his bundle,
and resolves to sit down and warm himself and say Aha, (as the Prophet Esa. 44
16.
most rhetorically humors it) when a man thinks to enjoy the sweet of his
labors, to make his gold fusive and malleable, run it and beat it out into the
varied delights of his ownfancy, when he is going to set fire to his bundle,
and pleases himself with the chearing project of pleasing himself and his
friends Acts 28. 3.
with its warmth. How often does it prove like St. Paul's bundle of sticks?
There comes a viper out of it, some sting, some venom, some vexation to poison
and sour his contentments. What do they do that burden their bodies, their
brains, their souls too, to load themselves with thick clay (as the Prophet
Hab. 2. 6.
elegantly) but like men pressed to death, cry more weight still? We run here
and there like the Prophets vagrant, and grudge if we be not satisfied, but we
are not satisfied for all our grudging: We Psalm 59. 15.
knock at the door of every Creature, but one says it is not in me, and the
other say it is not in me: there is nothing within to entertain us and bid us
welcome: Job 28. 14.
Riches, Relations, Learning, Liberty, have nothing in them, any further than
we can see God in them: indeed, to see God in any thing though below stairs is
a beatifical vision, and makes even a Hell a Heaven: which makes me often think
that speech of Luther not so wild, as some would have it, Mallem esse in
Inferno cum Christo, quam in caelis sine Christo. I had rather be in Hell with
Christ, than in Heaven without him: it is the King that makes the Court. This
is Sugar to the most bitter Cup of Affliction. A man may make a meal of sour
herbs with contentment, when he sees God in it as a Passover, when the lintels
and doore-posts Exodus 12. 7.
are sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, when every bit he eat sis dipped in
the blood of Jesus Christ. It is a rare Cordial to a fainting spirit, when he
can see God in his distresses, though but as the Sun in April through a shower
of tears. Nay St Stephen had joy in his death when he saw God and Christ at
Acts 7. 55, 56. 58.
his right hand, though through a shower of stones. There is more in that Text
of David then is ordinarily discovered, Psalm. 4. 7. Lord lift up the light of
thy countenance upon me: Thou have put gladness in my hear^, more then in the
time that their corn and wine increased, that is, not only more then these poor
empty creatures of corn and wine can give; or more then their corn and wine,
that is, more then they can give them whose they are, (though certainly they
are the most refreshing creatures, and they have the highest gust of their
refreshments whose they are, that are their proprieters) not only more then
corn and wine, and their corn and wine, but more then in the time of their corn
and wine, that is, the Harvest and the Vintage, the merriest seasons of all the
year. Thus David preferres his joy he had in God, as he did Jerusalem, Psalm.
137. 6. Above my chief joy, (...) Above the head of my joy. This sight of God
in any condition is the top and pinnacle of all joy, for this supplies what a
man has not, and sweetens what he has. This was that which sweetened Genesis 28. 13.
Jacobs dream, and softened his hard pillow, that besides the Angels he saw
ascending and descending upon his ladder, the Lord God stood above. Thus have I
gathered up the fragments of the first piece the heart is broken into, in
showing you all those low thoughts it has of it self.

It is now high time to come to the

2. His high thoughts of God. This piece of a broken heart is so great that it
may be broken into many more; but I will only name five, and I will little more
then only name them. 1. Submission to the will of God. 2. Sorrow for sinning
against the will of God. 3. Shame, as the proper issue of that sorrow. 4. Fear
that he may sin against him again. 5. Prayer that he may not.

1. Submission to the will of God. The broken heart lies at the foot of Gods
will, to do, to be any thing, nothing. A broken heart is a heart after Gods
heart, that is, is ready to fulfill all Gods will, as God characters his
servant David, Act. 13. 22. A man after mine own heart, that shall fulfill all
my will; it is wills in the Original, (...) all my wills. A broken heart is a
heart broken to, (as well as by) Gods hands, to do what he will, to suffer what
he will. Like his great pattern and principle of obedience Jesus Christ, he
first sacrifices his will, and then all he has and is to the will of God; not
as I will, but as thou will. He cries, The will of the Lord be done, though I
be undone.

1. He does what God will have him do, though he dye for it. It is not
necessary that I should live, says he, but it is necessary that God should be
obeyed; and therefore he willingly takes the yoke of Christ upon him. Thy will
is my sanctification, says the broken heart, and that is it I would will too;
that is it I would be at rather then my life, a life of grace rather then a
life of nature; I would fain be holy, and live up to the standard of thy Word;
I see a great deal of beauty in holiness, and though there be a great deal of
weakness in me as to the attaining of it, yet there is a great deal of
willingness in me as to the embracing it. Thy people shall be willing in the
day of thy power, Psalm. 110. 3. (...) Populus voluntatum says Vatablus; but
why not Voluntates? they shall be all wills, for all thou will, as Psalm. 109.
4. But I give my self unto prayer; it is Heb. (...) But I am prayer, I am all
prayer for them, I only or always pray for them, that only or always prey
upon me. So for (...) Thy people are all wills, that is, all resolved into thy
will, or resolved into all thy wills, they are delivered up to the will of God.
So Romans 6. 17. Ye have received from the heart, the broken heart, that form of
doctrine which was delivered to you, or rather to which ye were delivered,
(...), their hard hearts were melted into the will of God, for this is in the
day of thy power, that is, when thou have powerfully broken their hearts. This
posture you see St Paul in, Act. 9. 6, When the Lord had unhorsed him, and he
lay upon the earth trembling, astonished, and blind, he cries Acts 9. 6.
out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? As David says, Adhaeret pavimento
anima mea, Psalm. 119. So his soul cleaved to the dust, as well as his body; he
lay grovelling in the dust of his own broken heart, as well as that of the
earth; his heart was utterly broken from his own will, wholly into the will of
God; he lies at the foot of Gods will for orders, and when he gives the word,
he obeys. A broken heart is like the Centurions servant, when his Master says,
go, he goes; and come, he comes; do this, and he does it. This is exampled in
Abraham, if God call him out of his native Country, and his Fathers house, nay
out of his own Fathership, and bid him sacrifice the name and nature of a
Father, in sacrificing his son, his only son, he disputes not, but stat pro
ratione voluntas. His Masters will is his law; and therefore it is said, Esa.
41. 2. He raised up the righteous man from the East, called him to his foot.
That which is Heb. (...) righteousness, we translate the righteous man; and
justly, because meant of Abraham, as the Caldee Paraphrase cleares it, (...),
Abraham the choice and famous man for righteousness. And it alludes to that of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. All his Saints are in thy hand, and they sit down at thy
feet, every one shall receive of thy words (that is) are at thy feet in posture
of servants and scholars, that hear, to learn, and obey: so obedient Abraham
follows his master step by step wheresoever he goes, as the Poet, (...).

2. The broken heart lies at the foot of Gods will, to suffer as well as to
do, what he will: he can die for, as well as do, and live to the will of God
whether he please to delay or deny the good he has not, or take away the good
he has: when a man's heart is broken from the world, he is not sollicitous for
any of the concerns of the world. I am crucified to the world and the world to
me says St Paul. And do you think a man that is crucified or broken upon the
wheel, or rack, will care much, what his Clothes, or diet, or room is. The
broken heart is at a point for all outward things, he is content with any
thing, because he is nothing. I have larned says St Paul in whatsoever estate
I am, therewith to be content: I know how to be abased, and how to abound,
Phil. 4. 11. I have quieted my self as a child that is weaned from his mother,
my soul is even as a weaned child, Psalm. 131. 3. I do not lament for the
teates, for the pleasant fields, or fruitful vines, Esa. 32. 12. I was a
froward child indeed, and cried for all the fine things I saw; but now I am
broken from all these things, weaned from the gay nothings that please the
children of the world. I am brought up by hand; what my dear Father gives me,
that I take thankfully. I eat and am satisfied, and praise the Name of the
Lord. The great heartbreaking of the men of the world is, that they have not
so great a share in the world as others; Vicinumque pecus grandius uber habet.
Whereas the truly brokenhearted regards not what the world is to him, or he is
in the world. O says the broken heart, the very brokenness of my heart makes
my heart whole! It Is true I am very poor, my house poor, my fare poor, my all
is poor; but this does not break my heart, because my heart is broke for better
things. My heart is broken by God, and for God; the clefts of my broken heart,
hiatus cordis, the desires of my heart are gaping after him. Though I be poor,
I court not the God of riches, but I gasp after the riches of God. I am rich
even in my poverty, because I have a rich God, and if he give me no more, yet
that I have is more then he owes me of debt, and more then I can pay him for in
duty. When pride is never contented, his house, his clothes, his diet are
never good enough, because his heart is not broken. He that is full of his own
brokenness, is broken from the worlds fullness, like his Master Christ,
exinanivit seipsum; he is full of nothing but his own emptiness, and therefore
sees nothing but emptiness in the worlds fullness. He sees all is vanity, and
that truly the whole world is but a great nothing; these outward things are all
but phantasms, they have no real being in themselves, but are only what we
creat them in our fancyes: besides meat and drink and clothes, all the rest
is merely opinion. As the Preacher says Eccl. 5. 11. when goods increase, they
are increased that eat them: and what good is there to the owners thereof,
saving the beholding of them with their eyes? Laden dishes, swelling bowls,
gay clothes, great houses, vast rents numerous Retinue, are nothing but what
the worlds Gen 33. 9^ 11^
flattery, and our own fancy creates them; the Spirit of God calls them no
more: for when King Agrippa, Bernice, and Festus came in great state to hear
St. Paul, Act. 25. 23. When Agrippa was come and Bernice with great pomp; it is
in the Greek (...), with a great deal of fancy: so true is that Arabic
Proverb, (...) the world is not in the muches, but in the enoughs. Fortuna
multis ^imium dedit, nulli satis: Many think they have never enough, though
they have never so much. And therefore it is very observable how those two
Brothers Jacob and Esau differ in their expressions in the Heb. when they seem
to pass the same complement in our Translation. Esau refuses Jacobs present,
because says he, I have enough my Brother; and Jacob presses it upon the same
terms, Take I pray thee my blessing, etc. because I have enough: But Esau
says (...) I have much, but Jacobs is (...), I have all. Esau had much because
he had a great deal,; but Jacob had all because he had enough; which all had
not been enough neither, but that God was his all, and that all makes not only
much, but enough of nothing; and if God will give him nothing, or take away
that little, 1 Samuel 3. 18. 2 Samuel 15. 26. Esa. 3. Job 1. 21.
more than nothing, he has given him, as he gave all, so if he take away al
from him; It is the Lord, says Eli. It is the Lord, says David, let him do
what seems good unto him. God forbid that should seem ill to me that seems
good to God Good is the word of the Lord, says Hezekiah; The Lord gives and
the Lord takes away, says Job, blessed be the name of the Lord. He gives
thanks when God takes, as well as gives, when the Lord comes with a voiding
knife and takes away his meat, as well a when he lays his cloth, and
furnishes his table, because his Grace is in his meal. Thus you have seen the
first high thoughts of God the Heart is broken into, expressed in his humble
submission to the will of God, in being willing to do and and suffer his will.

There remain four other perticulars in which a broken heart speaks loudly his
high thoughts of God, as 1 Sorrow for sinning against him. 2 Shame as well as
sorrow. 3 Fear least he may sin again. And 4 Prayer that he may not. But this
though a noble part of our frait to lighten our vessel and shorten our voyage,
I was content should be swallowed in the quick sands of the hourglasse; and I
will not weigh them up again for your eyes that were drowned to your ears: but
rather tack about to the next point, which is the,

2 Thing: How a man may judge whether his heart were ever thoroughly broken and
truly contrite: and I shall give you Four short Rules for this.

1 Philosophers say Durum non cedit, and durum non sentit. Hard things yield
not, feell not; therefore hardness of heart and contempt of Gods word and
commandment are linked together as a chainebullet, to be prayed against in that
excellent piece of our Leiturgy the Letany. I shall therefore lay it down as a
clear symptom of a broken heart, when it is sensible of its own hardness:
when it sighs and weeps, and bleeds over it, and prays against it, Ut amplius
no^ indurescat cor nostrum, sed cedat tibi, etc. Forer.
as they, Es. 63. 17, O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways and
hardened our hearts from thy fear? return for thy servants sake. O there is
nothing speaks a broken heart more emphatically, than a sense of, and sorrow
for its own hardness; as Divines say of the sin against the holy Ghost, that
when a man is afraid he has committed it, and grieves for it, it is a sign he
has not committed it; so when a man complains of a hard heart it is a blessed
symptom his heart is not hard. St Chrysostom has a passage to this purpose, of
a friend of his that came crying and bellowing to him beseeching him to help
to break his hard heart. O says the good Father the work is done; thou
could never desire to have thy heart broken if it were not broken already.
Therefore if you would know whether your heart be broken, ask your selves this
question, whether you desire to have it broken, from a sense of, and sorrow
for, its hardness. Sorrow is the great heart breaker under God whose hammer it
is to break this stone, and therefore sorrow that thy heart is not broken is a
sign thy heart is broken: it is a sign that God has struck the the Rock when
the water gushes out: the weeping of the marble is a degree of softening, at
the least a prophesy of and a preparation to its crumbleing.

2. Catechize your soul with this Interrogatory, Whether you prize a broken
heart or no? He that never truly valued a broken heart, never desired a broken
heart, and he that never desired a broken heart, never had a broken heart.
There are two sorts of hearts that God chiefly prizes, the upright heart, and
the contrite heart, and these are inseparable, for that heart can never be
upright, that never was contrite: and therefore St. Bernard says, I am daily a
troublesome Question to my self.

3. He that has a broken heart, his heart has Joel 2. 12. Jer. 4. 3.
been active in, and to its own breaking. Rent your hearts and not your
garments, do you rent them your selves. Plough up your fallow ground, and sow
not among thorns, do you your selves plough them up. You are not to stay in an
idle expectation that God would break your hearts for you. The drunkard must
not stay at his Cups till his Wine inflame him, squander away his precious
hours, (which must one day be sadly accounted for) dishonor God, abuse his
mercies, and (perhaps) wretchedly guzle down his Childrens bread, and his Wives
tears, and think that God should pluck the Pot from his nose, and drag him out
by the ears, break the knot of good fellows that so ties him to his
debaucheries, that he may break his heart whether he will or no. The unclean
person must not think that God should come (...), and snatch him from his
Dalilahs lap to Abraham's bosom, and say he stays but till God will break his
heart, but he must pray and grieve and strive and avoid all occasions, or else
he does like the Sea this and more in Dr. Heyl^ng. Hist. Quinquart.
Lantgrave of Turing, of whom Heistibachius tells us, that being warnd of his
lewd and loose life, and the sadness of his condition, if he should dye in his
sins, that he made this wretched answer: Si praedestinatus sum nulla peccata
poterunt regnum Caelorum auferre, si praescitus, nulla opera mihi illud
valebunt auferre: if I be elected, no sins can hinder me from Heaven, if I be
reprobated no services can help me to it: therefore you must be active in
breaking your own hearts your own selves.



viz. the hatefulness of sin, the deceitfulness of sin, the deceitfulness of
your own hearts, the dreadfulness of wrath, the goodness of God that leads to
repentance, and the severity of God, if thou repent not, But after thy
hardness and impenitent Romans 2. 4, 5.
heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath. Set the
hammer of the word to this stone, and see if that cannot break it. Apply the
Blood of Christ warm by faith, and see if that cannot break this Adamant. Let
the love of Christ break it, as we do flints upon a pillow. I know there is
another way of breaking and melting the heart which God often uses, but it is
commonly when nothing else will. But he that deserves and desires it, let him
have it. They say indeed, that fire will make flints run. But o it is a shame
for us, that wear the name of Christ in such large Phylacteries of a loud
Profession, should be overgrown with such a hardness, as not to be made fusile
and ductile, malleable at least, fit to take the impression of Gods stamp and
image, we have defaced, without so intense a heat as a fiery Furnace.

4. Whosoever's heart is broken, nothing will satisfy Matthew. 4.
him but pardoning mercy. Give him the Devils offer to Christ, the world and
all the glory of it. All the splendour and grandeur, the pomp, peace, plenty and
pleasure the whole world can afford in all outward Accommodations, are all
empty Ciphers, insignificant nothings to him, till he sees God shine upon him
in the face of Jesus Christ. O nothing can bind up the wound of a broken
heart, but a sight of God reconciled in Jesus Christ. God has pardoned me,
Christ is mine, Heaven is mine: this alone will do the work, and nothing till
this: of other mercies, till this, and without this he cries with Tertullian,
Suspectam habeo hanc Dei indulgentiam, these are suspicious mercies I will have
none of them; and with St. Bernard, Misericordiam hanc nolo Domine: and as the
Tradition goes of Thomas Aquinas, Been de me scripsisti Thoma, quam ergo
mercedem accipies? Nullam Domine praeter teipsam. Thomas thou have written well
of me, what reward will thou have? None but thy self Lord. Look upon a broken
heart on his deathbed, when his body is breaking into dust. O the end of that
man is peace, see him Psalm 37. 37.
entering upon the confines of eternity, with what patience, with what peace,
with what pleasure, can he see the glory and beauty of the world melt and
moulder away? he can (...), relations, liberty nay life it self slide from him
with no more disturbance, and with more comfort and contentment, than
Passengers in a Boat upon the Thames, see the great City, and the fair houses
glide from them, when their business is at Whitehall and Westminster, the City
and Court of the great King: His soul is landed in Heaven already. It was
rarely spoken by that old Soldier of Henry the 4th of France, who having
received his deaths wound in one of his many battles, when he was above 80.
years old, and his friends coming about him to condole and comfort him against
the fear of death, what says he, have I lived above fourscore years, and do
you think I do not know how to die a quarter of an hour? he can die any day,
every day, 2 Cor. 25. 31.
that dies daily: his heart will never be broken for leaving the world at his
death, whose heart has bin broken in leaving the world in his life.

3. I have nothing to do now, but only to give you two words.

1. To quicken you to get your hearts broken, if they be not.

2. To caution you that you be sure they are broken.

1. That you would get your hearts broken if they be not: and that for two
short Reasons.

1. Is from the Text, that this is the only sacrifice that God will not
despise, this he ownes and loves above all others, at least, all others for and
in this: All sacrifices and services without this, are but broken sacrifices,
broken services: A sacrifice without a heart was a Prodigy, and without a
broken heart is a Profanation: that which break^^^ makes us: Vulnus opem tulit:
our wounds blee^ ^^^am.

2. A broken and contrite heart gives you a key into Gods presence chamber; you
have a Patent for it under Gods hand and seal: will you see the Charter? Esaias
57. 15. Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabits eternity, whose name is
holy: I dwell in the high and the holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the pir it of the humble, and to revive
the spirit of the contrite ones: Here is oil of Gladness indeed, but it is a
broken vessel that must receive it, a broken and humble heart.

2. To caution, as well as quicken you, that you give not over the work till
you be sure your hearts are broken: I shall hint four Reasons.

1. Because your hearts are deceitful, and apt to put a cheat upon you,
especially in this duty, this irksome duty, of searching your own hearts, to be
satisfied that they are really broken: you had need call a Parliament, a great
Council of all the facultys in the polity of man together, for this scrutiny;
and be assured thou shall find thy heart as full of tricks and juggles to keep
thee off from calling this Council, as the Church of Rome put upon the
Christian Princes of that age, about calling that council which proved the
Council of Tre^t. It was a good time before his holiness would be preswaded the
Church or Court of Rome needed reformation there was omnia been: Therefore a
Council would be as needless as physic to a sound body: but at last to stopp
the mouth of the loud clamours of the world, a council is yielded to: but the
time and place kept them in many years debate, to while out the time till they
hoped their zeal might cool: but at length called it was, but what was the
Issue of it? why that council that was designed for a scourge of the Church
and Court of Rome proved a successful engine of its advnacement: such is
commonly the result of such great and tumultous assemblies, as they are managed
by parts and parties, So their ordinary product are the dictates of wit, and
power; for the most part, to the raising of the worst, if not to the ruin of
all, as we have but too lately seen: but to apply it to our purpose. Thou
would feign bring thy heart to the test to try whether it be that broken and
mortified humble thing it pretends to. Never expect to find it willing to stand
the trial. What to be cut and cauterized, to be prob'd and tented, to run
through the macerations and martrizations of a thorough examination? It will
never endure it, when it comes to the push, it will give thee the slip if thou
do not look to it: it will use all the petty arts imaginable to keep it
self from gaging and garbling: it will tell thee thy heart is a good heart if
you can let it alone; there is many a worse heart that passes for a better; is
any man but you so nice and scrupulous, and so cruel to his own flesh (which
he should love and cherish) as to rake and grable Ephesians 5.
in his own heart, and to seek that in it, which thou would be sorry to
find, and if thou do not find it, thou will be as sorry thou have searched
it? come let it alone, man thy heart is as good a heart as others are; but
suppose all this fine deluding Rhetoric will not do, thou see a necessity
of searching thy heart to the quick; and art resolved to set upon the work: see
if the Devil and thine own heart have not some trick in lavender, to divert thy
most serious intentions with some plausible pretenses or other, as sickness,
business, company ( Pol me occidistis amici, is too often true in this case of
breaking the heart) from breaking the heart. But to make short work with it, as
thou must do, if thou will make any work at all: If God at last smite thee by
his word or sword, that thou beginst to reflect upon thy self, and say, sure I
am not in the way to Heaven, that straight and narrow way? I am not so strict
as I should be for all my heart flatters me thus. And therefore nothing shall
keep me from searching. Then look for the grandest cheat of all: then have a
care thy treacherous heart do not make thee believe, that every little qualm
of conscience is a heartbreaking, every slight touch at a Sermon, every
heart-ach for any affliction thou fear or feel; and when all is done,
have a care that thy heart does not out-wit thee at last, and that that means,
which thou usest as the most proper expedient to break thy heart, do not
harden it more. O thou do not know thine own heart man! It is a cunning and a
cosening piece of flesh; you have a strange example of this if you need any) in
Hazael, 2 Kin. 11. 12. 13. Elisha looked upon him steadfastly till he was
ashamede: and the man of God wept. and Hazael said, why weeps my Lord? and he
answered, because I know the evils that thou shall do unto the Children of
Israel. And when he had told him all his cruelties, he should be guilty of;
What says Hazael, Is thy servant a dog? He would not believe his heart was so
base, and yet the man that was so much ashamed that the Prophet should think so
ill of him, was not ashamed to be as ill as he thought, and do as bad as he
said. A man would have thought, that that tincture of grace, that dye of shame,
that ingenuous blush which the Prophets eye had cast upon him, had been the
life-bloud of his broken heart that leaped into his face to write his innocence
in a dominicall character, that seasonable sally of modesty, a man would have
thought had been virtues colors: but for all this he was so far from a
bleeding heart, that he had a bloody heart: a deceitful heart lead him aside:
he could not fathom the depth Esaias 44. 20.
of his own heart: The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17. 9. The word which we read,
deceitful, is (...), from whence Jacob is derived, that (you know) signifies
supplanter, and it has two very eminent senses in Scripture.

1. It signifies crooked, Es. 40. 4. The crooked shall be made straight (...):
Your hearts are crooked hearts, serpentine, winding hearts, the crooked
serpent, you know not where to have them. The way to heaven is too narrow; the
gate to life too straight, for such reeling, riddling, crooked pieces.

2. It signifies treacherous Jos. 8. 13. (...) Liers in wait. Your hearts are
treacherous hearts and lie in wait to deceive you: your hearts are jugglers,
can cast a mist before you, and make you think they are broken when they are
utterly broke for want of breaking: an ordinary legerdemaine and deceptio
visus, look to it: O it is an unworthy thing for a man to be deceived, but more
to be deceived by himself, by his own heart, but most of all; to be deceived by
himself in so near a concern as the breaking his own heart.

2. Remember that God (whose eye is in your heart and that is (...)) sees what
course you take to break your hearts: your hearts (as false as they are) cannot
cheat him: if you do not pass a right judgment upon your hearts, but burn
them with a cold Iron, pronounce them broken when they are not broken, God will
reverse your judgment, repeal your sentence, and break you because you are not
broken.

3. If you be deceived in this point of heartbreaking, you will never thrive
in the great work of Christianity: if you judge not aright of your humiliation,
you will be mistaken in the whole work of your sanctification; I was about to
say, of your salvation, I will say of your satisfaction. This is the
fundamental work of grace: and it is in grace, as it is in nature, an error in
the first concoction is not mended in the second,

4. If you be deceived in this you are deceived for eternity: the foolish
virgins were so deceived, and so eternally excluded. I am ^ure that would be a
great heartbreaking to you to see others in the Kingdom of Heaven and your
selves thrust out. And therefore be sure, you use all the ways to break your
hearts, and be sure, you use all the ways to be sure they are broken, that they
may be broken so, as that you may go in with the Bridegroom, and not broken
because you cannot go in with the Bridegroom: but see others go in and your
selves kept out. Let us pray therefore to the heart-maker, and to the
heart-searcher, who is the great heart-breaker that he would give us broken
Spirits and contrite hearts, that he would make them such Sacrifices as he will
not despise. Be it so Lord. Amen Amen.

FINIS.

