The bloody BATTLE AT Preston in Lancashire BETWEEN His Majesty's Forces
commanded by Duke Hamilton, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and the Parliaments
forces commanded by Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Major General Lambert.

With the particulars of the Fight, the total routing of the Scots Generals
Army, and their killing of 700. upon the place, and ^aking of 1100. horse, ^7.
Colors, 20. Pieces of Ordn^^ce, and all their Arms and Ammuni^ion.

Likewise, the Resolution of the Scottish Army, touching Lieu^enant General
Cromwell, and both Houses of Parliament, and the present proceedings concerning
the King^ Majesty, Together with a Message from His Highness the Prince of
Wales, to the Lord Genesis Fairfax. And his Excellencies Answer thereunto.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

A perfect RELATION OF A great victory in the North, obtained by the Forces
commanded by Lieu^enan^ General Cromwell, and Major General Lambert, against
the Scottish Forces command by Duke Hamilton, as it was certified thence by
Letter.
SIR,
WE in these parts have suffered much by the late incursion of the Scots,
they plundering and taking away from us, all what they saw good, paying neither
Royallist nor Presbyterian; and if any that had acted much in their behalf, in
rai^ing either men, money, or been any other way their favorite, had informed
the Scottish Comman^ers, of what service they had done in their behalf, and
desi^^ng that they might be freed from plunder, and such other ^nconveniencies,
all the answer they could have, was thi^, that they conceived the best way was,
for them to convey away their goods, that it might not be a temptation to the
Soldiers; for they could not restrain them from such extravagancies: so you
may see that whether we be for them, or against them, their friends, or their
enemies, all shall speed alike; and it their friends have no better assurance
to keep their goods, but the hiding them away, they have no greater privilege
for security then their enemies: then with what heart can any act for them? And
besides their plundering of us, they lie upon free quarter, none paying for
what they received, and to augment our burdens so many were quartered upon us,
that we by that time the Soul^iers were satisfied, had not sufficient bread to
put in ou^ mouths, and when they removed their quarter^, it was because that we
had no provision left to su(...) them, and sometimes when they have removed,
they ha^^ (...) so b(...) f^r want of provision, that we have endured much
hunger, before we could get any thing to relieve our wa^^, and if that were too
little, they laid great taxes upon many of us, and compelled us to pay it, and
on all the chiefest of us they laid Se^les for man and horse, every man worth
20, or above 20 pounds by the year, was to set forth a horse and man completely
armed, and furnished for the War, so that by these means, a great part of
Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, and a part of Lancashire are much
impoverished thereby.

But now we are in great hope, that this black Northern storm will in some time
be blown, and it beginning to clear clear already by, means of a great Victory
obtained by Lieut. Genesis Cromwell, Major Genesis Lambert against the forces
commanded by Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Calender and others, though they were
unwilling to fight, and took more pleasure in plundering, and free quarter,
then in martial affairs, as should become Soldiers, yet they were at last
compelled to fight (as you shall here anon) or else for ought I know, they must
have starved in their quarters, beginning to rise and oppose them in what parts
soever they came, but of this enough, the manner of the Fight was thus. Lieut.
Genesis Cromwell, having left 2 Regiments of Horse and Foot to secure and block
the castle of Scarborough and Pomfract, (and understanding that the Scots had
entered Lancashire, and began to seek fresh quarter, he took with him the new
raised forces of Northampton shire, Leichestershire and Yorkshire, and so
joined with Maj. Genesis Lambert, and their forces being united, they marched in a
body toward the Scottish quarters, and sent out parties to rouse the
straggling, plundering Scots, and force them from their Head quarters. The
Scottish Straglers cared little for fighting, but still made way before our
forces, and gathered toward their Head quarters.

Our Forces thus chasing them, gave a strong alarm to the whole Scottish Army,
who when they saw there was no remedy, began to make preparation for a sudden
engagement. Our forces very resolutely marched toward them, with an intent to
fight them, or force them to a retreat

The Scottish Forces perceiving the gallant resolution and intention of our
soldiers, and seeing they were necessitated to a present engagement, seemed
very willing and desirous to try one bout before they returned; wherefore they
immediately drew all their forces, both foot and horse into Batalia, and made
choice of their ground near a Town in Lancashire, called Preston, some 12 miles
from the City of Lancaster; where finding a commodious piece of ground for
their purpose, both Armies prepared for the Fight, and drew their Armiesn to
two bodies. upon Barbers Moor,

The Scots being first deawne up, got the wind and the most advantagiou^
ground; but yet our Forces would not be discouraged, but resolved to fight,
though with some disadvantage, both Armies faced each other, we being about 12
or 13 thousand, and the Scots above 20 thousand; parties were drawn out on both
sides, who met together and fought, in the mean time both Armies prepared
themselves for a charge, and our party overcame the Scots parties, this put us
in some hopes of victory, we receiving it for a good Omen: then fresh parties
were drawn out, and fought again, and at the last the whole bodies drew up to
the charge, both parties at the first engaged courageously, and after some
dispute, our Infantry being the left Wing, was like to have been worsted, and
being overpowred by their numbers, were forced to give ground a little, but yet
maintained it with great courage.

While this dispute lasted, our right Wing worsted the Scots, and quite
defeated their Cavalry, for after the Scottish horse had stood to it a charge
or two, and finding such not service, began to retreat, our horse followed
them, and with their shot so galled them, that they forced them to run, our
forces persued them as far as they could, and not be endangered by the
^cottish foot. In this persuit many were slain, and diverse taken prisoners.
Then our horse retreated, and came in very good time to relieve our left Wing,
which was in great danger of being defeated; when they came, they found them to
have lost some of their ground, but by the coming in of our horse they were
much comforted and encouraged, they having endured two hours of very hot
service, the Canons playing often on both sides; then our horse began to charge
the Scottish Infantry, who began to be greatly disheartened by seeing their
Chavalry thus defeated, and a great part of our Chavalry coming in to assist
our left Wing, they charged the Scots again and recovered their lost ground;
and udon the second charge the Scots retreated, and were put to a confused
flight, our forces persued them till the nghr parted them, and had the pillage
of the field.

In this fight we took eighteen hundred prisoners, many of them being men of
note, in the next I shall give you a List of the particulars. In the persuit we
likewise rescued all the prisoners they had taken, at the beginning of the
fight, and slew 700* of them in the place, wounded many, Duke Hamilton himself
narrowly escaping. We took 1100 Horse, 47 Colors, 10 pieces of Ordnance, most
of their Cariages and Ammunition, and above four thousand Arms. The Scottish
horse are fled toward Scotland, but Lieutenant General Cromwell has sent a
partee of horse (if it be possible) to get before them and stop them. With the
next I shall give you a more particular Relation, take this for the peesent,
from

Your assured Friend, J. Walton.
Aug. 20. 1648.
A Copy of Prince Charles his Letter, to the Lord General Fairfax.
My Lord,
Being informed that some rigorous cause is intended against M. G. Laughorn,
C. Powell, C. Poyer, and others now prisoners of war, for things done under the
authority of my commission, I think fit to let you know, that I cannot but be
extremely sensible of such proceedings, as well in regard of the persons, and
of my own honor, which I take to be highly concerned in their preservation,
as also because thereby a necessity will be put upon me of proceeding with
such as shall fall into my hands in a way very contrary to my nature, and as
far from my intentions, unless I be necessitated thereunto by your rigor to
those Gentlemen, I desire therefore that by your care and seasonable
interposition, such moderation may be used toward them, as becomes Soldiers to
one another, and as I conceive to be due to them, which will be an engagement
to me to pursue my inclination toward those that shall be in my power, and so I
remain.

Your loving Friend,
Aug. 14. 1648.
His Excellencies answer.
May it please your Highness,
I Have acquainted the Houses with your Highnesses Letter concerning M. G.
Laughorn and the rest, it being not in my power to act further, the Parliament
having ordered in what way they shall be proceeded against, not so much that
they were in hostility against them (I suppose) as that they have betrayed the
trust reposed in them to the sad engaging this Nation in a second War and
bloody; so it is not in my power to interpose their justice; but that all
obstacles of a just and firm peace may be removed, shall be the earnste prayer
of

Your Highness most humble servant. FAIRFAX,
14 Aug. 1648.
FINIS.

