The Grand, CONVENTION FOR ENGLANDS Summum Bounm.

As it was held by the Loyal Cavaliers, and the Phanatick Heretics.

WHEREIN Is proved that there can be no Peace nor Settlement till the
restoration of CHARLES the Second to his Crown and Dignities.

By Samuel Wall, Clerk.

2 Chronicles. 23. 11. Then they brought out the Kings Son, and put upon him the
Crown, and gave him the Testimony, [ that is, They put upon him his Royal
Apparrell] and made him KING, and said, GOD save the KING.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

The Grand Convention, etc.
BEing met at the place appointed, Mr. Speaker (avery indifferent and unbyassed
man) arose from his Seat, and delivered himself, as follows;

Gentlemen, Gilead into every sick soul, then may we bind up the broken and
shattered joints of our pre-distracted Bodypolitique.

Gentleman, whatsoever men may produce as Arguments either in the maintenance
or defense of this or tho 'ther, in plain terms, the Nation is in as sad a
plight as ever was any in the world; the Church is run into Hetesies, the State
into Factious parties, the Military and Civil have scarcely patience to hold
their finger each off the other, Trading is quite decayed, the poor Nation
subjected to a servile yoke, great oppressions imposed upon her shoulders,
Taxes, Tallage, unreasonable Customs, Excise, high and heavy Imposts, and
other great Grievances, which to speak indifferently, is a providentiall
Miracle, how the poor Nation is able to do such things. Therefore, as here we
represent the face of the Public, it behooves us, like Servants, to improve
the Talents they have entrusted us withal, to the best advantage of our
mouldering Nation; then if we do good and healing Acts, shall after Ages have
cause to bless and remember us in the midst of all their mirth and jollity:
Above all things let us pray for the concurrence and divine assistance of our
heavenly King, that we may do such things as may redound to his Glory, and
both our terrestrial and eternal Comforts; therefore, first of all, I am
commanded to put this to the Vote, Whether the altering of our Government from
Monarchy to a Commonwealth, has not caused all the miseries that we have
suffered under to fad upon us; and whether there is or may be any hopes of
Peace, Settlement, or the bealing of our national breaches, till we fear God
and the King? And therefore call home our lawful King from banishment.


Phanaticks. Mr. Speaker, your Proposition is so illegal, conttary to our
great and glorious cause, that we judge it altogether undeserving a Vote, for
that we have passed it with the Negative already; therefore pray let us proceed
to matters of greater importance, viz. to the preventing the common Enemy and
his Adherents, the continuing Liberty of Conscience to the godly and wel-gifted
Christians, the pulling down the Temples of Idols, the raising of Assesments to
encourage our faithful Army, who have been nigh unto us upon all imergencies;
for if once they forsake us, we are all undone for ever.


Loyal Cavaliers. Nay but Gentlemen hold a little, you drive too furiously, we
are not here Assembled to comply with your idle and wicked humors, but to
build up the walls of our Jerusalem: you say Mr. Speakers Proposition has past
with a Negative; but under favor not with our negative; for we do here jointly
and severally affirm, That the Murder of our KING, contrary to the command God
has given us by his Scriptures, Job 34. 18. both by the National Laws,
Statutes, and Common Laws of our Kingdom, as the damnablest Treason ever
Subjects committed; and that his innocent blood has mounted up and cried
loudly for vengeance on this Nation: from that fatal night has sprung all our
miseries; and therefore has God made us a confused Babell. If right reason
will be heard by you, we will convince you that way; You have had Eleven years to
settle your Commonwealth, as you pretend, a very fair time one would think to
have settled a Nation in; and I pray have not you done it upon a firm Basis: O
how Plenty and Peace flourishes! how bravely have you reformed all things! No
Gentlemen, if your meaning was lawful, reasonable, conscionable or honest, you
would not have any of this Bugbear army to terrify and oppress poor England,
as it has done, and must of necessity do, till Nations be no more, if so long
you can fool the people with your Utopian Fangle.

We do affirm Mr. Speakers Proposition, the Fundamental of this Convention, and
the Querie (Whether) to be certo; ergo, no Peace in our Kingdom, till our now
Noble King and lawful Sovereign Lord, as Suprem Monarch, swaies the Scepter;
and that this Change in our Government be utterly abolished.


Phan. Gentlemen, it is in vain for us to put any thing tending to either the
preservation or detriment of our Interest to the Vote; for to be sure you
Cavaliers will out Vote us, although you work by no other reason then the Major
controuls the Minor.


Caval. You are much mistaken in us, we desire to be ruled by Reason,
Conscience, both to God and Man, the good of our own souls and others, that we
may do such things as may be to the glory and honor of God, and the
Advancement of the Gospel of Christ; otherwise, King should be no more to us
then the poorest of beggars: What we Vote, we shall not fear to refer to the
Arbitration of honest and non-self-interessed men, and shall abide their
Determination without grumbling.


Phan. Gentlemen, tell not us of Conscience, the Honor and Glory of God, and
these trifles, we will have a Commonwealth; and if you will not Vote with us,
by fair means, but thus turn ours back again with the Negative, we will
over-vote you by foul means, and immediately send for our Army, either to
cudgel you into better manners, or else to garble you as the putrefactory
entrails of the Famous Parliament of the Commonwealth of Antipodes. What
Gentlemen, do you think that it can stand with our liking to let him in amongst
us, whose Father we have disenthronized, and him dis-inherited by the breach of
so many Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Engagements, Declarations, Solemn League
and Covenant, Remonstrance, Allegiance that have paved and cemented our way to
Honor and Preferment, with so much blood and perjury; pray excuse us
Gentlemen, You may well allow us to take a little comfort of our Labors; for
assure your selves they will cost us full dear before we have paid for them:
It Is time enough to rechange your Government, when we shall have left the
Stern, summoned by the stigian Charon to Embark for Gehenna.


Caval. Then to maintain your wicked Grandeur, the whole Nation it seems must
suffer a perpetual yoke of Tyranny and Oppression, be persecuted and pinched
both in their spiritual and earthly lives and conversations, in their estates
and subsistances; nay above all, we must, contrary to the light of knowledge
and express Word of God, be enforced to despise the Throne of our lawful King,
the ancient and always Government of the Antipodes, and that the best above
all others, to cry, Hail, Hail unto you.


Phan. Tell not us of your ancient Governments, the sad condition of the Nation,
Law, Equity, Gospel; for we have won it and we will wear it: therefore
Gentlemen, it behooves you, without further Disputes to pass such things ith
House as we shall Vote, if you respect your own lives and peace, complie with
us, and let us go on vigorously; for the Soldiery are even ready to mutiny
for their pay.


Caval. We thought what Saints you were; you cry, Money money, but where will
you have it? the poor Subject he is brought so low, that it pusles the most
ingenuous amongst us now a days to get bread to feed their poor perishing
Families the Merchant dares not stir the tradesman blows his nails and rubs
his heels, trading with him is fallen into such a benumbed Lethargy, and the
Farmer and Rural Peasants may even go shoe the Goose for money to pay you.
What are you become Egyptian Taskmasters? you will have the sul Tale of Bricks
from them, but not a bit of Straw will you give them to work; you will scrape them
to the very bones for money to maintain your splendor and vain grandeur, but
make no other provision for their subsistence, then instead of planting free
Trade amongst them, seek by all ways and means to root out that little that is
left them:

Witness the continuation of the War with Spain, and the suffering the lordly
and self ended Hollander to play Piscator Angliae upon our own Coasts, and the
fantastical Frenchman to eat the bread out of poor Antipodians mouths.

Therefore Gentlemen, if you have any pity or compassion for the bleeding and
gashlie wounds of poor Antipodia, show it forth in being a joint Instrument
with us under God to deliver her, which must be by a King, and none but a King,
and no King neither; but our lawful Sovereign, CHARLES the SECOND, which we
will from the bottom of our Consciences, prove unto you, if your patience will
vouchsafe audience.


Phanat. Well Gentlemen, we care not much if you have the hearing, though
'twill be but so much breath spent in vain and to little purpose.


One of the Cav liers in the name of the rest, and on the behalf of the whole
Kingdom, speaks as follows.

To prove unto you that no other Government then Monarchy, has Sat at the
Stern of these Nations ever since they were Civilized.

I will not here stand to instance; a most every Almanac being a sufficient
Testator for me in that.

And to prove that you have sinned against GOD and your own souls in murdering
of your KING and his faithful Adherents and loyal Subjects, and Committing
those abominations that you have done since you butchered him:

Your own guilty and enflamed Consciences are Witnesses and Commentators
sufficient for that.

But my scope is to extend it self as well to the good of your own souls, and
of our poor Kingdom, which you have thus shattered, rent, and torn in pieces.

And therefore to prove that the Nation can never be at rest, till she be
brought under her ANCIENT DUTY and OBEDIENCE, till MONARCHY come again to
spread his WINGS as a HEN over her CHICKENS to NOURISH and DEFEND her: For
first a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. And when there was no
King in Israel (meaning no supreme and lawful Magistracy) every one did that
which was good in his own eyes; then how do you think England can be at peace?
and he that lives not in peace, is in Hell upon Earth in his inward and outward
man.

2. Whilst then the Church can never be united, which (though the State be
never so well healed) will set all on flames, and continually imbroil'd, each
laboring to be Pater ac Defensor suoe fidei, and subvertire omnes religiones
viventes in nostro Regno aliorum sanctorum hominum proeter sucs.

3. Trading will never be restored; for the Nations round about us, make us
their scoffing and laughing stock, scorning to have any other trading and
traffic with us, then what they think will impoverish and utter ruin us. Ho,
say they, why should we fear them that have murdered their King; we will no
longer continue our subjection, but as they have forgot their duty, so we will
forget our fear to them, and make them glad to owe some to us; for we know well
enough what that giddy-headed people will do now they have shaken off their
ancient Government, even wallow up to the neck in one another blood: for what
Enemies are comparable to the Civil; contra se inimica foerox est.

4. The Laws of the Land are so aptly constituted for Regal power, that they
cannot, without great abuse, be of any force in this Kingdom.

5. The illegality of both the banishment and seclusion of King Charles the
Second, our lawful Sovereign from his Crown and Dignities, and the great
Tyranny, Persecution and Slavery the Nobility and Gentry the Upholders and
Glory of a Nation, have suffered under the loss of their lives, undoing of
their Wives and Families, by the illegal deprivation of and Sequestration of
their Estates, Houses, Goods, and banishments of themselves, gives so great a
stroke at either our Summum bonum ve summum malum, that we can never expect any
peace till the One be restored to his Crown, the Other to their lawful
Heritages, and due recompense be made by sorrowful remorse, both before God and
Man, for the innocent blood that has been shed upon Blocks and Gibbets to the
Third.

6. I do affirm on the behalf of these worthy Gentlemen and the whole Kingdom
beside, that when King Charles shall be established, the Nation will be in as
sweet and blessed a condition as any in the whole world.

For first the Church will be (by devine assistance) restored to Unity, Order
and Discipline, which will consequently cause the same happiness to fall out in
the State; so that then when the world shall see as of one heart and one mind,
they will no longer scoff at Antipodia, but be glad to currie-favour again for
quietness sake.

Secondly, the Laws fundamentals, Statutes, and Common laws of Anripodia will
assume their ancient vigor (having gotten their ancient president again) and
will stand sorcibly to correct the impetuous abuses and inormities both
foreign and domestic in Church and State in the public and private.

Thirdly, There will be no longer need of this great Army, neither will the
Army it self have any need to follow its employment, in respect of the fullness
of a free Trade, which will call home such Martials as have any Callings, or
Trades, from the sword, to get a living at an easier rate, than now they do;
and those that have none, to seek some one more honest and gainful.

Fourthly, The Nation will then be so aubndantly eased of her burdens, that
within few years her flourishing estate will write her sufferings in Oblivion.
The terrible Plague-fores, Taxes, unreasonable Customs, high and heavy Imposts,
Monopolies, Excise Sequestration, and all their attendants shall vade
conragious, and never rise any more; for there will be no need at all for them;
when this Army is otherwise disposed, easy will be the national burden.

Fifthly, All nations will be glad to Trade and Commerce with us when they fee
a settlement, which now they a void, by reason of the horror and confusion
which is amongst us.

Sixthly, and lastly, which is our Summum Bonum, we shall be reduced from the
service of Belial, to become the Fearers of God and the King; Whereby we shall
prove our selves to be no longer of our Father the Devil; but the Sons and
Daughters of the living God, and most Heavely King.

So I conclude, desiring that Reason may have some influence on your hearts,
where, if any spark of Grace and Loyalty be left, let it kindle; and like a
mighty fire consume the strong holds of Satan there; and throw them down like
consumed ashes: Then shall we all with one accord lift up our voices and cry
aloud, God save the KING: a harmony that will sound pleasantly in the ears of
those both Noble and Common, from the Merchant to the Plowman, from the Lord
to the Beggar, whose Representatives we are.


Which made the very hearts of the Phanaticks to tremble, and all with one
accord, they lifted up their voice and cried aloud. Men and Brethren what shall
we do to be saved? and immediately fell into a strong agony; which having
awaked from, they said as follows:

Phan. We do confess from the bottom of our souls we have done wickedly out of
measure, in so much that we are even ready to become a second Francis Spira; we
feel the terrible pangs our Lunacy have brought upon us:: We confess now there
can be no peace or settlement either in Church or State till the Son of our
late King be set upon his Fathers Throne, which in reason or conscience we can
no longer deny; but only self-interest, to think that we must part with all the
Honor, Gold, and changes of Raiment that we have gotten is bitter to us: these
we do ingeniously confess are all the Gates and Bulwarks we have raised against
our King: neither Religion or Conscience leading us to such undertakings.
Besides, now we seriously consider, if we assent and join with you, we shall
not only hazard our lives, but multitudes of the people both Military and
Civil, who have sided with us; together with all the Goods and Estates which
their Children and Families depend upon for a future subsistence: above 400000.
having propriety in Kings, Queens, Princes, Crown and Ecclesiastical Lands, and
the sequestered Estates of Delinquent; so that we shall not only lose our
lives, but we and our posterity will be stripped of all, the very money we have
paid to purchass these things withal: But if we could but be certain of an Act
of Oblivion, together with an enjoiment of our said portions of such Estates,
until such time as we should have received the money that paid our purchase, We
do here solemnly in our own Names, and on the behalf of all our Brethren and
Members in the three Nations protest, That we will heartily concur with you in
the establishing peace and settlement in this Commonwealth, which we do now
affirm can by no other way (under God) be done, than by restoring Charles the
Second to the Throne and Dignities of his Father of blessed Memory.


Caval. Let not that trouble you, or hinder your joining with us in this right,
true, and indeed glorious Cause; for be assured upon the word of a Gentleman,
that our King will not be found less willing to condescend to any Act of
Clemency, Mercy, Piety, or Justice, than you shall be ready to ask. And for
what you speak of, we tell you he has pondered the same in his heart already.


Phan. Well then, we consent, and from hence forth will become fellow helpers
with you to settle our King upon his Throne, that Peace may crown our latter
days, and Unity dwell amongst us, and that we may all be brought back again
from the worship of Idols, to the true fear of God and the King in


THE END.
POSTSCRIPT.
Poor England joy thy Peace is hasting on,
For now the Royalist's in union.
The penitent Phanaticks are bound fast
To set up Charles their King on's Throne at last.

