Christian Reconcilement, OR GOD AT PEACE with MAN IN CHRIST, Delivered in a
Sermon at St Mary's in Oxford.

By JOHN WALL Dr in Divinity, and PRAEBENDARY Of CHRISTCHURCH in OXFORD.

Psalm. 37. 4. Delight thou in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts
desire.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall, for R. Davis. 1658.

To the Honorable, and truly noble Lady, the Lady SARAH HOGHTON, Wife to Sr
RICHARD HOGHTON Knight, and Daughter of PHILIP, Lord STANHOPE, late Earl of
CHESTER-FIELD; Grace and Peace be daily multiplied.
Noble MADAM,
PArdon my Confidence that I make use of your Name, and place so rare a
Frontispice before so mean a Piece. My desire has been to honor your
Lady-ship some kind of way for those many favors derived to me, not only from
the Root and Stemm, but also from the several branches of that your noble
Generation and Parentage. Yet in this, I must needs Confess I honor my self,
while the eminency of your graces casts a luster upon my Services; and the high
esteem of those magnetique virtues draws greater acceptance to these
endeavors. However, be pleased to receive this manual, and give it some place
in your Closet among the Saints of God departed this life, with whom you have
been used to Converse frequently in their writings. It will not take up much
room, and though it Contain little that you may learn, yet does it somewhat
that you may remember, the incomparable blessing of Christian atonement, which
is the very foundation of all our Comfort. This I Commend to your pious
thoughts, and the religious exercise of your diviner Meditations: that you may
joy in God, and be strengthened daily in the Spiritual Union which you have
with him in Christ Jesus. For I well know when the Scriptur's were a delight
unto you, and you had (as Saint Jerome writes) of Marcella, a Roman Lady
(ardorem incredibilem etc:) an incredible desire to read and understand, the
precious Mysteries of those saving Oracles; (...) (in the words of the Apostle)
from a Child: wherein I have late evidence, that you persevere Constantly, to
the honor of God, and the rejoicing of your Spirit, with the Continual feast
of a Good Conscience. Sure I am, it was the practice of that Honorable Lady
your dear Mother, now with God blessed for ever: whose Goodness like an
Ointment poured out, left a Sweet Savor in the parts where she lived round
about: whose paths you tread, and seem to enlarge, or make plain, in a Pious
aemulation, and zealous Imitation of Her choicest Graces. But I will not make
an Elogie of an Epistle, or a Panegyric of a presentment: (though you well
deserve it) least I seem to dipp my Pen in Oil, and mingle Honey with my
Oblation: Contrary to the direction given to Moses by God himself in those
Leviticall instructions. The Lord pour a blessing upon you all, from the top,
and head, to the several branches of your Noble Family. Irest,

MADAM, Your most Humble Servant in him that took upon him the form of a
Servant, our Lord Jesus Christ, JOHN WALL.

CHRISTIAN RECONCILEMENT.
Romans 5. 11. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
received the atonement.
WHEN St. Paul wrote to the Saints at Rome, there was a ball of contention (as
it were) thrown betwixt the Jew and the Gentile. And howsoever they were
converted as true proselytes to the Doctrine of Christ, yet did they burn with
jealousy one toward another, and receive the gospel with strife and envy, and
sharp contests of mutual reproach, and fervent emulation (a fault to much
used in these our Days, both in the expressions and impressions of many
Christians, though interdicted by St. Paul to the Ephesians, and condemned by
St. James in the very brethren, with a note and character of (...) and (...)
which is mere bitterness, the gaul and wormwood of crabbed Zeal and corrupt
affections.) The Jew boasted of his stock, the Gentile of his Wisdom, the Jew
of his privileges, the Gentile of his Endowments; the Jew despised the Gentile
as a wild olive, the Gentile despised the Jew as a withered branch cut off from
the right olive; the Jew despised the Gentile as a stranger from the Covenant,
the Gentile despised the Jew as one despised of God and rejected of him for
murdering his only Son, and crucifying the Lord of glory.

But as it is said of Nestor, an ancient Counselor of the Grecians. -- Nestor
Componere lites
Inter Peliden festinat and inter Atriden;


So does the Apostle use all diligence, to repress the animosity of their
carnal spirits, and to reduce both to love and unity, patience and humility,
showing plainly that all were debtors unto God, and that none had cause to
boast of themselves, first by reason of their natural condition they were
subject unto wrath; then by reason of their spiritual renovation they were
justified by faith, not of merit but of grace, free grace, rich grace, the
grace of God through faith in Christ Jesus. All which is copiously delivered in
the precedent Chapters, and compendiously gathered in the latter verses,
whereof my Text is a brief Synopsis

We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received
the atonement. We joy in tribulation, because it tends unto hope: we joy in
hope because it ends in glory, as the precedent Words do rightly insinuate.
But the top of our joy and the crown of our rejoicing is God alone, pacified by
his Son in the wood of his Cross, the blood of his Cross: who indeed is
(...), and (...) (as Theophylact speaks) the author of joy, the author of
rest, the author of glory, the author of righteousness. Have our conflicts
abounded, and have not our Comforts abounded? Have our trials abounded, and
have not our triumphs abounded? Yea doubtless, as the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so does our consolation abound through Christ Jesus. And we
never had more Cause to rejoice, than now we have in the Day of our peace, the
blessed reunion of God with us, the heavenly redintegration of his infinite
love and merciful Kindness.

We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received
the atonement. These words are exceeding jubilar, and not unsuitable with the
present time, which is dies palmarum, or (as we term it) Palme-Sunday, a Day
of spreading garments, unfolding graces, discovering holiness, singing
praises, and crying Hosanna in the highest, blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest: not with green bows of Pagan
wildness, but with palm branches of faith and godliness: which St. John will
have to be most flourishing and victorious, with (...), this is the victory
which overcomes the World, even your faith, the 5th and the 4th of his 1. Ep.
You may compare them to the Song of Mary, when she cried, My Soul does magnify
the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. There seems at once,
to be (...) and (...), on the Lords part (...), on our part (...): on the
Lords part grace, on our part glory, on the Lords part goodness, on our part
gladness, with a sober kind of ravishment and spiritual Ecstasy.

We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received
the atonement. 1. That which I shall first observe is the grace and benefit of
humane reconcilement. [Wee have received the atonement.]

Secondly the means or conveyance, and that is [our Lord Jesus Christ:]

Last of all the result or extraction, which is delight and glory, exultation
and jucundity, together with the circumstance of time, or rather indeed the
instance of time, not future but present, not in expectation but fruition, now
we are reconciled, and now we are comforted, since the death of Christ and
the power of his rising:

We joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received
the atonement. All these have their implicit theses, and may be easily
resolved into enuntiative positions, one, That man is reconciled unto God.

Another: Christ is the author of this reconcilement.

A third, We ought to joy in God alone, through Christ our Mediator and
Advocate. But I proceed after the method I have delivered, and shall begin with
my first observation, which is the grace and benefit of humane reconcilement,
(...), we have received the atonement.

Man is an empty thing, and has naught in himself, but what he does receive,
nec quid, nec quale, nec quantum, as the Logicians speak of their (...) or
rather indeed like that ancient chaos which Moses would have to be (...) and
(...) in the first of Genesis, without form and beauty, a mere solitude and
vacuity, in so much that a Heathen could say, as well in respect of men as of
their actions. O Curas hominum, and quantum est in rebus inane?

St. John tells us, we have received Grace for grace, or grace upon grace: one
grace brings in another; and one grace brings in another; and one grace draws
in another, neither is it man's wisdom, but Gods bounty that leads to
repentance, charity, meekness, humility and whatsoever is praise worthy; most
agreeable to that of Bernard, Quaevis scintillula in cord accensa, etc. The
least spark of holy fire, kindled in the breast of any Creature must needs
arise from the love of God, and the infinite grace of his eternal providence.
We receive life in our creation, strength in our being, knowledge in study,
comfort in misery, patience in trouble, help in adversity, (...), the same hand
that framed us must preserve us, neither can we any more relieve our selves,
then we could at first make our selves, as Justin Martyr has observed in his
Apology for Christians. Formation, conservation, reformation, consummation are
glorious acts but from the Lord, as fruits of the divine goodness; not
branches of humane impotence, which the Apostle has comprised in a word (...)
Our sufficiency is from God, in the 2d to the Corinthians.

But among all the favors that have been bestowed upon us, that of
reconcilement is most precious, whereby we are made friends unto God, stronger
then our enemies, Lords over the Creature, and aequall with the Angels, that
warte on his throne, stand in his presence, delight in his worship, and rejoice
to do him service.

St. Origin is so charitable, as to extend his mercy to the Devils, and would
have them to be saved after a thousand Years completely ended: howbeit, we know
the worm dies not, and their fire never goes out, as we gather from the
words of our Savior, in that final doom, and fatal sentence, (...), depart
from me, ye cursed into everlasting fire, provided for the Devil and his
Angels, Mat. 25. 48.

As for the host of blessed Angels, that kept their station; they are not said
to be truly reconciled, because they never departed from their obedience: yet
are they confirmed by the mediation of Christ, and seem to have a two fold
advancement: one in respect of their knowledge, because they look into the
mystery of our salvation: another in respect of their joy, because they delight
in the work of our Conversion. That which makes the Scruple touching their
reconcilement, is taken from St Paul, in the Is It Chapt. of his Ep: to the
Colossians, where he notes of Christ, that he sat at peace with the blood of
his Cross, (...), things on Earth and things on Heaven. All which is most
unquestionable, and ought to be understood of the holy Angels, not in relation
to God, but in relation to man; not as they are reconciled unto him, but as
they are reconciled unto us, and united more firmly with us under one head
which is Christ Jesus. And therefore; if you consider the words of the Text, it
is not said, they but we, not all but some, We the Saints of God, we the Sonns
of God. -- Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan.


Chosen freely, drawn sweetly, renewed by his word, quickened by his Spirit:
WE have received the grace of divine love, and heavenly atonement,

Before the Apostasy of our father Adam, there was a sweet harmony betwixt God
and man, but as soon, as he fell, and had transgressed, he ran away, and was
cast forth of Paradise; at what time there was a breach made, and we became
(as the Apostle notes) (...): not only strangers and aliens but foes and
enemies to the Lord of glory; such as despise his grace, and despite his
goodness, with the infinite provocations of enormous impieties. We grieve him
and he forsakes us: We resist him and he abandons us from the brightness of
his face, and the glory of his presence. For Sin is abominable to God, neither
can his pure eyes endure to behold the filthiness of our Corruptions,
whereupon says Isaiah, Your iniquities have separated betwixt God and you. He
did so love us, that nothing could take him of and make him leave us but our
sins: He did so hate Sin, that nothing could bring him on, and make him love
us again but his Son: his dear Son, his only Son, the death of his Son,
the oblation of his Son, who gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice
unto God, of a sweet smell and pleasant odor (...) Your iniquities have made a
separation betwixt God and you in the 59th of his prophecy.

It was for sin, that he left Israel, and it was for sin that he cast the
Angels down from Heaven: It was for sin that he drowned the old World, and
it was for sin, that he destroyed the works of his creation: Though at
first he took pleasure in them, and said of every thing (which he made,)
(...) it was good, very good the first and the last of Genesis.

This was our Condition in the sad times of humane defection, and thus we
stood at a distance, I will not say a defiance with the Lord of hosts and the
God of spirits. But since the partition wall is broken down, and there is an
entrance made into the holy place; we have obtained mercy and are received
into favor. The heat is of, the fire is quenched, wrath is alaid, the strife is
ended: and he that was most wronged, is most desirous to be reconciled. Whilst
the Angels of God are made the Ambassadors of peace, and do openly proclaim
tidings of good will unto men upon earth. As James said of Abraham, that he
was termed the friend of God, so we may say of all beleivers, the Sonns of
Abraham, the generations of his Children. They are (...) and (...), lovers of
God and beloved of him. God is their friend, and they are Gods friends, by the
new Covenant of eternal righteousness, in the dispensation of Christ, and
merit of his obedience. For, as when two men fall out, a third coming between,
makes them friends and brings them to an amicable condition: so Christ being in
the nature of God and man, has united both and made them one, as well in love
as in person, by the sweet interposition of his mediatory function.

If any shall desire to be further satisfied concerning the nature of this
atonement and shall say to me of this spiritual Manna, as the Israelites did
of their corporal Manna, which fell in the Wilderness, full of pleasure and
delectable sweetness (...) What is this? or how do you Conceive it to be
understood? We are ready to pronounce with learned Zanchius, that it is
renovatio, etc. a reinvesting of man with pristine holiness, or a reducing of
man to that former interest we had with God in Christ Jesus, from the state of
wrath to the state of peace, from the state of bondage to the state of liberty,
from the state of fear to the state of assurance, from the state of misery to
the state of mercy, that we may draw near with boldness to that heavenly
throne, and having received that spirit of adoption, cry Abba, father, (...),
Romans 8. as Sons and heirs, heirs of God and coheires with Christ, in the
sweet fruition of an everlasting Kingdom. The dislike and antipathy, the
variance and the enmity which transgression wrought, being quite abolished and
obliterated by the precious blood of that paschall Lamb, sprinkled upon the
door posts of our hearts and consciences. For to speak in the Words of
Salvian, Crimen nostrum discrimen gravissimum, Our greatest danger is from sin.
That being cleansed, we are preserved, nor only so, but graced and honored,
embraced and dignified with signal ornaments of love and kindness, by ring and
by robe, as they are distinctly mentioned by St Luke the Evangelist, in that
comfortable story of the prodigalls Conversion. Hence it is the Apostle does so
much boast of a holy Communion which the saints have with the Father and the
Son, Our fellowship, says he, and that with an Emphasis, truly, Our
fellowship is with the Father and the Son, in the 1st and 3d of his First
Epist. That as he is one with the Father, so we may be one with him, of one
heart, of one mind, of one desire, of one judgment, of one building, one
Temple, one body, one spirit, which indeed is the height of comfort, and does
most eminently represent the wonderful excellency of Christian atonement.

St Bernard mentions diverse unions in a tract of his styled, Varij Sermones,
natural, carnal, virtuall, moral, personal, substantial, and the like.
Natural between the Soul and the body, they are one man; Carnal between the
Man and the Woman, they are one Flesh; Virtuall in the Consent of our
affections, they are one harmony; moral in the Conjunction of brethren, they
are one Society: personal with the divinity and humanity, they are one Christ;
substantial in the deep mystery of the blessed Trinity, They are are our God,
our Lord, of whom, and by whom, and through whom all things were made. As for
the union in the Text it is spiritual, whereby we are not only transformed in
our selves, and transported out of our selves, but engrafted in Christ, and
made one Spirit with him, as it is directly avowed by the Doctor of the
Gentiles in the 6 Chapt. and 17. verse of the 1 Ep. to the Corinth. (...), he
that is joined with the Lord, is one Spirit with him, acted by one Spirit,
raised by one Spirit, sanctified by one Spirit, governed by one Spirit, the
holy ghost moving as it were upon the whole body of the Church, and having a
gracious influence from the head of Christ to the hearts of men, and the
secretest juncture of his dearest members, For when Christ was gone, he sent
down a fire on the Earth, a Vestal fire, a sacred fire, a blessed fire, a holy
fire; I mean the Comforter, which is the love of God, that he might keep us to
to himself, and abide with us for ever.

I could fix upon such a meditation as this, and dwell in the contemplation of
divine peace, that great atonement, that blessed atonement, the atonement with
an Emphasis, the atonement with an excellence that cleares the mind, and
cheares the spirit with unimaginable comfort, dulcor ejus absorbet
conscientiam, says that elegant father the sweetness thereof swallows up my
thoughts, and puts me into a frame of jubilar excess. O that it were no less
with men, than with God, and that we might see a perfect reconcilement in
every condition, like that of the disciples who met together (...), as the
Text has it, with one mind, in one place in the 2. and 1. of the Acts of
Apost. But this is more to be prayed for, than can easily be expected in Massa
and in Meribba, at the Waters of strife, amidst the divisions of many brethren.
And yet it is a shame, that Christ should dye to make our peace, and we should
live to make debate amongst our selves: striving and struggling, like Jacob and
Esau in the womb, and bowels of Church and Country, not as true Israelites,
but as vain Ishmaelites, or generations of the Patriarch Dan, who was said to
be Coluber in via, a Snake in the path, and a Serpent in the way Genesis 49. The
Lord grant, that at length we may be able to say in a general sense, a sense
moral, a sense political, a sense natural, a sense ecclesiastical (...),
we have received the atonoment, for the honor of God, the peace of Sion, and
the great Security of this Land and Nation.

But I hasten to my Second observation, from the grace to the means, from the
benefit to the Conveyance, and that is Dominus Jesus Christus, our Lord Jesus
Christ. Not Moses or Aaron, not an Angel or Cherubim, nor any creature of
highest order, but God alone through Christ his Son: Jesus Christ, our Lord
Jesus Christ, (as we read in the Words of my Apostle.) He is a Lord for his
Dominion, a Jesus for his salvation a Christ for the dignity of his threefold
unction. A Lord that does rule us, a Jesus that has freed us, a Christ that
shall anoint us, with grace holiness, joy and gladness, to the rich
enheritance of immortal blessedness.

Give me leave then to put you in mind of a notable saying which I have from St
Ambrose, vulnus accepit, unguentum effudit, he took a sore wound in his
natural body, he powered forth a Sovereign balm in his mystical body: a
Sovereign balm, a precious ointment, that has cured our sores, and healed
our infirmities, to all well-pleasing, and good acceptance with the God of all
comfort and Father of mercies.

Indeed we have (...), a Word of reconcilement, and (...), the ministry of
reconciliation: but the Work is his, the power is his, the merit is his, the
performance is his, that made both one, by virtue of his passion. We are
serviceable, and isntrumental, as suppliant Orators, and subordinate
cooperators in so great a business. He is the root, and the ground, the
spring and the fountain of that celestial agreement, and heavenly
composition. Whereupon says John, We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the reconciliation for our sins. As for Paul,
he is most clear, with a (...), God has reconciled us to himself through
Jesus Christ. And again, (...). God is in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.

How then is it that in the same place, we are desired to be reconciled unto
God, we pray you in Christ's steed, that ye be reconciled unto God? Have we
strength enough to do it our selves? and are we able to make our own peace?
This seems to contradict the series of the Text, and to derogate from the
honor of an absolute mediator. Yet if we distinguish the manner, 'twill be no
hard matter to reconcile the Scripture. Christ did it fundamentally, we
conformably: Christ authentically and radically, we obsequiously and readily,
with desires answerable and hearty being drawn and converted in the sound of
his word and power of his Gospel, in the smell of his garments, and the savor
of his ointments. Insomuch that what he wrought by the wonderful humiliation
of his temporal economy, we must apply it to our hearts and consciences by
faith, repentance, charity, obedience, invocation, adoration, the frequent
exercises of the holy Sacraments, and the religious observation of divine
ordinances, which were given us for no other end, but that we may draw near
unto God as loving children.

Let men please themselves never so much with their several Idols, whether
Corporal or spiritual, among the dead, or among the living: there is no
creature in heaven or in earth, in the center of the one, or circle of the
other that can bring us to God but only Christ Jesus; The Angel of the
Covenant, the first borne of every creature, the great high priest, that took
the censer of his flesh, and laid upon it the burning coals of divine love,
and offered up the sweet incense of a pure heart and a gracious spirit. Is he
not the way and the door? the way in whom we go? the door by whom we enter?
As no man comes to the son, unless the father draw him: so no man comes to
the father, unless the son does bring him. Abraham is ignorant, and Israel
knows us not, as we read in that Evangelicall prophet. -- Nec defensoribus
istis
Tempus eget --
For behold Christ is here, clothed with our flesh; that he may invest us with
his righteousness, and present us to the father, holy and unblameable, without
spot in his sight: a greater then Moses, a greater then Aaron, a greater then
Elias, a greater then Solamon, or any prophet, since the world began. And
therefore God must needs be angry, if we do not kiss the Son, his dear
Son, his beloved Son, in whom alone he is well pleased, and by whom alone
we are truly reconciled: kiss the mouth of his word, and precious oracles:
kiss the hand of his power, and wondrous miracles, kiss the feet of his
justice and sure mercies, his sure mercies and steadfast promises that stand as
the Sun, and continue as the Moon for ever in the heavens. These we must
kiss, and these we must embrace, looking toward Jesus, the author and
finisher of our course: if ever we mean to have God our friend or the light of
his countenance to shine upon us.

It was for Joseph's sake, that his brethren were so courteously received: and
it is for Christ's sake that we are so graciously reconciled. He came into the
world as Joseph came into Egypt, for the good and the benefit, for the
protection and the liberty, the help and the comfort, the provision and the
safety of all his brethren. And therefore Augustine will have him to be a
figure of Christ, with a typum gessit salvatoris, in one of his sermons
inscribed, de tempore: both alike sold, both a like spoiled, one thrown into a
pit, another into a grave; one cast into a dungeon, another into hell by a
voluntary condescension; though exalted at length that he might save us, as
well from death as from derth, the derth of his word, and the death of our
souls, in that burning lake of intolerable woe, and insupportable misery. And
therefore says Bernard, mortem pertulit, at mortem sustulit, he suffered
death, but he abolished death, and destroyed him that had the power of death
with his own weapon.

Sweet Jesu! who shall declare the strange procurement of our gracious
reconcilement in that rare Conjunction of both natures, by the power of the
Godhead, by the patience of the manhood, by the majesty of the one, by the
humility of the other? This enabled thee to bear, that to overcome; this to
endure, that to satisfy; this to descend and lay down thy life, that to ascend
and take it up again, that we may be advanced above those angelical Thrones,
and sit together with thee in heavenly places. St Chrysostom is astonished
with it, and cries out (...); how comes this work, this great work to be acted
and accomplished? And therefore I will not take upon me to describe the manner
of it, further then I have direction from the Apostle, who gives you a twofold
explication in the 1 Chap. of the Epist. to the Collos. that he does reconcile
us (...), in the body of his flesh through death: and that he does reconcile us
(...), with the blood of his cross: where you have death and blood, and a
Cross. In death there is misery, in blood there is cruelty, in a cross there
is shame and notorious infamy. All which meet together like three fatal
sisters in Conjunction, for ill to Christ, for good to us, the aggravation of
his punishments, the instauration of our nature; that we may be joined with the
Saints above, and gathered into the bosom of our heavenly father; (...), in
the body of his flesh through death, and that with blood, the blood of his
Cross; the blood of his cross that has drowned our iniquities, the blood of
his cross that has purged our Consciences, the blood of his Cross that has
destroyed our enemies, the blood of his Cross that has justified our persons,
the blood of his Cross that has quenched the violence of that flaming sword
that hung at the gate of our celestial paradise, to keep us back from the
sight of God, and the blessed Communion of his glorious Angels. Insomuch that
Augustine speaking of Satan has these words victus in patibulo qui vicerat in
par adiso, He is now overcome in the blood of his Cross, that did first
overcome in the garden of paradise.

The Apostle affirms we are bought with a price. I confess we are reconciled
with a price, a great price, the price of blood, whilst the chastisement of our
peace was laid upon him, and his stripes were our healing; for it cost him
dear, and whatsoever he got for us, he purchased at a very high rate; our
peace with his own travel, our freedom with his own bondage, our favor
with his own disgrace, our comfort with his own punishment, our welcome and
reception with his own contempt and dereliction, a strange dereliction, a
grievious dereliction, that made him cry, and lift up his voice, with anguish
of heart and agony of Spirit, Eli, Eli, lammasabachthani, my God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me?

Now me thinks, I stand amazed at the love of God that has reconciled us with
the death of his Son, the bitter death of his only begotten Son, at the love
of Christ that has reconciled us with his blood, the voluntary effusion of his
own most precious blood. What shall he not do for us, now we are made friends
and righteous, that did so much for us being enemies and sinners, dabit tibi
bona sua qui pertulit mala tua, says learned Augustine. He must needs bestow
his rest upon us that has taken his burdens upon himself.

The truth is, his death is available unto life, his life is available unto
glory, his death plucks us out of Satan's hands, his life puts us into Gods
hand, and the protection of his majesty. We are absolved by his death, we shall
be advanced by his life, we are saved by his death, we shall be kept by his
life never to depart from the obedience of his truth, when he shall have bound
us to himself with everlasting mercy, in a threefold cord of faith, hope, and
charity, -- Quem nec satanae ir a nec ignis, Nec ferrum potuit, nec edax
abolexe vetustas.

as the Poet has it in another sense, which no force shall be able to break,
no age to consume, no power to dissolve, nor yet the gates of hell ever to
prevail against.

It is recorded of St Bernard, in his life Guilielmus, when Satan came to him
in his sickness, and thought to drive him to despair with remembrance of his
sins, that he was much troubled at first, but afterward gathering strength,
said unto him, non sum aignus etc. I confess, I am not worthy of my self,
neither can I expect to enter heaven by any righteousness of my own, but
Christ has a double right unto that glorious kingdom, one of inheritance by
the father, another of purchase by his passion. That of inheritance he keeps to
himself, and rests in it; that of purchase he gives to me, and I lay hold on
it with faith and confidence. At these words the enemy was confounded and
vanished away: but the holy father was much comforted, and triumph't
exceedingly in the merits of his Savior. By this we learn to cast our selves
upon God for eternal safety, with a perfect abdication of humane infirmity;
and may justly Condemn the vanity of such as go from the Sun to the Moon,
from the lord to our lady, from the fountain of living waters, to the broken
cisterne of humane emptiness, and from the protection of our Savior, to the
mediation of any creature, from the temple of God to the temple of idols, from
the sacrifice of Christ and the satisfaction of his death, to the shrines of
Diana, or the rotten sepulchers of the most holy Martyrs. These I might argue,
and these I might condemn, but that indeed they are not so much to be refuted
with care and deliberation, as to be exploded with scorn and derision.

The use I shall make of this doctrine is a short expostulation out of St
Augustine, with a quanta iniquitas? quanta perversitas etc? If the peace of our
souls, and the reconcilement of our natures be the price of blood, the blood
of Christ, the true Son of the everliving God: what a pravity, what
injustice, what a phrensy, what a madness is it, to sell again those souls
unto the Devil for a little gain, a little pleasure, a little smoke, a little
honor, or any the like shadow of outward means and temporal felicity, which
God has purchased to himself with extreme pain, and infinite misery?

The Argument which the Apostle frames is most considerable, and worthy of
observation, ye are bought with a price, and are not your own. Your bodies
are his, your souls are his, that did emancipate and set them free from the
strong man's hand and danger of the enemy: his by creation, his by redemption,
his in making, his in reconciling, and therefore he must be glorified in both,
and loved of both, that we may delight in him, and he delight in us, that we
may rejoice in him, and he may rejoice in us with joy unspeakable and full of
glory. For if it be life eternal to know God, what is it to love God? and to
have the gracious returns of love from him again? Without controversy; it is
the fullness of joy, and the marrow of bliss: as rivers of oil, and floods of
peace, whereof the Angels drink most plenteously, and are continually refresht.
And therefore says Chrysostom, (...), To love God and to be loved of God,
with the sweet reciprocation of mutual dilection is more then a Kingdom to
the Saints; the Kingdom of glory, the Kingdom of heaven.

My dear brethren, I beseech you with the Apostle, or rather I charge you with
King Solomon, by the hinds and by the roes, by the mercies of God and bowels of
Christ Jesus, by the obedience of his life, by the power of his death, by his
Word and by his Gospel, by his Sacraments, and by his ordinances, by the blood
which he shed for you, and by the Spirit which he sent to you, that he might
lead you into all truth, and make you partakers of a precious inheritance
amongst the Saints in glory,

Custodite animas and nulli credit raso. keep your souls with all diligence,
and let nothing draw you from the love of Christ Jesus, cleave to the Lord with
all perseverance, and what God has joined let no man sever. In vain do we
renew the league of divine friendship, if we do not hold it inviolably, without
provocation of great offense. The fathers would have Caudam hostiae, as well as
Caput hostiae, both head and rump to be offered, no less in spiritual
sacrifices, then heretofore in the just performance of legal observances. The
precious robe of Christian holiness ought to be like the embroydered Coat of
the Patriarch Joseph, which is said to be talaris, down to the feet and below
the ancles: that we may adhere constantly to the Lord, and finish our Course in
the perfection of holiness. It is a great interest we have in God by means of
this present union; labor to improve it, and do not grieve the Holy Spirit;
whereby ye are not only joined and coupled, but Sealed and confirmed unto the
time of your redemption. Christ says, ye are made whole, sin no more, lest
a worse thing come unto you. I say, ye are made friends, sin no more, lest a
worse thing come unto you, when the house of your Soul, and tabernacle of your
Conscience being swept and garnisht, may draw many unclean spirits in, and the
end prove worse, then your beginning. Are ye not washed? are ye not cleansed?
are ye not reconciled? are ye not justified? are ye not cured? are ye not
healed? are ye not renewed? are ye not sanctified, in the name of the Lord
Jesus; and by the Spirit of our God? Christ has obtained for you the remission
of your sins, and Christ has put on you the garment of his righteousness,
that ye may find grace in the sight of God, and be adopted into the family of
his dearest children, with all the Company of his elect Angels. Beware then of
relapsing into sin, and take heed there be not found among you a heart of
unbelief, to depart from the living God. O let not the poison of sin, abide
in you, because the love of God has abounded toward you: but hate it as a
Serpent, and embrace him that has taken away the sting. Avoid it as a Siren,
and hold what you have, that no man take away your Crown, the Crown of your
life, the Crown of your rejoicing, whereby we are enabled to cry with the
Apostle, and to sing triumphantly, with joy in God through our Lord Jesus, by
whom we have now received the atonement.

And so I come to my last observation, The result or extraction, of delight and
glory, exultation and jucundity. Which indeed is pleasing and may serve for
application of all that has been spoken, In Deogloriamur, we joy in God.

Saul had a Jonathan, David an Absalon, and Paul himself a beloved Timothy,
and a dear Philemon; wherein they took much pleasure and delight. But God
alone is the joy of our hearts, and the Solace of our Spirits, that has called
us to his eternal glory through Christ Jesus. And doubtless we may very well
joy in God, that enjoy so much from God, in temporal mercies, spiritual
graces, outward benedictions, and inward refections, that fill our souls with
marrow and fatness. For to speak in the words of Solomon, The winter is past,
the showers are gone, the singing of Birds is come, and the flowers appear in
our land: Choice flowers of grace and peace, truth and righteousness, whereof
we may compose (...), (as St Chrysostom speaks) a thousand garlands of divine
celebrities, and tripudiant gratulations. He that turned water into wine before
his death, turned blood into wine, at his death; the blood of his Cross into
the wine of gladness, the blood of his passion into the wine of consolation: A
sweet wine, a pleasant wine, the mulsum of grace, and the mustum of his Spirit,
(for so I promise you, St Bernard terms it,) reserved for the marriage of the
lamb, and kept as twere in the wine cellars of the King: that we may be
cheared and wholly forget the vanities of the world, the pleasures of sin, the
lusts of the flesh, and the lures of Satan.

For indeed, he is the right object of humane Comfort, most absolute and
complete, most adequate and perfect, that can satisfy the heart of man, and
fill every corner of that winding Labyrinth with delicious Content. We joy in
him, and we joy of him, in him for the grace of present adoption, of him for
the hope of future exaltation to our selves and to our brethren: In him simply,
as he is God in himself, of infinite power and incomprehensible majesty, in
him respectively as he is God to us of infinite goodness, and unspeakable
mercy; In him as a God, in him as a Father, in him as a Lord, in him as a
Savior, that we are his, and that he is ours, by the gracious stipulations of
Evangelicall promises, Our God and our Father, our Lord and our Savior, the
Author of peace and everlasting tranquillity, the donor of life and immortal
glory; which makes the spouse rejoice with melody, and sing with jubilee, my
beloved is mine, and I am his. He feeds among the lilies, the white Souls
and pure Consciences of men Sanctified with the Spirit of holiness.

Aeneas Sylvius used to say (as it is recorded in his life by Platina) nullum
gaudium sine virtute solidum, there Could be no sollid joy without the exercise
of virture. Had it been said without the love of God in Jesus Christ, it had
been spoken most divinely. Some joy in their strength but that is Carnal, some
joy in their wisdom but that is imperfect, some joy in their treasure but that
is deceitful, some joy in their greatness and honor but that is inconstant
and sometimes mutable, and therefore we joy in God that are endeared to him,
and have received the benefit of divine atonement. Our heart does rejoice, and
our flesh does rejoice in God, the living God, that makes us a rejoicing, and
Creates us a very joy, through Christ his Son, and the powerful working of
his Continual intercession.

The original word (...), is most emphaticall, and impleyes a kind of joy more
then ordinary, even gestient gladness, and triumphant glory: I know not
whether I should call it an exultation, or an insultation, because it makes us
insult over the adversary, and triumph over the enemy, laughing at his
destruction, and exposing him openly, as the Grecian did, of whom the verse
goes,

Ter circum Iliacos raptaverat Hectoramuros,

for by this, we do not only joy in God, but we joy over that which may anoy
our souls, and trample on it with derision and contempt. Not unlike our
blessed Savior, when he bruised the head of the Serpent, and brake the head of
the Leviathan in the midst of the waters; sporting with him that sported
therein, with the staff of his Cross, and the rod of his power, his eternal
power and Godhead, Romans 1. Who then shall lay any thing to our charg? It is
God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that died. yea rather
which is risen again, and sits at the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us, as we have it in that brave challenge, graciously set
down, and courageously sent forth by that Champion of God, and trumpet of the
Gospel, the Doctor of the Gentiles, and vessel of election, in plain scorn
and open defense of spiritual wickedness in highest places.

We joy in God, we joy over death, we joy in God, we joy over sin, we joy in
God, we joy over the grave, we joy in God, we joy and crow, (as it were) over
hell and Satan, with all the powers of that infernal kingdom, and may safely
tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, (as the Apostles did) without hurt and
danger, in the name of Christ, and strength of our redeemer, that has set up
his cross, as a glorious Trophy in the midst of the Nation, to the everlasting
reproach and eternal confusion of the Dragon and his angels. Of this we have
both an emblem and example: an Emblem in the woman that was clothed with the
Sun, and had the Moon under her feet: an example in the Apostle when he brake
forth into that triumphant (...), Oh death where is thy sting? O grave where is
thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law:
but thanks be to God who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
And therefore says God by the mouth of his Servant, Qui gloriatur, in me
glorietur; let him that glories, glory in me, that he understands me, and
that he knows me, who shows mercy, and judgment, and righteousness upon
the earth, Jer. 9.

Give me leave then to put you in mind of those everlasting joys, which shall
never be taken from you, not of meat and of drink, not of harp and viol, in
the luxury of the greatest feasts, but of God and of Christ, the Word and his
Spirit, Quo nihil speciosius, quo nihil pretiosius, in the sweet language of
that incomparable Father: then which nothing is more amiable and specious for
grace and beauty, nothing more admirable and precious for substance and value,
lest it be said of you, as it was of the Pharisees, Luke 7. 32. Cantavimus, and
non Saltastis, we have Piped unto you, but ye have not Danced, we have Sung
unto you, but ye have not rejoiced; you may peradventure have joyed in the
pleasant noise of musical instruments, ye have not rejoiced at the Word of
God, and sound of his Gospel, in sober dances of Spiritual rejoycings: with
this he is pleased, with that he is grieved: in this he is glorified, in that
he is dishonored, and sometimes mightily blasphemed.

I will not deny, but that we may rejoice in the outward comforts of humane
life, and take pleasure in the very creature, joy in health, joy in beauty, joy
in wealth, joy in safety, joy in Arts and Sciences, Tongues and Languages,
friends and favors, privileges and preferments, the gifts of nature and the
graces of the Spirit, whereby we are enabled to promote the honor of God and
benefit of his Servants. In these we may rejoice, in these we may triumph, as
they are blessings of our heavenly Father and pledges of his love: so it be
with a twofold Caution and respect: the one of thankfulness, in the right
acknowledgment of divine bounty, from whence they come; the other of
subordination in the real intendment of divine glory, whereunto they run.
For that is finis debitus, as Aquinas speaks, and ought to be the maine aim of
our best faculties and most eminent perfections. In this sense we interpret the
words of St Paul, and are to understand that deprecation of the Apostle; God
forbid I should rejoice in any thing, but the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ:
not primarily and wholly, but conditionally and moderately in order to Christ
and the advancement of his glory.

And therefore, as Aristotle said, when they brought him two sorts of wine, the
one from Rhodes, the other from Lesbos, with allusion to his Scholars,
Menedemus and Theophrastus (...) etc. That of Rhodes is good, but this of
Lesbos is the sweeter: So do I profess of earthly joy and heavenly joy,
corporal joy and spiritual joy, the joy of the Creature, and the joy of the
Creator: that may be good, this is better, that may be pleasant, this is
sweeter, that may be useful, this is needful, and such as ought most to be
desired.

Feign would I draw you to it, that your hearts may rejoice, and your joy may
be full, when that which is perfect shall come, and that which is imperfect
shall be done away. For in his presence, there is fullness of joy, and at his
right hand there are pleasures for ever more. But where I fail, let Augustine
go on, and make supply with his gaudete in one of his Sermons de Verbis Domini,
Gaudete in Domino, non in saeculo: Gaudete in veritate, non in falsitate:
Gaudete in spe aeternitatis, non in store vanitatis: rejoice in the Lord, not
in the world: rejoice in the truth, not in falsehood; rejoice in the hope of
life and glory, not in the flower and flourish of Pride, and of vanity. All
this is strongly enforced by the Word of God, which indeed is mighty in
operation, and sharper then a two edged sword, to divide betwixt the Soul and
the Spirit, the joints and the marrow, the world and your heart, the earth and
your affections. I might send you to the Prophet David for ample direction, who
writes many Psalms of this argument, with a jubilate in Deo, O be joyful in
the Lord, all ye Lands, serve the Lord with gladness, and come before his
presence with a song: And with a Venite, exultemus in Domino, O Come let us
sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our Salvation,
let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and show our selves glad in
him with Psalms. But I shall leave you to a shorter compendium out of the
Apostle, Philip. 4. 4. where he gives you a double charge, and bids you rejoice
in the Lord, with an Iterum dico, Again, I say rejoice: that he may awake you
from the dreams of secular fancies, and bring you to the joys of Spiritual
ecstasies. I scarce remember a place in the Volume of this Book, of greater
emphasis, that does more insinuate into the heart of men, with a sweeter Echo
of forcible ingemination, and patheticall instruction, then what I last spoke
unto, rejoice in the Lord, and again I say rejoice.

Therefore I wish it may have a deep impression with you, and be as nails
fastened by the masters of assemblies, never to be removed and forgotten, that
yet may affect it, and that it may lift you up, from wordly desires and earthly
Cogitations, as the Spirit did Ezekiel, when it took him by a lock of the
hair, and brought him to Jerusalem, lift you up, and bring you on to
Jerusalem, the vision of peace, the fruition of bliss, the new Jerusalem, the
celestial Jerusalem; Jerusalem which is above; the Mother of us all. Where
amongst other songs and doxologies of praise and thanksgiving we may remember
this, and sing aloud upon our beds, with Patriarchs and Prophets; with
Apostles and Evangelists, with Martyrs and Confessors, with Saints and Angels,
We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement. Which the Lord Grant for Christ his sake, to whom with the Father
and the holy Spirit, three persons and one God be ascribed all Power, Majesty,
and Dominion now and for ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

