The craft and delusion of those that would master and control the People,
has not availed (by fomenting our differences in Religion, which is their
common practice) to make me judge preposterously, either of your or any other
men's sufferings.

We have a general cau^ion, that no man suffer as an evil doer; but if any
suffer or well doing, who are they that would be thought Christians, and can
exempt themselves from suffering with them? No certainly, it is neither petty
differences in opinions, nor personal frailties in sufferers, nor both, that
can acquit or excuse us in the sight of God* so we are not simply to be
spectators or beholders of them a far off (as too many do,) but if one suffer,
all ought to suffer with that one, even by having a sympathy and fellow
feeling of his miserie^ and helping to bear his burden; so that he may be
eased in the day of tentation; yea and the sentences both of absolution and
condemnation shall be pronounced at the great day, according to the visiting or
not visiting of Prisoners, and hearing of their mourning, sighs, and groans.

This is my judgment, from whence has issued this my practice, that when I
hear of the sufferings of any man, I do not enquire, what his judgment is in
Religion, nor do I give eat to any tales or reports of any man's personal
imperfection. (being privy to mine own) but I presently labor to be rightly
informed of the cause of his sufferings (alleged against him) whether that be
evil or good, and of the proceedings thereupon, whether legal or illegal,
just or unjust.

And this has been my course and practice in things of that nature for almost
a score of years, whoever have been the Judges, whether Parliament, King,
Counsel board, Star Chamber, High Commission* Kingsbench, or any Judicatory,
yea what ever the recuser, or the accused, the judgment or punishment has
been; I have taken this my just and necessary liberty; for having read,
observed d^b^ted and considered both ancient and latter times the variations
and charges of Governments and Governors, and looking upon the present (...)
judgment, I still find a necessity of the ^^me my accustomed watchfullnesse,
it never being out of date; [the more my hearts grief*] for worthy and good men
(nay the most public spirited men): to suffer for (...) is promised the
blessing and the heavenly Kingdom (...)*

Your suffering at present, is bec^me every good man's (...) for they all
universally (...) your faithfulness and zeal (...) public ^^^le to be such,
as no occasion or tentation, could possibly corrupt, and the testimonies you
have given thereof to be so great, as greater could not be.

They observe likewise, the large testimony given of your deserts, by your
honorable and worthy Friend in the Army, Lievten. General Cremwell.

And therefore, that you should now be kept in safe custody, was very sad
news to all that love you; knowing how impossible it was, to make you fly or
start aside; but when they heard that you were sent to that reproachful prison
of Newgate, they were confounded with grief.

It should seem, that you being questioned by the Committee of Examinations
stood upon your old guard, alleging it to be against your liberty, as you w^^e
a free borne Englishman, to answer to questions against your self, urging
MAGNA CHARTA to justify your so doing; And complaining that contrary to the
said Charter, you had been diverse times imprisoned by them.

Now it is not much to be wondered at, that this your carriage should be very
offensive unto them; for you were not the first by diverse, (whom I could name)
that have been examined upon questions, tending to their own accusation and
imprisonment too, for refusing to answer* but you are the first indeed, that
ever raised this new doctrine of MAGNA CHARTA, to prove the same unlawful.

Likewise, You are the first, that compares this dealing to the cruelty of
the Starte Chamber, and that produced the Vote of this Parliament against those
cruelties (so unjustly inflicted on your self by that tyrannous Court) And how
could you Imagine this could be endured by a Committee of Parliament? No, most
Parliament men are to learn what is the just power of a Parliament, what the
Parliament may do, and what the Parliament (it self) may not do, It Is no
marvel then that others are ignorant, very good men there be; who affirm,
that a Parliament being once chosen, have power over all our lives estates and
liberties, to dispose of them at their pleasure whether for our good or hurt,
All Is one (say they) we have trusted them, and they are bound to no rules, nor
bounded by any limits, but whatsoever they shall ordain, binds all the people,
it is past all dispute, they are accountable unto none, they are above MAGNA
CHARTA and all Laws whatsoever, and there is no pleading of any thing against
them.

Others there are (as good wise and juditious men) who affirm, that a
Parliamentary authority is a power entrusted by the people (that chose them)
for their good, safety, and freedom; and therefore that a Parliament cannot
justly do any thing, to make the people less safe or less free then they
found them: MAGNA CHARTA (you must observe) is but a part of the peoples rights
and liberties, being no more but what with much striving and fighting, was by
the blood of our Ancestors, wrestled out of the paws of those Kings, who by
force had conquered the Nation, changed the laws and by strong hand held them
in bondage.

For though MAGNA CHARTA be so little, as less could not be granted with any
pretense of freedom, yet as if our Kings had repented them of that little,
they always strove to make it less, wherein very many times they had the
u^naturall assistance of Parliam^nts to help them: For Sir, it we should read
over all the hudge volume of our Statutes, we might easily observe how
miserably Parliaments assembled, have spent most of their times and we shall
not find one Statute made to the enlargement of that straight bounds,
deceitfully and improperlie called MAGNA CHARTA, (indeed so called to blind the
people) but if you shall observe and mark with your pen, every particular
Statute made to the abridgement of MAGNA CHARTA, you would make a very blotted
book, if you left any part unblotted,

Sometimes you shall find them very seriously employed, about letting loose the
Kings prerogatives, then denominating what should be Treason against him
(though to their own vexation and continual danger of their lives) sometimes
enlarging the power of the Church, and then again abridging the same,
sometimes devising punishments for Heresy, and as zealous in the old grossest
superstitions, as in the more refined and new, but ever to the vexation of the
people.

See how busy they have been about the regulating of petty inferior trades
and exercises, about the ordering of hunting, who should keep Dear and who
should not, who should keep a Greayhound, and who a Pigeonhouse, what
punishment for Dear stealing, what for every Pigeon killed, contrary to law,
who should wear cloth of such a price, who Velvet, Gold, and Silver, what
wages poor Laborers should have, and the like precious and rare business,
being most of them put on of purpose to divert them from the very thoughts of
freedom, suitable to the representative, body of so great a people.

And when by any accident or intolerable oppression they were roosed out of
those waking dreams, then what is the greatest thing they aim at? Hough with one
consent, cry out for MAGNA CARTA, (like great is Diana of the Ephesians)
calling that mess of pottage their birth right, the great inheritance of the
people, the great Charter of England.

And truly, when so choice a people, (as one would think Parliaments could not
fail to be) shall insist upon such inferior things, neglecting greater
matters, and be so unskilful in the nature of common and just freedom, as to
call bondage liberty, and the grants of Conquerours their Birthrights, no
marvel such a people make so little use of the greatest advantages; and when
they might have made a newer and better Charter, have fallen to patching the old.

Nor are you to blame others for extolling it, that are tainted therewith your
self, (saving only that its the best we have) Magna Charta has been more
precious in your esteem then it deserves; for it may be made good to the
people, and yet in many particulars, they may remain under intolerabl^
oppressions, as I could easily instance: And if there be any necessity on your
behalf, it shall not fail (with Gods grace) to be effected, let who so will
be offended, but if there be not a necessity, I conceive it better (for this
present age) to be concealed, then any wise divulged.

But in this point you are very clear, that the parliament ought to preserve
you in the Freedoms and liberties contained in Magna Charta at the least, and
they are not to permit any authority or Jurisdiction whatsoever to abridge you
or any man thereof, much less may they be the doers thereof themselves:
Something may be done through misinformation, but believe it, upon
consideration, they are to make a mends. Humanum est errare.

But as Abraham reasoning with God, was bold to say to that Almighty power,
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Much more may I in this your
case be bold to say, shall not the Supreme Judicatory of the Common Wealth do
right? God forbid.

That liberty and privilege which you claim is, as due unto you, as the air
you breath in; for a man to be examined in crimminall cases against himself,
and to be urged to accuse himself is as unnatural and unreasonable, as to
urge a man to kill himself, for though it be not so high a degree of
wickedness, yet it is as really wicked.

And for any man to be imprisoned without cause declared, and witnessed (by
more then one appearing face to face) is not only unjust; because expressie
against Magna Charta (both of Heaven and Earth) but also against all reason
sense, and the common Law of equity and justice.

Now in such cases as these, no authority in the world can overruled without
palpable sin; It is not in these cases, as it is in other things contained*
in Magna Charta, such as are the freedoms of the Church therein mentioned, for
some do argue that their power must be above Magna Charta, or otherwise they
would not justly alter the Government of the Church, by Arch Bishops and
Bishops, who have their foundation in Magna Charta.

But such are to consider, that the Government of the Church, is a thing
disputable and uncertain, and was always burdensome to the people now unto
things to themselves disputable and uncertain, as there is no reason why any
man should be bound expressly to any one form, further then his Judgment and
conscience do agree thereunto, even so ought the whole Nation to be free
therein even (...) ^aker and change the public form, as may best stand with
the safety and freedom of the people, For the Parliament is ever at liberty
to make the People more free from burden and oppressions of any nature, but in
things appertaining to the universal (...) of common equity and justice, all
men and all Authority in the world are bound.

This Parliament was preserved and established, by the love and affections of
the people, because they found themselves in great bondage and thraldom both
spiritual and temporal; out of both which the Parliament proposed to deliver
them in all their endeavors, at least Declarations, wherein never was more
assistance given by a people.

And for the first, it was a great thing, the exterpation of Episcopacie, b^t
that merely is not the main matter the people expected which indeed is, that
none be compelled against Conscience in the worship of God, nor any mollested
for Conscience sake, the oppression for Conscience, having been the greatest
oppression that ever lay upon religious people, and therefore except that be
removed, the people have small ease by removal of the Bishops, but rather will
be in greater bondage, if more and worse spiritual taskmasters be set over us.

These were no small matters also, their abolishing the High Commission, and
Star Chamber for oppressing the people, by imposing the Oath Ex Officio, and
by imprisoning of men, contrary to law, equity, and justice. But if the people
be not totally freed from oppression of the same nature, they have a very small
benefit of the taking down of those oppressing Courts. Seeming goodness is
more dangerous then open wickedness. Kind deeds are easily discerned from
fair and pleasing words. All the Art and Sophisterie in the world, will not
avail to persuade you, that you are not in New gate, much less that you are
at liberty.

And what became of that common and threed-bare doctrine, that Kings were
accountable only to God, what good effects did it produce? No, they are but
corrupt and dangerou^ flatterer, that maintain any such fond opinions
concerning either Kings or Parliaments.

What prejudice is it to any in any authority, meaning well, to be accountable,
for indeed and truth all are accountable, and it is but vain, (if not
prejudicial) for any to think otherwise. Does any man entrust, and not look
for justice and good dealing from him he trusts.

And if he find him through weakness or wickedness doing the contrary, will
he forbear to set him right (if he can.) Can he sit down silently with
injury or prejudice? I could judge those people very near to bondage, (if not
to ruin) that could be brought to believe it, there be many instances both
Fortaigne and Domestic, which yet I forbear to express.

The greatest safety will be found in open and universal justice, who relyeth
on any other, will be deceived, Remember therefore (says God) whence thou art
feign and repent, and do the first works, or else I will come quickly, and
will remove thy Candle stick out of his place. March not so swiftly ye mighty
ones, one single honest heatted man alone oftimes by unpleasing importunity,
not only stays, but saves a whole Army from inevitable danger; for better is
wisdom then weapons of war Ecclesiastes 9. 18. Timely mementoes and
cautions to advised and modest men (howsoever uttered) are never without good
effect. If godly David made some good use even of rash Sim^is railing, then
what happy use may the godly minded make of any faithful man's words, which
tend altogether, to justice, equity, and reason?

Nor can I imagine any evil is now intended toward you, for your faithful
and plain dealings, except by some few, and those instigated by one only, who
(by his great success, in getting out Mr. Henry Martine, that just and zealous
Patriot of his Country, and some other prevalencies) has swollen so big with
confidence, of greater matters, that he thinks Lilburns blood the next meat
Sacrifice for Oxford, so that what the King could not do to him as one of the
Parliaments best friends) when he was close Prisoner there the Parliament
themselves must endeavor to do to him in his unjust prisonment here,

The Poison of Asps is under that wicked man's tongue, with which he labouteth
always to poison Scripture, (mixing it figuratively) in his discourse to
corrupt, sinister, and unworthy ends, whose malice and hypocrisy (doubtless)
will ere long discover him to all men.

And (I doubt not) but that same God that took a h^ppie course with Hama^, and
delivered Mordita and all his people, will in you^ greatest necessity and his
fittest opportunity, fight against all your enemies and deliver both you and
all yours our of all your afflictions at least, so to mitigat^ and sweeten them
by supporting you under them, or rather bearing of them with you) that they
shall prove to be exceeding joys and consol^tions, to you and a^^ that love
you.

The honest and plain men of England in dispite of that man's malice, shall be
your Judges, and will spread forth in order (like King Ezekias letter) both
before God and their own consciences, what a world of injuries and miseries
you (between 20. and 30. years of age scarcely to be paraleld any where in
this age) have with great fidelity, magnanimity, and constancy undergone, in
the discharge of your conscience, and defense of the liberties of your native
Country, and will not suffer a hair of your head to be touched, nor any
reproach to be stuck upon your good name, but you shall live and be an honor
to your Nation in the hearts of all honest and well affected men, which shall
ever be the hearty desire of me.

Your faithful Friend.

The Printer to the Reader.
THere is here a copy of an excellent letter, which coming to my hands, by
the careful means of a worthy friend, who is a Wel-willer both to his
Countries privileges, and to those few who eitherstand for them, or for the
truth, have thought it my duty not to ^ther nor obscure such a needful
Epistle' but rather (as times are) to manifest it to the world, according as it
came entitled to me, namely, A Private letter of public use: Whereby it may
appear now in these dangerous days, both how the States and Clergy of this
Kingdom have pitifully abused the people, even our ancient predicestors for
many ages, both in Church and Common wealth.

First, In bringing them with a high hand, under heavy thraldom and great
bondage, and then keeping them in lamentable slaverie for many hundreds of
years, as still their Successors the States men and Clergy of our days, do
with all their policy and machinations; and what designs they cannot thereby
bring to pass, they endeavor by all possible means (whether directly or
indirectly) even by open violence, without showing any just cause, and yet all
under the color of laws, when in the mean time they were called together,
sworn, entrusted and commanded, both to rectify whatsever wicked decrees,
Popish Cannons, Arbitrary, corrup^, or defective Laws, their predicessors in
the days of gross ignorance and palpable darkness, did establish.

Howsoever, the body of the Letter does not specify in plain rearmes, what
the title painteth out in lively colors, yet thou being judicious and
industrious, may easily enough perceive the same by the full scope, true intent
and meaning thereof, intimated to thy understanding, under the Authors modest
and loving expressions, to this worthy instrument of Englands delivery,
Lievten. Collonell Lilburn, that he may see more clearly. then (it may be) he
did formerly, both how far short even those which we call our best laws,
comes of the mark of perfection, justice, integrity, and reason, that the
worthyes of Parliament, according to their duty unto the people, and the
peoples due at their hands, may not only reform what is amiss (and that now
whiles they profess reformation) but likewise carry that dutyfull respect
unto him, as one of their most trusty servants, and that according to the
degree, nature, and eminency of all his faithful services, and cruel
sufferings, and that such others, (though there be few) may be rather
encouraged to persist, then any wise being so rewarded, to desist. Fare you
well.

Courteous Reader, I desire thee to read a late Printed Book entitled,
Englands birthright justified, against all Arbitrary Usurpation, whether Regal
or Parliamentary, or under what Vizar soever.

Printed October, 1645.

FINIS.

