A Copy of Sir William Wallers Letter, etc.

A GREAT VICTORY, OBTAINED BY Sir WILLIAM WALLER, AND Lievtenant-Generall
CROMWELL, AGAINST Colonel Sir James Long, (High-Sheriffe of Wiltshire) who
was driven from the Devizes, and his whole Regiment taken, being the same Horse
that conducted the Prince from Oxford to Bristoll, Where were taken Colonel
Long, the high Sheriff. The Under-Sheriffe. Eight Captains. Seven Cornets.
Four hundred Horse. Three hundred forty Arms. Three hundred prisoners. Goring
pursued by Sir William Waller.


Published according to Order.

march.18th LONDON, Printed for Robert Austin. 1645.

A great Victory obtained by Sir William Waller, and Lievtenant-General
Cromwell, against Col. Long, etc.
Noble Sir,
SInce Colonel LONG was returned from conveighing the Prince, with the Bishop
of Armach, and diverse of the Oxford Nobility, to Bristoll, we had intelligence,
that he was coming toward the Devizes, having a gallant Regiment of Horse,
consisting of about 400. men, hereupon Sir WILLIAM WALLER endeavored to get
betwixt him and the town; but having a long march, he got to the Devizes,
before Sir WILLIAM approached, and was quartered there, with Colonel Sir
CHARLES LLOYD, the Governor thereof, for about two days, by which time Sir
WILLIAM WALLER made his approach. On Monday the 10. of this present March, he
quartered with his whole Army at Almesbury, Normanton, Lake, Dearne, and
Derringron, and that very a strong party was commanded forth, out of which
were drawn diverse Scouts, which were sent toward the Devizes, Stepstone, and
other parts, to discover the Enemy, and what strength they were of, some
whereof returned in the evening with Intelligence, That Colonel Long was in
the Devizes, with a Posse Comitatus, or the County Forces, for this Long is
the Kings high Sheriff of the County of Wilts, son to Sir Walter Long who
lately deceased, who being in drink, fell from his horse near Chichister, and
broke his neck, and his son has been a very active man against the
Parliament, ever since he has begged his Wardship, which put him to much
travel and pains, for which he almost spurred the horse to death that had
broke his fathers neck; for he had vowed before he came off his back to get his
Wardship.

This Intelligence caused Sir William to advance toward the Devizes that
night, having also advertisement, that the enemies Works about the town were
very slight, and when his Army were on their march about a mile from Amsbury,
he drew them up into a Body, and four out of every Troop, to go on the
Forlorn Hope.

On Tuesday morning very early, our Forlorn Hope gave the Enemy an Alarm (the
whole Army marching all night) upon which all Colonel Longs Regiment, which
were quartered in and near the Devizes, drew into a Body, and news being
brought thereof to Sir William, he made some stay, and at the first seemed
rather to prepare for defense, then to give an assault, and divides his Horse
into three Brigades, the first commanded by himself, quartered near Potterne,
Woodington, and the Devizes, the next Brigade was commanded by
Lievtenant-Generall Gromwell, and the third by Sir Hadzer Waller a kinsman of
Sir Williams, which Brigade joined together, and wheeled about and fetched a
large compass, that they might not be discovered by the enemy, and fell in
between them and the Bath.

On Wednesday morning, Sir William Waller drew up his Forces to fall upon the
enemy, and they having discovered that Sir William had a purpose to give them a
visit, Colonel Long with the horse left the Devizes, and retreated toward
Bath, not having notice of General Cromwells readiness on that side to
receive them, and Sir Charles Lloyd the Governor of the Devizes, with most of
the Foot slighted their Works, and retreated into the Castle, thinking that
they were not able to defend the Town: Sir William hearing that Colonel Long
was marching away, he pursued him very close in the Rear, and when the Enemy
were a little past Milchin, thinking by the swiftness of their march to make
their escape away.

Colonel Cromwell appeared in the Van, betwixt him and Bradford, which having
notice of colonel Long, would have returned back again, but could make no
way of escape, the passes being narrow, and the country so sortified with
quick set hedges, that he was as it were in a pound.

We took from the Enemy 400. Horse, and 300. Prisoners: we took colonel Long
himself the Kings high Sheriff, their Commander in chief, Captain Web, and
seven Captains more, the Under-Sheriffe, seven Comets, with many other
Officers. We took also 340. Arms; and of this whole Regiment, which was the
best (as we understand) the King has, there escaped but 30. we lost but two
men on our side, and but four of the Enemy were killed.

Colonel Ludlow is now (thanks be to God) sole high Sheriff of this County:
his competitor (being now taken prisoner) is in custodia Mariscallorum, with
the greatest part of his Commanders and Officers, and his whole Regiment
utterly extirpate.

Colonel Ludlowes approach hither is now most earnestly desired to join with
us, in regard this County, in which we hope there will be found but little
opposition, though we have been lately heavy laden with infinite numbers of
barbarous villains. To God be the praise, who has so graciously looked upon
our sufferings.

The Garrison of Langford hearing of so many losses to the Kings Army, in
several places, one upon the neck of another, are in great distraction, and
almost hopeless of subsisting, having not above sixteen Horse, and they are
very poor jades, to fetch in provisions, of which it is conceived, they begin
to be straightened: and for their men, they are most of them forced, of which
(we hope) there will shortly be given a very good account.

We hear Colonel Goring does still retreat before us: it is thought he
intends to join with Colonel Barkly the Governor of Excester; and Sir
William Waller is marching toward Colonel Holborne at Ta^nton, and intends to
draw out what strength he can out of Summer set shire to joint with him, and so
to loose no time to pursue after. So with my due respects and humble service, I
rest,

Southampton March 14. 1644. Your faithful and affectionate Servant.

Here follows a Copy of Sir William Wallers own Letter.
SIR,
Colonel Cook and Captain Butler have written at large unto you, and
therefore I shall only confirm it, that with Gods gracious assistance we have
routed the best Regiment the King had in the West, of four hundred Horse;
there escaped not thirty, the Colonel, Sir James Long, eight Captains, and
seven Cornets were taken, and most of the other Officers, with about three
hundred prisoners. This fell out in Wiltshire, between Troughbridge and
Stepston. We are now marching toward honest Holborne, with wnom (by the grace
of God) we will join, or stick half way.

March 13. 1644. William Waller.
A list of what was taken.
Col. Sir James Longthe high Sheriff The Under Sheriff 8. Captains 7. Cornets
400. Horse 340. Arms 300. Prisoners. Goring pursued by Sir W. Waller.


FINIS.

