PETITIONS AGAINST BISHOPS And their Votes in Parliament, subscribed unto after
a Clandestine, delivered after a tumultuous manner, and falsely going under the
name of a whole County or Town, proved to be both contrary to our late taken
PROTESTATION, as also utterly unlawful by many other clear and evident
Reasons: First written for satisfaction of some private men, and now published
for the good of others.

By J. W.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Richard Lownds, at his shop adjoining to Ludgate,
1642.

Mr. Cachism,
FOr your satisfaction, why I have several times refused to subscribe your
Petition, You may please to understand, that for the good of the Commonweal,
County, or Parish wherein I live, I shall be always ready and willing to give
not only my hand, but my heart and purse likewise: For the public welfare
whereof I have been both active and passive for several years together.

But for me who am but a private Subject, A Protestant, and no Lawmakers, to
give my hand in a Factious way, and without command from Authority, to will,
that there shall be no Bishops, and that they shall have no voice in the House
of Peers, is against my Conscience, and that light of Reason and Understanding
which I have received: And I dare not comply with the Distempers of the people,
and follow the stream of a Multitude to do evil, on these grounds following.

First, Because I have by the Example and Recommendation of the Parliament,
solemnly taken the Protestation: Whereby I have seriously Protested, to
Maintain and Defend as far as lawfully I may the true Reformed Protestant
Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all
Popery, and Popish innovations, contrary to the said Doctrine. Now in the
thirty sixth Article of the said expressed Doctrine, the Office of Bishops is
inclusively confirmed.

Secondly, I am engaged thereby also, to mayntain and defend the Powers, and
Privileges of Parliaments, which is chiefly to be understood of the established
Laws concerning the same. Now several Acts of Parliament do not only
confirm, as aforesaid, the Office of a Bishop, but by the powers and
privileges of those Acts of Parliament, they are also to sit as Members of the
Lords House.

Thirdly, I am bound by the said Protestation, to mayntain and defend the
lawful rights and liberties of the Subject (And if this extends to every
subject in particular, much more to Parliament Men) Now they being subjects,
and their Rights and Liberties being lawful, I am bound to mayntaine them as
far as lawfully I may, in those lawful Rights and Liberties. Again, the
making and repealing of Laws, for the good of the Commonwealth, is a special
and peculiar power, privilege, and right, proper only to Parliaments, therefore
not to be forced or coacted by me being no Parliament man. For that may be
lawful and warrantable in my Governors to do by reason, which is altogether
unlawful and unwarrantable in me to require by Will. This is rather to be a
tyrannical ludge, then a legal Witness, to break Laws rather then preserve
them, and instead of Reformation to bring in Confusion.

Fourthly, I am likewise obliged to mayntain and defend the Kings Royal
Person, Honor, and Estate, and to preserve the Union and Peace between his
three Kingdoms (much more amongst our selves.) Now there is no better way
thereunto, then to keep his laws: For both the honor and safety of the King,
the liberty and peace of the Kingdom, and welfare of them both, are involved
in them.

Fifthly, I am engaged also to oppose, as far as lawfully I may, and by all good
ways and means to bring to condign punishment, all such as shall either by
force, practice, Counsels, plots, or Conspiracies, do any thing to the contrary
of any thing in that present Protestation contained. How then dare I be so
far from bringing to condign punishment the offenders, that I shall wilfully
consent to the breach of it, and procure others thereunto, by practice, plots,
conspiracies or the like?

Sixthly, I am neither for hope, fear, favor, or other respect whatsoever, to
relinquish this promise, vow, and Protestation, much less to break it for the
same ends, and to make others to do the like; This betraying others thereunto,
and making them guilty of the breach of so solemn a Vow, is an offense of an
high nature both to God and our Governonrs.

Finally, I am not bound in any Article thereof, farther then I may lawfully
perform it, The Law being the harmonious scope, bounds, and limits of my
Protestation, And therefore I may not unlawfully do any thing that may tend to
the breach or contradiction of any Article thereof.

Moreover, the manner of the proceeding does not satisfy me.

First, Because it is not done in that right way it ought to be. For that which
is to go under the name of a County or Town, ought to be first assented unto
by the Sheriff, Justice of peace, or other Magistrates respectively, and then
the matter may be publicly propounded, and condiscended unto or contradicted,
that men may be encouraged or dissuaded, by good reasons pro and con.

And this is that lawful and usual way for Election of Knights and Burgesses
for the Parliament, and of other Officers and Matters concerning the public;
Wherefore Clandestine and surreptitious actions, going about from house to
house by night, and without the consent and commission of authority, to engage
people to the breach of their protestation, and to make it as an act of a
County or a Town, and in a manner to force men thereunto, are but unlawful
works of darkness, and will not endure the light.

Secondly, It is justly to be feared that these ways are sinister in the
Undertakers, being very probable that some of them do it out of ill will,
hatred and malice, as well to the Government as the Governors, or for favor
and affection to some whom they suppose it pleases, or for gain and profit,
or fear of displeasure of Landlords and Customers, or for vain glory, that it
may be said, This is the Babel which they have wrought with their own hands.
And some few of these shall engage and prejudice others (and not without cause
as it is to be feared) by false informations and reasons to make men subscribe.

Thirdly, The like sinister proceedings are to be supposed in the subscriber.

These kinds of ways by Tumults and Multitudes without legal allegations and
probations to compass that by will which you cannot obtain by reason, is of a
very dangerous consequence, and threatens the subversion of all Law,
Government, and Governors, for which of them, be they never so good, shall be
secure, if the Multitude of distempered people please to will the contrary?

These cause much distractions, Hinder the proceeding of the State, and the
relief of the oppressed, break our blessed Unity, and bring the actors within
the compass of a punishment from the law of God and Man, for not walking
according to the expressed Statutes contained therein.

Furthermore, this does not agree with that light of Reason, and Understanding,
which God has given me to walk by, nor that Christian experience which I have
gained under the Cross.

First, That for the vice or abuse of any thing, the right and lawful use
thereof, or execution of the office, should be abolished and taken away, or
that for the present particular offenses of some, the innocent posterity shall
suffer; For I am not convinced in my conscience of the unlawfulness of the
Office of a Bishop, and am persuaded that there have been many of them godly
and zealous Martyrs for the Truth, and many of them remain still godly and
religious protestants.

Secondly, Though time of prosperity has made some of them guilty of foul
offenses, and it may be with the children of Israel they have not worshipped
the true God as they ought, and have inclined to Idolatry, and thereby justly
provoked the Almighty to wrath and indignation against them: Yet I am
persuaded, that for the very execution of their Office, and the Ecclesiastical
laws, for the unity and peace of the Church, they suffer instrumentally by
diverse ill affected to Government, or by such as have been punished by them for
doing contrary thereunto. And if the like proceedings may be suffered against
all Judges and other Executioners of the laws of the Kingdom, there shall be
no secure execution of the law against offenders, and so we shall live
lawless, and let in all manner of Disorder, and Vice, Murder, Rapine, and the
like. Those Bishops rather (under correction) that have done contrary to the
law, are to be punished by the law, on due and true proofs, and not according
to your wills.

Thirdly, Because that which is or seems to be a prejudice now, may in Gods
good time prove a great benefit, We many times earnestly pray for those things
which afterward we heartily give God thanks for not granting our requests, And
this has many times been for the removal of our present afflictions. I am
confident if there were good care taken (as there may be) that good men may be
made Bishops, we shall never repent of their lawful office or place, for
greatness with goodness will much advance the cause and welfare of the Church
and Commonwealth, and farther, I know it is possible for some inferiors to
execute the Law and the Gospel likewise, in a far more imperious and
Tyrannical way then some Superiors have done.

Fourthly, That though there be Obstacles and Mountains in the way, and the
supposed enemies of Gods Church and Children, yet as I am a Christian I dare
not judge them, or curse them as many do, or use any unlawful means to remove
them, (or under the pretense of pulling down one Babell to set up another:)
What David did by way of prediction, as he was a King and Prophet, against the
inveterate and incurable enemies of the Church of God, I as an ordinary
Christian ought not to do, I may live peradventure to see my enemies desert
upon them, which I may not desire to see.

I am to judge charitably of the actions and intentions of my Governors, what
I think peradventure is for my hurt, may be intended, or at leastwise turned to
my good, I must walk by the Rule of Gods Word, and follow the examples and
precepts of my Savior, To pray for them that hate me, and to do good to them
that persecute me, And not forget to pray for all that are in authority, that I
may live a godly life under them in all peace and quietness. Why may I not
suspect that this long enjoyment of the Gospel in peace and plenty, has
produced evil effects in me as well as in my Governors? But be my Governors
what they will I have learned to obey all their lawful commands, and thank God
that I may live under so happy a command; If they command me to do no otherwise
the what is just and right, I must and will willingly do it. Neither dare I
neglect my duty to them, though they forget theirs to me: For their offenses
and neglects to me shall not excuse me to God nor them, for my offenses and
not performances of mine to either of them.

Fifthly, I dare not but look at the hand of God, and not at the instrument
only of my afflictions, I know nothing can come to pass but by his permission.
I am assured that sin is the prime cause of all my sufferings, and I fear
that ingratiude in not being thankful, and walking worthy of those great
mercies received, has been a principal cause why God has shut up the hearts
of some of our Governors at this present, as is much feared.

Sixthly, I know God will correct his children for their sins, and in the
execution of his judgments on the World he will begin at his own house, either
to work out sin, or to work in grace, or to make that Grace more manifest
which is already wrought. I know that the end of Gods correction is
Reformation, till then, if smaller afflictions will not prevail greater shall,
if not one kind then an other, if the sword of our enemies do not, the swords
peradventure of our own amongst our selves shall, if not they, peradventure the
Pestilence, or the Famine, or some other shall. Sundry of which sometimes come
together, to let the World know, that our afflictions come not immediate from
any one secondary and isntrumental cause, but that it is from the will and
pleasure of the Almighty so to order and to dispose it, who will not take off
his judgments as the effects, till our sins as the causes be removed.

Seventhly, I dare not use any unlawful means to ease my affliction, I know no
better way then by Humiliation and Prayer to God for a sight of those sins
whereby I have provoked him to wrath, and for grace, and true repentance for
the same, and Remission by the merits of my Savior Jesus Christ; And then to
apply my self with all diligence to all lawful means to remove them, yet I
am not to put too much confidence in them. I could never yet find any benefit
by impatience under the hand of the Almighty, I have found more afflictions
procured thereby, and I am assured that the Church and Children of God never
lost by patient suffering.

Eighthly, As I know that Gods Decree in his determination of judgments shall
be fulfilled, so I am confidently assured, that when the time of his
deliverance is come, all the power and subtilty of the Devil and his
instruments, as they shall go no further then he has limited them, so they
shall not hinder him from taking off his Rod when he pleases. For he is able
to bring his will to pass by means, without means, and contrary to means.
Rather then his children shall not have their due relief, The Sea shall part,
the Earth shall open and swallow up their adversaries, or fire shall come down
from Heaven and destroy them. And this may comfort Christians, that God reigns
and rules as King in Heaven, the cause of his Church and Children is his, and
he beholds and governes the inhabitants of the earth, he has the hearts of all
in his hand, he can turn them or overturn them when he pleases for the good
of his, When our ways please him He can make our enemies be at peace with us,
and the same hand to heal us that has wounded us, It is he only that can make
men to be of one heart, and one mind, and to make all things to work together
for the best of them that love him.

To conclude, I hope by this time you have received full satisfaction, why I
have refused to subscribe, yet let me assure you that if the Parliament shall
think fit to alter that Government, I dare not, in conscience, and duty to the
Protestation, refuse to be governed by it.

Be confident, that not only my Prayers, but my true endeavors have been, and
by Gods Grace shall continue, for Reformation. I know God has suffered many of
his dear Saints and Children to fall into great and heinous sins and
offenses, yet when he has duly chastised them, after true repentance he has
made them greater instruments of his Glory, and the good of his Church, then in
former times they were.

I must expect for this, as well as the rest of my endeavors for Truth and
Peace, your usual jeeres, scoffs, and censures of reprobation and the like,
but my comfort is, that God knows who are his, and who are the true Friends
and Enemies of the Church and State, and that I have syncerely discharged my
conscience, according to that weak talent I have received, in obedience to the
Protestation, for the good of both.

I therefore you shall remain still my adversaries for so doing, peradventure
I may for a while longer suffer, yet it shall comfort me, that it is for
well-doing, Whereas when you shall suffer as evil doers, you may (without
timely repentance) everlastingly perish in the gain-sayings of Core. For though
hand join hand in hand, God will not suffer the wicked to go unpunished. If
you find any Material error herein inform and convince me thereof, and I
do assure you on the Faith of a true Protestant, I will endeavor Reformation,
the like I commend unto you hereby, and expect the same from you as a trial of
your profession, which I shall plainly discover if wilfully you continue and
persist in a known error, and so I bid you Farewell,

Remaining a constant Friend to Truth and Peace, the only support under God of
the welfare of the Church and State,

And Yours I. W.
Ianuarii primo 1641.
FINIS.

