THE Bowing the Heart OF SUBJECTS TO THEIR SOVEREIGN.

A SERMON PREACHED on the 24th of May, 1660.

Being a Day of Public Thanksgiving to the Lord for raising up his Excellency
the Lord General MONCK, and other eminent Persons, who have been Instrumental
in the Delivery of this Nation from thraldom and misery.

By Francis Walsall D. D. and Rector of Sandy in Bedfordshire.

PSALM. 126. 1, 2, 3. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were
like them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue
with singing, then said they among the Heathen, The Lord has done great things
for them. The Lord has done great things for us: whereof we are glad. LONDON,
Printed for John Sherley at the golden Pelican in Little-Britain, 1660.

TO THE Ingenuous Reader.
IT is not hard to divine, that this poor Piece will be charged with a double
guilt, of coming out too soon, and of coming out too late; too soon as being no
better, and too late if it were better. The horns of this Dilemma will be more
easily slipped, by owning both, then denying either. The reason why it comes out
so late, being because the Author thought it not fit to come out at all,
howsoever at last he bowed his heart, to use the phrase of his Text, to the
judgment (shall I say?) or affection of his Friend: 'twere a day after the
Feast, but that he hopes the Feast will last always: besides that it may pass
for a vigil to the grand Festival of June 28. which is appointed a Day of
Thanksgiving for his Majesty's happy return, etc. If any expression in it be
quarreled at, as too aerie, thou will easily pardon the ebullitions and
excrescences of an excessive and unweildy Joy. Since it pleased God to go out
of the ordinary Road of his Providence, in giving us this blessed Opportunity
of Rejoicing, it is no wonder if we step out of our ordinary road of
Preaching, to meet him, and wait upon his Praise. Those clear souls, whose real
affections to the Cause have exalted their spirits, will need no other Topic
to persuade their Allowance of some passages, which upon another Account may
seem too light, than this, that when Rivers overflow their banks, (as in this
great Springtide of Joy) before they retreat to their channels, they leave
behind them a kind of light matter that floated upon the face of the waters,
which has its use too in a tendency to make fruitful, as the rest of the body
of water that has more weight, and sinks deeper. When men's mouths have been
long stopped (as we have been too long ante-episcopally silenced) when the Lord
opens our lips to show forth his praise by so eminent a Miracle of Mercy as
this was, it is hard to give a check to those thoughts that have lain so long
in durance, and now press, and throng, and crowd up to such a Jail-delivery.
Such Solemnities, as they enlarge the heart, so they give a great latitude to
Tongue and Pen in venting those enlargements. But no more, this will be enough
to him I address to, the Ingenuous Reader.

F. W.

A SERMON Preached on May 24, 1660. Being a Day of Public Thanksgiving, etc.
2 SAMUEL 19. 14. And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the
heart of one man, so that they sent this word unto the King; Reurn thou and all
thy servants.
AS I cannot speak too much, so I would not speak too little, of those Glories
the most conspicuous hand of Providence has shed and shined upon us, those
Miracles of Mercies he has gilded and enameld this day withal: (...), the
day is too little for the day, as our Savior says, Enough for the day is the
evil Matthew. 6. 34.
thereof: so may we say (and happy we that we may say so) too much for the day
is the good thereof: the day is too little to acquaint you with all the Grounds
of your praising God this day, and to raise the Building of your high Praises
upon those grounds. Therefore Psalm. 149. 6.
that little that the little time will give me leave to speak to the Time, I
would fain have apt and apposite, few words, but fit words; acceptable words,
such as the Preacher sought out, a word in season, such Eccles. 12. 10. Esa.
50. 4. Prove. 25. 11. (...). Opus Diei in die suo.
as the Prophet found out. Solomon tells us, that a word fitly spoken is like
Apples of Gold in Pictures of silver: such gold and silver Medals would I cast
among you this day: and therefore have I pitched upon this Text, than which the
whole Book of God affords none more seasonable and suitable for the work of the
day, or the day of the work: for it wraps up in its fair bosom, all those
sparkling circumstances that have canonizd this day in the Rubric of our
hearts, and characterd it in a Dominicall scarlet for a holy Feast to the Lord,
a day of Praise and Thanksgiving. This May 24, is the forerunner of May 29, as
John Baptist was to Christ: and I have the rather chosen this, because, as it
is a remarkable Time, so you should have a remarkable Text; that whatsoever the
Sermon be, you may be sure of an excellent Text, a Text butted and bounded, and
exactly circumstantiated and proportioned to the Time; that those, that
commonly remember little of the Sermon, may remember Sermon enough in the Text.
And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man;
so they sent this word unto the King, Return thou and all thy servants.

My work to day shall be only a Paraphrase and a Parallel, close woven together
on the words modelled into these three parts:

1. Here Is a blessed Instrument; He.

2. A blessed Influence of that, He, upon others; He bowed the heart of all the
men of Judah, even as the heart of one man.

3. A blessed Effect of this Influence, that they sent this word unto the King,
Return thou and all thy servants.

1. The blessed Instrument, He: A blessed Instrument in the hands of God and
the King; Gods servant, and the Kings servant, Amasa, the General of the Army.
If you would know who this* Amasa was, look into Chap. 17. 25. And Absalom made
Amasa Captain of the Host instead of Joab: He was the General of the Advers
Party, Absoloms General, yet He (i. e.) his General did this great Work: He
bowed the hearts of all the men of Judah, (i. e.) He inclind and brought over
the whole Nation to the King, that he might happily bring over the King to the
Nation: God bowed his heart first, and then he bowed the hearts of all the
People. This bowing the Generals heart to the King, as well as the Generals
bowing the hearts of the People to the King, is the most eminent and
conspicuous work of the great heart-bower and heartbreaker God himself; of whom
Solomon says, Prove. 21. 1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord as the
rivers of water, he turns it whithersoever he will. He turned the Generals
heart to the King, and turned the Peoples heart to the General, that he might
turn Genesis 22. 14. (...).
the Peoples heart to their King. This is Deus in monte, and Deus e machina, an
eminent and immediate Providence: where we may see, not the finger only, but
the hand; not the hand only, but the eminent, visible, naked bare Arm of God.
God covers his hand, acts as it were behind the hangings when he uses means,
but when he will shed a luster upon eminent Persons and Things by immediate
Providence, he makes no use of the Creature, but puts forth his own power
immediately: thus he handles the enemies of his Church without gloves (as we
say) with his bare naked hand, which is more than with his Rod, as speaking
immediate vengeance: and thus God delivers his servants with a mighty hand and
outstretched arm. So has he done for us, that we may say with the Prophet, Esa.
52. 10. The Lord Hab. 3. 9. Thy bow was made quite naked.
has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all Nations, and all the ends of the
earth shall see the salvation of God. And therefore you shall find in some
Scriptures, that God does eminently assert his own hand, as Esa. 63. 5. I
looked and there was none to help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold,
therefore his own arm Esa. 59. 16. It is in the third person, ^is arm.
brought salvation. Thus it has often been the honor and happiness of Gods
people, to own their salvation to the immediate hand of God: Deuteronomy. 33. last.
Happy art thou O Israel; who is like unto thee, saved by the Lord, the shield
of thy* help, and who is the sword of thy excellence? such is the salvation we
bless God for this day; this is the Lords doing and it is mavelous in our
eyes, Psalm. 118. 23. it is in the Hebrew (...) this is from the Lord, i. e. the
immediate hand of God: the doing is from the Lord, as the day is from the Lord,
both his immediate work, as it follows ver. 24. this is the day which the Lord
has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it: (...) hanc diem fecit Dominus,
which I conceive a more natural reading of the words, than that of haec est
dies quam fecit Dominus; because there is neither, is, nor which, in the Text.
This deed the Lord did, and this day the Lord made, we will rejoice and be glad
in it. And good reason, for such a sweet, such a sudden, such a saving change,
without noise, without charge, without blood, I challenge all Nations, all
Ages, all Story to produce a parallel: the Lord help us to kiss the Hand of
that glorious Arm with an humble Thankfullness. Let us thank God for Amasa, and
let us thank God in Amasa for David: let us thank God for the General, and let
us thank God in the General for the King. As we have a high share, so let us
have a deep sense, of those sweet and saving successes that Providence has
crowned the Generals undertaking with. I would gladly let the world know the
value we put upon his Excellence for our Deliverances; deliverances that have
not only answered, but prevented our hopes, prevented and yet enlargd them, by
giving in pledges to our humble confidence, that this floating Island is at
length growing to its long-groand-for establishment, upon its proper Basis of
Truth and Peace, Religion and Law. Let us pay our Sterling* thanks to the Lord
of Hosts for this Excellent Amasa the Lord Generals Excellence, whom the Lord
has made the Healer of our Breaches, first to heal a broken and divided House,
and by that a broken and divided Kingdom: both which, as they were a Judgment
of God upon us, so in the Judgment of God himself, they threatened our fatal
and final Ruin. A House divided, and a Kingdom divided, cannot stand, says
Christ, Mar. 3. 24, 25. And we were both these, and the Lord made the General
a blessed Instrument of Healing both these, and by them us all; by applying his
excellent Weaponsalve to the Sword, heald us that were hurt. It was he that set
the dislocated (secluded) Members of that great Body in joint again: He was the
first Mover to our Happiness, the first that gave Check to that rapid motion
that so hurryd us to destruction. It was he that securd the Intervall between
the two Parliaments so, that (though the world was half mad then) yet we had a
lucid Intervall. It was he that settled our Joys and securd our hopes in this
present Parliament. It is he, the needful Midwifery of whose constant Care and
goodness still attends this poor traveling Nation (that is yet in her Throes
tormented with many struggling Parties in her Womb) till she be fairly deliverd
of a Handsome and Happy Birth, that may wear the Lord Generals Name to
Posterity, and our Childrens Children shall sing the Story of the Lord General
Monks Peace, while their pleased Parents smile themselves into tears of Joy, in
the remembrance that they lived to see the Truth of those strange Revolutions,
that to after-Ages may possibly wear the face of a Romance. This is that
blessed Instrument in Gods hand and the Kings hand: that He in my Text, Noble
Amasa, a General that is the Darling of Prince and People. Lord shield him
from the Fate of Amasa and Joab: Lord keep him as the Apple of thine Eye, whom
thou have raisd to keep the Apple (the light) of our Eyes, his most Sacred
Majesty, the only proper and precious Keeper of our Lives and Liberties. O may
both King and General long live happy in one another, and all we in both them!
You may wonder I have said so much of this He, the General: but that I may
rebate that wonder, which is indeed but the daughter of Ignorance and
inconsideration, I must tell you, this He, is a General, and that word speaks
Power, a Public Person and a General Blessing. And truly though I never spoke
so much of any living man in this Place (and I fear (or hope shall I say) shall
never have occasion to say so much again of any living man, a Subject) yet if I
had spoken less of him, the stones might have flown in my face for my silence,
and spoken themselves these loud Truths. The Peoples Argument to Christ for the
Centurion was but a petty Topic to this; They tell him, that he was worthy
for whom he should do this, for he loved their Nation, and built Luke 7. 4, 5.
them a Synagogue. Whereas this Noble Soldier has, not only loved, but saved
our Nation, and not only saved our Nation, but (as the admired St. Alban says
in that History of Stanly to Hen. 7.) saved it and crowned it at once, nay saved
and crowned three Nations at once. Saved the Nations and Crowned them with their
King; saved the King and Crowned him with his People: the best of Crowns that
ever any Prince was Crowned with, a Crown of hearts: a Crown of greater luster
than those three upon his Predecessor Edwards Sword: and not only built us a
Synagogue, but a Temple, another Zerubbabel laying the foundation at least of a
second Temple, for our first is sadly destroyed: but no more of that; I will
not infaudum renovare dolorem, I will not blast your full blown joys, or grate
your ears, or my heart, with any sad and unseasonable Reflections upon that
mournful Theme, upon a day of such universal rejoycings. But this is but one
Argument of my Apology for enlarging so much upon this Subject the General,
this day; my next is, that he is the General Subject of this day. This is one
of the main things in the Act of Parliament for this days solemnity, as being
the Resolve of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this day be set apart
for a day of Thanksgiving to the Lord, for raising up his Excellency the Lord
General and other eminent Persons, who have been Isntrumental in the Delivery
of this Nation from Thraldom and misery. I shall also acquaint you with
another Resolve of the House of Commons of the same date, viz. Apr. 26. 1660.
Resolved, That his Excellency General Monck have the acknowledgement and
hearty thanks of this House for his eminent and unparalleld Services done for
those Nations. Mr. Speaker did accordingly give the thanks of the House unto
his Excellency, taking notice of his eminent Services and great Wisdom in
conquering the Enemy without expense of Blood or Treasure. That Gods making him
so isntrumental to keep up the Nation from sinking, when no way appeared
whence deliverance should arise, could not but be acknowledged by all, and
looked upon as a miracle: so then we must praise God for the General this day,
and when we praise God for him, we cannot but praise God in him. One Reason
more I could give for dwelling so long upon General Amasa, and that is, that he
was the Kings Kinsman. See the verse. before my Text, how the King cajoll's him:
Say ye to Amasa, art thou not of my bone and of my flesh: it is no small honor
to relate to a King, but every loyal soul, and every loving Subject looks upon
himself, as nearly related to his Prince by his Allegiance, as he can be by his
Alliance: and upon that account thinks all the Blood in his Veins, and all the
flesh and bones of his body little enough to guard his head, his Cognatum
numen, his lesser God in flesh, his Deity incarnate in his Prince.

2. He bowed, etc.] How was he qualified for such a work? It is not every man
that could have bowed a whole Nation thus: and especially this Nation of Judah.
I am sure Moses, that was their General as well as Amasa, branded them for a
stiffneck'd rebellious People, and this General's Master, David, found them so:
how come they so soft now? They were stiff enough as long as Absalom lived: but
Actio moritur cum Persona, his cause died with his carcass, and now they melt
for him, and they melt from him. Hopes and fears may stiffen peoples hearts
against their known duty, whilst the cause looks promisingly; but if it get a
knock, soldiers themselves we see will faces about: but nothing softens like
the example of a Commander, like lightning he melts the steel in the
scabber'd, makes their hearts soft and fluid, and ductill, easily lead with a
finger to run in their old chanel of Allegiance to their natural Prince. O a
great man, but especially a good great man, and beloved for his goodness as
well as greatness carries an invisible loadstone, that bows and draws even iron
hearts. Indeed when greatness and goodness meet together (which it is pity is
no oftener) they work wonders. The God of Heaven call's great ones, Gods on
earth, and therefore we give them a civil worship; now, Quos colimus, imitamur,
says the Father; and therefore if men in power be as good as they are great,
they show themselves worthy the Divinity God has stamped upon them; for like
the upper lights, they have a great influence upon those below them. The truth
is, great men had need look what paths they tread; for they walk in snow, or
like the Priests of Bell, in ashes, every one sees their footsteps, and most
will walk in them. It is not for the Sun to lie a bed till noon, while no man
regards the rising or setting of a petty Star. We see by our late Usurpers
and Oppressors, what power some leading men had to bow others to their will
and way: they lead people in droves to the Devil; the very broad way was full
of leaders and followers. When one of these great things relapses into
backslidings, let him go backward from God, as many degrees as he will, he
shall be sure the multitude will crowd after him, as the Sun that went
backward for Hezekiah, was waited upon by knots and Committees of vulgar
lights: It was ever the deplored fashion of the world; let great ones do what
they will, they shall never want Apes, while sometimes being too eager in
tacking about to gain the tide of wealth, or the wind of honor, they not
only shipwreck their souls (a loss they do not much value) but (as we now
see) endanger their estates and lives. Well these Grandees had need look to it.
Great men are like great Parish clocks, if they tell a lie, and preach false
Doctrine in the steeple, they misguide the whole Town into heterodoxy. Great
men are called stars, and they are so indeed; for as they shed their light
and heat among us, so all our fair or foul weather comes from them; either in
counsel, command, or example. But if like our Amasa, our General here, they
guild the honor of their Birth or Place with noble Action, they convert souls
by it, and preach themselves into Heaven. A great good man is a great
good-maker; Tu conversus (says Christ to Peter) When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren. A good man is any man's, nay every man's good; a common
Conduit, Market, Magazine, Exchequer, Exchange. Amasa is the Kings good, and
the peoples good. A good General is a general good. He that is most straight
himself, is most likely to bow others. Upon that principle, Rectum est Index
sui and obliqui: Upright persons are fittest to be Rules and Rulers: for as
their straitness makes others obliquity and warping more notorious, so as it
discovers, it recovers crookedness many times, as he bowed, etc. No marvel
Amasa should have such power over them; we read his nature is in his name,
(...) Populo parcens, Populum elevans, he minds nothing but the advantage and
advancement of the people, as they find it in a full springtide of Trade,
they bless God for.

3. He bowed, etc.] He, what He? the General? Why this bowing their heart was
in loialty to their Sovereigne, and love to one another. And is this work for a
General? for a man of war to make Peace? This is as great a Riddle, as that a
soldier should invent Printing, or a scholar should conjure up Gunning: or
that a Monk should unravel all the plots of the Jesuits spinning. But Sic
quaerimus Pacem, say they that destroy all with fire and sword. The end of
war is Peace, and though soldiers of fortune, that make a trade of war (I
hope that Trade that has broke all others, will break it self at last) be
content like the Estridge to eat iron, and live upon the sword; yet they that
take up the sword only upon an honorable necessity, will be glad to think an
honest convenience, a cogent necessity to lay it down again, and afterward
look upon it as as great an honor and happiness to live by their headpiece,
as by their sword: especially when God comes in with his sword, and wounds a
noble Commanders heart, that it bleeds for the blood of its Country ungodlily
poured out, to make a red Sea for a villain to swim in to the death of his
natural Prince, whose murdered body is designed by the hypocritical Traitor,
as a footstool for Mas Anello, to clamber up to his Sovereigns Throne; and
therefore it is no wonder that he bowed them to Peace, that the General should
be the Peacemaker. Thus Abner cries to Joab, 2 Samuel 2. 26. Shall the sword
devour for ever? And so little an Item bows both these great Generals to Peace,
verse. 28. So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and pursued
after Israel no more. And oh let him have his part in Gods and the Kings Beati
Pacifici, in internal, external, eternal Peace: May he be blessed from the
beginning to the end quite through, Ps. 128. Thou shall see thy childrens
children, and peace upon Israel.

Secondly, The blessed influence of this He, That he bowed the heart of all the
men of Judah.

Where we are to enquire into the Act and the Object.

1. The Act, He bowed. 2. The Object, Their heart; He bowed the heart of all
the men of Judah.
1. He bowea:] Was this such a blessed influence? Was this such a piece of
goodness? Soldiers indeed know how to make the people bow (we know that)
yes, and will make but a small matter of breaking them too, if they will not
bow. God dealt with us, as with his people, Isai. 51. 23. God put us into the
hand of them that afflicted us, which have said to our soul, bow down, that we
may go over, and thou have laid thy body as the ground, and as the street to
them that went over. Haman would break the whole Nation of the Jews, because
one Mordecai will not bow. But our Amasa is of another temper: his design is
only to bow and not break the heart, to soften them into a sweet compliance
with their Prince, and one another. He bowed the heart of all Judah, and sent
it the King for a token. Indeed some hard hearts are like some other hard
things, not to be bowed without violence, or at least much liquoring, or
greasing with drink or money: there are such thick skins in the world, that
there is no bowing them without a great deal of oil, and that is perhaps operam
and oleum pe^dere. But blessed be God he met not with such a people, (...), he
met with them (as we say) in another sense.

Well he bowed them, but how? With balmy words, with soft and gentle stroking,
not striking them. This is (...) our Thankfulness to our good God, and this
noble General that he bowed us without breaking, or cutting: he undertook, and
went through the cure without incision, causticks or corrosives: but like the
good Samaritan he poured wine, and oil into our gaping wounds, mollify'd us
with sweet ointments and balsoms, gently binding up the wound that had bled
(but) too freely, and* to little (too little) purpose, but that of our enemies,
to infeeble our hearts and lives, and quench our spirits. For just in such a
case he found us, as the Samaritan found the man that went down from Jerusalem
to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and
wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead, Luke 10. 30. Truly if it be
not a little too tart, I think I may safely (as sadly) say: we have been dealt
withal as thieves do by them they rob: we have been bound and gagged, that we
might not sti^re to help our selves, nor cry out for the help of others: while
some in the mean time cleverly took away our money: so that we owe and own to
our General, not only the hope of redress, but the happiness of address. He
was fain to bow us, that he might unbinde us: if our hearts had not been
bowed, our hands and tongues had been bound still: and now being handsomely
handled, carefully opened, and softly bound up again, our very wounds will
bleed balsome, though we bleed freely to preserve our natural Head.

2. The Object, The heart of all the men of Judah. Why? were their hearts right
and straight before he bowed them? Can they be right and straight that are in
actual Arms against their lawful Prince? No sure: they were far from
straight: they were bowed too much the wrong way, to treason and rebellion, to
rapine and murder, to covetousness and cruelty, to ambition and arrogance, to
their own ways, and their own wills, and their own works. Every man would be his
own King, and his own Priest, his own Magistrate, and his own Minister: and do
what seemed right in their own eyes, the ordinary posture of the people when
there was no King in Israel; as it is a brand upon that headless people often
in Scripture; but especially it is the fulmen in clausula, the last words of
the last Chapter of the Book of Judges. So that it seems, they were bent too
much; therefore he was fain to bow them to other way; to bow them, to unbend
them, to bow them to their Prince in loialty, and to one another in love: this
is the bowing that makes them straight. They were a crooked generation before,
and he bowed them to make them straight. The evil bow before the good, Prove.
14. 19. Thus this good General, is the forerunner of his King, as John Baptist
was of his Christ: he makes straight what was crooked to pave the way to his
entertainment. Luke 3. 5.


But here are two considerable notes that I must not slip.

1. That he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah. 2. Even as the heart of
one man.
1. All the hearts of the Nation, here is the Universality. 2. Even as the
heart of one man, here is the Unity of their bowing.
1. Their Universality, He bowed the heart of all the men of Judah. What are
all bowers? What a world of Osiers are here in a land of Oaks? Or did he change
the Oaks into Osiers, with that pretty (...), that one weakly prayed for, that
God would make all the willows about his College Cedars of Lebanon to wainscot
the house of the Lord. What a rare influence had the prudence, and power, and
courage, and conduct of this good man, that could undeceive them all, and turn,
and bow them all to their forgotten Prince and principles? The great Artist
said, If he could but get some thing strong enough to fasten on his Engine on,
he did not doubt but he could the world round. Many of this kind of Engineers
have been very busy, and have turned a great part of the world round (round
even to (...)) blessed be God, there was a place found yet in constant and
loyal hearts, where this excellent Artist the General fastened his rare Engine
of wisdom and moderation, by which he has bowed and turned them again to their
proper motion. They are now moved by their own Angel again, their own
intelligence, their native Sovereign, whom God set over them as his own Sphere,
we hope inseparably, as he that first fancied that opinion. Every one begins
to move in his own Orb, to sit under his own Vine, and his own Fig Tree.
But the manner of this successful bowing is beyond all comparison admirable;
the Modus rei, is as much as Res ipsa, the manner is admirable as the matter:
nay in some sense, Materiam superabat opus. To see a whole Nation turned thus,
and bowed in a moment to their God, their King, and their Country, in so
unexpected Psalm. 126. 1. (...)
, so unlikely a way, without money, without mutiny, without murder, is so rich
a miracle of mercy, as not this day only, but all the days of our lives are
little enough to be Thanksgiving-dayes: for (...). ^urip. Alii legunt (...).
I shall wholly entitle God to it, and set his Name upon it, with the Apostle
St Paul's (...), Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments (and blessed be his Name,
his mercies too) and his ways past finding out? (...), no footstep to trace
them by; and therefore let us not busy our heads to find them out; we shall
praise God the better, the more we owe to mercy, and the less to men. It is
true, men are (...), Gods hands, as Herbalists call the Plants (and some have
mere signal and speaking signatures of God upon them) and these hands of God we
may kiss. But let us be careful not to take the Crowns and Garlands which we
should lay at Gods feet to set upon man's head. Here are two eminent Persons,
for whom, and in whom we rejoice, whom we may with as great reason, as the
people of Lystra Act. 14. 11. etc.
did Paul and Barnabas, call Jupiter and Mercury, but yet we dare not sacrifice
to them. (...); These footstep-lesse ways of God, let us spend that time in
praising God for them, which our busy nature would in searching to find them
out. I have much ado to forbear criticizing upon the word (...), but then I
should run into the Metaphor the word relates to, and take away that quick
sent of the mercy, and leave you at a loss without a footstep to follow this
glorious mercy to its proper form, the great and good providence of God, that
clift of the Rock in which Moses lay, while the goodness or glory of God (for
his glory is his goodness) passed before him. We have no more to do than what
Moses did, Exodus 34. 8. And Moses made haste, and bowed his head down to the
earth, and worshipped. We can do no less than pay such a bowing of the head,
for this bowing of the heart. O come, let us worship and bow down, etc. Psalm.
95. 6.

2. The Unity as well as the Universality of their Bowing, is to be considered.
Two expressions speak it.

1. It is said, He bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, the heart, not the
hearts: they were all of one heart, of one mind: this is the eminent and
immediate work of God. It is he that makes men to be of one mind in a house,
Psalm. 68. 6. And we have seen what a rarity it has been, to find two men of
one mind in a house, nay hardly one of one mind for an hour together, much
more in the Kingdom (as I thank God I can now call it) and that is the

2d. Even as the heart of one man. The word is not doubled in the Hebrew, it is
but (...), and that is enough too: I would our Translators would mode their
rendrings so, that we might once see these modern tongues, Linguas ancillantes,
wait upon their mother and mistress, and not debase (and in some places I may
say debauch) the holy Idiom into a low compliance with our vulgar (sometimes
too vulgar fancies:) but I have observed many expressions, some in the Text,
and some in the Margin (though truly more in the Text) which I shall humbly
present to the Church, when God shall please to give the Ark rest. In the mean
time I shall go on, Even as one man, or the heart* of one man. God complains of
some that have (...) An heart and an heart, two hearts, more than one man
should have, a Prodigy in the Sacrifices of faith and love. (...), as St. James
call them, Jam. 1. 8. Double minded men, that are unstable in all their ways.
And truly it is no wonder, that one man should be unstable that is of two
minds, when two men (nay many men) must needs be unstable, that are not of one
mind: therefore to establish them, he makes them of one mind, single-hearted
men: of one heart to their God, their King and Country. This is the mercy we
have long prayed for: Let us not forget to praise God as heartily for it, as we
have heartily prayed for it. I shall close this with David's, Ecce quam bonum
and quum jucundum? Psalm. 133. 1, 2. Behold how good and pleasant it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity? It is like the precious oinment upon the
head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aarons beard: that went down to the
skirts of his clothing. From the Prince and Priest, the Magistrate and
Minister to the lowest subject. Nay like the ointment of Mary powered out upon
the head of our Savior; all the house is filled with the sweet savor of it.
Not only the house of our Church and Kingdom, but the great house of the
world (...), we shall be as famous for our Peace, as we have been infamous for
our war; nay we shall redeem our elder glories, and recover that beauty and
verdure which has been so long withered and blasted by our unnatural and
unhappy differences (to call them no worse) when the world shall see, Umbra non
errabit Crassus multa, by our turning our swords, that reek yet with the blood
of our Brethren, in some successful design upon our enemies, that we can be
as a warre-like people abroad, so a peaceable and quiet Nation at home. And
when you have a while refreshed your spirits, and healed the Nation with this
sweet sympathy-pouder of Peace, I doubt not but your gunpouder will be more
offensive in your nostrils (unless in triumphs, when it only alludes to past
dangers) than it has been these many years. It is that, which as it should have
blown up one, if Providence had not dank'd it, so I am sure has blown down many
Parliaments: whereas it is this sweet sugared syllable Peace that alone can
restore them to their just power and splendor. But no more of this. I hope the
miseries of our past war have dearly taught us the price of our present peace.

3. Part. The Blessed Effect of the blessed Influence of this blessed
Instrument; So that they sen^ this word unto the King, Return thou and all thy
servants. Here I shall briefly touch at three particulars:

1. They sent word. 2. They sent this word to the King. 3. And the word they
send to the King, Return thou and all thy servants.

1. They sent word unto the King* it is well yet they are bowed so much, as to
send to their King at all, that they would own him to be their King. There was
a Vote passed of no more addresses to the King. But blessed be God, a part of
the same party, by whose power the Vote past for Non-Addresses, are now by a
benign influence bowed to an humble owning their Sovereign. O that wretched
Vote! I cannot remember it without horror, that was the bloody Avenue, whereat
r^sh'd in an Army of mischiefs, tyranny, Anarchy, any thing, every thing, that
could speak sin, or shame, or sorrow to the people. But no more of that,
Blessed be God that has changed their Nolumus hunc regnare into our Vivat Rex.
What ever was done then, it is well, yet they address now* They sent word: it
is well they sent, and it is well they sent word: before they sent nothing but
blows, or a word and a blow; if a word, a blow too, or words that were as bad
as blows. The words that David's Rebels sent him, Words that were very So that
translation in the Liturgy reads it.
swords. There was a ^^ong war of the Pen, before that of the Sword broke
out, when both sides shot only Paper-pellets: then all was lap'd up in butter
and honey, and oil, gold, and silk, and wool: Your Majesty's most humble and
obedient servants, and the Event has proved that the major part then meant it
so; but there was a poisonous vein in the Lampery, that venomed the body so,
that though Jacobs voice went along with Esaus hand a while, the ^ougher hand
at last silenced the smoother and softer voice. So that upon the whole matter,
I think without any unhandsome reflection upon the voice, which the hand
stifled, I amy refer you for a character of th^se J^hu-like furious drivers
to destroy their master, to Psalm 55. where you have David's Commentary upon
the missives and messages of his Rebels. For after he had said, verse. 9. That
he had seen violence and strife in the City, he comes at verse. 21. to tell, how
that violence and strife was dissembled; the words were smoother than butter,
but war was in the heart. The words were softer than oil, yet were they
drawn swords, drawn out of the scabberd, and the scabberd thrown away, and
only sheathed in thin paper, lawn-paper-complements, a Petition and a Pistol,
a word in one hand, and a sword in the other. These daubers with untemperd
mortar, that meant to pull down the City and Temple, State and Church, had
their Trowel in one hand, and their Sword in the other. Blessed be God, though
this message is of another nature; for they sent this word to the King, Return
thou and all thy servants. And that is the

2d Particular, They sent this word to the King. To the King.] But one King.
There is but one God in the world, but one Sun in Heaven, but one ^oul in the
whole man, but one heart in the whole body. There is Divin^y in this Unity,
(...); but one King, the King; no more (...) to many Kings: and we hope no more
many Kings to addre^^e to. We have seen the misery of many Kings: that Body is
in an ill posture, where every little bone of the Rump is swelled as big as a
Head. We have paid dear for learning Solomon's Divinity, Prove. 28. 2. For the
transgression of a land, many are the Princes thereof. We hope now to be in a
capacity to go on with that wise King in the next words: But by a man of
understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged. By a man of
understanding and knowledge; not many pretenders to understanding and
knowledge, who whatsoever their judgment was, had no affection, no compassion.
We have a Sovereign, that is a Sovereign indeed in the sense of Medicine, as
well as Majesty, of a healing virtue; Majestas and Amor, Majesty and mercy
enthroned in his Royal breast; a Sovereign like our Savior, that can be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities: Such an one whom besides his
Sovereign sweet nature, his sufferings have taught Heb. 4. 15.
compassion: to this King this word is sent: and that is the

3d. Particular, The word they sent, Return thou and all thy servants.

1. They sent. 2. What they sent.
1. They sent this word, Return, etc. They (i. e.) All the men of Judah; the
people of the Land in some frequent Senate or Convention; for so I suppose the
people of the Land is to be understood. So is that 2 Chronicles. 33. 25. The people
of the Land slew all them that had conspired against the King: and the People
of the Land made Josiah his son King in his stead. So here, They sent this
word (q. d.) We, all thy people say, Return. Our General has bowed our heart
as the heart of one man, and we unanimously with one heart and one voice cry,
Return thou, etc. It was but an ungodly party among us that drove thee, and
kept thee away: but now we are all for thy return: We all Lords and Commons (as
it is in the Vote of May 9. instant) desire his Majesty's speedy return to his
Parliament, and Kingly Office.

2. Return thou] We are returned to thee, do thou return to us: only a few
fanatics, that Thou, every body else, are not for this Thou: but it is no
matter for them, as considerable as they vaunt themselves: do but Thou return,
and they will be more then ever what they are, Quakers. Return thou, the glory
of our Nation, the light of our Eyes, the breath of our Nostrils: Thou, whose
Right we own, whose Person we honor, whose prosperity we pray for. Thou, who
art the joy of our Hearts, the praise of our Tongues, the desire and delight of
our Eyes: Return thou, and bring new Joys and new Glories to thy poor widowed
comfortless people; and we will gather hopes from those startling Providence
that promise us thy Return, that the King of Kings will set up a fifth Monarchy
in thy beloved Person and Progeny, in a truer and nobler sense, than is
intended by the wild assertours of that judgment. Thou can alone under God
put a period to our unsufferable sufferings, therefore we pray, we send this
word, Return thou.

3. And thy servants.] Those that were before looked upon as enemies, our
hearts are now bowed to entertain and embrace as friends: Thou art our great
Master, and thy servants are our fellow servants.

4. All thy servants] We will not dare so fanatical an insolence, as to think
of shackling or restraining our Prince to Numbers or Persons: it is above our
duty, and it is below thy dignity: No, no, All come and welcome: All that
please thee shall please us: Return thou and all thy se^vants.

The next words are, So the King returned. Be it so Lord, be it so, Amen. The
King of Kings return him to us with speed and safety, and keep him with us with
honor and happiness, by keeping us to him with Humility and Sincerity.

I had done here, but that there is a bowing the heart in my Text, which bows
my heart, to bow your heart in a short application.

Our backs have been bowed down to bear all the burdens that proud and wicked
men thought fit to lay upon us. Like Issachar we have lain crouching between
two burdens of sin and shame: our hearts and our backs too bowed, till they
almost broke, by our fellow Subjects. Since then our hearts are thus sweetly
bowed in Loyalty to our natural King, and love to our native Country; Let us
say with St Paul, Ephesians. 3. 14. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And as David expresses it, Psalm. 95. 6. O come let us
worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker: Let us bow down
in praise and prayer. I will only quicken your memories with a few hints, what
you should praise and pray for, and then join with you in praise and prayer for
them, and the Lord bow all our hearts to, and in this Duty.

First, For the Exercise of the Duty of praising God this day, the Text and the
Time put us in mind of eight things.

1. That the Lord has pleased to bow the heart of the General to be so
eminent an Instrument for his Glory and our Good. This is the duty the
Parliament calls upon us for, but I hope we need no quickening.

2. That the Lord has crowned that excellent Instrument with so magnetic an
Influence; that he has bowed so many hearts, heads and hands without breaking
any.

3. That we our selves are sincerely bowed to our duty, to our King and our
Country.

4. That this bowing is so universal, as to miracle it is: We may say as much,
All the men of England, as the Text says, All the men of Judah. If the major
part be all, if an hundred to one be all.

5. That this bowing our heart to our King, is as unanimous as universal. All
hearts centred in obedience to his Sacred Majesty. We hear of triumphal Arches
erected in honor of the two new married Princes; we have an Arch which we
acknowledge not so artificial, no^ would we have it so, it were not good it
were so: and that is that Arch which alone will bear the weight of a Kingdom,
the universal and united bent of all our hearts to our King. All hearts are
bowed into one Arch; a Bow which like that Bow that wears the Kings Colors in
Heaven, in a partycoloured Ribband (woven with Sunne-beams upon a cloud) shall
be for a Token and a Covenant between God, our King and us, that a deluge of
war and misery shall never destroy us any more.

6. For the wisdom and goodness of the Kings most Excellent Majesty, who was
bowed by God into such a condescension, as to vouchsafe to send such gracious
Letters and Declarations to the Parliament, General, City, Navy.

7. For those humble Messages that are sent back from all these to his Majesty,
with their most humble desires of his Return, That they sent this word,
Return thou and all thy servants.

8. That the desires of the Parliament for the Kings Return are so free, so
full, so ingenuous for him, and all his servants. From my soul I bless God,
and I desire you to do so too, for the sweet mutual repose and absolute
confidence and trust between the King and his Houses: which is to me the best
Augury of our future happiness, because all our former sufferings owe their
beginnings to our foolish fears and jealousies.

Secondly, Prayer. There is a great stock of Prayers to be laid up, and to be
laid out upon a threefold Account.

1. For the Remission of National sins. 2. For the Removal of National
Judgments. 3. For the Restoring of National Mercies.
1. For the Remission of National sins. Never expect good from God and the
King, till you repent the evils against God and the King.

Object. There were great and grain-sins committed in the Nation, to which
guilt we would not, if we could, and could not if we would have contributed; as
we could not hinder such villainies, so we did not further them, but hated and
abhorred them in their Causes and Consequences, so far as we could foresee them
all along.

Sol. I answer that I dare answer for you, there is no tincture of the actual
guilt of those high abominations, crimson sins, sticks to you; you may say as
to all the blood shed in the high places of the field, or that Akeldama
Westminster Hall, with the Apostle, you are clear from the blood of all men.
But O let us consider whether we have not contracted a guilt ex p^st facto, if
not by closing with the power these bloody monsters swumme to in blood, yet by
not pouring out water enough before the Lord to wash away this defilement, and
stop the Cataract of vengeance, which we may justly expect, God will let loose
in showrs of blood upon the Nation.

2. Though we could not perhaps have prevented them, we ought not to have
connived at them. As we ought not to have complied with them, so we ought to
have complained of them more to God, than it is to be feared we did. I shall
only give you a slight touch or two upon some of them, and that so far only
as I conceive they may bring vengeance upon the Nation without repentance. For
as I hate to take in that sink that stinks all the world over, or stir that
old foul dunghill, the corruption whereof has bred so many vipers, that tear
out* their mothers bowels: so I scorn to throw any bitter reflections at a
party that is down. I shall only mind you of them, as I have but too much
reason to fear, they will draw down the vials of Gods wrath upon the Nation,
unless good people pray them away. There be many of them like the Devils in
Mary, Legion, a phrase which the more suits those sins, as speaking not only
multitude, but power, an armed multitude. But I shall wrap them up all in one
piece, but it is scarlet, the notion of blood, a sin of the deepest die, and
the loudest cry: we may all pray with David, Psa. 51. 14. Deliver me from blood
guiltiness, O God, so we read it, but it is from bloods (...). Several sorts
of blood lie upon us, and cry upon us. I shall name only four; blood of
People, blood of Prophets, blood of Princes, blood of Christ.

And here because every man's heart and eyes, as well as tongue, can speak
freely upon this sad subject, I shall say no more but this: O pray, pray to God
for pardon of our heat and tindernesse to war, the swiftness of our feet to
shed blood. I could tell you how too freely you parted with your gold to set up
Calves, that you might worship them. But I think you have dearly paid for this
State-idolatry, though I cannot say dearly enough, because I fear the Lord has
not yet said to his destroying Angel, it is enough. We cannot but fear that a
great shower of vengeance will fall upon us, unless we prevent it with a shower
of tears, for all that blood of the Nation, which our Land has drunk up so
freely, till it staggered and reeled again: and to complete the Sacrifice to
Pride, Ambition and Covetousness, it was crowned with the blood of our lawful
excellent Prince. This blood is loud blood; it cries high; and I am afraid the
cry of our tears, the voice of our weeping has not yet stilled the cry of this
sin. This blood is not speechless yet. O let us pray that the blood of
Christ would plead for us, and wash away this blood: and so for the blood of
the Gospel, in countenancing even blasphemy it self: discountenancing the Truth
and its Preaching and Professors, and prostituting the Ordinances of the first
magnitude to the basest of villainies, here is work enough for this head of
prayer, for the remission of National sins.

2. For removing of National Judgments, which we either feel or fear,
especially from war, battle and murder. David rather chose Plague than War,
to fall into the hands of God than man. O pray against the Causes and
Consequences of War. The causes, divisions in Church and State, and
dissatisfiednesse with the present, though we know not how to make it better:
and the Consequences of it, destruction of body and soul, Estate, Relations,
Name, Nation, All. O it is the devouring sword: it has done too much, the Lord
say, it has done enough.

3. For Restoring National Mercies. Here I shall propound to your devotion two
heads of prayer.

1. That the Lord will please to return our King to us safely and speedily, we
must pray to God as well as the King for his Return. Lord return him speedily
to us, and keep him safely with us, to thy Glory, the good of thy Church, the
honor of the Gospel, the Peace, Plenty and Prosperity of all his Majesty's
Dominions: and let all the people say, Amen.

2. That the Lord who has pleased to bow our hearts, would keep them bowed to
himself, his second self, his sacred Majesty, and to our selves ( i. e.) to one
another. That the King may rejoice in his people, ^^e people may glory in their
King, and both King and people in their God: that we may see God shining upon
us in that glorious Prophecy, Isa. 1. 26. I will r^store thy Judges as at the
first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning; afterward thou shall be called
the City of Righteousness, the faithful City. The good Lord restore
Magistracy and Minist^y to their lost beauty and splendor, and that old Peace
and Plenty, honor and safety with which he has heretofore crowned this Queen
of Islands, Amen, Amen.

I have but one word more, and that is concerning the Joy of this day. I would
not willingly give the least check to the honest and sober expressions of your
Joy: you were never blessed with a time that more required it: but then it is
honest and sober Joy I mean, not rude, beastly drunkenness and debauchery: No,
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling, Ps. 2. 11. (i.
e.) Fear to offend God in your Joy. I shall beg this of you that belong to my
charge, for three precious sakes, your good Gods sake, your good Kings sake,
and your good Causes sake.

1. For your good Gods sake, that gracious God who has given you this blessed
opportunity of rejoicing, and can turn that joy into weeping, as he has done
your water into wine. Provoke him not to anger under a pretense of praising him
for his mercy. Do not blast such a glorious mercy as this is, by abusing Gods
other mercies in riot and drunkenness.

2. For your good Kings sake. His most excellent Majesty, who is the just cause
of your joy is a sober Prince, and no man ever hated drunkenness and debauchery
so much as he, unless it were his Father of precious and glorious memory, who
was the Great Example of Temperance in every kind* Reg^^ad Exemplum -- O
imitate two Kings rather than beggars and rogues, that can be content to die as
they live, beasts.

3. For your good Causes sake. Remember that there is a Party in the Nation,
whose eyes are upon you to spy out something that may open their mouths
against you and your Cause, and are resolved to take advantage from the
looseness of your mirth, to make people believe, that now all wickedness and
profaneness is broke loose, and riot shall be countenanced, which is a great
disparagement to your Prince, your Parliament, and this glorious Cause. Let us
not drink down this Cause again; it shrunk in the wetting before: we know, how
little drinking the Kings health contributed to his help. If this good Cause
should take wet again, I will not prophecy, but I will pray yet against this
wickedness. Let us pray and praise God.

FINIS.

