A Word in the KINGS Ear.
REPRESENTED To His MAJESTY to be taken into Consideration, with the
Propositions of both KINGDOMS for PEACE.
Dread Sovereign,
GIve leave, great King, unto your Subject here
Now, to approach your Royal presence near,
To beg your heart unto your Parliaments.
To end your troubles, and their discontents.
Luster Your Crown, and do three Kingdoms good:
And them recover from a Gulf of blood.
Your Subjects long, from their dark Cells, to see
The glittering beams of your bright Majesty:
In splendour shine, of Britain Great the King.
Great Charles in Honor through the World to ring
The glory admired every where will be,
When King and Kingdoms shall in one agree.
Your Royal self, first placed in the front,
Shining to us, like Moses in the Mount,
Antiquity of greatness, by descent
Of Kingly race, fixed in the government,
Of England, Scotland, Ireland Sovereign Lord.
What Nation dare attempt to break this Cord?
A monument of glory may you then
On your right hand, with comfort rear again;
The Royal Progeny of valient dust;
Whose Fathers Acts no time can ever rust:
Your Royal Consort, and our noble Queen,
That from your bed, so long has absent been.
And on the other side, we shall (with joy)
Have future hopes, in your posterity;
Those O live branches which from you proceed:
To rule our Children, that shall us succeed:
Long may the Crown with you and yours remain.
Even till the time that Shilo come again.
Your Luster in the Houses then will shine,
As if the heavenly powers did all combine
To make you great, beset with lights about
Both England, Scotland, Ireland, (eke) throughout.
All Courts and Officers will be content,
To borrow splender from your Government.
Unto the Parliament, great Charles unite.
There is the Royal Throne, your Chair of right.
There is the true state of Nobility,
Prowess figured with magnanimity:
By long contracted honor in their blood,
Fitted for council for a Princes good.
From all parts of the Kingdom, there by summons,
Sit at your Royal feet, the House of Commons.
Englands great body, representative,
Contracted so, to keep the head alive:
Compelled to contribute, with heart and hand,
Our Sovereign, to preserve, and save the Land.
Those Messages of grace which you have sent,
To both your Houses of the Parliament.
The Kingdoms sad distempers to compose:
Brought to your Royal hand, what they propose:
To beg your Majesty's assent, O then!
Let them return with Peace and joy again.
Look on our Army (prostrate at your feet,)
With brave deportment, Englands King to greet:
Your Subjects liberties safe to defend,
They for the Land, their dearest blood will spend.
To make you glorious in all Your Stations,
Your kingdoms terrible to other Nations.
May King and Parliament, and Army eke,
Join hearts in one triangle as they speak,
Treat, write, and Act, with great alacrity,
May all their hearts be wrapped into an ecstasy:
That those retirements which were made by spite,
May re-inforcements be, now to unite.
May every one endeavor in his place
By some sweet violence, (in such a Case.)
Each other to surprise, by Acts of love;
So firmly settled that no blast can move,
Devide, or separate your Throne from you,
Or you from us: so prays.
VALKRUE

FINIS.
Printed in the YEAR, ^MDCXL VII.


