The Good Angel of Stamford.

OR AN EXTRAORDINARY CURE OF AN EXTRAORDINARY CONSUMPTION, IN A True and
Faithful NARRATIVE OF SAMUEL WALLAS Recovered, BY The Power of God, and
prescription Of an ANGEL.

LONDON, Sept 23. Printed in the Year. 1659.

A Relation of Samuel VVallas his being restored to perfect Health, after his
thirteen Years Sickness in a Consumption, taken from his own mouth, who for the
last four Years lay bedridden, and so weak that he could not turn himself
therein without help, by which distemper his Body was so parcht and dried, that
he was most like an Anotomie, but now at present has recovered his former
strength, and follows his Trade again, being a Shoemaker, Living at Stamford
in Lincolshire, this following discourse was related to him that writ it, by
the said VVallas with much affection and sensiblenesse of the Lords goodness
and kindness to him. April 7. 1659.

UPon Whitsunday last about six a clock in the afternoon, after Evening Sermon,
he finding himself a little lightsome, and able to get out of bed alone; there
being no body in the house then with him, and his Wife being gone into the
Country to her Friends, to seek some relief; he crept to the fire side, and
reading upon a Book entitled, Abraham's suit for Sodom, he heard some raplat
the Door, and thinking it to be some stranger because he knocked as if it were
with a stick, and being the Sabbath day, he took his staff in the one hand, and
the Wall one his other, and went to the door, and opening of it, he beheld a
proper grave Old man, who said to him Friend I pray thee, give an old Pilgrim
a cup of thy small bear; And the said Samuel Wallas replied, I pray Sir come
in, then he answered, Friend, call me not Sir, for I am no Sir, but yet come in
I must, for I cannot pass thy Door before I come in (the said Wallas then
thinking he had been so dry, that made him say he could not pass his Door
before he came in) And thereupon said come in Sir, and welcome; And after he
was come in, he went with the help of his stick, and drew him a cup of small
bear in a little jug-pot, and gave it him in his hand, who took it by the
bottom and drunk a little, and so walked two or three times to and fro, and
then drunk again, and so a third time, before he drunk it all, and after that
set the jug down in the window by the said Samuel Wallas, he leaning then upon
a little Table, and then the said Samuel Wallas thought, he would have been
going, but he went and walked to and fro some three or four times as he did
before, all this while neither speaking one word to each other; but at last,
coming to the said Wallas, said Friend, I perceive thou art not well, and he
replied, No truly Sir, I have not been well this many Years, then he asked
what was his disease, who answered a Deep Consumption, our Doctors, say it is
past cure, then said he, they said well: but what have they given thee for it,
then the said Samuel Wallas, replied truly nothing; for I am a very poor man,
and am not able to follow the Doctors Counsel, and therefore he was willing to
commit himself into the hands of Almighty God to dispose of him as he pleased,
and thereupon the Old man replied, in that thou say very well, then I will
tell thee by the Almighty power of God, what thou shall do, but remember my
words, and observe them, and do it, but whatsoever thou do, Fear God, and
serve him. To morrow morning go into thy Garden, and there get two Reg-sage
leaves, and one Blood-wort leaf, and put those three leaves into a cup of small
Bear, and let them lie in the bear for the space of three days together, drink
as often as need requires; but let the leaves remain still in the Cup: but the
fourth morning cast them away, and put three fresh ones in; and this do for
twelve days together, neither more nor less, and I pray thee remember what I
say, and observe my words, and do it, but above all whatsoever, thou do,
Fear God, and serve him. And for the space of these twelve days thou must
neither drink Ale, nor strong Bear, but afterward thou may a little to
suffice. And thou shall see before these twelve days be forth, thorough the
great mercy and help of Almighty God, thy disease to be cured and thy body
altered; Now the said Samuel Wallas, doubting of these things, said, Sir, be
this good for all Consumptions, and he replied I tell thee, I tell thee;
observe what I say to thee, and do it: but above all whatsoever thou do,
Fear God, and serve him. But this is not all, said he, for thou must change the
Air for thy Health, then the said Wallas said, what do you mean Sir, by
changing the Air? And he answered, thou must go three, or four, or five miles
off, or if it be twenty miles off, the further off the better, and thou must go
forth as speedily as thou can after thy twelve days is out, or else thou will have a very grievous fit of Sickness that will suddenly seize upon thee,
yet through Gods mercy, by this doing thou may avoid that: And thou shall
see that before the Month and twelve days be out, through the help of
Almighty God above, the clothes thou have now upon thy back thou will scarce be
able to wear with ease, thy body will be so much grown; and I pray thee
remember my words, and observe to do them, but above all whatsoever thou do,
Fear God and serve him. Then the said Wallas said, I pray Sir, if it shall
please the Lord to enable me to go into our own Fields Two or Three Times a
Day, will not that serve the Turn? He answered no Friend it will not, for that
Air where the infection is taken, is not so properly good to cure the same
disease; And then the said Samuel Wallas said, Sir, I thought to have been let
blood: but he returned, No Friend, by no means, for before thy month and
twelve days be up, thy blood will be as good as ever thou had in all thy
Life; but this one thing observe, thy joints will be weak as long as thou
live. Now Friend said the Old man I must be going, I pray Remember what I
have said to thee, and do it; but above all Fear God, and Serve him. Then the
said Wallas asked him, if he would eat any Bread and Butter, or Cheese; but he
answered, No Friend, I will not eat any thing, the Lord Christ is sufficient
for me, neither but very seldom do I drink any bear, but that which comes from
the Rock, And so Friend the Lord God in Heaven be with thee; And the said W.
seeing him go out of the door, went to shut it after him; but the Old man
returned half way in the entry again toward the said S. W. and said, Friend I
pray thee Remember what I have said, and do it, but above all whatsoever thou
do, Fear God, and serve him; And so they parted; And the said S. W. says,
he saw him pass along the Street some half a score yards from his door, and
so shut the door, and went in; but this Old man was not seen by any body else,
nor pass along the Street, though there were persons standing in their doors
opposite to the S. W. his house.

Now afterward, within four days that the said S. W. had made use of the Sage
leaves and the other leave aforementioned, he says, there arose a skurff which
came off his body under which he had a new skin, that was as if it had been the
skin of a Sucking child, and by the end of the twelve days was as healthful
and strong as ever he was; only this he says, that when he sits down, his
knees will smite together, finding still a weakness in his joints; And this
further he said, that one day within the time exhibited, by the solicitation of
some Friends, he drunk a little strong drink, but imediately his speech was
took from him, and he could not say any thing for twenty four hours.

As for the Description of this Old Man's person, and habit; He was Tall and
ancient, his hair as white as wool, curled up, with a white broad Beard, and he
had a fresh Complexion, and wore a fashionable Hat, and a little narrow band,
his Coat and hose both of a purple Color his stockings pure white, and a pair
of new black leather shoes;tied with ribbin of the same color his clothes
were. And though it rained when he came in to the said S. W. house, and, as is
very well remembered by many, all day, yet he had not one spot of wet or dirt
upon him, he was without Gloves, but his Hands as white as Snow.

It seems there was a meeting of the Ministers about Stamford, upon this
occasion, who concluded, that this apparition was the good Angel, for several
weighty reasons inducing them to believe it; but for other reasons here omitted.

FINIS.

