Britannicae Virtutis Imago.

OR, THE EFFIGIES OF TRVE FORTITVDE, Expressed to the life, in the famous
actions of that incomparable Knight, Major General SMITH, Who is here
represented, June, 1644.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall, in the Year 1644.

THE DEDICATION.
TO the Immortal memory of that ever famous Gentleman, The Glory of our
English Nation, Sir John Smith Knight, Major General of his Majesty's Western
Army, under Command of the Right Honorable the Lord Hopton:

His servant and admirer consecrateth this, E. W.

Britanicae Virtutis Imago, OR, The Life and Death of renowned, Sir JOHN SMITH.
WHen the Reign of James the prudent Monarch of Great Britains united Empire
drew near a period: at Skilts in Warwickshire, (a Manor of the Sheldons)
was borne this ornament of our Nation I am now to treat of; by a choice and
selected branch, of the stout and valiant Markhams of Nottinghamshire, married
to Sir Francis Smith of Wotton Wavers in the County of Warwick: Heir to the
Noble and ancient Family of the Caringtons; famous for Sir Michael Carington,
Standard bearer to our first Richard in the Holy Land, and renowned for the
loyalty of John Carington Esquire, to his Lord and Sovereign King Richard the
second, upon whose deposall he was forct to fly into Italy, where he grew
famous for many brave and valiant acts: yet at his return he changed his name
to Smith, which all his Posterity have ever since retained, until now it has
pleased His royal Majesty, to renew the ancient name of this Family in the
present Lord Carington, Sir John Smith's eldest brother. The Escucheon of this
Family is of so near a semblance to the badge of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, that in my judgment it convinces it self to be a kingly gift,
bestowed upon them for some notable service achieved by their Predecessors:
The particular definition whereof I leave to the Heralds as a star visible
only in their Horizon. But I am sure I do not remember to have seen any
Family in England, excepting this, to bear in a white Field a red Cross in a
form so genuine to that we call St Georges.

This Sir Francis Smith was a Gentleman of that integrity of life and noble
nature, that to this day his memory is still precious amongst those that knew
him. He was remarkeably happy for many worthy children and fair possessions,
but especially in his Consort, a Lady of those excellencies, that we could
expect no ordinary piece of nature from her; being also eminent for her
hospitality and charity, but especially for her loyalty so firm and spotless,
that it is almost incredible and beyond example what that noble Lady has
sustained when for a small contribution she might have secured her self; she
rather choosing with a magnanimous patience to undergo the loss of all, then
in the least manner to comply with the Kings enemies.

Before the birth of the Heroike child, this virtuous Lady and her Knight fell
dangerously sick, as if they had both contributed their utmost powers to his
perfections. Nature perceives him to fit her expectation, and therefore
impatient we should longer expect her bounty, exposes him to the world at least
a month before the usual time. It may be she desired that even in his birth,
the child should make the first trial of his valor, and beyond example there
express his magnanimity, and contempt of danger.

I shall not need to ask pardon if I pass by his infancy, as affording
nothing but merely shadows of a great spirit, enclosed in that little casket,
in a sleep (as it were) expecting his maturity. His infancy past he is brought
from his nurse, and committed to his mothers care, where his education could
not choose but be excellent; for without vanity I speak it, this Kingdom
affords not a Lady, that has given more happy testimonies of her skill in that
kind. In the time of his childhood, his sweet and tractable nature made him
singularly beloved in his Fathers Family, and to this day many of them much
please themselves with his pretty policies, and witty stratagems to compass
his sports, and deceive such as held a hand over him.

He is no sooner capable of learning, but he is sent to a Kinsmans house,
amongst other young Gentlemen allied unto him to lay the foundation of a
Scholar: where notwithstanding his active disposition, he profited so well,
that after some reasonable preparative his Parents desirous to make him more
accomplished, sent him to study and travel beyond Seas: where he made so good a
progress both in the Greek and Latin tongues, that in one of the prime
Classes, he obtained the Emperors Chair, a Seat of eminent difference from
all the rest, and due to him that is judged to excel his fellows.

But nevertheless he is impatient of this manner of life, his noble mind
aspires to greater actions, and will no longer be contained in this course. The
Almighty begins to call him to that state wherein he is pleased to employ him.
Who will not be satisfied until he be sent for England, where arriving
contrary to his friends desire, he finds a welcome accompanied with rebukes;
which he long patiently sustained without any effect: at last, merely to comply
with them against his own nature, he takes his course the second time for the
Low Countries; where he takes his books in hand, and again falls to his study:
not without daily conflicts with himself in overcoming his contrary
inclination. But there he demonstrated his virtue, in conquering himself to
satisfy the desires of his Parents and friends, declaring he knew as well how
to master his passions, as his bodily enemies. Which in a thing of that nature,
so to overcome himself, considering his age and spirit, was very remarkable.

In the place where now he resides, there happens a Commotion in some sort
resembling ours: where the dreggs and rude multitude of the City bandy against
their Prince, Magistrates, and Nobility, in such sort that nothing but ruin
seemed to hang over the heads of the latter. The Rebels were so numerous and
violent, growing daily so insolent, that at last the best sort were compelled
to endeavor their own defense in the best manner they could: for diverse of
their persons and houses were violated and plundered, the same being imminent
to the rest: wherefore they arm themselves as they can, and resolve to resist
if any one shall hereafter be assaulted. This quickly produced a Skitmish;
wherein the multitude prevayling, our gallant young Student hears of it, and
can no longer contain himself, but goes out of the College where he resided,
takes arms from the next he meets in the street, and joins to the weaker
side; putting himself into the head of them, where with his brave carriage he
does so encourage, and revive them, as if his valor had an influence upon each
in particular. Wherefore they give a fresh assault to the enemy, and that with
so good success, that they foiled their vanquishers: who were soon daunted
when they saw our young Champion had laid their Mechanicke Leader upon the
ground, and still bestowed his strokes so freely on all that he came near,
that the rest judged it better to give ground, then to come in reach of his
sword.

Their retreat was so sudden and confused, that much of their Plunder was left
behind, where our noble youth happens upon a Cloak-bag full of Silver plate.
His eminent service this day procured him special thanks from the chief of
the City, but the other side were so enraged against him, that they vowed to
hew him in pieces; and to that end laid wait every way to compass him. By this
time an Army comes to punish the offenders, and settle the City; our young
Soldier glad of this opportunity seconded with the necessity of avoiding the
peoples fury, bids his books farewell, lays by his gown, and takes his sword
in hand, repairing to the Camp; where he puts himself into a posture fit for
a gentleman of his birth under an expert Commander: and behaved himself with
that gallantry, as purchased him love, and admiration from all that knew him.

You have seen his introduction to Martial attempts was both fortunate and
gallant, where you may observe, that this noble spirit in his first enterprise,
showed a natural aversion from base, and vulgar actions: and that he disdained
to accommodate himself to Popular humors; choosing rather to suffer shipwreck
with the nobler sort, then to stand idle and let them perish, if his endeavor
might the least conduce to their safety.

It was not long after he had entered the school of Mars, but he had occasion
given to make trial of his wit, as well as fortitude; for a Party of their
Horse attempted to beat up the enemies Quarters, and at the first entered the
place; where out of inconsideration and desire of Pillage, they made a way to
their own ruin, by dismounting; for the enemy finding a way to gather a head
and call more aid, came and surprised the dispersed Soldiers. Our Heroike
youth had still discreetly kept on Horseback, and prevailed with some few more
to do the like, which had all escaped had not the enemy strangly circumvented
them. They seeing no hope of escape left, resolved to force a way by mere
strength. In this attempt, he leading the way was knocked off his Horse with
such a violence, that quite astonished him; the enemy gave him for dead, he
falling prostrate on his face. Wherefore they busied themselves in searching
for and pursuing the rest, making sure of him at leisure. At last recovering
his spirits and memory, considering how he came there, he lies still for a
while, till hearing the streets quiet, he looked about very circumspectly, and
discovers all clear with a Stable open over against him furnished with Horses
ready sadled: He takes hold of the opportunity and goes in, chooses one of the
prime Horses, commanding the boy there, not to dare to speak till he was gone,
as he tendered his own life. After he is out he puts spurs to his Horse, which
with such celerity conveyed him thence, that he escapt his pursuers, and unhurt
past by diverse that met him. When he arrived at the Army, diverse of the chief
Commanders were full of joy to see him, whose fall but even now they did
generally there condole. The General himself did praise his ingenuity and
courage, giving him one hundred pieces for the Horse he brought away.

This put a second vigor into him, both encouraging and enabling him to
continue in his present courses; his success does animate him, and his reward
gives life to his encouragement. He continues with singular respect and love
amongst the Commanders, and Soldiers: most of the later proposing him as an
example to themselves. At last some accident or other happens which calls him
into England, his departure is very unpleasing to that Army, nor can he get
away without engagement of his honor for his speedy return. By this time his
same is grown eminent, and his friends began to relish his courses, which
makes his welcome of a better temper then before; for now they did honor those
excellencies in him which so prosperously began to flourish.

He had scarce taken time to visit his friends after his arrival, but his
promise calls him back, and thither also he is already by Letter invited: the
employment was so grateful unto him, that to his friends he makes a necessity
of virtue, and tells them he had engaged his honor for his return; under this
pretense he bids them farewell, and immediately repaires to his former service
in the Netherlands, where he serves in the Lieutenant Generals own Troop,
whose favorite he was, preferred in esteem before the rest.

I am sorry, that I am not able to give account of sundry of his actions
deserving memory, performed in this time: diverse of which I have heard related,
though now I cannot call them to mind. One thing I cannot omit, to wit, the
taking of a signal Color in a memorable Fight in those parts, wherein the
honor of the adverse Army was much engaged. And here I may take occasion to
express his modesty, in my judgment very singular, for in the gaining of
those Colors he having slain the man that carried them, another takes them
up, when they were down, whom the enemies assail in such manner, that there
had that party died, had not our English Gallant rescued both him and the
Colors. This ungrateful man out of too much vanity, claymes the reward for
the action, and such was this young gentleman's modesty that he resigned it, and
as much as in him lay the honor of the act unto him.

This and such like gained him an extraordinary portion of honor, and esteem
amongst all; but especially endeared him to his General: insomuch that he
seeks occasion to displace his own Captaine-Lieutenant, thereby to make way
for his advancement to that place. Which when our gallant perceives, with anger
he expresses his dislike of it, and absolutely refuses the offer: But still
seeing his General promoting the business, and privately urging it, with a
modest indignation he protests that he will not build on another ruin, and
therefore quits the service. Here you may behold an eminent effect of that true
nobility which inhabited his generous breast, and how much he disdained to tread
upon another head, for his own advancement.

Immediately after this the Scottish Tumults began at home, whereupon an
honorable invitation concurring with his own natural inclination to that
service; he makes for England: choosing rather to serve his own Sovereign,
then any foreign Prince. This was unwelcome news to the Belgian Army, that
he should now forsake that Field where his Laurel began so happily to
flourish. But he will by no means be any longer detained from doing service to
his own Lord and Sovereign, therefore requesting them in this respect to
dispense with him, he takes his leave. There never went thence a young
Gentleman more beloved, or of whose loss the Soldiers were more sensible.
When he was gone, long time, and often was he a subject of their discourse, one
praised his incomparable valor, another his diligence, a third his obedience
and modesty, a fourth his courtesy and truly noble nature, in fine they
generally concluded, that he was a prime ornament to our whole Nation: nay,
some chief men amongst them did by Letters confess, they did emulate England
in the possession of him.

By this time is our young Picolhomini arrived in England, (for that surname
the Netherlands had already honored him withal) he begins his Command under
that noble and valiant Knight Sir John Digby, whose Lieutenant he was: in which
place he carried himself so worthily, that no ones gallantry in that service
was more famous then his, of which he gave singular evidence in the Fight at
Newburne. At which time his Captains captivity gave him occasion for his
release, shortly after to make trial both of his valor and discretion, in a
very remarkable manner.

Douglas, Sheriff of Tividale (whilst the Scottish Army lay heavy upon the
North of England) adventured, with a party of about four score Horse, to
plunder a House in those parts called Stapleford, belonging to Master Pudsey, a
Gentleman of quality. Who as soon as they are arrived, finds means to bring
intelligence to His Majesty's Army, where Lieutenant Smith seeing few upon the
news show any great alacrity or forwardness to undertake his rescue, proffers
himself to take it upon him, angry (as it were) to see so little commiseration
or resolution in many others who were more concerned in it then he. Being
authorized to go, he selects a small party of Horse (of a far less number
then many judged requisite for his undertaking) thereby to make his enterprise
more honorable, calling along with him two or three Trumpets besides his own,
meaning to make that discreet use of them which shortly followers. This done,
he sets forward toward the place, where he arrives with that privacy, that
disposing all his Trumpets but one, on several sides of the House, he comes
upon the Centry at unawares, and cleaves him down through headpiece, and all;
then commands the Trumpet he had reserved to sound a charge, which all the
other did second with great amazement to the Scots, who thinking themselves to
be besieged on all sides, could not resolve whether it were better to fight or
retreit, either of which they might well have done, had they known how few
their assailants were. In this confusion, an old woman of the House found
means to let them in at a door unguarded, where being entered they killed
sixteen in the place, and the rest of the Soldiers with Douglas their
Commander surrendered themselves, to the mercy of this prudent and valiant
Gentleman, who led them captive to His Majesty's Army; rejoicing that he had
got one wherewith to release his Captain, which by exchange was immediately
performed.

This was the only action, redounding to His Majesty's honor, and the credit
of our Nation, performed in all that service. For our own Army was then so
confounded with Faction, and consequently exposed to treachery, that we
prospered in nothing we then undertook. What honor and fame he gained by
this, I need not express; for there are few I presume in this Kingdom that
are ignorant of it, every one praising and admiring so much discretion, and so
brave a spirit in a gentleman so young. Not long after our Royal Sovereign
out of His tender compassion to both the Nations, and His unwillingnesse to
engage them in a Civil War, finds means to close up the breach between
them: though not without prejudice to His own Royal Prerogative.

Now our brave Soldier betakes himself to a retired life, in his Mothers
house at Ashby Folvile in Leicestershire, not aiming at any further voyage: for
he prudently foresaw that the former fire though now covered with ashes of a
pacification, would shortly break out into a greater flame then before. And
was but a preamble to this horrid and unnatural Rebellion, which now
sufficiently appears in its own shape. He said, he knew evidently, that
though the Scots had obtained their wishes, yet the Faction who invited them to
what they did, were as little satisfied as over, and consequently their unruly
spirits, could not long contain themselves out of action, but shortly would
endeavor to set the Kingdom on fire. He in the interim contented himself
with this retirement, being by reason of this expectation, unwilling to take
any Command abroad.

His Majesty was pleased in respect of his eminent carriage in the last action,
to offer to make him a Knight Baronet, as a princely reward, and encouragement
for his further progress in these Heroike courses. He considering himself to
be the youngest of four brothers, that his revenewes did nothing agree with
the maintenance of such a Title, and believing that honor on those conditions
would be but a mere burden unto him, modesty refused it; contenting himself
with his former condition: which action does clear him from all aspersion of
vanity. This interim he bestowed in so good a manner, that he acquired singular
love and respect, from all that conversed with him. His conversation was so
sweet and affable, and his excesses so rare, that most men in a Soldier
admired that temperance and courtesy. This time he neglected not frequently to
read and study books of Military Discipline and instruction; but those
selected, and of the choycest sort: to these he added Histories, seeking to
extract thence in short time by Theory, what many years practice would hardly
afford him. He did well discover the ignorance of such, as are only trained up
in the sehoole of practice, under a few years experience; and confessed, that a
mere practical knowledge could not make a perfect Soldier, and that practis^
ought neither to march in obstinate blindness without speculatives of
historical knowledge, and examples; nor these again without practice, but
that both of them should be respected as necessary parts, to make a complete
Soldier.

Long time passed not before the unhappy actors in this present tragedy,
forgetful of the honor of our Nation, their duty to their Sovereign, or love
to their Country, bring to light this unnatural and ugly monster of Rebellion,
and Civil War: not respecting their own happiness in the calm of a happy
peace, or felicity in a King of that excellent temper, for all perfections
belonging to a good Prince, that hardly ever did Britannia's Diadem crown the
temples of his equal. This suddenly grows to that height and infolence, that
it was out of His Majesty's power to suppress it, seeing himself on a sudden
deprived of all His Arms, Ships, Forts, and necessaries for War. But soon
he is brought to that exigent, that either Himself, His Queen, and Royal
Progeny with the whole Kingdom must be ruined, or else he must endeavor to
oppose himself, by all possible means to hinder its further progress. To
this end he casts himself into the arms of the divine providence, and out of
nothing begins to raise an Army for His own defense; presently our young
Worthy is sought for, and made Captain-Lieutenant under the Lord John Steuort
(brother to the Duke of Richmond and Lenox) a gentleman of a wonderful sweet
and noble disposition.

This Troop was very eminent in respect of the Commander, upon whom the eyes
of most men were fixed in extraordinary expectation, wherein whether they were
deceived or no, let his succeeding actions declare. In the time of his
Quartering at Lincoln there happened a passage worth noting. Not long before,
there was a gentleman of quality in the Kings Army taken Prisoner by the Proto
Rebels of Kingston upon Hull, and there in time of his durance was abused by
one of the Wrayes, Heir to one of the chief Houses of that name in
Lincolnshire, who like a Jay, cast a glass of beer in contempt into the
captive Gentleman's face. Whereof our gallant Commander hearing, was much
incensed: determining to vindicate the wronged Gentleman, if ever occasion were
offered. Whilst he was at Lincoln this hotspur Wray comes to Town, whereof he
having notice, repaires to the house and enters the room where Wray and diverse
others ill-affected to His Majesty were met; he demands of him whether he were
the man who at such a time abused one of His Majesty's Soldiers in Hull? the
other peremptorily acknowledging the fact, he takes occasion with his cane to
pay him his hire, and did it to the purpose, in such a manner, that the other
present daunted with his courage, dared not once to stir in Wrayes defense.
This was an argument of his noble nature, and served the Soldiers and Townsmen
to laugh at a long time after. The like he did since on a Knight of greater
name and bulk in vindication of a noble Lord to whom that Knight had been too
ungrateful. Indeed his disposition was such that he could better endure to see
himself wronged, then any other ingenuous man, and would sooner vindicate
another injury, then his own.

He could not endure to see the insolence of Soldiers over the poor pesants
and country people, ueither ever would he tolerate it if it lay in his power
either by foul or fair means to remedy. Which an Officer of the Army (who
thought himself no mean man experienced certainly at Leicester. This man
usurpes power, upon I know not what authority, to press, and dispose of Horses
at his pleasure: which he performed with that insolence, as was very grievous
to the people. Wherefore they complained to this generous Commander, who
immediately questioned the other about it, and finding him both very guilty,
and peremptory in his offenses: Lays him (although he were his namesake) by
the head and heels in the stable, amongst the horses, and there lets him lie,
durante beneplacito, till he was entreated to release him.

By this time the Cockatrice of this Rebellion was grown to some maturity, and
amongst all that sought to lop the growing Monster our noble Captain Smith
gave one of the first blows: the particulars whereof as they are related
authentikely by the Herald, (who extorted the relation from his own mouth) I
will here insert. In the beginning of August. 1642. He marched with the Lord
John Stuarts Troop into Warwickeshire, there to meet the noble Earl of
Northampton, who was then in Arms for His Majesty. Captain Bartue Troop
marched with him, and at Rugby on the edge of the aforesaid County he quartered
the 8 of that month, where he understood that at Kilsby in Northamptonshire,
about two miles distant, the Inhabitants had put themselves in Arms against
His Majesty's Proclamation; He therefore conceiving it fit to disarme them, did
that night set a strong Guard in Rugby of about 30 Horse, to the end he might
draw out of the Town at any hour with the less noise, or notice.

Before break of the day he marched out, the morning being very wet, and before
it was light, coming to Kilsby Town side drew up his Horse in a body. As soon
as it was clear day he entered the town, where presently he found the people
gathering together, some with Muskets or other gunnes, others with Pitchforkes
and Clubs, He asked them what they meant, and told them he had no purpose to
do them harm, entreating them to deliver up their Arms for His Majesty's
service. The untuly people no whit hearkened to his courteous desires, but
furiously assaulted his Troop, (which could not be drawn up into a body in
regard of the straitness of the passage) they wounded two or three of his men
and some horses. Yet made he shift to disarme some of them, and then advances
to the Constables house, where he finds more company; but commanded his men not
to discharge a Pistol upon pain of death, hoping yet by fair means to
qualify them. Immediately diverse shot is made from the Windows at him;
whereupon, he commanded his men to give fire, and so presently dispatched three
or four of them: which the rest seeing, ran away all except an old man that
with his Pitchforke ran at Captain Smith, and twice stroke the tynes thereof
against his breast, who by reason of his arms under a loose coat received no
hurt, yet could not this old man by any entreaty be persuaded to forbear, till
a Pistol quieted him. Here he took 40 Muskets, and the same day marched toward
the valiant Earl of Northampton, whom he met with Brooks his Ordnance, about
three miles from Warwick and attended him thither. In this action if you
consider the condition of those times, you will discover a great deal of
discretion in the managery of it, and nothing savouring of rashness or vanity,
some taint whereof you might well expect in a young Gentleman so spritefull,
and overflowing with valor.

The next action remarkable that our fortunate gallant had a hand in, was that
famous fight September the 23. the same year, near Worcester: where he
charged with that bravery and discretion, that many confess he did singularly
promote the victory. Thus daily he gained new honors, and his Laurel still
flourished with more splendour then could be expected in his age.

To this at Worcester succeeds that memorable Battle near Keinton in
Warwickeshire, the particulars whereof following we owe to Mr. Dugdale, Chester
Heralds careful preservation. His Troop at this time being in the Lord
Grandisons Regiment, was drawn up in the left wing of the Kings Army; This day
his singular valor was most eminent for sundry notable actions, especially his
rescue of His Majesty's Banner Royal, vulgarly called the Standard. For after
the Rebels left wing of Horse, and diverse Regiments of Foot were routed, and
execution followed by His Majestices Horse of both wings, through and beyond
the Town of Keinton. It happened that this prudent Commander saw some eminent
persons of His Majesty's Army, in pursuit of the flying Rebels, which he
conceived had been appointed as a Reserve of horse, for assistance of our
foot: which much amazed him, hearing both Armies at that instant in sharp
fight, whereupon he presently seeks out the Lord Grandison, Sir Charles Lucas,
and some other Officers of quality; and importuned their speedy rallying
together of what horse in this confusion could be suddenly got, that so
speedily they might return to the assistance of out foot.

His excellent advise was very well resented by those noble Gentlemen, and
accordingly they soon rallyed about 200 horse, and marched back toward the
Armies then in fight. In their passage they met with a great part of the
Rebels of Charles Essex his Regiment, running confusedly toward Keinton Town
with their colors: those they presently charged, slew some, routed the rest
and took all their Colors. This done these horse rallyed again, and
advanced, but they had not past far before they met with about three Troops
of the Rebels horse, which were wheeled off from the rear of their foot,
these also they charged, routed, and followed in execution so far, that now
this brave Commander could rally but fourteen men together to prosecute his
return: with which as he passed up still toward the rear of the Rebels
Army, he met with a great part of the Lord Whartons Regiment that formerly were
routed also, and now were with their Colors, confusedly hastening toward
Keinton Town; these with his fourteen horse he valiantly charged, and routing
them took their Colors. The Majors Colors were taken by himself, which he
delivered to one Chichly a groom of the Duke of Richmond's, who had taken a
Colors of Charles Essex his Regiment.

But now of all his fourteen there was no more left but himself and Chi^hley:
the rest following the pillage of the routed Rebels. As these two were passing
on toward our Army, this Mirror of Chivalry espies six men, three Curiasiers
and three Harquebusiers on horseback, guarding a seventh on foot, who was
carrying off the Field a Colors rouled up which he conceived to be one of the
ordinary Colors of His Majesty's Leife-guards, and therefore seeing them so
strong, intended to avoid them. Whilst he was thus considering, a boy on
horseback calls to him saying, Captain Smith, Captain Smith, they are
carrying away the Standard. He would not suddenly believe the boy, till by
great asseverations he had assured him it was the Standard, who forthwith said,
They shall have me with it, if they carry it away; and desiring Chichley if he
saw him much engaged, to throw down the other Colors and assist him; presently
he charged in with his rapier at the footman that carried the Banner, (who was
then Secretary to Essex the Rebels General) saying, Traitor deliver the
Standard, and wounded him into the breast, whilst he was bent forward to
follow his thrust, one of those Curiasters with a pollax wounded him in the
neck through the Collar of his doublet, and the rest gave fire at him with
their pistolls, but without any further hurt then blowing of some powder into
his face.

No sooner was he recovered upright, but he made a thrust at the Curiasier that
wounded him, and ran him into the belly, whereupon he presently fell, at which
sight all the rest ran away. Then he caused a foot soldier that was near at
hand to reach him up the banner, which he brought away with the horse of that
Curiasier. Immediately comes up a great body of His Majesty's horse which were
rallyed together (according to his first advice) to charge the enemy again,
with whom he staid; delivering the Standard to Master Robert Hatton, a
Gentleman of Sir Richard Willyes his Troop, to carry forthwith to His Majesty.
So far was he from prizing his own action, or gaping after honor or reward.
The day was now so far spent that he had time left only to rescue Colonel
Richard Feilding who was taken Captive by the Rebels, and was leading away,
whilst in the interim our Heroicke Commander comes, and in despite of them
sets him at liberty. Surely this days work deserves eternal memory, and
concludes that he was borne this day to place a laurel garland on his
Sovereigns head, and preserve the honor of His Nation; Many confess that the
preservation of our foot is due to his prudent foresight and advise. If his
valor had afforded us nothing else but the rescued Standard, we could not
sufficiently celebrate his praise. It had surely in the peoples eyes been a
sad O men of succeeding enterprises, had we not by his fortunate and courageous
atcheivement repaired so singular a loss; but this on the other side
encouraged them, who seeing the Standard so near lost, yet happily regained,
conceived hopes that though the royal Diadem was as deeply engaged, yet by the
fortunate endeavor of such Noble Heroes that also together with the Kingdom
might be recovered.

The next morning King CHARLES sends for him to the top of Edgehill, where His
Majesty (though the modest Gentleman did what lay in him to avoid the honor)
Knighted him for his singular valor. Immediately our worthy Knight (seeing the
Rebels having gathered all the residue of their strength into a body, stood
drawn up near the side of Keinton Town) signifies a great desire he had that
our horse should charge them, but that being not resolved he craved liberty to
have a small party assigned him, with which he would endeavor to fetch off
some of their Canon, which being granted he marched down into Keinton field,
and of his party he drew out about 30 to approach near the body of the
Rebels, and face them whilst horses were span'd in to draw off the pieces: he
commanded this party himself, facing their maine body within musket shot, but
their horse were so awed with the former days work, that they durst not
adventure to charge him with that small party; with which he brought off three
brasle pieces of Canon that stood about the left wing of the Rebels army in
the battle; which action our whole Army stood looking on with wonder and
applause. He concludes this days work with the generous assistance he gave
Sir Gervase Scroopes son in fetching off his valiant Father stripped naked and
almost dead, with the loss of so much blood by nineteen wounds.

These valiant actions made him very eminent in His Majesty's sight, so that
the royal munificence gives him a troop of his own, and the noble Lord
Grandison elects him for Major to his Regiment: wherein he did singular service
in diverse places, exercising all parts of an excellent Commander; witness his
gallant behavior in the fight at Brainceford, and his beating up of the
enemies quarters, with his souldierlike retreat, the same year in December
near Winchester. Where with a small party he dared to go into the mouth of a
powerful army, to beat up their quarters, and afterward when they came upon
him when he had done great execution in the place, with such discretion to make
his retreat scarce with the loss of a man in despite of them all.

He still more and more expressed the greatness of his spirit, and true
magnanimity, when the next day the potent enemy had beseiged them in Winchester
Castle; he would have issued out and tried the utmost of fortune, rather then
submit to those whom he so much detested, one of which in respect of their
exigence in provision, they must of necessity do. But when he saw the rest
disclaiming and not concurring, he was feign to desist: But nevertheless
disdaining to have any hand in the parley, refused to subscribe to the articles
of submission. How undauntedly he carried his captivity is incredible: as also
how boldly he looked adversity in the face. The Allmighty it seems was pleased
to make trial of his fortitude every way, to see whether he were as courageous
in suffering as fighting, or as mild a Captive as a modest Conqueror. Very
magnanimously did he support this tedious trial of nine months imprisonment,
where the enemy perceived his worth so well that they were loath to part with
him on any conditions that might be termed reasonable.

Nevertheless when the divine wisdom saw him sufficiently exercised in this
school of patience, he is at last released, to the singular joy and comfort of
most brave spirits in the Kings Army: some of which even with tears at Oxford
entertain him. The noble Lord Herbert of Ragland wooes him to his service, and
makes him Lieutenant Colonel to his Regiment of horse, with promise of a far
more eminent place in very short time. In this interim of his command here, I,
attracted by the fame which rung through the Kingdom of him, repaired unto
him, desiring to serve His Majesty under this matchless Gentleman's command:
and from that time to his death was an eyewitness of what I shall after
relate. There I observed the love, honor, and respect he had of all the
Soldiers and Commanders, which valued him beyond expression. I could not
choose likewise but see his exceeding modesty in the midst of all these
respects and applauses. In his expedition against Massey he expressed the
natural aversion he had from rissing the Country, or enriching himself by
those baser means, in his frequent endeavors to restrain the soldiers from
the pursuit thereof; where often he demonstrsted his noble mind stored with
compassion, in tendering the complaints of suffering people.

The Court looks upon him as one deserving greater command, and more active
employments, wherefore in his return from the said expedition (where
Gloucesters Idol showed his dexterity in running, as well as his policy in
other things.) Our worthy Knight meets with the Kings Letter, whereby he is
called immediately away to Oxford, where he is no sooner arrived but commanded
thence by His Majesty to the West, there to take the place of Major General to
the horse, in that Army under the Lord John Stuart, by whom at Winchester he is
entertained with extraordinary welcome; The Renowned Lord Hopton declaring that
he also took no little content in the possession of such a Jewel. Indeed it
was impossible for a Gentleman to find more honor and respect then he did
from those Worthy Lords, together with the whole Army, the eyes of all being
bent upon him.

Our Gallant Major General now settled in his office, begins and prosecutes his
affairs with that prudence, courtesy, and magnanimity, that all sorts of
people were enamoured with his true excellency. He won the soldiers with his
courtesy, the people with his modesty, and even from his enemies drew he
admiration for his gallantry. By this means his fame increases daily to an
unspeakable height, insomuch that beyond Seas also he is celebrated as a worthy
of the times. He has here fought so good a fight, as claims already the
speedy possession of a celestial Diadem, and to that end he must now be
summoned hence, but yet in the most honorable way that may be, whilst he is
sacrificing his life for his King and Country in the head of a gallant Army.

Now approaches the battle at Bramdean near Alresford in Hampshire, on March
the 29. 1644. Wherein our Worthy must put a period to all his renowned actions,
as if he had fore-known what was to succeed, the morn before he sets out of
Winchester, he prepares himself for death in the best manner possible. All the
time our Army lay expecting opportunity to assail the enemy, every eye looked
upon him as the loadstarre of their success. In the night before the sight he
goes out himself and killing the enemies Centinell returns back with honor:
In truth we had not any more daring, and vigilant then he.

It is incredible what cheerfulness, and alacrity he showed when the sight
drew nigh, at meat that morning, bidding his Soldiers feed heartily, for they
should have Princely sport anon. The fight begins where our valiant Foot beat
the Rebels out of the woods, and bravely even bestowed a hopeful victory upon
us, till some out of a rash Gallantry engage both themselves, and the fortune
of a glorious day, insomuch that the Horse must needs be commanded up, though
upon a great disadvantage, which our prudent Knight resents, and to some that
were near unto him expressed a great dislike of it, but understanding that it
was peremptory, he esteemed his honor so highly that for a world he would not
be seen to detract from any thing: lest if thereupon any disaster should
ensue, the dishonor should light upon his innocence. On therefore he goes in
Heroicke obedience, though expecting nothing else but what ensued. In a
distracted manner they are of necessity to charge a solid body of the Rebels
Horse, lying under the protection both of Canon, and hedges lined with
Musketeers: their Canon (when he is come almost within pistol shot with
intention to charge in) flies off so freely, that amazes his Horse, the fire
even flashing in his face, causes him to rear, and turn sidewise upon the
enemy, who seeing all his riders power employed to keep his saddle, and
recover his Horse, let fly at him as thick as hail: and in this interim comes
one from amongst them clad in Arms like a Lobster, who with a Carbine gives
him his third and mortal wound, in his belly on the left side beneath his
armor; with this wound he falls, and with him the fortune of the day, and
courage of our Horse, for no sooner was he down, but daunted with so
disastrous an accident they in a great disorder retreat, scarce any but his own
Troop remaining on that wing, who resolving to die rather then loose so brave a
Leader advanced to fetch him off, even to the enemies nose, and indespite of
them gallantly brought off him, his horse, and Arms, whilst one of the Company
a reformado Lieutenant in a brave revenge, rides up to the Armed monster and
shootes him in the eye, sending him to answer for his detested fact, in so base
a manner wounding to death a Gentleman every way accomplished, and worthy. The
Almighty was not pleased that any miscreant should live to glory in so foul an
action.

Our Major General now wounded, desires those faithful Gentlemen, not to
suffer him to come into the enemies hands, but convay him to some place where
he may a while repose with security. They bring him immediately to the
Physician General to be dressed, who unfortunately missed his mortal wound
discovering only a bruise on the same side beneath it, and therefore concludes
he is out of danger, upon this they bring him to Woonston, a village 5 miles
from Winchester, where his Troop lately quartered, here after he had drunk a
posset, and warmed himself a while, he desires to lie down and rest, a bed is
prepared and he lies down, immediately falling to sleep; which considered,
together with the courage he supported his mortal wounds, made us confident he
was out of danger: his being so hearty, and no sighs or groans to be
perceived, as generally in dying men. He was no sooner awake, but he began to
question how far we were from the enemy, what time a night it was, and what
was become of our Army: and after falls into a formal discourse, wherein he
dispatched some particular things concerning himself, which because they were
private I omit: which done he lies down again, and said, the conceit of our
men running away did more trouble him by far then his wounds: and though
others were hardly induced to believe it, both now and before he expressed in a
mild manner, that his life was near a period: and conjured me by all the love
and respect I ought him, to certify his Dear Mother that he died with a quiet
conscience, and a resigned mind, hoping likewise that she would not take his
death with too much heaviness, but rather rejoice that she had a son to shed
his blood for his Sovereign. A truly Christian, and Heroical speech, which
though but short, comprised the very Elixar of true fortitude, loyalty, and
piety.

After this he prays, making an excellent act of perfect resignation, saying,
O my Lord and God, out of thy infinite goodness have mercy upon me, who cast
my self into thy blessed hands, heartily wishing that thy divine will may be
performed in me: whilst he was thus like the Swan, singing so sweet a dying
Ode with eloquence scarce usual in his life time, his carriage is made ready,
to take him from danger imminent, to a place of more security: and so to Oxford
if it were possible. He notwithstanding his deadly wounds, comes down stairs
on foot, and ascends the carriage with that stoutnesse, as hardly has been
seen in a dying man: all the symptoms of pain you could perceive in him, was
sometimes he would bite his nether lip, when his pangs with most extremity came
upon him. When we drew near Andover, he began to say (his senses being a
little astonished) Good my Lord let us charge up again, let us charge them
once again, and the day is ours. As soon as we entered the town he began to
invoke the sacred name of Jesus, often repeating it with a soft voice, as if he
had taken taken a gust and sweetness in the divine virtue of it. Shortly
after, over against the sign of the Angel, in a mild and sweet repose he
expired: where it would have grieved the hardest heart to have seen him round
enclosed with sundry Gentlemen, condoling with tears the untimely end of so
Peerlesse a Gentleman.

Thus alas you have seen how this Worthy of our Age, one of the prime flowers
in our English Garden, is cut off in his youth at the age of scarce thirty
years: who seeing he was arrived to such an eminent excellence in so short a
time, what might we have expected from him, had he attained but a man's age? His
body at Oxfora is entertained with exceeding grief both to Court and City;
whilst his burial is preparing at the College of All-Soules in the Chancell,
his body is exposed to the peoples view, whither a great number of all sorts
resorted, some to view his wounds, and many to behold the man of whom fame had
proclaimed so great things, and for whom now there was so universal
lamentation.

The next day being the first of April in the afternoon, were his Funeral
rites solemnized, with as much ceremony as the shortness of time, and means
of preparation for one of his quality would permit, The manner whereof was
briefly thus,

First, three Trumpets with black Scarfes went sounding very dolefully before,
next his Horse whereon he was slain was led by a Page and covered in black to
the ground, upon which were placed his Escucheons of Arms. Then two Heralds
went carrying his Sword and Spurs; the Corpse were carried by Gentlemen of his
own Troop, whilst the Pall set with Escucheons was supported by the Earls of
Cleveland and Rivers, the Lord Herbert of Ragland and the Lord John Somerset
his brother. Six Colonels, on each side the Corpse three, carried his Arms;
Then followed the Right Honorable the Lord Carington as principal mourner,
accompanied by the Earl of Lindsey Lord Great Chamberlain of England, and the
Earls of Northampton and Dover, (from persons of that degree an extraordinary
respect) with diverse others of the Nobility, after these came all the chief
Commanders of Horse and Foot then in Oxford, with a multitude of other
Gentlemen.

In this solemn manner proceeded they to Christ-Church, and in the South-east
corner of the Chapel, on the Southside of the Quire, was the body of this
renowned and gallant Soldier deposited: at the head of the late Viscount
Grandison. Where after the Office of burial was performed, this following
expression in honor of his memory was made by Somerset Herald.

THus it has pleased Almighty God to take out of this transitory life unto his
divine mercy, the valiant and most worthy Gentleman, Sir JOHNSMITH, Knight,
(descended of the ancient Family of Carington, from Sir Michael Carington
Standard bearer to King RICHARD the first in the Holy Land) who for his signal
valor in rescuing His Majesty's Banner Royal, in the Battle of Keinton,
after it was possessed by the Rebels at that time received the Honor of
Knighthood, from His Majesty in the field; and since in sundry other Battles
against the Rebels, has given singular testimony of his loyalty and valor,
especially in that memorable Battle of Bramdean on Friday last, the 29 of
March: where having received several wounds in pursuit of victory, he dyed of
them the day following at And over, and here in Oxford is now interred.

God save the King.

Here lies our noble Hero, whose memory exacts both from his Family and our
Nation a Monument to adorn his triumphant ashes, which I doubt not but either
of them will perform, rather then suffer the least stain of so great neglect,
or ingratitude rest upon them. In the mean time will I make bold to inscribe
an Epitaph, upon this living monument which I now erect unto him.

His Epitaph.
Immortalitati Sacrum.
SUspend your tears, whilst I declare
Whose ashes here enshrined are.
This Tomb adornes the precious dust,
Of one whose fame can never rust.
That noble, valiant, gallant Knight,
Renowned SMITH whose name so bright
In honors Hemisphears does shine,
That many judge it is divine:
And that some Deity at least,
Does his immortal soul invest.
Beneath this Marble does remain
The body, which did it contain,
And here it lies to be refined
Until again they be rejoined.
Those endless glories to possess,
Which crown the Saints with happiness.
I cannot here omit to sacrifice a tear or two upon his urne in a funeral
Elegy, though in so doing I shall effect nothing but discover how sensible I am
of his loss, so that even my raptures are so possessed with his precious memory,
that in them I am not able to conceal my passions.

An Elegy.
WEre Aganippe by some secret vein
Conveyed into the Cisterns of my brain,
'Twould be exhaled (me thinks) in learned tears.
By this bright Sun, new placed in the Spheres
Of immortality: yet grieve not I,
To think he is seated in an Orb so hie;
For this were envy; I grieve alas! he is gone,
So great a distance from our Horizon,
That we deprived of his precious light
Esteem the day a melancholy night.
Yet this my grief is vain, since he does shine
Although Eclipsed to these rays of mine
By passion; which has from my tender eyes
Exhausted such a crystal sacrifice
Of streaming tears, that they by love exhaled
In mist-like incense hence, and then congealed
Into a cloud by grief, deprive my sight
Of his more glorious and immortal light:
Till grief and love, justling as cold, and heat,
Combat in nature, like to her beget
Flashes of fire, and together mould
Something like thunder, out of heat and cold
Jumbling together; loudly may proclayme
To future worlds Great SMITH's Renowned name:
And with the clap this dusky cloud remove,
Which hides from me the bright aspect I love.
Ed: Walsingham.

There are many whose curious affections will exact at my hands, many
particulars about his inward and outward man, not yet specified: which
consideration makes me here undertake a brief description of him, in some sort
by way of prevention to satisfy such as would expect it of me.

Sir John Smith was of a middle stature, but strongly built, his hair was
long, and thick, in color like a ripe filberd: very decent and becoming; his
complextion was a moderate languine, but his aspect was so awful and stern,
that you may conclude he was rather formed to command Armies, then allure
Ladies, though in truth I have not seen a Gentleman whose ordinary looks were
repleat with such a natural majesty, intermixed with such singular modesty.
From his infancy did he retain a certain lisping in his speech, which
notwithstanding, was rather an ornament, then any blemish unto him. In all his
carriage and gestures you could observe nothing affected, or savouring of
vanity, but on the contrary a certain decent neglect, which did much become
him. His humility was very eminent, for notwithstanding all that honor and
respect which deservedly attended him, could any one conclude that any thing in
him savoured of pride, ostentation, or arrogance, for he seemed wholly to be
made of courtesy, respect, and modesty. His excesses were so small for ought
that I could ever inform my self that he will be oftener admired then
imitated; for though I curiously observed him, I could never yet conclude that
I saw him overcome by drink.

Complements and Ceremonies were for the most part neglected by him, as out of
his element, and take him generally he was wonderful sparing and reserved in
his speech: but what he said was for the most part sentences and solidly to the
purpose: the truth is, he did infinitely better express his judgment,
prudence, and gallant abilities in action then public discourse, being none
of those windy gallants whose chifest eminence does consist in vapouring
bravely; yet was he not so reserved in these things, but he had also a sweet
dexterity in accommodating himself to time, or company which often gained him
a great measure of love and respect. As he was without taint of vanity, so
there was none more free from emulation, for he would speak the best of all,
and if he confessed their defects, would also acknowledge their virtues; yea
though they were his enemies. He delighted to relate the exploits of others,
but was so far from boasting of his own, that he could ill tolerate to have
another mention them.

In his counsels he was very close and reserved, in his expeditions exceeding
discreet, and vigilant in all his actions, as he was strickt in his discipline
and command to others, so also exact in obeying his Commanders, and disdaining
no employment whatsoever. There was no common Soldier more patient of labor,
or hardness. His disposition was wonderful noble, and his liberality such
that whilst he had any thing, his Soldiers should want nothing. In his clothes
he was nothing curious or vain, witness all that knew him.

With great discretion, would he make trial of their disposition, sidelities,
and ability, whom he intended to employ about him, or entertain into the
number of his familiar friends, hardly affecting any whose discretion, candor,
and fidelity, he was not assured of by prudent experience. He would not rashly
determine of any thing that was brought before him without due digestion, and
fit consideration; his prudence and foresight, all his speeches and actions did
loudly proclaim. But which in respect of his youth is most admirable, I have
not observed a Soldier more reserved in courting Ladies, he was not easily
entangled in every pleasing object, but if ever he entertained himself in that
kind, a modest mirth, and not any baser end was his inducement, for he judged
such diversions unworthy entertainments for a noble mind if they tended any
further then true affection and modest recreation. This is confirmed by a
pleasant passage happening not long since at Winchester, where he accidentally
came to see a Letter by a young Gentlewoman of that place, in which he
discovered so much wit and modesty, expressed in so good language, that struck
with admiration he was very desirous to know the author. Her name was denied,
but it was told him that she was as beautiful as wife, and virtuous, and
withal very young. Whereupon laying aside all further curiosity, he answers,
Blessed be God who has made so many excellent gifts concur in one creature.
A rare conclusion for such a discourse, and admirable in a Soldier so young,
and vigorous: It might well challenge any of the ancient contemplatives for
patron. Doubtless it concluded that Christian piety which was so eminent in
him, to be true and solid.

I could not observe any Soldier more duly frequent his prayers if his
business would possibly permit, whereby if prevented he would seek to supply
his loss with frequent aspirations, and acts of devotion. Nothing was more
opposite to his nature then flattery, for he sought always with a candid
freedom to speak his mind, which if he did not desire to have known, he
would by silence rather then dissimulation conceal it. What time he could
steal from company, or employments, he would privately employ in reading
Military instructions, and observations; or else reposing himself on his bed
consult what he was to do, and lay grounds for future designs, all which he
went about with great prudence, and discretion.

He was none of those who out of a bravery and rash inconsideration run
headlong with their followers into inevitable dangers; but as there was none in
the fact more valiant, so there was none in the circumstance more discreet,
which caused all that knew him with incredible confidence of felicity to
accompany him in any enterprise; whom still he brought off with that success
as seldom any the like; nay, in that near Alrezford (where it pleased God to
summon him from this earthly warfare to place him amongst his heavenly Legions,
there to prosecute his Sovereigns quarrel) not one of his followers were
hurt, though exposed as much as any, and some of them even last in the place.
His former felicity still accompanying them even at this time, when it forsook
himself, to invest him in felicities by infinite degrees more permanent, and
truly excellent.

Here must I set a period to my description of this gallant Gentleman, with
this confession, that I want judgment and abilities duly to express his
excellencies. Which I cannot better supply then with this acknowledgment: let
any one imagine, what perfections they could wish in a most valiant, loyal,
and Christian Knight, I dare affirm them eminent in this matchless Commander
insomuch that not only his family, friends, and followers, but also deservedly
our whole Nation may glory in him; as a singular ornament unto them all: whose
fame will doubtless ever remain, increasing daily with greater splendour, as
long as our English Nation has a being.

To the advancement of whose glory I must needs place this Trophes of the
Muses, as a votive tablet upon his famous Shrine, thereby to incite the learned
Poets of our Nation to employ their diviner pens in so excellent a work, as
concurring to immortalize the memory of so brave a Spirit.

An Acrostick ANAGRAM
S'hame it is to cease, aloud for TO proclaim
Renowned Acts THAT merit lasting fame;
Jn hope of which, the NOBLE r spirits run
On brave attempts, that WORTHY ly they done;
Honor may close, and fame THE ir actions crown:
New ages call them MIRROR 's of renown.
Shall this be said OF TRUE th? and yet not one
Make have to place famed VALOR s Impresse on
Inequall'd SMITHE, Sr JOHN that valiant Knight
That makes the name of SMITHE the Lands delight.
Happy PRESERVER from the worst of harms
Even the glory OF THE Imperial Arms:
He waighing death less then the ROYAL stain,
Engaged his life the STANDARD to regaine.
Shall we desist now IN REWARD OF this
To sing his praise? or shall HIS VIRTUE miss
In fame to live? AND'S LOYALTY lie low
M'indlesse in the dust? THE VIRGIN QUIRE say, no.
Sooner we'll loose OF LEARNED maids the name,
His worth shall live, MUSES have vowed the same.
On honor's altar we HAVE PLACED THIS
New TROPHY, FOR AN endless mark of his
Eternal praise, and EVERLASTING gains:
Record whereof this MONUMENT contains.
UPON THIS ALTAR CHARLES THE GRACIOUS

ANGLICANO HEROI Sacrum

The Author, to censure.
GEntlemen. Our English Trismegistus, that Oracle of wit in his Advancment of
Learning, delivers some what singular in defense of my endeavors in this kind,
which seeing requisite I cannot prudently omit. As for lives when I think
thereon. I do find strange that these our times have so little known and
acknowledged their own virtues, being there is so seldom any memorial of the
lives of those who have been eminent in them. For although Kings and such as
have absolute Sovereignty may be few, and Princes in free Commonwealths not
many. Yet however there has not been wanting excellent men, though of an
inferior degree that have deserved better then an uncertain and wandering fame
of their memory, or some naked and barren Elegy. Such certainly was himself,
and the Gentleman I have here exposed: choosing rather like one of those Swans
(of whose paucity the learned Viscount complains) to carry my tablet to the
Temple of Immortality, then like those other negligent birds loose it in the
River Lethe: lest my own name should deservedly live famous only for
ingratitude; that living could neglect to express his unparalled worth, who
even dying looked with such a happy and affectionate eye on my indesert; yet am
I so far from judgeing that these mean endeavors have acquitted the debts
and affections of others, that I believe to have scarce satisfied for my self,
nor shall I rest content till I bring one grain of incense more to that great
oblation which I hope the Muses will offer ere long in public to his memory
thereby to induce Historians those Goldsmiths of time in their elaborate rings
the Chronicles and Relations of these days, curiously to enchace this choicer
Diamond to the delight and benefit of succeeding ages.

Vt'herba solstitialis paulisper sumns.
FINIS.

