A SERMON, PREACHED In the Kings Chapel AT WHITE HALL, On Sunday last July
15. 1649. By HENRY WALKER, Cleric. AUTHOR of the Perfect Occurrences.

MATTHEW. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, etc. Printed in the Year 1649.

A SERMON.
NUMB. 14. Verse. 24. But my servant Caleb, because he had another Spirit with
him, and has followed me fully, him will I bring into the Land, whereinto he
went, and his seed shall possess it.
THis Verse, and the Verse going before, sets forth the condition of those
Children of Israel under two notions;

First, part of them God does declare should not enter into the Land of Canaan,
those are set down in the Verse going before, Surely they shall not see the
Land of Canaan, which I swear to their Fathers, nor shall any of them that
provoked me see it.

There were twelve select men chosen out to search the Land of Canaan, and of
those twelve, eleven of them did draw back the people from going on ^^
searching the Land: Now God does denounce th^^ judgment against them, because
that they did design and act against God, in drawing back the people, God he
gave them this curse, that they should never enjoy the Land of Canaan; then he
proceeded to the words of the Text,

But my servant Caleb and his seed, they shall enjoy the land, because that
Caleb and his seed did stand faithful to the Lord, and the Lord then did bring
them to the Land.

Now the words that I shall pitch upon at this time is, He had a Spirit, and
that Spirit was with him.

In which words you may take notice of these four parts:

1. Here is the persons meant, those are Caleb and his seed. 2. Here is the
Leader, that is the Lord. 3. Here is the qualification of this person, He had a
Spirit, and that Spirit was with him. 4. Here is the manner of his enjoying
this Spirit. 1. He had it, 2. He had it with him.

I shall begin with the branch concerning the Leader, that is the Lord; it is
in the Original JEHOVAH, which is the most highest, the highest of the word is
HATHO, which does signify to be, that signifies his beginning: there is so
much comprehended in that word, that it is both the time present, then the time
past, and in the future tense the time to come: JE, that does signify the time
to be, HO the time present, VAH the time past; Now there is a signification in
VAH that does show the original of all things; God he is the Original cause
of all things that are, and shall be, and have been: The next thing is the
persons meant, that is Caleb and his seed, Caleb was with his seed, in the 13.
Chap. 6. of the Tribe of Judah; Caleb the son of Iephumieh, he was one of these
twelve, and the only one of them that did stand for God.

3. The qualification of this Spirit, he had a Spirit, then he had it with him.
The word is RUAN, a Spirit, it does come from RAVER, to receive breath, the
word it is sometimes in the Masculine, and sometimes in the feminine Gender,
which the Hobrewes do set forth much to us, and the Jews they were used to put
words oftentimes in the feminine Gender, as he had another Spirit, that is, he
did receive a Spirit from another Spirit, from God the fountain of all Spirits:
Now these may be understood the clearer by comparing two Scriptures together,
for it does much concern a Christian to know the operation of the Spirit of God.

And the Spirit of God did move upon the face of the waters, and God said let
there be light, and there was light, 1 Cen. 2, 3.

The Spirit of God did move upon the face of the water; the word which is here
taken for moved, is MER HUAH: it does come from RAHAP: it does signify to put
into, to put an influence into the spirit of man; now the same word which is
used (...) is used in the 32. Deuteronomy. 11. 12. As an Eagle stirs up her nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears
them on her wings, so did the Lord alone lead him, and there was no strange God
with him; now I say, that the same word in Genesis is in Deuteronomic, that
does signify, it lights down: so now the comparison does lie thus, that he
might bring it to our capacity, he lays down this similitude, as an Eagle; if
it does not sit upon her eggs and keeps them warm, but lets them be cold, they
will not be chickens: so if that the Spirit of God does not come into the
spirits of men, their spirits will be cold, and they cannot act any thing for
the glory of God. So this comparison does set forth the glorious oper^^ion of
Gods Spirit, that the Holy Ghost when it does warm the spirit of a man, and
does put an influence into the spirit, it does make the spirit act for the
glory of God; and to see the clear light of God; as the Sun does put an
influence into creatures, and the fire does warm the spirits of men, and revive
them, so does the Holy Ghost cause men to act for the peoples good, and does
inlighten their hearts.

2. He had another spirit, that is set forth in these words, he had a spirit
and another spirit with him, others they had a spirit, but theirs was a spirit
of fears and of bondage, but he did stand faithfully to the Lord, he had the
Spirit of God in him, to work for the glory of God and the good of his people.

4. The manner of his enjoying this spirit;

1. He had it; 2. He had it with him.
1. He had it, it did work effectually with him, it did take place in his
heart, and did cause him to work for Gods glory.

2. He had it with him, NUMAI, it was such an influence of Gods Spirit upon
him, that it did make him act great things.

So now the doctrine that I shall observe from these words are,

That when the Spirit of God does work or make an new impression upon the
spirits of men, it does put them into a condition to act high and great things
for the glory of God, and the good of the people.

I shall prove this out of Scripture says David, praying to God, Create in me
a clean spirit O God, and renew a right spirit within me: Psalm 51. ver. 10.
11. 12. David did know very well, that he was altogether unable to do any of
those works, which God did set him about, without he did make his spirit clean.

Ver. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from
me: David still had an eye to the Spirit of God, knowing that that must make
him work great things for the glory of God.

Ver. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy holy
spirit.

And the Spirit of God shall rest upon him; Esaias 11. v. 2. 3. the Spirit of
Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and of might, the Spirit of
Knowledge and fear of God; and shall make him of quick understanding in the
fear of God; and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, nor reprove
after the hearing of his ears: here is the impression of Gods Spirit, which
did rest upon his heart, and it shall make him quick and nimble to act for God:
when the Spirit of God is powerful upon the heart of a believer, it does make
him act powerfully and courageously.

I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, John 14. 16.
As if he should have said, the Lord he has great things for you to do, to go
forth and preach salvation to the people, nay to lay down your lives for God,
and to act very great things for the good of the people, and the glory of God.

In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
truth, the Gospel of the salvation, in whom also after that you believed ye
were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession unto the praise
of his glory.

Here now you see, that the seal is the earnest of our inheritance, that they
do act great things for the glory of God.

Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature, old things are passed
away, behold all things are become new: 2. Cor. 7. 17.
If that you will be a new Creature, this Spirit of God must make an impression
in your hearts. Now all old things are past away; those things which at the
first we had by nature, but now by the Holy Ghost we do receive new things; for
when a man is in the ways of God, all things become new, there is a new mind, a
new spirit, a new conversation, there is nothing of the old man in him; when
before the mind was busied about earthly things, now it is busied about
heavenly things, now his conversation is in heaven. now when the Spirit of God
does make a new impression in the spirits of Men, it does enable them to act
great things for the glory of God, and for the good of the People: And for
this, I shall give you some Reasons.

1. The first ground or reason is taken from Gods decree: for, as the Lord
prepared Heaven for the Elect, so the Lord has decreed, that those that he
has appointed for salvation shall live with him, and they shall have an
influence of the Holy Ghost, I say, that it does proceed from the Lords decree.

Ephesians. 2. v. 10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them.

God has before from all Eternity ordained that those that shall be saved
shall live here a sanctified and holy life, they shall receive an influence of
the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of God shall make a new impression upon their hearts.

2. The second ground is from the communion we have from Christ, it is
impossible that there should be such a communion between the members and the
head, as there is between a Saint and God; but there must be the Spirit of God,
and that Spirit must work effectually between them both; there is a communion
between him and us members, the same grace and glory thar he has, the same
has his members.

John. 17. v. 22. That the same glory thou gave me, I have given them, that
they be one even as we are one.

There is such a communion between Christ and his members, that the glory which
God has given him, the same he has given them; therefore they must get grace
here, that they may live the life of a gracious Christian: for, it is begun
here, and it shall be perfected when they come to glory hereafter.

3. The third ground is from the operation of the Holy Ghost, for, those that
have not the Spirit of God within them, they are none of his: those upon whose
hearts the Holy Ghost does not make an impression, they have no right to
Heaven, nor to any of the glory that God has prepared for his Children.

Romans 8. v. 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead be
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you.

It is in vain for any man to think that he does write in the ways of God, if
that there be no influence of the Holy Ghost that makes an impression in his
heart.

Now I will speak a word or two for application:

1. For Reproof. 2. Instruction. 3. For Comfort or Consolation.


1. To reprove those that do make a stright account of it, and low esteem of
it, insomuch that for any other temporal thing they will work night and day
for it, but so slack for my heavenly matter, and in the ways to be acquainted
with God and Heaven, that they do cast it behind their backs, they make no
account of leaving the Holy Ghost.

2. Another sort are to be reproved, that though they could wish that they
might go to Heaven and be saved, yet they are drawn back by some Earthly
Creature, and by some sin or other, so that they are mighty slack to get
communion with Christ, they are so much in love with the World and Earthly
things that they cannot hardly leave it.

3. They are much to be reproved that have had a great discovery of God in
their souls, who were once enlightened by the word of God, who have tasted of
the good word, who have had knowledge of God, and now do turn their backs
again upon the word of God, with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Swine to
the mire.

Jer. 13. v. 15, 16. Because they have turned from me, my soul shall have no
pleasure, says the Lord, etc.

When those that did profess the name of Christ, those that are of the Church,
and those that are called, those that have gone far in the ways of Religion,
and now fall back; this does make them odious in the sight of the Lord.

Heb. 6. v. 4, 5, 6. It is impossible who were once enlightened, and have tasted
of the heavenly gifts, and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have
casted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall
fall away to renew them again to repentance, seeing they Crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

When they have gone so far in the ways of God and Religion, that have been
enlightened and have tasted the good word, and the power of God, it is an
impossible thing for to renew those Men to repentance, when that they do
Crucify the Lord Jesus: but now I would have you to know that it is not
impossible, for there is nothing impossible to him; but yet if that God will do
it, he must do a great work to bring them again that are once gone.

4. Another sort are to be reproved who will not suffer Gods Servants to have
communion with the Saints, who had rather blot the Name of God out of their
minds, than God should work such a work upon them, that they should look into
their Consciences, no, their Consciences they are seared with a hot iron, and
they cannot endure to behold and look into their Consciences, and they cannot
endure that the spirit of God should make any impression in their souls.

5. It must serve to reprove them that do hinder others from having communion
with God, either by drawing them to sin, or hinder them in the work of God,
such as do deceive the Children of God because that they are conscientious in
their ways, and do strive to lead their lives in the fear of God, and to
lead a good life.

in your hearts, and stirring you up to prayer ^ than if you do quench it, you
know not when ever you may have such an opportunity again or no: take you heed
that you do never quench these motions.

2. Take you heed that you do not grieve the Spirit of God, as those that are
about to commit any sin; if it be Drunkenness, or whoredom, or any such
like sin, when the Spirit of God does smite your heart for it, and tells you
that that is the way to Hell, take heed that you do not grieve it then, when
it does strive to draw you off from doing such a sin, and strives to show you
the right way to Heaven.

3. Take heed that you do not trample the Spirit of God under your feet; take
heed that when the passion comes, it does not carry you on to act any great and
desperate sin against the Spirit of God.

Heb. 10. v. 28, 29. He that did despise Moses Law died without mercy, under
two or three Witnesses; how much severer punishment, think ye, he shall be
thought worthy of, who has trodden under foot the Soune of God, and bath
counted the blood of the Covenani, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing; and hash done despite to the Spirit of Grace.

If that a man for the breach of Moses Law with two or three Witnesses should
suffer death; what do you think a man at the great Day of Judgment shall
suffer for the shedding the Spirit of Grace under foot?

4. Let this stir up your affection to an holy duty, be in love with the Word
of God, with the Ordmances of God, with the People of God, with Proyer, for, by
this means there is a great enjoyment of God.

Holy Ghost did make an impression upon his heart, that he had a Spirit to
pray, that he did find an ability to do such things; for the comfort of this,
you shall see how they were carried on to work things above their power.

Romans 8. v. 26, 27. Likewise the Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groaning which cannot be uttered; but he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the spirit, because that he
does make intercession for the Saints according to the will of God.

Now the Spirit it does help you, it does carry you on to work higher things
than your own spirit is able to do: And I do make no question but there are
some here, that when they have come to prayer, their hearts have been cold, and
before that they have gone away, their hearts had been warmed with the Spirit
of God. I would not have you be mistaken, for there has been some men that
have presumed to say, that they had the Holy Ghost, when they have no such
matter; therefore I will lay down some few signs or tokens that you may be
certified whether you have the Holy Ghost or no.

1. The first token is, when there it a comfortable knowledge of the Lord, when
that the Holy Ghost has wrought a comfortable knowledge of God; and when that
any man can say, I know that my Redeemer lives, and I do know that God is my
God, and that the Holy Ghost has set a seal upon my heart, and I do know
that I am the Child of God.

John 17. v. 16, 14. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth, whom
the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, and knows him not; but ye
know him, because he dwells with you, and in you.

As if Christ should have said, Here is clear demonstration of those that are
sanctified, and those that are not.

1. For those that are not sanctified, they know nothing above nature, they do
not know Christ to be their Christ, nor God to be their God; but when the
Spirit of God does work effectually upon them, then they do know that they are
the Children of God, and that the Spirit of God is sealed upon them: the world
do not know him, but the People of God they know him.

2. When that there is a liberty in the spirit, I do not say a liberty to sin;
but when a man can serve God freely and courageously, where there is a delight
to work the work of God.

2 Cor. 3. v. 16, 14. Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the veil
shall be taken away; Now the Lord is that Spirit, where the Spirit of the Lord
is there is liberty.

A wicked man there is, the veil of sin that does lie upon his heart, that
does keep him down, it makes him go unwillingly to the Church, that when he
does go to perform any duty, he must be forced to it: but for the Child of God
that does go willingly to Prayer, and to the Church.

3. The third mark is, when the Holy Gh: has wrought a similitude of himself
upon the heart of a Man; that is the third point as a Seal, we do know that
the seal has made an impression upon the wax when that we do take it off
there is the same mark in the wax as is in the seal: so the Holy Ghost we may
know that the Holy Ghost has set this seal upon you when that there is the
same form and image in the spirit of the man as is in the Holy Ghost.

2 Cor. 3. v. 18. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory
of God, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as the
Spirit of God.

Where the Holy Ghost does make a powerful influence, there is a growth of
grace, from one decree of grace to another, till he be made a perfect Saint.

4. The fourth mark is, when there is a cheerful echo answering, in the Holy
Ghost, and without which there is many a poor soul does drop into Hell; then
when a poor soul will take and misconstrue a piece of Scripture to color his
sin, that is a very sad thing; for, now it is a hard matter when a man shall
argue with the Devil and his own soul, it is like to have the ^o^le? and now
when that God shall bid him do any thing he shall argue with God.

Gal. 1. 15, 16. There Paul if that he had conferred with flesh and blood, when
God had called him to be an Apostle, if he had argued with flesh and bl^ud it
would never have let him been an Apostle (...) but says he, But when it
pleased God who separated me from my Mothers womb, and called me by his grace,
to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen, immediately
I conferred not with flesh and blood.

If that he should have stood arguing and saying, I was a Persecutor of the
Church of God before, and they will never believe me, they may apprehend, and
stone me, I who before would apprehend Preachers, now am become one my self:
but he did not confer with flesh and blood, but went immediately and did as
the Lord bid him.

5. When there is a respect and tenderness of the Spirit of God, and not to
grieve it, when there is not the least inclination in the world to sin, that
when a man is going to him he shall hear a check in his heart to bring him
back; when there shall be a wearisomnesse in him to do any duty, the Spirit of
God shall rowse him up to do it cheerfully.

Ephesians. 4. v. 30. And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God whereby ye are sealed
unto the day of redemption.

When Paul had told them of many sins, he bid them not grieve the Holy Ghost:
there is such a tenderness in the spirit of a Child of God, that he is mighty
careful that he may not displease the Spirit of God, nor grieve it, for fear
their seal and evidence should be lost.

2. Secondly, for a use of comfort and encouragement to those that are destined
for the Cause of God for those that are to go into Ireland.

Those that do find an impression of Gods Spirit upon their souls, to do the
work of God to which they are called, now to receive courage to go against
those Idolaters in the relief of the Protestants, here may be a great deal of
comfort to those that do walk with God, and have God on their side, they
should go courageously on in this good work.

Esaias 43. v 4. Since thou were precious in my fight, thou have been honorable,
and I have loved thee, therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy
life.

It has pleased the Lord to manifest his love to this Army, and he has
honored them, and he has set a mark of his love upon them. But it may be
objected by some, that they are stronger, and theirs are stronger Garrisons
than ours are, and there are more of them; but you shall see, there was but a
11. to go to search the Land, and the same was objected by them.

Numb. 13. 28. Nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the Land, and
the Cities are walled and very great, moreover we saw the Children of Amak
there. v. 29. The Abimilecks do dwell in the Land of the South, the Hittites,
the Jebuzites, and the Amorites dwell upon the Mountains; and the Canaanites
dwell by the Sea, and the coast of Jordan: You see how they did object many
things. v. 31. But the men that went up with him said, we be not able to stand
against the people, for they are stronger than we. You do see that there was
but 12. sent to search the Land and a 11. of them returned back: but see what
Caleb did, he had another Spirit with him to encourage him. v. 30. But Caleb
stilled the People before Moses, and said, let us go up at once and possess
it, for we are well able to overcome. But it may be there will be more
objections, and some will hinder the design, and therefore it may not prosper:
but you shall say what they say, If that the Lord does delight in us, he will
give us the victory: now this is the work that every one should do, they
should seek to get the Lord with them, that they may receive an influence of
Gods Spirit, that it may carry them on to undertake the work with courage, now
the Lord he is with us, if that you have but a heart to trust in God you are
well enough; trust in God, he is able to deliver you and them into your hands.
But some will say, there are many divisions, and so they have made a league
with them. Verse. 10. But all the Congregation bade stone them with stones, and
the glory of the Lord appeared in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, before
all the Children of Israel: How much have we had Gods love appeared to us, and
have much more, should we go cheerfully to destroy Idolaters and Rebels.

Esaias 41. v. 13, 14. For I the Lord thy God will hold up thy right hand, saying
unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee; fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men
of Israel, I will help thee says the Lord, and thy Redeemer the holy one of
Israel: See now you do so put your trust in God, and take him along with you,
and you need not to fear the victory.

FINIS.

