CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS MADE By Sir William Waller, At the Surrender of
Arundell-Castle.

Together with A List of the Names OF The Commanders taken in the said Castle.

Also, Verses Gratulatory.

Licensed, and Printed according to Order.

Printed by JOHN FIELD, Jan. 11. 1644.

A Gratulatory, as it was presented to the Lady Waller upon her Husbands taking
of Arundell Castle.
MAdame, Bay-crowned Victory and Fame,
Your husbands Pages, bade me in his name
Salute you, and (though it be no news) tell
Of his renowned Acts at Aurndel.
Your pardon then, that I thus rudely press
To kiss your hands in a poetlick dress;
At such a time too, when the most do see,
All, as antic, set out in Poesy.
But yours are not vulgar eyes; nor the stone
Less precious which a Swine has trampled on:
Nor do I think you will more lightly set
A Jemme, though in a worthless cabinet.
I here present a Jewel, which I dare
Pronounce, though from mean hands it come, most rare;
Your husbands honor, from whose brighter flame
These borrowed sparks, pay tribute to his name;
And must confess, that they can nothing give
Worthy of him, by whom themselves must live.
That goodness of that cause for whom he fights,
In alarms and arms, spending the tedious nights,
Were praise enough, though he, perhaps should come
(Which heaven forbid) to us, successesse, home:
But when, unto our joy, we see him go
With triumph, on against the common foe,
And raise his Trophes, there, within those walls
That had conspired, and vowed his funerals,
Me thinks, our narrow language is too poor
To entertain his honors wealth and store.
Me thinks, I already read that larger page
Of Chronicle, in the ensuing Age,
Which shall contain his Name, unless that he
Go on so far, it must a Volume be:
Then, as I turn the leaves, perhaps, I find
Some lofty strain to speak his gallant mind,
And tell our after-nephewes part of all
That made him up a perfect General.
And what may he not do, to whom success
Is due, except our sins do make it less?
Why then may it not written be as well,
He conquered all the South, as Arundell?
Or shall we think his active spirit meant,
Only to stop the passage into Kent?
The yet half Pagan Welsh, that have no sight
To distinguish, because they want true light,
Except him: may he on then, to display
Together with his standard, a bright day
To that dark corner, and expel from thence,
The enemies advantage, rude ignorance:
And on his name may this due honor rest,
He made good one side, all from East to West.
This is enough; it were not mect to pray,
Or wish all fortune from the rest away,
When other Heroes, now, in every field,
Command opposers to despair and yield:
On one side Fairfax, the other Manchester,
The Scots behind, brave Essex every where;
Whose peerlesse honor is, thus to retain
Himself supreme of such a noble train;
The luster of whose Crests, in marching forth,
Will shine more bright in conquest of the North.
Thus Madam, in our thoughts, the work is end ed,
Religion, and the State, by you befriended:
All must confess thanks, who know what a mind
You bear beyond the rest of womankind,
That can with so much willingness, expose
Your chiefest Jewel to the reach of foes;
Dispend with all your marriage joys so far,
To hazard them upon the chance of war.
But doubtless, 'twill be greater joy to see
Him laden back with prize, and victory;
And then some pen, more able, shall rehearse
His worthy deeds in Chronicle, not Verse.
Propositions made by Sir William Waller, to the besieged in Arundle-Castle.
1 I require the Castle of Arundell to be delivered into my hands by to morrow
morning ten a clock.

2 That all Colonels of Horse, and Foot, and all Horse, Arms, Ammunition, and
military provision, what ever be then delivered unto me entire, and unspoyled.

3 That all Commanders, Officers, and Gentlemen, have fair quarter, and civil
usage.

4 That all Soldiers shall have quarter for their lives.

5 That for security of performance, Sir Edward Bishop, and Sir Edward Foord be
immediately delivered into my hands.

Will: Waller.

Explication.
1 By fair quarter I understand, giving life to those that yield, with
imprisonment of their persons, but civil usage, which is sufficient security,
they shall not be plundered.

2 Concerning the place where they shall be sent, I will not determine, but
will be left to mine own freedom, without further capitulation.

3 The Ministers are included in the Articles, and are prisoners as well as the
soldiers.

4 When I send away the Officers, I shall take care, that they shall not want
horses to carry them, but will not be bound to let them have their own horses.

A List of the Names of the Commanders taken by Sir Will. Waller, at the
surrendering up of Arundel Castle.
Colonells.
Bamfield. Bishop. Foord.
Lievt. Colonells.
Walker. Rawlins.
Majors
Bevill. Mullins. Gaudy. Mills.
Capt. Gabriel Thomas
Martial General. Edw. White Quartermaster General.
Captains of the Horse.
Crosland. Ashford. Ashcott. Hagidott. Buckley.
Capt. of Foot.
Shanckes Tailor Edmonds Anthony Garret Beale Rawlins Leach Reeve Rich Garret
Thomas
Resormado's.
Mulbancke Kempe
Leivt. of Horse.
Thornton Rockey Munckton
Leivt. of Foot.
Garret Masters Atkins Eaton Black Shipton Ildish Masters Allot Leach Talborne
Mackridge Warren Rene Sorrey Scott Turkey Coil Lightford
Cornets.
Powell Rochley Williams Halcy Hook.
Ensigns.
Duellinge Jones Rich Stechseame Sadler Williams Channon Cowlis Earls
Lichford Prynne Cooper Gilbert Martin Goringe Weymer Gloss Sutton
Gentlemen.
Gilbert Beckingham Arthur Creswell Henry Goringe Mr. Ennerfield Robert Allen
Thomas Marlett John Pay
Surgeons.
Will. Rosse Will. Berey Will. Pell John Greenfield John Beacher Richard Serley
Henrv Baveninge Will. Welbe.
Qartermaster.
Robert Lurbord Floyde Richard Spur^hford Richard Lewis Richard Cubbe John
Easton.
FINIS.

