A PARABLE, OR CONSVLTATION OF PHYSICIANS UPON MASTER EDWARDS.

Doctors.
Love. Justice. Patience. Truth.
Observers.
Conscience. Hope. Piety. Superstition. Policy.


LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Black spread Eagle, at the west end of Paul's Church. 1646.

To the Reader.
MEN, for the most part, of all opinions, are bread up with so much fear and
scrupulosity, that they no sooner arive to some measure of knowledge in their
particular way, but they become mere Pedants; fierce and violent censurers of
all things; they are not accustomed to themselves, instantly engaging, and
condemning, before they have deliberately examined, or maturely debated the
thing they judge: which is an evil and unhappy temper of mind, because
uns^ciable: and proceeds from want of that general knowledge, which freedom
of consideration would beget.

It is therefore worth our labor, to study how to reduce our minds into the
most friendly disposition, to be ready, and always provided of harmless and
friendly thoughts of men and things, until evident cause appear to the
contrary; not to look with an evil or a growling eye, as if we desired to
find matter to except against it is a shrewd sign of desease, when the stomock
hankers after unhol some things.

It cannot proceed from true Religion rightly understood, to beget malancholly,
moody, angry, frampoll Imaginations, for that rightly understood begets
cheerfulness of spirit: which is ever accompanied with love, and makes the
best construction: for love thinks no evil: but hops all things: and is
very kind to all men.

The ensuing discourse, would not need this preparative, but that there is an
aptness in the most to misconster; and a readiness to giveeare, gladly to any
that shall show either wit, passion, or malice, in finding fault: it is pity
good people should so easily be deluded: or evil men so easily work their
ends upon them: or good intents be so easily frustrated: the unusualnesse of
the Title and method of this discourse will minister occasion to the Weak and
to the Perverse: but if the authority, antiquity and use of Parables, be
considered with some ingenuity, the Author will not loose the end of his
discourse, nor of this preface, which is, to work amendment in some, where
there is cause enough.

A PARABLE. Or Consultation of Physicians upon Master EDWARD'S.
DOCTOR Love: Mr. Edwards, I have known you long, and have considered your
complextion, and inclination; and am no stranger to your alterations and
changes: your turnings and returnings: your loathing, and again liking, one
and the same thing: and was always willing to have advised you, to take some
fit course in time; as being too well assured, you could not but fall into some
desperate distemper; which now we all see has proved too true: but you ever
shunned my acquaintance; and at present, seem so little to regard my words, as
if you wished my absence.

Doct. Patience, Sir, excuse him, you see his distemper is very violent.

Doct. Love, Nay Sir, it moves me nothing; nor shall not hinder me from doing
him all the good I am able.

Mr. Edwards: Gentlemen, as desperately violent as you judge my distemper; I
have not yet lost the use of my senses, I know you a^l: and have heard Mr.
Loves wise exordium: I have known him as long as he has known me, but I was
never yet so simple, as to think him wise enough to counsel me, in case I had
needed any; nor do I know by what strange means, he or any of you (of his
politic tribe) thus thrust your selves upon my privacy.

Piety, Sir, it was my care, and their loves that brought them hither for in my
apprehension, you are in a most dangerous condition: and the more, because you
are altogether insensible there^f

Truth, He is either very insensible as you say, or very obstinately desperate.

Mr. Edw. As for both your judgments, I value them no more then I desire your
companies: and as for you friend Piety, you and I of late have had no such
great familiarity that you should presume to be thus officious, and
indiscreetly troublesome: you see I am not friendlesse, here are friends whose
friendship and counsel I much ^steem: Pray friends, what is your opinion of me,
am I not as sound of wind and limme, as ever I was in my life? have I need
think you of the counsel of these learned Doctors or not?

Superstition, Mr. Edwards, you know I am your faithful friend, I have
received much good by you, I would not for any thing in the world, the least
hurt should befall you: It is from you* I have received that little knowledge
and comfort that I have, for which I have not been unthankful; if it had not
been for you, I might ere this have run into one strange Sect or other, but
through your care, I keep close to my own Church, and to the Churches
Doctrine, through which I live quietly, and for which I am respected in the
place where I live, and may in time be some body in my parish, if not in the
City: and therefore I love you; and will be plain with you: I profess Sir, I
judge the Doctors to be very simple persons, for it is as evident, as the light
that is in me, that you are in as perfect a good condition as I my self am at
this time, and I am confident you will say I were very unwise, to ask their
advice.

Conscience. For all this Sir, you must know these Doctors, are of approved
judgment and fidelity, and how ever you may desire to be flattered, you very
well know, the ignorance and weakness of this your friend Superstition, whom
yet you sooth and keep company with all, and make to much use off contrary to
my counsel: you were better abandon him, and all the advantages you make of
him: and whilst you have time, give ear to the counsel of these Doctors: if
you neglect this opportunity, you are likely never to have the like.

Super. Sir, you are too rash in judgeing, but Mr. Edwards knows me, and I
know him, better then to be^ estranged by you, or any such as you are.

Justice. By your favor Sir, you may sooner be too rash then he: for what he
has said we shall find both just and true:

Policy. Truly Mr. Edwards, I am glad I have a further occasion to show my love
unto you at this time: you and I for some years now have been bosom friends;
you cannot imagine, I mean any otherwise you, then your own heart; and I must
needs tell you, I do see some symtomes of disease upon you: but what it is,
these learned men can best judge: and if I may persuade with you, you shall for
your own good; thankfully except their loves, and submit to their judgments,
and directions: but this I must also say, that I evidently see there is no
cause of have, some few days hence may be time enough, in which time, you and
I shall have settled that business which you know I am now come about: A work
gentlemen, that being finished, your selves will say, was worthy the hazard of
his and all our lives; no less then the building of Gods own house. sweeping
out of heretics and schismatics, stopping the mouths of illitterate
mechanical preachers: and beautifying this holy building, with the glorious
ornament of uniformity, the Mother of peace and all blessed things.

And if it will please these worthy Physicians, and the rest of your friends,
to give you and I leave for the present, to go on with this pious work, and to
repair to you when you shall find cause to call upon them I think they shall
in so doing show not only a care of you, but of the whole Church of God: nor
shall I leave it only to your own care Mr. Edwards, for truly gentlemen, he is
too apt to neglect his health and all that is dear unto him. for the good of
his brethen: I speak my conscience and the very truth from my heart and am
confident no hurt can come to him, but a great deal of good to the public;
if you allow of this my counsel, and I Judge you so prudent and pious, as to
prefer the public, before your own private trouble.

Cons. Although (Mr. Edwards) when you and I, and your friend Policy, are
together, and no body else, he alwai^s overswaies you, ever proposing things
suitable to your corrupted humors, yet now here are others present that can
impartially judge betwixt us, and therefore I shall use my accustomed
plainness, though I have never any thanks for my labor. (Pray Sir, turn not
from me, but hear me, and let these worthy men judge betwixt my perswations,
and the perswations of Policy) gentlemen, I pray observe well this darling of
his: This is he whose council he has long time followed, he it was that
first enticed him to undertake this unhappy work, which contrary to all reason
and Religion, he calls the building of Gods house, etc. though I showed him
plainly he went about therein to destroy the living houses of God: the vexing
and molesting of his most dear (because most conscientious and peaceable)
servants: though I told him plainly, any that differed with him, might as
justly compel him to conform unto them, as he could compel them: though I
manifested that he was as liable to error, as any that he complained off, and
that therefore there was no reason why he should endeavor to make men odious
for opinions: I showed him it was impossible, so long as knowledge was
imperfect, but men must d^ffer: I showed how nevertheless, every man was bound
equally as himself, to worship God according to his own and not another man's
understanding of the word of God. I told him he would bring upon himself, the
odium of all judicious Religious people.

I put him in remembrance, how extremely he himself complained of compulsion
and restriction of worship; in the Bishops times: laid before him their
miserable ends, and the great disturbances, that have arisen from thence to
the Commonwealth, showed how much it tended to devision, and confusion, to set
up one way of worship and to persecute or despise all others, that it was not
Gods way to bring men to truth by force, but the devils and Antichrists, to
fasten men in error: that there was no sin more unreasonable nor more odious
in Gods sight, then to enforce men to profess practice, or worship, contrary
to knowledge and belief: and that to enforce is as justly punishable by man,
as any other violence.

This and much more I told him continually: yet this wretched Policy finding
him ambitious, and covetous, applied his arguments, to these his corruptions;
and in an instant, swayed him into an engagement: for he said no more but this:
if conscience here will undertake to secure unto you the honor, domination
and profit, due to you as you are a Clergyman, then follow his council: but
if his, tend to make you esteemed, but as a lay man, and (not regarding your
learning and venerable calling) to mix you amongst the vulgar, and (in effect)
bidds you to labor with your hands the things that are lawful, that you may
no longer be a receiver of tithes, offerings, etc. but from your own labors
and sweat, to give to them that need: if he bids you, having food and raiment
be herewith content: and I show unto you a way to abound with superflueties,
like the men of this world, and to have a large share in controwling the
unlearned, and shall manifest unto you the defects of (...) and shall supply
you with rules that (...) to effect (...) then let you and I join our force
and council together.

And if we do not in the end, shall between us all the months wild go resup His
world, say Machelet was not so (...) natius loyola the Father of the lesuites:
upon this they stick hands and over such have plied their work, and though
success has failed, and those has produced contrary effect, those increasing
in number, and reputation, whom they labor to suppress and defame; (...).
Edwards though (...) and vex no be fallen into this (...) you now see him the
set you see this wicked Polly labors in a most cunning manner to dilwade him
from taking you present council, least you should direct him nor his recovery,
into some such course, as would (...) his wicked design abled prive from of
this his most special instrument: this is the united of this crafty Pbiscy.

And if you interpose not with your wisdom, he will preyaile to (...) of this
in distressed I rierd for a few houses more in this ungodly work (falsely and
deceitfully called the building of Gods House) will put him past hope of
recovery therefore admit of no delys (...) Pity will help you, and (...) and
hope: will thrust this where (...) cowrhe the stays, and out of doors, and
then I shall not doubt but some good may be done; come, pray set our hands such
suffer him not to speak a word for he will delude a whole nation, and make you
believe no man so godly or so charitable (...) it is, you have had so good
entertainment here; you are loath to depart; stand too Piety; sustice, (...),
(...) where are you now, you will still befoole your self down will Him; -- so
out with him, and I'e shut the door (...) ough I hope; or his entrance there
any more: -- how this and ungodly (...) has made us all sweat; superstition, I
thought you would (...) any zealous, as to have helped him, but an now stay and
see what usage your woeful friend here finds amongst (...)

Love: Conscience, Let us (...) while, I judge your violence against Policy,
(being unexpected) has put out distrested Friend here, into a kind of extacie;
let us observe the issue: I doubt not after this we ^^all find him sencible of
his distemper, draw the Curtains close; if he rest twill do well.

Justice, Conscience, I cannot but approve your faithfulness (...) your
friend, in the course you have taken against Policy I must consesse, had not
you by your pertinent discourse, kept my eyes open his subtle speech had
deluded me, as I see it did Patience, who was at the door to be gone, but it
is: better as it is: let us consider what is to be done.

Truth, As old as I am, I confess ingeneously I never ye was called to such a
consultation* the distemper is of such a nature as I have not seen the like,
that a man should discourse, labor, studdy, watch, write, and preach, and all
these to the continual vexation of honest, religious, peaceable people, and
yet seems not to be sencible of any evil he does therein: though nothing in
it self be more opposite to the true end of labor, study, writing, or
preaching, and what to advise in this case, I pro^es^e I am at present to seek.

Justice. What think you of an issue, if the humors be not too much settled,
they may gently, and by degrees be ^o drawn from him.

Patience, Happily I may speak somewhat properly of his disease, because I
have had much to do with him of late: and it will be a good step to his cure
if we can but di^cover his disease: All my reading will not furnish me with any
definition, or denomination I must therefore take the boldness to transgress
our common rules, and for your information; coin a name and call it a fistul^
in the brain: whose property is to open and vent it self once a month, and
though the matter it issues, be to a sound nostrill the most intollerably
odious that can be imagined, yet to himself it is not so offensive; and the
great profit he makes thereof, makes him bear^ with the stink thereof.

For to such as this man is whom you call superstition, nothing fells at a
deerer rate nothing is more exceptable, it is their meat and drink, without it
they are as dead men, with it, who but they: and this makes him instead of
seeking after a remedy, to studdy how to increase the humor, and nothing
shames or grieves him more then when it flows not month^y? having proclaimed a
market once every month: as beggars live by their sores so does he by this
fistul^, cure him and you undo him: a Physician is as death to him, diverse
have undertaken him but all his study is how to mischeife them and he only, is
welcome, that feeds his humor: I think he speaks* pray let us listen.

Mr. Edwards, Welcome Sir, you are very kindly welcome, pray sit down, I see
you faithfully labor, and take pain^s, in the sweeping of Gods house; come
what Rubbish have you discovered -- so, I have heard indeed, he is a stirring
Sectarie, but have you nothing else against him, but Rebaptizing and general
redempsion, I had as His Intelligencers. are here supposed to bring him
informations.
much before; and have published it, with as much reproach as I could and yet I
hear their numbers (...), is there none amongst them, adicted to drunkenness.
or whoredom, or theivery -- come, speak all you have, I can not be my self in
every place, if you bring me not matter to reproach them and they thrive and
increase, the fault's you^^ and not mine -- A Tailor and Porter Preach, what is
this now a days? it is nothing twill do nothing; they are heard with as much
respect as I am: for shame abroad again, and bring some extreo^dinary (...) or
all our labors lost?

O it is (...) -- you spoke with him your self you say, and provoked him to
discourse all you could; what, and bring away not^ing? D^vil^^^ (...) indeed;
ask't two questions, for your one; go, you are simple, and for want of wit, and
diligence, the Sectaries increase daily, and will do except you bring
something daily for me to make them odions withal; go; mend for shame, and
let not them out strip you.

So, it is well you are come -- I am almost out of breath* with chiding the
simplicity of those I ^mploy as intelligencers: -- Your kinsman you say, dyn'de
in your company; at your friends house, very familiar you were, and merry; he
suspecting nothing, but friendship from you (an excellent oppertunity) well,
and there he uttered the words in your note, which you say, you can safely
swear to -- Y^s, you did say you could swear to it? and why should you now
scruple it, since you presume it is truth? Well leave me your note.

I shall now pay this great Favouro^^te of the Sectaries, your note shall not
be lost, nor a little of it, never fear it: pray be continually watchful in
this great work, you know your labor shall not be lost.

I thought I should have seen nobody to day: I am glad yet you have not forgot
the work: A great meeting you say, and a P^tition read, somewhat tending to
liberty of conscience; and they talk of the King, and the Parliament, and
assembly, and (...), and you were the^^^ all the while but which is (...)
without some particular words that can be taken hold off.

I Will not give a rush for such informations can you make me believe so many
Sectaries could be together, and nothing to be, taken hold off; away for shame,
be sure you (...) next meeting and take somebody with you, that is able to
bring away somewhat t^^ purpose; begone I say.

O come I have bcom so vexed, men bring a great deal of circumstance, (...)
(...) substance at all: What is it you have got: -- Mr. Peter's you (...) spoke
the words in thi^ paper: you are sure of it: and M John Sigdmen these in this
paper: and Mr. Kiffen these: this the copy of a letter written from the North:
A woman dipped, and dyed ten days after: (...) (...) is the parties name that
dip^ her: An Anabaptists wife very well in health, and in five days dead of
the Plague: so, you have no more you say; truly ye have done very commendably;
never fear the loss of your trade.

I Will take a care, some friends I have shall be better to you then twice your
trade: O^^ck, I would not for any thing you had forgot it: is that active youth
(say you suspected to be a J^suite; you say you have strong presumption of it;
and what is said by him you ^ot on -- How an Atheist and blasphemer -- and the
other a drinker, and loose companion: truly I am glad I know it; if I do not
set them out to the life; let me Perish: here is matter worth the publishing:
this will be welcome news to my dear friend Policy, who is now setting the
greater wheels a going, and has prevailed very far already; nor do I
doubt, but all will be as he and I do wish; but I must be careful to keep all
close from my busy companion Conscience, he is one that knows too much of my
secrets, and I know not well how to be rid of him; I think Policy and I must
cach him alone, and stifle him.

Love, How strangely his mind runs upon the unhappy work, he has
undertaken: if we interupt him not, he will spend all his spirits, and expire
in this extacy: Conscience, pray take hold on this occasion, and speak to him.

Conscience, Mr. Edwards, I know all your proceedings, observe all your ways,
and have ever faithfully advised you for your good to leave the (...) of (...),
and to walk in the wish of Christ, but you are so far from following my
advice, that you lay plots to stifle me; but?

Truth, Conscience, save your labor: your voice no sooner sounded in his care,
but he fell fast a sleep, it is wonder our sad to con ^^^ but I hope the issue
will be good.

Justice, Twere but just, he should never wake; I never observe the most wicked
man in the world, delight in so abominable a work.

Patience, Dear Justice, Let us take this opportunity, to consult what may
(...) done for his recovery? for that is now our work.

Piety, pray ye friends, bring the light and come hither, I begin to smell the
most filthy savor that ever was smel^; see, see, what a black froth his mouth
somes with all; see; it rises more and more; some thing must be brought to
receive it from him: out upon'^, I am not able to hold the light any longer, if
it continue thus, we shall not be able ^o endure the room.

Superstition, Pray let me do that office, I wish I might never ha^s a better
sent, I am sure some of you smell of rank her esie, I mistake, not.

Truth, We must bear with can weakness, till you are better informed, how
^hunda^tly it flows: he is now extreme weak: but were he in his wonted
strength, with this most filsby Gangreno^s matter, would he mix his ink, and
whilst it were even hot, and boiling; fall to writing as he has done lately,
some huge volumne; with which he poisons the spirits of thousands (otherwise)
wells minded people; and fills them with a violent, musterfull disposition, with
which they go up and down, vexing and molesting all they meet, if any man
refuse to do as they would have them, in the worship of God (though never so
peaceable and well minded) him they revile, at him they r^lle, call him
Anabaptist, Independent, Brownist, Sneker. Ant^^o^^an: worry and vex him, by
all the ways and ^ei next they can (...) the Migistrate, and rude people, to
weary them out of all societyear? and will join with their own enemies, to
their own ruin, rather then these should have a quiet life amongst them: It
flames extremely stoop him a little (humillity is always good) I fear it
will blister his mouth, it is so hot, but I hope it will all come from him,
^and then we shall have no more to do, but to get out the b^gge for that must
be done, other wise the humor will fill again, and he will never be perfectly
^^red. Hope, Sir, the cou^er begins to alter from its blackness, (...) red.

Patience, There is now some hope of a good event: it does not smell so
strongly:

Love, Pray hold this sovereign Pomander to his nostrill, lest his spirits
faint.

Piety, I should be exceeding glad to see his recovery, which if he do, truly
Conscience, you deserve the greatest thanks.

Justice, There comes now perfect blood, my o^inion is, we must instantly
proceed to open his head, and take cut the blader, and in room thereof, to
leave some ingredients, proper for rectifying the temper of the brain and to
bring it into a good constitution. I have instruments ready, and he sleeps very
soundly.

Love. Pate^nce. Truth.We all agree: but let us be very tender: Superstition,
you had best withdraw a little, lest you fall into a sound, or your hand shake:
give the light to Piety: Conscience and Hope, lend us your help: who should
that be that knocks so loud, Conscience, pray step and see --

Conscience, What an inpudent wretch is this? who should it be but Policy,
returned in a grave Doctors habit, pretending to be sent hither, by a College
of friends, to lend his assistance: it was well I went to the door, for he would
have deceived any that had not known him so well as I, he was so like a
Collegiate, sure his familier tells him his agent is likely to be dispossessed;
but I have sent him packing, with a vengeance; pray go on with your work.

Justice, I pray bow him a little more to ^e-ward, so, give the pan to
superstition, I am not able to stand near it.

Piety, Rather let it be burnt, for Superstition is too much infected already.

Conscience, By no means, I Will keep it until my friend wakes, that he may see,
what filthy matter, his head was stuffed with all.

Piety, It is well considered: and if he loath the avon himself, his cure will
the better appear to us to be perfect.

Love. Do ye not lance too deep think you? pray be very careful.

Justice, Pray Piety hold the light nearer: come all hither, see what mighty
large bag it is, I profess I never saw the like -- except in the late head of
great C ANTERBVRY; but it was not discovered till after his death: but the
savor of this is much worse; what shall we do with it, now we have it out?
sure it is best to receive it, to show him with the matter it contained,
otherwise he will never believes: and I pray be all ready, with your several
ingredients to fill up the empty place, that the humors may be rectified; and
that thence may issue forth, no more such unsavory pestilent matter, odiou^to
good men, but such as may bring honor to God, and peace to all good men: come
let us see what we have amongst us, for this work will admit of no delay.

Love, I have a most excellent powder, the maine agent therein, being the eyes
of Turtle doves: and the property thereof, is to expel all sinister
apprehensions, and hard constructions of men and things.

Justice, I have a balsome: approved by long experience, for the clensing, and
drying, of all violent, hot, and gross humors.

Patience, I have found much profit, by carrying about me the well known plant,
called Al-hease: and I judge it very useful in this cure.

Truth, I have an ingredient, which though of astrange nature, yet without it,
I am parswaded the cure cannot be perfect: it is an extraction from the brain
of a Serpent: which gives quickness of apprehension and foresight.

Justice, I pray you truth be careful you ecceed not the just proportion,
because if you should, yould mar all: Hope, what think you of our course.

Hope, I approve thereof, so far as I understand: but itere is Piety, is
better able to judge.

Piety, I exceedingly approve of all: and if you please I Will mix them and work
them into a body, and form the same, fit for the place: and then Justice, when
you please you may go on with your work.

Justice content: -- so -- it is very well he stirs not: I Will close up all; and
we will all with draw, and leave him to rest: for rest now will be his best
friend: Conscience we will pray you to stay with him: if he stirr^ you will call us,
we be but in the next room.

Love, This Conscience is of true temper to make a friend off, he neither
flatters nor fears: no unkindnesse alienates him, nor. dange^ asseighes him,
from doing the office of a true friend at all times: on would not be with us
such a friend, for any thing in the world: this distressed man has extremely
abused him; and yet you set with what servency of affection he sticks to him.

Justice, I know abudance of the name, and of his kindred, and truly all the
generation of them are such.

Patience, Whence is he, the a Scholar? What prote (...) Truth, I never (...)
signs of (...) in him, not does ^^ make any profession (that I know of) of any
one calling holy in use: but hens of a wounder public spirit: you shall have
him at all (...) tings, that are for public good finding fault with the (...)
of one son of men with want charity in another, with pride and disdame in
another, willing them they glory to be esteemed Christians and till: much of
Religion, go much to Church hear and read, and pray, and fast frequently
because these are the cheapest parts of Religion; but to deliver the captine,
and set the oppressed free, or to feed the hungry, cloth (...) ^^ed, or visit
the Father less and Widomes, to all these they are very backward, when they
are called to these, one has a great family, and there has marrled awrfe
another has but one servant at home, and cannot be spared from his wade, and
getting of money; I says he, you are rare christians that can about in this
worlds goods, and see your brother laek.

His dealing is so plain, and to the point; that very few regard his company
and that is the reason, those great meetings produce so little good as they do,
for without his company, you shall never see any effect worthy the name of
Christian: he has had no breeding neither in the universities, or Ins of
Court: never was a Courtier not Trauailer; and yet he is ignorant of nothing
and speaks very shrewdly to purpose, owneth every just public cause, without
respect to persons of opinions: he will not wear finer clothes, if you would
give them to him gratie: and yet to an ingenious and virtuous man, there is not
a more pleasant companion.

Hope, Pray ye, what Religion is he off.

Truth, For matter of outward forms, he is very reserved, as if he were not
fully satisfied, I have often heard him say, God a Spirit, and will be
worshipped in spirit and truth: but he professes himself, to be clearly for
liberty of worship; and the greatest enemy to compulsion or restriction that
can be; affirming there is no sin so unreasonable or un-Christian, as for one
man (especially one bring man) to perecute, punish, or molest another for
matters of Religion or to make Laws, concerning any thing supernatural: he
says it proceeds not from any savor of Christianity, that men do so: but
from an imperious donsineering spirit that takes it in soul scome. that any
man should do any thing. but by License from him: I assure ye Conscince
allows no such dealing; and this is the maine quarrel twixt him and our
Patient Mr. Edwardse but I hope we shall see them good friends again.

Superstition, Well, if this man dye under your hand, your lives shall go for
his: I Will take my oath, you are the cause of his death.

Piety, Spare your tears, Superstition, you shall find we have done him a good
office, you will see him a new man: and your selle too Idcube not erelong,

Conscience, Hoe, friends, pray ye all come in quickly.

What Is the matter? Love. Justice. etc.


Conseience, Do you see this posture wherein he lies? thus he has layne
about a quarter of an hour, his lips moving his hands and eyes lifted up, just
as if he were praying in the Pulpit.

Hope, It is very wonderful: He takes notice of nobody, what will be the
issue? See, he now strives as if he would raise himself, as if his prayer were
ended, and he were preparing to Preach; Conscience, help to hold him up, and
see what he will do: certainly he supposes himself to be in some great
presence, for just thus is his manner at such times -- peace and listen for he
begins to speak.

Mr. Edwards, Men of England, my purpose is not now (as formerly) to promote my
own work: but to prosecute what is just and necessary, without respect of
persons, or opinions: which has occasioned me to make choice of this place of
Scripture.

The whole commandment is fulfilled in this one word, LOVE.

It has often come to my thoughts why the Apostle Saint John is called in a
peculer manner, the Disciple whom Jesus loved; but it never made so deep
impression in me as at present: certainly there could he nothing more joyous to
his own spirit, then to consider it; and my heart at present panting after the
reason thereof: tells me that John certainly was of a mild, a loving, and tender
disposition, more eminently then any of the rest; so soft, that our Savior
chose his breast, for a place of his repose: and I am strengthened herein,
because I find it recorded of him, that when he was so old that he was hardly
able to come into the speaking place, or to speak, he prosecuted this most
blessed and amiable theme. little children love one anoher, repeating it
often, little children love one another: as having thoroughly disgested this
lesson of his Masters: the whole commandment is fulfilled in this one word
LOVE; Love is the true touchstone of all Christian performances, it instantly
manifests how things are; so much love, so much of God

It is the surest guide in all private and public undertakings; without a due
regard to the rule of love, all things will go wrong: observe it, and it will
be like the North pole to the Mariners, to guide you to the quiet harbor of
justice and peace: it is a rule easy to be understood, the meanest capacity is
capable thereof, none can excuse themselves that swarve from this rule.

If you would know your duty to God, it will tell you that in equity you are to
love, as he has loved: has he so loved, as to give himself an offering and a
sacrifice for you, then ye ought to walk in love as Christ has loved; would
you know how you should manifest your love to Christ? Love will set before you
the sick, the naked, the aged, and impotent; it will lead you to prisons, and
houses of distress, and show you the captives, the widows and fatherless
Children, and it will assure you that in as much as you ministered to the
necessities of these, you have done it unto him, but if you have this worlds
goods, and see and suffer these, or any of these to lack, there is not the love
of God in you.

Would you have a rule for your conversations? Why, the love of God which
brings salvation to all men, has appeared teaching us to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, godly, and soberly in
this present world: Are ye public persons? Are ye entrusted to judge
righteously in all causes: Love is the best property even in a judge, for God
is Love, who is the righteous judge of all the earth, and slays not the
righteous with the wicked: Love (rightly so called) puts no difference
between high and low, rich and poor, but loves all men (as they are men)
alike: but the proper object of Love is virtue, the more virtuous, the more it
loves; the less virtuous, the less it loves: what so ever justly deserves
the name of infirmity, Love can bear with all: but it is contrary to its
nature to bear with wickedness, because mercy to the wicked, tends to the
ruin of the just, and so becomes the greatest cruelty: Love is just, as God
is; spares not the greatest, for his greatness, nor the wealthy for his money,
nor any for any by respect; so that hold but up your love to God, and you can
never be partial in judgment.

Love does as it would be done unto, in which respect it is a motive to the
complete performance of trust: for would it not grieve you to have your love
abused, in the trust you have given for your good: doubtless it would? Why
then (says Love) grieve not those that have loved and trusted you: but be
watchful for their safety; tender of their freedoms, and then you shall
certainly reap the fruit of love, whihc is an abundance of love and real
thankfulness.

Are you in dispute what you shall do in matters of Religion take Love along
with you, to light you through this laboriath, whence never any Authority
returned without prejudice? Say now, is Religion of that nature that you can
refer it to him (whom you must love) to set you ^'es in such sort, as you can
assure your self, you shall without sin obey these rulee.

Nay when your friend has done all he can do; are you not to follow your own
underst ending of the word of God and not his? and if you do not so, do you
not sin? if so, how can any trust Religion? And if none can must, none can be
trusted? And love will never meddle with matters not entrusted, by way of
injunction, but only by persuasion: whilst we live here knowledge will be
imperfect, and whilst it is so, that which seems truth to one, seems an
error to another: If I now shall be so anadvised, as to call him an heretic
who differs from me, I do but provoke him to call me so, for he is as
confident of his, as I am of my judgment: and here the rule of Love is broken,
that ought not to love in reference to opioion but according to virtue and
godliness of conversation; for this were away otherwise, to bring all into
confusion, there being so many several opinions; if one should revile and
reproach another, with the names of Heredques and schismatiques, Anabaptist,
Brownist, Antinomian, Seeker, Sectarie, Presbyter, this tends to nothing but to
devide the honest party, and to make way for your common enemy; for in
whatsoever the true and evident rule of Love is broken, it tends to
dissolution, it being love that preserves all things.

Therefore my humble advice is in this great cause, (upon which more depends,
then is presently seen that you give not countenance to one before another, for
that begets a high conceit in those you favor, and makes them despise all
others, though they may be as nigh the truth as those; in the one you be get
pride, in the other fear; the fruit of both being the worst that can come to
any people; none are now infallible, truth and error are two easily mistaken;
but love; is easily understood; to do as you would be done unto, is a rule
generally agreed on.

Let those that conceive they can justly submit their consciences to others
arbitration in the worship of God, give in their names for themselves and the
places they represent; I believe upon a little consideration few would be
found; it is not what formerly has been done, but what may justly be done, that
is to bear sway with all true reformers; No man has been more earnest then I,
for compelling all to uniformity and for punishment of all contrary practisers,
but I now see my error; and will do all I can to make amends for the evil I
have done; the books I have written, I will burn with my own hand: for I
judge no opinion so evil as molestation for Religion.

What I have in hand, shall never see the light, because I now see it to be a
work of darkness, and I exceedingly rejoice that I have this oppertunity to
declare thus much before you: if ever men shall kindly be brought to be of one
mind, I see it must be by liberty of discourse, and liberty of writing; we must
not pretend to more infallible certainly then other men, this distinction of
Clergy and layety, how I loath it, I Will no longer abuse the world therewith, nor
with any thing appertaining there unto, I will henceforth magnify nothing but
love: I am the devoted servant of Love, and his lovely companions, Justice,
Putience, truth, Piety. and Conscience, shall be my fortress to defend me from
the wiles and force of Machiavilian Policy: O Love I how thou have melted me,
how thou have refined me, and made me all new; perfect thy work O! Love, that
I may become all love, and nothing but love.

Piety, Here is a happy change indeed: certainly the cure is absolute, we have
great comfort of our poor endeavors: how his discourse fell at last from the
public to his particular content: my advice is, that we all silently depart,
and let all things be removed as if no man had been here: as for you
Conscience, I know you will not leave him, and when he wakes, your presence
doubtless will be most acceptable.

FINIS.

