THE ANALYSIS, Explication, and Application, of the Sacred and Solemn League
and Covenant, FOR The Reformation, and Defense of Religion, the Honor and
Happiness of the King, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Enjoined by the Lords and Commons, assembled in Parliament in England, and the
States of Scotland, to be taken by every man throughout all the three KINGDOMS.

Very useful, and profitable to be read, observed, and kept by all who take
the said Covenant.

By RICHARD WARD, Minister of Stansteed Mount Fitchet, in ESSEX.

Imprimatur,

James Cranford.



Printed at London, for J. D^. 1643.

The Analysis, Explication, and Application, of the sacred and Solemn LEAGVE
and COVENANT.
IN the League, or Covenant, we may observe these three general parts, viz.
The Exordium, Narration, and Conclusion.

FIRST, in the Exordium is only showed, the occasion, moving cause, necessity,
and end of the taking of this Covenant, which is so obvious and perspicuous to
every eye, that I forbear (for brevities sake) the particular anatomizing, and
analyzing thereof.

SECONDLY, in the Narration, or Narrative part of this Covenant, are these
three generals, to wit, The Covenanters, the Covenanted, and the Covenant it
self.

First, the Covenanters, or those who take or make this Covenant, are all who
are cordially and candidely affected to the true Reformed Protestant Religion,
in all the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland.

Secondly, the Covenanted, or he with whom we enter into Covenant, (...)
Jehovah, our God, the great Creator, and preserver of Heaven and Earth.

Thirdly, there is the Covenant it self, wherein, and whereby the Covenanters
oblige and bind themselves solemnly unto God. Now in this Covenant, are some
things Moral and Politic, and some Theological and pious.

FIRST, some things in this Covenant are Moral, and Politic, wherein four
things are remarkable, viz. the Matter, Manner, Means, and Limits or
Qualifications thereof.

First, the Matter, or Material heads, of the Moral and Political part (...)
this Covenant are these, to wit, I. Mutually to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of the Parliaments. And II. The Liberties of the Kingdoms. And
III. The Preservation, and defense of the King: wherein these particular are
included, to wit,


First, whom must we endeavor to preserve and defend? the Kings Majest^.

Secondly, what must we endeavor to preserve, and defend in the Kings His
Majesty's Person and Authority.

Thirdly, how must we endeavor the proservatiin of his person and authority? In
the preservation, and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the
Kingdoms, that is, either* 1. We, by endeavoring the preservation and defense
of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms, do truly and really
endeavor the preservation and defense of his Majesty's person and authority;
they being the best friends, and strongest supporters of his person and power,
who stand most stoutly for the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
the Kings Throne being established by Piety, Equity, and Law. Or, 2. We promise
to endeavor to preserve his Majesty's person and authority, to wit, so long as
he really endeavors the preservation, and defense of the true Religion, and
Liberties of the Kingdoms. And


Fourthly, Why or wherefore do we thus endeavor the preservation and defense
of the Kings authority and person? to wit, 1. That the world may bear witness
with our consciences, of our loyalty unto him. And 2. That we may make it
evident unto the world, that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his
Majesty's just power, and gr^atnesse.


IV. Another Material Head, or branch of the Politic part of this Covenant,
is to discover malevolent, and ill-affected spirits, and persons; wherein these
three particulars are involved, viz.

First, Whom must we discover? All such as have been, or shall be
Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments of the Church or State. And

Secondly, Wherein, or how does their malignancy show it self? viz.

1. By hindering the Reformation of Religion, i.e. by persisting, and
obstinately continuing in any schism, error, heresy, old custom, or
superstitious practice, etc. 2. By dividing the King from his people, i.e. by
drawing him from his Parliament, or detaining (by counsel, persuasion, or
otherwise his Majesty from coming unto, or complying with his Parliament. And
3. By dividing one of the Kingdoms from another, i.e. by raising aspersions,
casting scandals, fomenting jelousies, or differences betwixt them, and the
like. And 4. By making any faction, or parties amongst the people, contrary to
this League and Covenant. And
Thirdly, Why must we discover these, and the like Malignant persons? That they
may be brought to public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the
degree of their offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories
of both Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them for that
effect, shall judge convenient.

V. Another Material particular of the Moral part of this Covenant is, That
whereas the happiness of a blessed peace between these Kingdoms, denied in
former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God granted unto
us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both Parliaments, we shall
now each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they
may remain conjoined in a firm peace, and union to all posterity. And

VI. Another is, to assist, and defend all those that enter into this league
and Covenant, in the maintaining, and pursuing thereof. And

VII. Not to suffer our selves to be divided, or withdrawn from this blessed
Union and Conjunction. Now herein these four particulars are unfolded, viz.

First, the impulsive or moving causes of this division and alienation; namely,
Combination, p^rswasion, and Terror. And

Secondly, the Manner of this tie or obligation: viz. we must neither directly
nor indirectly suffer our selves to be dis-joynted by any ways, or means
whatsoever. And

Thirdly, when, or how we show our selves to be divided, and withdrawn from
this blessed Union, and Conjunction: to wit, 1. When we make defection to the
contrary part. And 2. When we give our selves to a detestable indifferency, or
neutrality in this cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of
the Kingdoms, and honor of the King. And


Fourthly, the Means whereby we may better continue firm in this League of
Unity, without any alienation or fraction. Now these Means are 1. To continue
therein all the days of our lives zealously and constantly, against all
opposition. And 2. To promote the same according to our power, against all
lets, and impediments whatsoever. And 3. What we are not able by our selves to
suppr^sse or over^^m^, to reveal and make known, that it may be timely
prevented or removed. And thus much for the Matter, or Material Heads, and
branches of the Moral and Politic part of this Covenant. Now


Secondly, the next thing herein is the Manner, how all these forenamed
Particulars are to be observed, or performed; viz. syncerely, really,
constantly, and faithfully: i.e. without any falsehood, faining, diffimulation,
hypocrisy, coldness, and inconstancy. And

Thirdly, the next thing herein is, the Means which we must use for the
performance of this part of our Covenant; namely, seriously to endeavor with
our persons, purses, estates, and lives, to perform what we have Covenanted.
And

Fourthly, the last thing herein is, the limits, bounds, cautions, or
qualifications of this part of the Covenant: to wit, to endeavor the
performance of each clause, branch, or particular thereof, according to our
several vocations, places, and interests, and no further. And thus much for
the Moral, and Politic part of this Covenant. Now

SECONDLY, some things in this Covenant are Theological and pious, wherein
five things are notable, and worthy observation: viz. the Matter, Manner,
Means, Limits, and End, or Scope.

First, the Matter, or Material Heads of the pious and Religious part of this
Covenant are these five which follow: to wit,

1. The Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland;
wherein these four things are expressed: viz.

1. What must we endeavor the Reformation of? Of Religion. And

2. Where? In the Kingdoms of England and Ireland. And

3. Wherein? In these four things: viz.

First, in Doctrine; because many Popish, Arminian, heretical, schismatic,
and heterodoxe doctrines have been broached, and printed, and unsound tenants
maintained, countenanced, and patronized in these Kingdoms. And

Secondly, in Worship, because we were taught to worship God according to the
humane inventions, and ordinances of man, and not according to the Word of God.
And

Thirdly, in Discipline; because many things therein were superstitious, and
not many tending either to edification, or decency. And

Fourthly, in Government; because the Government of our Church by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. was never advantageous to our Church, but
rather destructive; as our former superstitious, advancing of superstitious
Priests, putting down of preaching, silencing of Preachers, and the like, do
evidently confirm: and therefore none need question the legality of the
Parliaments abolishing of them, or of our assisting of them herein; this kind
of Government not being Jure Divino, but Humane, at has been abundantly
proved of late; and consequently may be taken away by as lawful authority, as
it was instituted, to wit, the Parliament of the Kingdom, with which the King
of Englands power is, although the Person of Charles Steward be absent, and
separated from them. And

4. How must our Religion be Reformed? namely,

First, according to the Word of God. And

Secondly, according to the example of the best Reformed Churches.

II. Another Material branch of the Theological part of this Covenant, is,
the preservation of the true, and truly Reformed Religion of the Church of
Scotland: wherein these two things are included: viz.

First, whom, or what we engage our selves to preserve: viz. The Reformed
Religion in the Church of England in Doctriue, Worship, Discipline, and
Government. And

Secondly, against whom do we engage our selves to preserve it: viz. Against
our, or the common Enemy of Religion; namely the grand Impostor of Rome, with
all his abetters, and adherents that is, as we now desire the assistance of
our brethren of Scotland, against those Atheists, Papists, and Irish Rebels,
who have banded themselves against us; so we covenant and promise, that if any
of these, or the like Viperous Brood shall endeavor to overthrow the Reformed
Religion in Scotland, in Dectrine, Worship, Discipline, and government, that we
will to the utmost of our power and place, endeavor to preserve it.

III. Another material head or branch of the pious part of this Covenant, is,
to endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest
conjunction, and uniformity in Religion, confession of faith, form of Church
government, directory for worship, and Catechizing. And

IV. To endeavor the extirpation both, first, of Popery. And

Secondly, of Prelacy, i.e. Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellours, and Commissaries, Archdeacons, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, and
all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy. And

Thirdly, Superstition. And fourthly, Heresy. And fifthly, Schism. And

Sixthly, Profaneness. And seventhly, whatsoever shall be found to be contrary
to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness. And

V. Another material head of the Theological part of this Godmans, is the
amendment of life's wherein these two things are observable, viz.

First, the Cause moving us to this amendment of life, which is twofold, viz.

1. The consideration of our guiltiness, by reason of our mani^s, and
provocations against God, and his Son Jes^^ Christ. And 2. Our present
distresses and dangers, the fruits of that guiltiness. And
Secondly, the expression of this amendment of life. Note here, our amendment
of life is expressed either by our actions or affection, our deeds or desire.

FIRST, by our deeds, and actions or words, for we profess and declare before
God, and the world, our unfeigned desire to be humbled. Now here three things
crave our animadversion, viz.

I. For what must we be humbled? For our own sins, and the sins of these
Kingdoms. And

II. For what sins must we humble our selves? viz. for these: namely, 1. That
we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable benefit of the Gospel. And 2.
That we have not labored for the purity, and power thereof. And 3. That we
have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walk worthy of him
in our lives. And.


III. Why must we humble our selves for these sins? because they are the
causes of other sins and transgressions, so much abounding amongst us. And

SECONDLY, our amendment of life is expressed by our affections, and true and
unfeigned purposes and desires, which respect both our selves and ours, wherein
three things are considerable, to wit,

First, the matter of this purpose and desire; namely, I. To amend our lives.
And II. Each one of us to go before other in the example of a real
reformation. And


Secondly, the extent of this purpose and desire, to wit, I. It must be both in
public and private. And II. In all duties we owe to God and man. And


Thirdly, the scope or end of this purpose and desire of amendment; which is I.
That the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy indignation from us. And II.
That he may establish these Churches, and kingdoms in truth and peace: and
thus much for the matter of the Theological part of this Covenant. Now


Secondly, the next thing in this part is the manner thereof, to wit, That
every branch, clause, part, and particle of this Covenant, be performed, and
observed sincerely, really, faithfully, and constantly. And

Thirdly, next in order follows the means, whereby we may be enabled to
perform what we have promised; which are

1. An earnest endeavor, to the utmost of our ability, to pay our Vows, and
perform all our promises unto God. And

II. The grace of God enabling us, in some measure thereunto. And

Fourthly, another thing in this Theological part of our Covenant, is the
limits or qualification thereof, viz. We must endeavor to observe every branch
of this Covenant, according to our several places, vocations, and interests.
And

Fifthly, the last thing in this part, is the scope or end of it, which is
fourefold; to wit, I. That all we in all these three kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and our posterity after us, may as brethren live in faith
and love. And II. That the Lord may delight to dwell amongst us. And III. That
the Lord may be one, and his name one in all the three Kingdoms. And IV. That
we may not partake in other men's sent, and thereby be in danger to receive of
their plagues.


And thus much for the second general part of this Covenant, viz. the
Narration. Now

THIRDLY, the last general part, is the Peroration or Conclusion, wherein are
these four particular branches, to wit, An Attestation, Protestation, Appeal,
and Supplication.

First, in the Attestation, or calling God to witness, We acknowledge three
things; viz.

I. That God is present with us, at the taking of this Covenant or Oath: And

II. That he who is present is Almighty, (...) it, both to reward us, if we
perform what we promise, and to punish us, if we be Covenant-breakers, or
falsify our Oath unto God: And

III. That as he is infinite in power, so he is infinite in knowledge, the very
thoughts, purposes, and intentions of our hearts being known unto him. And
this is laid down in these words, And this Vow and Covenant, I make in the
presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all hearts.

Secondly, in the Protestation, we promise in the presence of Almighty God
these two things, to wit,

I. To perform all the contents of this Oath, and this is the Matter of the
Protestation: And

II. To perform it with a full and true intention of heart; and this is the
manner of the Protestation; both which are laid down in these words, And this
Vow and Covenant I make with a true intention to perform the same.

Thirdly, the Appeal is contained in these words, This I promise to perform,
as I shall answer at the great Day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be
disclosed; wherein are these five things; to wit,

I. A belief, that there shall be a day of Judgment: And

II. That at that Day all shall be judged: And

III. That at that Day all secrets and secret things, (that is, all secret
actions, intentions, purposes and desires) shall be discovered, disclosed, laid
open and manifested: And

IV. A belief that we shall most justly, and impartially at that day be
judged, by the most just Judge, according to those actions, intentions,
purposes, and desires which are then discovered, and manifested to have been
in us: And

V. A secret and implicit Imprecation, God do so to me, and more also at that
day; or, I desire that I may find neither mercy, nor favor at the hards of my
all-seeing, all-knowing Judge, at the great and dreadful day of Judgment, if
I do not now faithfully, and fully purpose, and shall hereafter firmety and
unfainedly endeavor to perform to the utmost of my power, whatsoever is
contained in this Oath or Covenant. Now

Fourthly, in the supplication these three things are included.

I. The Petitioners; namely, we who make this Covenant. And II. The Petitioned;
to wit, the Lord: And III. The Petition, which consists of these two branches,
viz.
First, That the Lord would so strengthen us by his holy Spirit, that we may be
enabled to perform, whatsoever we have vo^ed, or promised in this Covenant.

Secondly, that the Lord would bless our desires, and proceedings with such
good success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people, and encour
agement to other Christian Churches, groaning under, or in danger of the Yoke
of Anti-thristian Tyranny to join in the same, or like association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

FINIS.

