A HAND-KIRCHIFE FOR LOYAL MOURNERS OR A Cordial for Drooping Spirits,
Groaning for the bloody murder, and heavy loss of our GRACIOUS KING Martyred
by his own traiterous and rebellious Subjects, for the truth of CHRIST, and
the Liberties of his People. Being a LETTER to a FRIEND.

Lam. 1.12. It is nothing unto you, all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the
Lord has afflicted me in the day of his feirce anger?

Lam. 4.20. The Breath of our Nostrills, the Anointed of the LORD is fallen
into their Pitts: of whom we said under his shadow we shall live.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1649.

A HAND-KERCHIEFE FOR LOYAL MOVRNERS OR A cordial for drooping Spirits,
Groaning for the bloody murder, and heavy loss of our GRACIOUS KING.
THe great obligations that I bear unto you, for your many favors, and more
especially for the refuge and comfort that I have received from you in the time
of my persecution, will not suffer the sense that I have of the public
calamities that are now upon us, in the loss of our gracious King, now
sacrificed to destruction by the Tyranny of insolent and ungodly men, so wholly
to take up all the room of my heart, but that the care of your safety and
comfort, must be a partner with it, so far as to set me upon this endeavor to
administer some Cordial unto you, to preserve you from fainting under the
burden of those render thoughts that are in you toward his sacred Majesty. It
is the condition that God has allotted unto all Earthly things, that they are
all bitter sweets, and have in them a mixture of joy and sorrow There is no
delight so perfect in this world, but has some affliction attending upon it.
There is pure and sincere happiness in nothing but in God; that we they not be
so taken with any earthly felicity as to give up our hearts unto it. Therefore
every Rose that grows in this garden has its Thorn, every beauty its
blemish, every Splendor its weight. That the one may be a remembrancer unto
us, not to doat too much upon the other: That the full bent of our affections
may still be reserved for God. If there were any thing found here of so entire
and uniforme a composure of felicity, that there were no other quarrel left for
the mind of man to entertain against it, yet this is an inseparable abatement
that sticks upon them all, that they are all frail and fading and must have an
end; and nothing can make us truly happy, but that wherein happiness is
lasting and perpetual and on the other side. There is nothing that befalls
us in this world, so purely grevious and calamitous, but there is some matter
of comfort and consolation to be found in it, which grace can discover and make
use of, though some times it is beyond the wisdom of nature.

There is no Poison but has something Medicinable in it, which the art of
Piety may draw forth of it. I confess indeed that the present calamity we are
under, the loss of his Sacred Majesty, is an evil of so sad a presence unto
an honest and Christian heart, that if we look upon it, with a full view in all
the consequences that are like to follow it will not be easily [for ought I
know] to think upon any earthly calamity of more universal and perfect sorrow;
and yet even in this. There are some corners of refuge for a Christian soul to
hide it self in, that it may not be swallowed up with discontent; That so good
a KING should die, it has in it matter of eminent sorrow. But then that he
died so good a KING That has some recompense of comfort and solace. In the
former, our loss calls for our sighs, but in the latter his gain allows
us some breathings of joy. That he should die under the name of a Tyrant, a
Murderer, and a Traitor, is an object full of lamentation. But that he died
indeed a Martyr; A Martyr both of the State and the Church, for the liberties
of his Subjects, like a good KING; And in the defense of the true Religion,
like a good and glorious Christian: This has joy in it above that sorrow,
whilst we see the ignominies of his death but shadows and falsehoods, But the
Glories thereof as Substances and Truths, which will enroll him in the golden
Catalougues both of faithful sufferers for his God, and saithfull Patriots and
Fathers of his Country. That he should be trampled on with so much insolence,
as I think the like has never been heard of in the World, (and I am sorry
should have the first president in a Christian Church, and Nation) it is a
matter of much sadness and grief, but that he should suffer so much insolence
with such admirable courage and Christian patience, the like whereof I think
has scarce bin read of in all the world, this presents him unto us as a
Conqueror over his enemies and persecutors, and them as the slaves and
captives of his Christian triumph, and affords us matter of joy and
contentment. It is an heavy thing to think on, that he should suffer by his own
Iudasses: But a joyful and glorious thing it is to think on, that he suffered
so like his own Jesus, so like him in the manner and circumstances of his
sufferings being betrayed by, his own servants, arraigned before Jews and
Pilate, at the best, reviled, reproached, and they say spit upon by an unworthy
varlet, scorned and contemned, and condemned unto death: so like him in the
temper of his sufferings, with so much meekness and fortitude, undauntednes of
spirit, and submission to the will of God: So like him in the cause of his
sufferings (as far as we may with all reverence to the infinite and
incomparable sufferings of Christ: compare inferior things with those that are
so far above them) Christ suffered for the good of his of his people, so did
he: Christ for the freedom of his people, so does he for the freedom of his:
indeed this difference there is which bars out infinitely any equality
between the one and other: Christ he suffered for the whole world, he but for
his three Kingdoms: Christ to free his people from an eternal captivity, and
the tyranny of Satan: He to free his Kingdoms from a temporal captivity and
the Tyranny of wicked men: so that though in these things he be far below his
master Christ Jesus, yet so like him, that I think it will be very hard to
sinde a nearer parallel in any earthly story: and like him too in the person of
the sufferer, Christ was a King and so was he, Christ the supreme and Charles
his substitute; Christ a spiritual King, he a temporal, whose Kingdom was of
this world, and therefore according to our Saviors Rule, his servants should
have fought, that he should not have been delivered to those Jews.

It is indeed a sad thing to consider, what a distressed Family and Kingdom
he has left behind him; But it is a joyful thing to think on, what a joyful
and a glorious Kingdom he has obtained, where every suffering of his has as
it were its peculiar crown: and his cruel death is succeeded with an eternal
and immortal life: a Crown that fears no insolent deposers and a life that
dreads no inhumane Traitors and murderers.

To conclude as we find in him so much matter of joy to balance our sorrows,
and such as does add much honor to all those that have truly served so good,
so gracious, and so pious a Lord and Master, so we have in him likewise great
patterns of Patience and Christian resolution, that as he fainted not in his,
so we may learn first of Christ, and then of him too, not to faint in our
Trials, that as he went so patiently and meekly to the suffering of the loss
of his Crowns and life, so we may prepare our selves Patiently and meekly to
suffer the loss of him, not murmuring against God, or charging him foolishly,
but seeing and acknowledging Gods hand even in this, that we may with the holy
Psalmist hold our peaces and say nothing (nothing I mean in the way of
murmuring and impatience) because it is his doing, but if we say any thing we
may say with Eli; It is the Lord let him do what seems him good, or with
holy Job; The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the
name of the Lord, that however wicked men have taken upon them, without
Commission to be the Judges of his Substitute, yet we may not take upon us to
judge God, or call him to an account for his actions, but rather reverence both
his Justice and mercy therein; his Justice upon us for our sins, and his
mercy unto his Anointed, in taking him away, from so wicked, cruel, bloody
and insulting a Nation, humbling our selves under his mighty hand, and waiting
upon him in the ways of his judgments, and patiently expecting in this also
the fulfilling of that gracious promise of his unto his people. That all things
shall work together for good to those that love God. In which joyful promise,
I heartily wish you and your worthy Husband, and your family a plentiful
share, and in all that good which I hope the Lord will return yet upon the
faithful, and loyal people of this land for the sufferings of his Anointed,
whereby he is so much glorified. I shall end all with this Prayer unto God:
that he will dispose us to submit as we ought unto this and all other
afflictions he shall lay upon us, and give us grace to yield him the fruit of
them: That he will be gracious to our young King, the afflicted Queen, and the
Royal Family, and to the oppressed and distressed people of the Land. That he
will forgive our Enemies, and soften their hearts, and multiply his blessings
upon us and all our friends. So I rest,

Your much obliged servant.
January 31. 1648.
FINIS.

