A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House OF COMMONS At their late
Monthly Fast, being on Wednesday, June 30. 1647.

By NATHANIEL WARD Minister of Gods Word.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Stephen Bowtell at the sign of the Bible in
Pope's Head Alley 1647.

The Bookseller to the Reader.
Courteous READER:
THis Sermon by a special Providence came into my hands. The ensuing Letter
was written by the Author to some friends, for whom this Copy was prepared:
That the printing of false Copies might be prevented which I heard were
abroad, and intended for the Press: I have adventred at the earnest request of
many, both godly and judicious, to publish this without the knowledge or consent
of the Author, not doubting but that it will be both useful and acceptable to
most, and justly displeasing unto none.

Thine S.B.

A LETTER To some Friends.
Loving Friends,
TO satisfy your expectations I am willing to send you a true copy of my
Sermon as I wrote it, but I confess in some things a little differing from my
preaching it: wanting time and rest, having traveled much a little before the
day, and striving to speak loud in so great a Church; I soon discerned, that I
could not be Master of my thoughts and memory: but forgot somethings
material, and expressed two or three passages inconveniently, which sounded
ill in mine own ears. I was very loath to read my notes more then some
scriptures: had I done it, I presume I had not offended any: but my judgment
is altogether against it.

It has not been my manner to grieve any man's spirit in the Pulpit, But in a
distempered time, when occurrences of State are so violent and various that a
man speaks for life, it is hard to speak pertinently to the case, and
acceptably to all hearers, especially when there are so many counterparties,
tuning their ears to the key of their own Interests, insomuch that I scarce
know any man who lies not now under some pressing prejudice, most men seem to
Exercere hanc artem industriously: and God seems to pinion up every man's
arms, whose hearts is set to do him or this State any true service; but I am
far from excusing my self any farther then I may and ought.

Two or three things I hear pleased not, 1 My persuading so much to lament the
King, wherein I acknowledge I let fall one redundant expression; I am very
ignorant of Gods mind, if it be not a very Christian, and at this time a very
necessary duty; I think I had spoke nothing to the Text, if I had not spoke to
that which is the maine point in it. I earnestly wish that time does not drive
us to a more bitter lamentation for his carriage and mis-carriage, then now we
are able or willing to foresee, I desire to bewail my self that I can bewails
him no more. Yet if I may believe my self, hot or cold, I am as far from
being a Malignant as any man that heard me.

Another was some passages concerning the Army, which I have sent you verbatim,
I acknowledge I can but pity and pray for them, and so far as God who is able
to work good out of evil, makes them his instruments to awaken the Parliament
to expedite what is necessary. I look on them in hope they will do no great
harm, but when I consider, how they have begun so vast and strange an
enterprise without Warrant, I cannot but fear they will proceed besides and
beyond rule, if God lead not their leaders, with his only wise hand, little
do good men know what spirits themselves, much less rude men, are of, if once
they be imbroyled, in heat of action and opposition.

The other was, the word carting, which you shall meet withal in its place, it
grieved me to see diverse smile at it with slight Spirits in so solemn a time.
I weighed it before and advised with a godly prudent Divine about it, who said
it was no unfit expression, but might be well used. Christ calls himself a
Husbandman, into which calling it falls; carting is as honest and honorable a
work and word as Carpentering: I think I shall ere long show you a good
Commentator on Ezekiel. who says, Christus, or, spiritus Christi est optimus and
peritissimus Auriga, etc.

Some of you know how truly unwilling I was to come upon any public Stage,
knowing how perilous and jealous the times are, and how seriously I declined
this text suspecting the very words of it would be ungrateful to some. I
consulted with seven intimate friends about it, and another much cooler and
peaceable, whereto my own mind most led me, as they can bear me witness,
six of them urged me to this, yet my heart did constantly discourage me from
it, though upon many thoughts I could not conceive any subject so necessary as
to persuade the restoration and conservation of our lost authority, in a time
when Government is fallen so low, and men's Spirits risen so high: that if it be
not suddenly looked into, no humane eye can see any help or hope how it can be
scrued up again to its due altitude, unless it be by him who can do what he
please.

I trust I shall not be grieved that I was not thanked or ordered to print, I am
not only above but a verse to both. I have had more thanks then I can tell
what to do with, and many justify me I fear too much, and more importunity to
print it then I have or shall listen unto, for I see the nakedness of it well
enough, this I acknowledge grieves me sadly, that coming a hard Winter voyage
over the vast raging Seas to do what service I could to my Country, in
preserving Truth, and promoting Peace; I am obstructed so far as I am. I am not
ignorant that there are some troubled at my being here, and watching an
opportunity to weaken me and my work, which I have attended faithfully,
meekly, and not without some success, but I am not altogether discouraged. I
hope I shall make and keep my peace with the Lord, as for men I hope not for
it, till he shall vouchsafe to give us more humility and fear then I can yet
see in this Land, which two graces seem to me to be much more wanting then
they ever were in my days.

I pray let none take any copy of this Sermon, but such as are wise, and
friends to me, and have no itch to publish it, I would not add offense to
offense, it has been often told me with some confidence, that it is already
in the Press, but where and by whom, I cannot learn: I have used means and
friends to prevent it, if it should by any other Copy. I shall then advise with
you what to do.

I entreat you, if in perusing it you find any evil in the matter or manner,
you would charge me faithfully with it; I shall find a time and way to unsay
and undo it, in the mean while pray for him, that shall be

Yours if ever a time come again when men may be their own. Nath. Ward.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of Commons, assembled in
Parliament: At their late Monthly FAST, Being on Wednesday June, 30. 1647.
EZEKIEL 19. ver. 14. And fire is gone out of a Rod of her branches, which has
devoured her fruit, so that she has no strong Rod, to be a Scepter to Rule,
this is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.
THIS Chapter is a Tragical conclusion of the Antecedent part of this
prophecy, wherein the Prophet tells them, 1 To what pass they have brought
the state of Jsrael. 2 What God would have them now do.


The first, under a twofold or rather threefold Allegory, it will not be
amiss to take a very Transient view of the whole Chapter, being short; that we
may take the better aim at the Text.

Moreover take thou up a lamentation for the Princes of Jsrael.

It well beseemes a State professing Religion to lament the miscarriages and
miseries of their Princes, and good reason, for they are usually for their
sin, and to their sorrow.

And say,

It seems God and the Prophet took the Commonwealth to be the Mother or
Parent of their Kings, the Kings her Sons.

If Commonwealths were such Mothers as we read of Prove. 31. And would
instruct their Princes so piously as she did, they should probably have more
Lemuels and fewer Rehoboams.

If Princes would acknowledge their commonwealth to be their Mother, there were
some hope they would better observe Solomon's advice, or rather Gods, which is
not to forsake the Laws of their Mother to rule pro arbitrio, nor prove a
heaviness to their Mother, nor a shame to their Mother, nor despise their
Mother, nor chase away their Mother, nor curse their Mother, nor smite their
Mother.

But this Mother at this time was a Lioness, she couched among Lions, and
nursed up her whelps among young Lions.

If Commonwealths be Lions, how or why should their Kings be Lambs?

If they will nurse up their Princes among young Lions how should they shift to
share deep of their nature?

Young Courtyers are lightly none of the best Tutors.

And she brought up one of her whelps:

If Subjects will be Demobori why should not their Kings be Demophagi?
Jehoahaz.
It is pity a predant people should want a Rampant King; But a man had need to
have a good thick skin, and good solid bones to live in such a Kingdom.

It becomes a King to be a Lion, but a Lamb too, else he will not be like
Christ the King of Kings, and King of Saints.

The Nations also heard of him, Egypt.

Foreign Nations, though heathen, do neither like, nor love their neighbor
Kings, if they hear they are oppressors.

What pits Princes dig for their Subjects they often fall into themselves. 2 Chronicles. 12.7, 8, 9.


Now when she saw that she had waited, Jeofahei^^


It is Christianity to wait with all patience for the return of a King: it
will also stand with Christianity, when all patience, and hope is spent, to be
thinking of a right successor.

And he went up and down among the Lions;

Of this before ver. 3.

And he knew their desolate places,

When Princes begin to oppress they know not where they shall make an end;
vice has no mean but not to be at all.

A King may roar his Land desolate, by roaring Proclamations and Edicts.

Then the Nations set against him on every side from the Provinces,

And they put him inward in Chains, Babylon, they brought him into holds, that
his voice should not be heard upon the Mountains of Jsrael.

It were Royal wisdom for Kings, to take warning by their erring
Predecessors: but that's out of fashion.

When Kings will not be quiet without absolute Monarchy and Sovereigne
Liberty, they may come at length to that Market where they can have none at
all.

These were foreign toils, but European Histories tell us of sundry Kings
and Princes taken in home Toils.

Civil Nets, which is a great trouble to Subjects, but a mercy to Kings if
their people be Christian and merciful.

Thy Mother is like a vine in the blood,

And she had strong rods for the Scepters of them that bear rule, branches,
and she appeared in her height with the multitudes of her branches.

But she was plucked up in fury, East Wind dried up her fruit, her strong Rods
were broken and withered, the fire consumed them.

And now she is planted in the Wilderness in a dry and thirsty ground.

Calvin takes blood for pollution as cap. 16.6. But I must crave leave to think
that the Prophet speaks in vinerous language.

It is a great felicity for States to flourish in people and plenty.

It is a peculiar mercy when they are well stored with strong Rods, or Scepters
of rule.

It is an easy matter for Kingdoms to abuse prosperity, which too often
destroys the foolish. Prove. 1.3


And it is as easy with God to destroy such kingdoms with a precipice, King
and kingdoms are as little matters in his hands if he be provoked.

And fire is gone out of a Rod of her branches, which has devoured her fruit,
so that she has no strong rod to be a Scepter to rule: this is a lamentation,
and shall be for a lamentation.

A Scepter is an Ensign of public authority, it is called Baculus Regius, le
Baston Royal.

Sceptrum Jovis, from whence I take other Scepters were derived, was wont to
solemnize great matters.

A Scepter is sometimes in scripture and other Authors taken for Monarchical
power.

Sometime for Aristocraticall and the power of subordinate Princes.

Sometime for the Standard rule or law whereby they rule. Heb. 1.8.


Out of this 14th. ver. wherein there are no Criticismes, omitting other
collections, or animadversions, which may be more offensive then profitable, I
will only take this general Observation.

When a State has brought it self to that pass that the Scepters of
authority, and powers of Government are wasted and weakened, it is a
lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

The truth of this does now stare us in the face with so grim a visage that I
need not be long in confirming it.

All the Schoolmen and wisemen in the world can hardly determine whether man
be most beholding to God for his being or his well-being, much may be said on
both sides from Scripture and reason, but there is no present need of this
dispute.

The being of man, God has placed, in his natural constitution, his
well-being in his political institution.

Political Institution is completed in Ordination, Administration,


Ordination, 1. Framing a State into the most proper form of Policy it is
capable of. 2. In the Sanction of apt and regular laws, for Peace and War.


Administration, 1. In placing pious and virtuous men in all Political
Offices. 2. In their Just and diligent execution of their Charges.


A fail in any of these, makes a mutulation in state.

We are to speak most properly of the last, the Text confines us to it.

If weak or unfit men be elected into public places, if Rulers prove
defective in their Actual Administrations;

If every wheel of Government keep not its proper station and due motion, but
prove so vicious or stupine that they lose their strength, it brings a
Commonwealth to a Common misery.

The Scripture reveals the universal or general Policy wherewith God has
ordered the world.

We may see it in a breife scale or Clymax.

I. Know thou the Ordinances of Heaven, Job. 38.33.
and their Dominions on earth? If these Caelestiall bodies should set
themselves on fire by their over violent motions, or rout themselves into
disorder by their distempers, or prove sluggish and uneven in their
revolutions, or unfaithful in their influences and defluences, the inferior
Creatures would soon come to putrefaction and destruction: This is natural.

II. God blessed man and gave him dominion over the Fish of the Sea, the fowls
of the Air, Genesis 1.28.
and every living thing that moves upon the Earth. Man by forfeiting this
Segniory has made himself obnoxious to Fish, Foul, and Beasts, and all these
mutinous and perilous one to another: This is humane or virile.

III. God gave Rulers and Superiors dominion over Inferiors, some naturally,
some Politically; Romans 13.1.2. Prove. (...).16.
if these through ambition fall into usurpation, or through Corruption into
mali administration, Ephesians. 3.10.
or through negligence into non-Administration. States would be soon distated
and prostrated to confusion: This is Political or Civil.

IIII. God gave yet a higher Dominion to his Angels, (...) 10
making them principallities and powers in sublime places; they are his
Nobility; If these should cast away their Dominions as some of them did, the
world would soon be turned into a Hell: This is Angellicall.

V. God gave Christ who is right Heir to all Crowns, (...). 9 ^, Isa. 22.2^.
Ephesians. 1.21.^^.
the Sovereign Empire over all, he laid the government on his shoulders, put
the Key of all rule into his hand; He is Dei Claviger, as the Grand Tyrant of
Russia mistiles himself; If he through unskilfullnesse, or unfaithfullnesse
should confiscate his Dominion, it would soon be the dissolution of all, as
his resignation shall one day be: This is Sovereigne and Divine.

These Ordinations are Gods foundations, which if they should fail, what can
the righteous do? he must do as others do for ought I know; some translations
have it where shall the righteous appear? The righteous have an Interest and
access into all the sanctuaries and Cittadells under the Heavens, yet he must
appear in the open Streets, or on Hownsloe-Heath, or under a hedge, or in a
Ditch, or where he can shift best for himself.

Were it not altogether unmeet to damask fast Sermons with humane Histories, I
might instance this truth in all or most of the states of the world, The
Egyptian, Persian, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and in diverse nearer hand, If my
observation and memory misuse me not, I think I might give you Presidents from
Classical Authors of 66. Empires, Kingdoms, Dukedomes, and Provinces, that
have suffered wrack upon the Flatts of Authority, happily many of them driven
by the tempest of Tyranny, But God delights not to be worshipped on these
days in imbrothered Sackcloth, He bidds us lay aside Ornaments and pleasant
things at such times.

Yet give me leave to mention one instead of the rest, The Greek Empire having
flourished many years, especially after it was enlarged by the Median
Kingdoms, When Alexander the great Scepter failed, Leosthenes a very wiseman
said, that the heart of it did presently Palpitare moribunde, the spirits of it
huc atque illuc jactitare miserrime, that it did scatere vermibus, ignavis
Regibus, Ducibusque torpidis, and forthwith marcesere, et contabescere intra
se, But I shall forbear and hold my self to Scripture, and scripturall
reasons.

When Dominion or Authority fails, Ordor.
All Political Order fails. Scaliger says, That Ordo est Anima mundi,
another Author, that it is Anima Reipublicae; let order be dissolved, confusion
follows.

The Holy Ghost says that Christ shall sit upon the Throne of David and his
Kingdom, Isa. 9.7.
He shall Order it and establish it; There is no establishing of Kingdoms, but
by Order.

Job speaking of the Territories of darkness, and the shadows of death
says, It is a Land without Order. Job. 10.20.
Unity is the ground of perfection and perpetuity, Order is unity branched out
into all the parts of consociate bodies to keep them in unity and perfection;
where Order fails they are disjoynted and convulsed; Symmetry and Harmony are
the two supporters of the world; Plato said God was always setting things in
their due stations and proportions; We shall often observe in Scripture when
God threatens destruction, he threatens it under the word Confusion.

When a man is confounded, the Animal, Vital, and Natural spirits are
powered together, a man for that while is unmanned, so when popular bodies are
confused they are for that time impolitized. The states of the Netherlands are
wisely called Ordines, so should all other Statesmen be.

When Dominion fails, Religion fails. Religion.


Authority maintains piety, Government preserves Christianity, If not, It
fails officially. David divided the Priesthood into their courses and Offices,
1 Chro. 23 ca, 24.
It is said these are their Orderings, Christ has done the like in the Gospel,
but when Authority failed, Ephesians. 4.
these orderings failed.

In the time of Jeroboam the lowest of the people were made Priests, such as
were not of the sons of Levi, who ever would might be consecrated.

It fails Theorically, In the times of these lamented Kings the Law of God was
prevaricated, Ezekiel. 21.26. Zeph. 3.4.
they offered violence to the Law. In the time of the Maccabees the Law
gathered so much corrupt dross, and such false glosses, that Christ takes much
pains to refine it.

It fails Practically. In the time of the Judges when Authority declined,
Piety degenerated, those were very sinful times, Judge. 7.
There was no King nor Government in Israel, every man did what was right in
his own eyes, They took what Gods, what Priests, what Concubines, what
Heritages, and undertook what war they pleased; When the Ordinances and
everlasting Covenant was broken, then was the Earth defiled, and the Laws
transgressed. Justice.


When Authority fails, Justice fails.

When the foundations are out of course, Psalm. 82.
then Governors will not know the mind of God, nor understand how people
should be Governed, then will they Judge unjustly, accept the persons of the
wicked, and not defend the Cause of the Fatherless, Widow, poor and
afflicted; Amos 6.12.
Then Judgment is turned into Gall, and Righteousness into He mlock: Then
every man Hunt his Brother with a Net, they do evil with both their hands
earnestly; Princes ask, Judges ask great men ask, Mic. 7.3.
the best are as Briars, and the most upright as Thorns.

When the mighty men, the Judges and, Ancients fail, and Children are Princes,
Rulers Babes then the People shall be oppressed every one by another, Isa. 3.2.
and every one by his Neighbor, the Child shall behave himself proudly
against the ancient, and the base against the Honorable.

When Political rule fails, then the strength of a State fails. When a
Kingdom of Gold degenerates to Silver, Strength.
Silver to Brass, Brass to Iron and Clay, a stone cut out without hands
breaks all in pieces.

It was said of the Assyrian State, Dan. 2.34.
the strongest State of those times, that their tackling being so loose, that
their Maine-mast could not stand strong, nor their Sail be well spread, that
the lame might take the prey and divide the spoil; this Prophet says of these
times, that upon the approaches of Wars all hands shall be feeble, Isa 7.2.
all hearts shall meditate Terror. The hearts of people in such times are moved
as Trees are moved by the Wind; such States are like bodies out of joint, full
of divisions, discontent, and Rulers have little or no power to rule them whom
they have misruled.

When Dominion fails, the wealth of a State fails. Wealth.
Taxations, and oppressions are usually great, Rehoboams little singer was
heavier then Solomon's Loins, 2 R. 23.35 Isa. 42.24. Isa 24.
Jehoiachim, exacted the Silver and the Gold of the People. In such times God
gives Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers. He makes the Earth empty
and wast, States are spoiled, they fail and mourn and languish away, No man
has any mind to trade or Husbandry, they know not what is their own, nor how
long they shall keep it, some Canker or Palmer-worme, the Caterpiller or one
East Wind or another devoureth all. When the Greek Empire was broken, one
compared it to a great Chest of Gold and Silver, whose sides falling out, the
Purpurati, and all that could, fell scrambling to the prey with all their might.

When good Government fails, Honor.
then the beauty and honor of a state fails.

Jerusalem the City of God was beautiful, Psa. 48.2.
the joy of the whole earth, but in these times all her beauty departed, the
Lord covered Sion with a cloud, and cast down from heaven to earth all her
beauty, all that honored her despised her, all that passed, by clapped their
hands, hissed, and wagged their heads at her, and said, is this the City that
men call the perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth? that flourishing
State became a song. A State is happy when it is undique happy, Domi and foris,
as this was in Solomon's time. Lamen. 2.
A man may do as much by his name, as by the goodness of his talent or gifts,
so may a state to themselves and others.

When Government fails, Peace. 2 Chro. 15.5, 6.
then peace fails, which is the soil of all felicity. In Abijahs and Asa's
reign, Israel was without the true God, teaching Priests, without the law and
Government; in those days there was no peace to him that went out nor to him
that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the
Countries, and Province was destroyed of Province, and City of City, for God did
vex them withal adversity; thus it has been with the State of Florence,
Syracuse and many others: and thus it is now with Germany, and little better
with ours.

I take these seven things may well be accounted the seven Pillars whereon
wisdom bulldeth her house, Prove. 9.1.
if these fail, the house however wisely built at the first, must needs fall
with a sorrow.

And that which boyleth up the misery to the full height is this, that in such
times States are of themselves irreparable, now is Ephraim, like a silly Dove
without heart, now is the State of Egypt intoxicated, the wisemen and greatest
Counselors infatuated, the Lord mingles a perverse spirit amongst them, there
is nothing but contradiction and prevarication, Isa. 19.11.16.
objections interjections, puzlings and counterpuzlings, pluranimities and
pluranimosities amongst them, nor shall there be any work which the head or
tail, branch or rush may do.

In that day they shall be like unto women which do nothing but talk, Jer.
8.22.
brabble and squabble their council and States in pieces; in such times there
is no Balm nor Physician, by whom the health of a people can be recovered; in
such times the Stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give
their light, the Sun shall be darkened in his going forth, Isa. 13.10.
and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine; in these times the Lord will
cover the heaven and make the Stars thereof dark, obscure the Sun with a
cloud, and extinguish the light of the Moon, and darken all the bright Stars
of heaven, that he may set darkness upon a land: Ezekiel. 32.7, 8.
all which may be safely understood politically. In such days or rather nights
wisemen are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken. When the Macedonian State
was broken, a wiseman said it was like a blind Cyclops that reaches forth his
arms and hands, to find somewhat to stay upon but cannot. Justus Maenius
writing of the troubles of Germany, just a hundred years since, this present
year, says, it had been better for a man to have dyed by the first stroke
then to be saved through so many distresses.

These are the days wherein God will not be inquired of, Cap. 20.3.
nor entreated to give any counsel, these are the days of perplexity and
giddiness, wherein the best counsel a man can give or take is that of the
Prophet Micah, to look unto the Lord, to wait for the God of his salvation,
to bear the indignation of the Lord, because he has sinned against him, until
he pleads his cause and bring him forth to the light, and to persuade himself
that at length he shall behold his righteousness.

Application.
TO this pass was this state now brought.

We come now to the second part, What such a collaps'd State should do, which
shall stand for Application.

This is a lamentation, and shall be for lamentation; for this very calamity
the Lord commands this Prophet into these passions,

Sigh, Cap. ^1.
thou Son of man with the breaking of thy Loins, sigh with bitterness
before the people, cry and houle son of man, because it is a trial (a trial
indeed) thou therefore son of man smite thy hands together and lament.

There is a time to rejoice, we have had such times long, I wish we had
better improoved them, there is also a time to mourn, into which time our
Sins, and Gods righteous Judgments have now brought us.

Let us first Mourn and Lament for our Royal Scepter that he is thus weakened
and unfitted to Rule; Royal
let us lament his Personal sorrows, pity should be shown to him that is in
affliction; let us lament that he is deprived of his Royal Consort and
Children, the supports and delights of nature, the sweet Objects of humane
affection; deprived of his wonted honor and attendance, his Nobility and
Compeers; deprived of his wonted Meniall Servants, and attended with Military
guards, unwelcome and ungracefull to him; deprived of his wonted liberty; these
things must needs make him a man of sorrows; howsoever his heart is supported,
he cannot but look upon himself as a man under Gods black rod; if God
would soften our hearts to lament him as we should, it is probable he would
soften his heart to lament his Subjects as he ought. God commands both this
Prophet and this state to take up a lamentation for the Princes of Israel,
Princes that were wicked enough, and more then enough isntrumental, to the
ruin of that Common wealth, and their own houses; let their demerits be what
they will, it is Gods mind and Subjects duty to lament them, They are bone of
our bone, and flesh of our flesh, and as men ought to be pittyed. David a man
after Gods own heart, thinks it good Religion to lament Saul, Gods and his
professed Enemy; I much fear that that man is much wanting in Grace and
loyalty, which has not shed tears in the behalf of our King, or done that in
part of grief which amounts to tears. If he laments himself too little, let
us be wail him so much the more. Let us also lament him in respect of his
Political sorrows; Jer. 48.17.
God says of Moab, all that are about him bemoane him, and all that know his
name say, how is the strong staff and beautiful Rod broken? blessed be God,
our staff and Rod is not yet utterly broken, but greatly warped and
weakened: The Lord in his mercy restore him and bind him up again. Cap. 32.2.
The Lord charge this Prophet to take up a Lamentation for Pharaoh King of
Egypt taken in a net, though he had formerly taken one of these Kings of
Israel in his Net, much more for the Kings of Israel as bad as they were. Lam
4.20.
The Prophet Jeremiah Lamenting Zedcahiah this finfull and miserable Prince,
says, the breath of our Nostrills is taken in their Net, Of whom we said under
his shadow we should live. A natural Body has vital parts, as Heart and
Lungs, etc. Yet if the breath be not in the Nostrills all the wheels of life
move not, but are suspended from their functions; so it is with a Political
body, The Prince puts life into all Authority, and gives the Fiat to all Laws
and Ordinances in an ordinary course; If in an Extraordinary, a State wants
this breath, it breaths but faintly, Authority is not in the full, but much
Eclipsed, at least in the thoughts of Subjects. Jet. 6.26.
It becomes the Daughter of Gods people in such a Case to Gird her self with
Sackcloth, to wallow her self in Ashes, to take up a Mourning and a bitter
Lamentation as for her only Son, for so is our King during his Reign. I will
cause the Sun to go down at Noone says God, and I will darken the Earth in
the clear day, Amos 8.9, 10.
and I will turn your Feasts into Mourning, and all your Songs into
Lamentation, and I will bring up Sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon
every head, and I will make it as the mourning of an only Son, and the end
thereof as a bitter day. I verily believe this frame of Spirit would at this
time be far more pleasing to God then our slightness and Jollity. Isa. 28.5.
God says of Christ, he shall be for a Crown of Glory, and for a Crown of
beauty to his people; so are all Kings in their Measure, or should be. All
Common Societies, yea every good Subject has a subordinate Crown or Coronet
upon his head; while our King and his Crown are distanced, in this sort, every
Subject stands bare, and the whole Land uncovered, which is a great abatement
of Honor; Let us therefore lament him for his sake and our own.

Let us also here Lament a Branch of our Royal Scepter; Jer. ^8.2.
O Vine of Sybnah, I will weep for thee with the weeping of Jazer, thy Plants
are gone over the Sea, the Lord keep him there without infection, and return
him in safety. The Prophet Jeremiah bewayling Jerusalem, in her comfortles
Condition, says, There is none to guide her of all the Sons she has brought
forth, neither is there any to take her by the Hand of all the Sons she has
brought up; our Case is not altogether so, but too near it.

Let us in the next place sadly lament our National Scepter, National.
this present Parliament. Our State may be compared to the Theater of the
Philistines which was supported by two Grand Pillars, so are we by our King and
this Honorable Parliament, If these two fail, Our Theater will hardly avoid
falling, so may much more harm be don to our Lords and People at the latter
end, then in all our former late troubles. Howl ye Fir-trees, says the
Prophet Zachari, for the Cedar is fallen, the mighty are spoiled; Howl ye
Oaks of Bashin, Zach. 11.2.
a voice of Howling of the shepherds, for their Glory is spoiled; a voice of
roaring of young Lions, for the pride of Jordan is spoiled; you are our
Fir-trees, our Cedars, our mighty men, our Oaks, our shepherds; If you be
fallen we cannot stand, if you be spoiled, we are undone; If our shepherds be
smitten, we your flock are scattered and lost. You know how it was with Rome in
Anthonies time, and in the Reign of Valentinian the third, and Placidia his
Mother, how with the State of Germany, when the Empire was translated to
Charles the fifth. If the whole head be sick, and the whole heart faint, there
will be no soundness from the sole of the foot to the Crown of the Head, but
wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores, which can neither be closed, nor
bound up, nor Mollified.

Lament your constitution, Constitution.
that it is so Heterogeneus, dissimular, and contramixt. Where the Members are
Membra dividentia the whole can hardly be whole; An Heterocranian in our
national head will necessarily breed greater troubles in our national bodies.

I conceive it would please God and the Land well if you would please to give
some general directions, if it were but by way of request to the people, for
the choice of Parliament Men; you are not ignorant what Laws and limitations
not only the Scripture but Heathen States have instituted in this behalf,
they should be natu majores, primogeniti, sapientes, probi, seniores. etc.

Lament that the Providence of God, and the improvidence of men having made it
so, the grace of Christ cannot or does not amend it. I will plant together the
Ceder, Isa. 41.19.
the Shitrah tree, the Myrtle, the Oil tree, the Fur, the Pine, and the Box
tree all together, that you may consider that the Hand of the Lord has done
it; It would be a great Honor to the Religion of England, if the world might
know, though there be varieties of constitutions, difference of degrees, and
diversities of Judgments among you, yet that your hearts were united in the
fear of the Lord; when God means to restore his people to happiness, he
says he will unite the stick of Joseph in the hand of Ephraim with the stick
of Judah, Ezekiel. 37.17.
and make them one in his own hand; when he means to ruin them he
threatens to break their staff of Beauty and their staff of Bands, and the
Brotherhood between^ Judah and Israel. Zach. 11.7.14.
If a thin and sharp vapor get into any of the two Membranes which cover the
brain, it causes convulsive motions in the body; when the spirits move
unevenly a vertigo in the head: you are the lifeguard of our King and
Kingdom, If you agree not in your Counsels we shall hardly agree in our
courses; If ye mutiny in words we shall be too ready to mutiny with our Swords.

Lament your Administrations, Administrations.
in special Lament that you have not endeavored so speedily and sufficiently
to establish the Scepter of Christ, which is the primum mobile of all good
Government. He cannot reign with strength if his Scepter be weak: To put but
a Reed into his hand is next door to the setting of a Crown of Thorns on his
head; let him have his complete Dominion, and he will have a care of your
regular Authority, both to preserve it and improve it. The delays and
disagreements about this, have weakened all the Scepters and strengthened all
the stirrs in the Land.

Lament if you have not sufficiently attended the reestablishing of the Royal
Scepter, which is our secundum necessarium. The providence of God are immensly
deep, he can turn our delays into his expeditions, a Kings peremptorinesse
and a Parliaments slacknesse, into a greater good then all the eyes of the Land
can foresee, yet certainly it is no less then an amazement to many considerate
men, that that work should go so slowly on. If a Commonwealth be headless
the people will be brainlesse. I dare profess in the ears of God and this
Honorable Senate, that I know not how any man can be more jealous then my
self, that he should be restored upon imperfect and unsafe terms, but if it
may be done upon good terms and Gods terms, the sooner it is done the
sooner all will be quiet; Far be it from me to press an interru^^ion or
intermission of such ^^^^ires as are instant and urgent, only I humbly entreat
you to remember again that it is our secundum necessarium, and that till you
two our great wheels be set right, all the lesser are like enough to go wrong.

If you have not been early enough in rewarding the Army, with just payments,
and due honor, I humbly entreat you to lament it: If any of this honorable
House have erred in discouraging, or disparaging them, I entreat them to lament
it, yea though it be now healed, it is no dishonor to honest men, (as we
presume you are) to repent of what incogitancy has done amiss.

If the zeal of maintaining the Power, and Liberty of the Parliament, and the
Peace of the Commonwealth has moved you to prevent, or reject some Petitions,
though they were ill countenanced, and thereby caused the people to fear a
loss of their popular Liberty, I likewise humbly entreat that you would lament
it, and to remember what a King, and Kingdom within the pale of Christendom,
I mean Henry King of Swede, suffered, for an error of this kind, though I
confess much worse in degree.

If through connivence, and indulgence you have too long spared some that have
too boldly blasphemed our supreme Court and Council, and thereby emboldened
others to speak more evil of you then there is cause, you should do very well
to lament it, and reform it.

If you and your Officers have been any thing unthrifty in the accounts and
disbursements of the Kingdoms Treasury, I pray let it be lamented and amended.

If you be so deserted that you are necessarily exposed to such yeeldings as
may prove prejudicial presidents to future Parliaments, and deep detriments
to the whole Realm, it would be cordially lamented.

If by these or any other defects you have laid your selves low, in the
estimations and animadversions of the people, it would be sadly lamented. I
somewhat fear that you may take up part of Job's parable, and say, Job. 29.
Oh that you were as in months past, when God honored you, when his candle
shined upon your heads, and when by his light you walked thorough darkness,
when the almighty was so present with you, when the ear that heard you blessed
you, when the eyes that saw you gave witness to your proceedings, when you put
on Righteousness as a Robe, and Judgment as a Diadem, when your glory was
fresh in you, and your bow renewed in your hand, when the people waited for
you, as for the rain, and when you chose out their way, and dwelt as a King in
the Army, comforting the Mourners! But now those that are far short of you in
age, and worth, yea some, that are children of Fools, and base men, viler then
the Earth, make you their by word spare not to spit in your face, (Oh that you
will spare such!) Job 30.
let loose the bridle before you push away your feet, and raise up against you
the ways of their own destructions, for which the Soul of this good man
powered out it self upon him, and complains, that they were days of great
afflictions, that God had cast him into the mire, and made him become like dust
and ashes. I hope you are not yet at so low an ebb, I pray God give you hearts
to lament the least loss of your Authority. I shall not need to re-mind you,
that the loss of the power, and honor of a Parliament is the greatest loss
our Kingdom can sustain, the loss of a King clothes the whole Land in sable,
but the loss of a Parliament in a winding sheet.

Our lives and all that we are, and have, are bound up in your reputation, and
all that your selves are, and have, also; But I must excuse you the more,
because it is a time wherein the Lord of Glory is staining the pride of all
glory; the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of England want no grace more then
Humility, which is the soil of all graces, and the best way to Exaltation.

Let us also lament our present Martial Scepter. Martial.
We have flighted Gods Moral, and Evangelicall Law, he has now brought us in
some sort under-Martiall Law: Let us lament, that so good an Army should be so
illguided, as to do what they do without warrant from God or state, so far as
wisemen can yet discern.

Let us lament, that a Scepter made of so much gold and silver, and true
English metal, should have any part of it of a westphalian temper. Let us
lament that such honorable and serviceable Troops should have any mounted upon
any Saddles of John a Leyden's make.

Let us lament that so good an Army should advance toward so ill a work, at
least in their shows, and our fears, as to deliver a Parliament of some
eminent Members by a Caesarian section.

Let us very sadly lament, that some of them of a mechanic alloy should be so
bold, as without warrant from th^^ chief leaders, to plunder us of our King;
it was so malepert an act, an act that would have better become a John a
Loyden, Knipper Dolling, or Jack Cade, then a Loyal English Subject. But what
if the sword contemn even the Rod, what? Ezekiel. 21.13.
It is great pity but that Sword should meet with a sound Rod: If no body else
will provide it, I hope God will. But I trust Gentlemen some of you will call
to mind what an old Roman, a wise Statesman, wrote to Marcus Brutus in the
like case.

It was too great a disparagement to make out King who is the Lord paramount of
all our free-holds, such a moveable: I believe there have been Spirits in the
World which would almost scorn to be King again after such a handling. If he
went willingly, let us bewail his error.

Let us lament that there should be any Korah's, Dathan's, and Abiram's, in an
Army, that lays so much claim to Piety.

Let us lament with much spiritual grief, that many of this Army have
bemeazled so many ignorant Country men and Towns, with impious and blasphemous
opinions, and rude manners. I marvel much that any man who fears God closely
and uprightly should fear this Army, whereof a great part is said to be so
good, that surely they will not, and others so bad, as surely they cannot hurt
us.

In the first of Ezekiel. there is a description of a strange wheel; it was a
wheel, and wheels, and a wheel within a wheel, and four wheels, and there
were four flashing, and sparkling Creatures, guided by a spirit, that was in
the midst of them, whither the spirit went, they went, the form and motion
of this wheel made the Heavens look terrible; I could parallel our Army to
this wheel allusively but not abusively; If they can so drive their wheels that
they overthrow not Charles his waine, nor break the axel-tree of the State, I
mean the Parliament, and run not the wheels over some of their own loins,
and can be so wise, as to unload on this side Munster, before they come to
battle and slaughter. I dare be bold to say with all reverence, that either
the General, or Christ his General, has more skill in carting, then I ever
look to have while I live.

Let us lament that these our Brethren have embarked themselves into an act
unparalled, and an enterprise so snarled, and imbranched, that I dare say,
all the eyes amongst them can not see to the end of all 'its issues by a
thousand leagues; Let us seriously lament, so seriously, that we may prevent
all lamentations by these our Brethren, and more then fellow Subjects.

Let us lament that such an English Army have cast so much well deserved honor
in the dust, and such a black voyle over the face of the Gospel.

Let us also lament the whole State, Popular.
and people, who feel in part but do not sufficiently see their sin, and
sorrow. The anger of the Lord was moved against the people, 2 Samuel 2^.1.
and moved David to sin against them. Kings can sin fast enough of
themselves, and kindle fires upon themselves, and the people but usually
people, by their sins, blow the Coals to a flame.

Lament that they have a suspended King. Did they know what the Egyptian and
Russian States, and what the Kingdom of Fez suffered for more then seven years
together, for want of a King, they would lament to purpose.

Jsrael shall say we have no King, Hos. 10.3.
because we feared not the Lord; what then should a King do to us? he that can
tell what a King should do to a people that will not fear the Lord, I could
earnestly wish him our Kings Viceroy in a Country that I know, I should hold
him as good, and as wise a man as ever was Papirius Censor, What should a King
do to his people embroyled in so many Divisions, Commotions, and Distractions?
What should a King do in a Country where there are so many Kings, and so few
Subjects? I dare frcely say, that Claudius Gordianus nor the Barbarian Hermit,
would not willingly at this time take the Royal Scepter into their hands,
though the Subjects, in the plight they are, would swear sealty to them with
their hearts pinned upon their tongues ends. It may be an Abimileth, or a
Perkin, or a Michael de Lando, would if they might.

Let us lament, that through these distractions, Jere. 8.22.
and Peoples clamors, there is nor balm enough, nor sufficient Physicians left
in our Gilead to recover our healths.

Lament that you pursue your own Parliament with so many strifes, and stripes
of tongues, whereby you may degrade them much more than any defects of theirs,
or any contest or affront of an Army. You go the next way to cut off your own
necks, and your Childrens throats with your own Raisors: such gales, Psa. 52.2
or gusts of so ill breath, may soon burn down, and abate the height and
breadth of your tallest and straitest Cedars, under which we must take shelter
in such storms as these.

Lament that you have so far lost your proper popular Scepter, the fear of
God, and the power of godliness, for which these troubles are come upon you.

Lament, that the Figtree languisheth, the Pomgranat tree, the Palm tree, the
Apple tree, and all the trees of the field. Our Gentry, Citizens, Yeomen, Joel
1.11.12.
Husbandmen, and Tradesmen, are so far withered that their wonted joy is
taken from them. You should do well to consider that these national fires do
not only burn the strong rods, Isai 5.24. Isa. 9.18.
But as the Prophet says wickedness burns as a fire, and devoureth the
stubble, the chafe, the briars, the thorns, Mal. 3.2.
and the thickets of the Forest. You cannot endure the refining fire of Christ
willingly, he can make you endure his consuming fire whether you will or no.

Lament in a special manner, that your Towns, and Churches, are so belepered
with errors, and strange opinions, and that so many are roblet-led with new
lights, which though they be but Candles-ends will hardly be extinguished, till
they have set Gods wrath, and the Peoples spirits on fire.

Lastly, let us lament, that we cannot lament, at least as God would have us
lament; because it is not a lamentation, it shall be for a lamentation; so it
proved by the Lamentations of Jeremy, who lamented for these miseries with more
bitter lamentations then ever any mortal man made, or Poet feigned. He
lamented till his eyes failed with tears, his bowels were troubled, and his
liver was powered upon the Earth, and sped never the worse for his lamentations.

The Lord threatens the people to double the Sword the second and third time;
if he has intermitted a while, that he might whet and furbish his Sword for a
second scene, or act of War,

He that cannot see whence the third is like to come, Ezekiel. 21.14
has very dirn eyes. He can over-turne, over-turne, and over-turn, he can
shave the head, and after that the beard, and after that the feet, Isai.
7.20.27. Lev. 26.
he can walk seven times contrary unto us, he can give us real signs, and
good hopes of making us a comfortable settled and reformed State; But when the
vessel is well near finished upon the wheels, he can break all again, and
make it of a miserable form, if the sins of a Nation provoke him to it.

But some may say, Jer. 18 10.
or think, as the people did of this Prophet, that he speaks parables, and that
these visions are but sailing visions; I pray God they may prove so, for his
tender mercy, and holy names sake.

I had thought to have spoken somewhat of Ecclesiastical and Domestical
Scepters, and how weakened Scepters might be restored to their strength, so far
as belongs to a Divine: But fearing that the State is at this present in too
violent and hot a Paroxisme to take physic, and that it would cost more time
then can be allowed, I shall here conclude with these four conclusions, which I
take to be everlasting truths.

I. That the highest honor, and weightiest charge, God has betrusted any of
the sons of men with, is public authority.

II. That no man can sin a greater sin against God and Men, then to cast
the honor and power of authority in the dust: The sin against the Holy Ghost
excepted.

III. That besides the Mal-Administrations of government by Magistrates
themselves, there is no readier way to prostitute it, then to suffer vile men
to blaspheme and spit in the face of authority.

IIII. That if Rulers once lay public authority wast, they will find it the
difficultest piece of work that ever mortal men took in hand to raise it up
again to it is due height, and true strength.

FINIS.

