AN ANSWER to a Declaration of the Commissioners of the General Assembly, To
the whole Kirk and Kingdom of SCOTLAND. Concerning present dangers, and duties
relating to the Covenant and Religion.
By BORIALIS Guard.
THE Commissioners of the general Assembly of the Church of Scotland are
better read in books then men, and in this age of different opinions, they do
like those at the confusion of languages, sort themselves with whosoever they
be that jumpe with them in judgment, and think them honest and infallible in
all things else, that hit right in Presbytery, though they but pretend to it,
for such there are that are neither Presbyterians, nor Independents, but cry up
the one, because it cries down the other, and consequently the English Army
that new model, which they hate for their virtues, not for their vices, their
victories, not their tenets. But the greatest Clerks are not always the wisest
men, nor see not the furthest into a millstone. Some read Machiavell to do him,
but they to undo him. There are Protestant Jesuits of the short robe, that can
so disguise themselves as to cozen them of the long, and draw them (by an
erroneous credulity) to be really theirs, but by seeming that they are not.

All Is not gold that glisters, nor all true Englishmen or Patriots that are
friends to Presbytery, or foes to the Army. Believe it, there are many Lay
Lord-bishops still alive, that go disguised in Presbyterian visors, because they
know it is in vain to strive against the stream, until the wind blow right for
them. Whoever he is that is an Englishman, and entrusted for the Commonwealth,
if he be factor for the King, he holds his principles as well Ecclesiastical
as civil, and intends the Prerogative of both, time will tell you so, though
they do not; if God deceive them not, they will deceive you; but hitherto they
have missed their mark, traveled with iniquity, conceived mischief, and
brought forth a lie, and so I am confident will ever do. Only take heed you of
partaking in other men's sins, call not evil good, nor good evil, but
distinguish; cry down error, but not the Army, lest you change the actors, but
not the tragedy, and cry up Presbytery, but not al Presbyterians, lest as wise
as you are, at last you conclude with a non putarem.

The King long since pawned both the word of a King and a Gentleman, and never
yet redeemed them (for Peter Martyr observes, That at Rome its a maxim that
Merchants, not Kings are to keep their words, and Popery and he have been long
bed-fellows) how to charm our English credulities, in his papers he calls God
to witness, another state stratagem (it seems he is not witness to oaths and
promises) for nothing must be left unsaid or unassaid, and vouches conscience
for the continuing of Archbishops, Bishops and their lands, because of the
great Charter, and the curse of the superstitious donors. So that the
Ecclesiastical part of Magna Charta may not be violated, nor Popish Episcopal
lands alienated, but the civil or secular part of it may without offense, his
peoples liberty, property, and estates too fans scruple. Rare Chimistry, in
conscience, that can distinguish without a difference, whereas indeed the root
of the matter grows out of that old rotten maxim, No Bishop, no King. He that
can break his word when he will, and make conscience of what he will, well he
may ruin me, but he shall never deceive me, whose nature is so apparently
disagreeing to his office, and the duties belonging thereunto.

From the Bishops, whose abolition he tells you in his message from the life of
Wight, he cannot consent to, he falls down to the Militia, and does as
unclearly consent to that, as he clearly dissented from the other; for first
having laid a firm foundation of it to be inherent in the Crown (as if the
interest of the King were diverse from that of the Kingdom, and the Crown or
Court to be preferred to the Commonwealth and its safety) by a strong
assertion, though he can neither press men nor raise moneys, and therefore
cannot give his consent to alienate it from the Crown, and that because of his
trust, which he is careful to keep, but not to perform. Yea, so tender is he
of the Commonwealth, that he will not part with the Militia no not to it
self; but to give an infallible evidence of his intentions, he will and he
will not as to himself depart with it during his reign, for first he says he
will consent to an act that the whole power of the Militia shall during that
time be ordered and disposed by the two houses, and after he comes with a
mental reservation, and says, that neither his Majesty, nor any other (by any
authority derived only from him (shall execute, etc. also that patents and
commissions must go as formerly, viz. In his own name, which to grant, it
seems in court construction, is to yield the right of the Militia to be in the
Crown, the thing he drives at, for thereby he gains more de jure then he loses
defacto, and is the more to be avoided, and the legal intentions of such laws,
and their terms (bordering upon the Crown) both in this and other things of
like nature ought to be made more explicate both to the vulgar peoples better
understanding and Kings also, who only talk of a trust to delude the people,
and make it a stalking horse to compass their wills, and make themselves
absolute, for what bears their image or superscription, it seems acording to
the Court-credit is believed to be absolutely and inseparably theirs, as if the
Crown were neither from, nor for the people; upon these terms, in time, our
moneys will be pretended to as well as our Laws, if care be not taken to
prevent it. All monopolies have legal pretenses, specially Prerogative the
worst of all, wherewith his Majesty is so impetuously principled, that he is
not counsellable in things touching common and public good in a regular
understanding of them according to the end and ordination of government. If the
Militia be a flower of the Crown, pray, take it out, and stick a jewel in the
room on it which is both of more Majesty and less danger. From the Militia he
passes to the Armies arrears, and in time proffers to pay them 400000.abl. a
great sum (it seems he has been lustily promised, and well advised, during
his abode at Hampton Court) but nothing to a willing mind, for so he hopes
either to disband them (and then he knows how to re-inburse that money, and as
much more as will pay his arrears also) or to win them to himself when he
himself becomes their pay master. And though he cannot depart with the Militia
from the Crown, yet with the Court of Wards he can, though that also is
invested in the Crown for protection and that of Infants, but this he is
content to have taken away if it seem grievous, not the other though it be so,
to all. In the close he minds them of that which of all other must not be
forgotten, The dissolving this Parliament to make way for another by due
elections, that is wherein his partizent, Cavalliers and malignanrs may be both
elected and electors, and so undo all that either is already or shall
hereafter be done by this, and then we have spun a long thread to little
purpose, rare sophistry and King craft. But I hope the people of England
understand their interest better then thus to pull down their props, and bring
the house upon their heads, and that they will not take seemings for Beings,
nor shadows for reallities. Take heed of disguises and Court-masks, after so
many blows and bullets, be not fooled with fair words, and false fires. I pray
your Majesty Believe your self a Subject, as well as a Sovereigne, and know
that honesty is the best policy. stand not on your head and shake your heels
against heaven. Take God more into your counsels and your people into your
care: It has ever been the fault of Kings to study and practice policy more
then piety, which has brought so great miseries upon many of them, and some to
untimely ends, and what came of them after, God knows: what will it advantage
you to gain the whole world (of power, and that power never so absolute) and
lose your precious soul, you must dye as well as other men and leave your
Crown behind you when you go to the grave. Sure Kings either think they may
sin cum privilegio, or that those things which are sins in other men, as bing,
dissembling, oppression, murder, rapine, swearing, forswearing, are not so in
them. Play with your conscience which one day will be serious with you,
pretend, not protection when you intend destruction, be not deceived, Got will
not be mocked. How can you expect to be believed that never kept your word till
this parliament, nor now if you could have broken it, the endeavors whereof
has been the cause of all this Civil war and bloodshed, besides, you still
retain the same principles, entertain the same counselors, and adhere to the
same friends. It Is true that Kings are called Gods, so are Devils to,
therefore bear not your self upon that, as if there were no excellence in God
but Power and Sovereignty, whereas he has other Attributes and Properties
besides that are honorable, and that he is to be honored for, as goodness,
mercy, justice protection, faithfulness, initate him in these, so shall you be
Gods indeed, and though you must dye like men, yet shall you be as the Angels,
for as ill Kings their condemnation is greater, so are good Kings their
glorification higher, by how much their talent and stewardship on earth is
above others.

The Scots are singular Schoolmen in State-matters, and can distinguish to a
mote in the sun. If the Parliament wished them to advance Southward, they
retreated Northward by a Scotch figure, because the North of England, is the
South of Scotland. And lay just so long before Newarke, till by private
confabulation, the King came to their Leaguer, and then, and there broke their
word (but kept Covenant with the Parliaments Commissioners,) against their
promise carrying away the King to Newcastle, in all post haste, as if they had
meant to have invited him to Edinburgh, in freedom, honor and safety, but no
such marter my Lord; touching the Kings dignity and greatness; the Covenant
only binds on this side Tweed, for beyond it He Is little enough, but it seems
they have bargained with him like the two Tribes and half, so they may have
all beyond Jordan, they will see him in safe possession of Canaan, therefore, for
that end, must there needs be a personal Treaty, and an invitation of him
(whom they will near invite into Scotland) to London, in honor, safety, and
freedom, the Kings own words, fiddle and stick, which makes Pregmaticus (the
Court-jester) ready to leap out of his skin, for joy, to hear this tune
played upon the Scotch Bag-pipes, so that he will go near to want a Theme, to
time upon next week, being reconciled to this loyal fraternity. But they tell
you the reason (and for my part I believe them) why they would have the King
entertained at our cost, because they say their happiness is in him, for you
must consider the two great wheels of the Scotch Engine is now in perpetual
motion, the one to make England Scotland in matters Ecclesiastical, so that It
is, and It is not so, in Scotland, were urged in the Assembly like ipse dixit
in the Schools: the other is to make Scotland England in things ervill, and
though an English man in Scotland must not untie the Kings shoe latchet, yet
they stick not to propose to have the third part of offices about him here.
They cry out of the abuse offered a single Commissioner at Hampton Court, and
that no repair is made, the whilst they sanctuary Knox, and nose us with
Cheesley those arch incendiaries, that in whole volumes abused the whole state
of England, with breach of privilege of Parliament to boot, which by Covenant
is to be maintained, and they punished, but a trick at maw will help that, for
they can in their printed Papers (those Scotch spectacles to blind Englishmen)
take the Covenant in pieces, and quote it in abstract Propositions leaving out
the principal verb still, the conditionate coherence of one thing with
another, so that the reason why they so cry up themselves (wherein they have an
excellent faculty) for transeendent Covenanters, is, because they do by the
Covenant, as some Sectaries of these times do by the Scriptures, bring their
sense to it, and not take sense from it. And for most part what is their
Religion? Presbytery, they do by it as the Jews did by the Temple, worship
it instead of God, and though swearing lying, and dissembling, be even
national vices amongst them, yet by virtue of this bare badge they cry up
themselves for the people of the Lord, as if heaven also could be caught by
craft, but forma dat esse is a maxim undeniable with them, they are the best
Christians and Covenanters, because the best Presbyterians, which they make
their staulking-horse to catch city and country, and the Assembly also, and
their skreen to be-spatter the English Parliament, except the eleven Members,
whose devotion to Presbytery and the old Model, prefers them in favor above
the rest. From State Presbyters, Libera nos.

But however let us do them all good Offices, and keeps them at all due
distances mix not interests, keep Covenant in the intive plain English sense
of it, avoid their tedious Haranys, pend speeches, and voluminous Papers, which
they only speak to the Parliament first, to the end that after they may speaks
them in print to the people, which they know so great a body as the Parliament,
pressed with infinite and weighty businesses cannot suddenly answer, and so
think to carry the cause by cajoling the vulgar, and to divide betwixt the body
real and representative, and then the towas's their owns; too much Serpentins
wisdom to stand with the innocence of Doves. Think not the worse of
Presbytery because they Idolize it, but let power of godliness and purity of
worship get hand in hand. Let (in a word) the Parliament be true to their
trust, and England to it self.

The Army are men both in their effects and defects, and Englishmen also, the
Kingdom have cause to say so, though too many are loath to speak out their
commendations for fear of discommindng themselves. Emulation as it tends
toward imitation is a virtue, but as to envy a vice. In the way of their
possession they have done rare things, both as good Soldiers and true
Patriots, in over-comming open enemies, and disappointing secret ones; but they
are nothing so good at book-work, as at sword-play; it cannot be denied but
they make foul work with Scripture and Pulpits, we never read of Centurion
Preachers, and yet one built a Synagogue, and had so great a faith that Christ
himself marvelled at it, but he had deep humility withal, and yet a great
Commander, moving in his sphere as a Soldier, and not out of it. The other is
renowed for a devout man, fearing God with all his house (there indeed it seems
he taught as a pater familias) a Giver of Alms, and frequent in prayer, but
neither before nor after Peter came to him, do we read that he took upon him
to preach: It seems though they were both gracious men, yet neither of them was
a Gifted Borther. They abound in Victories, and so they do in Errors, it is
pity they should do so, that they who have been the Lords Host, and fought
his Battails, should now be the Devils seeds-men and sow his Tares.

Yet I would have them to be not so bitter against the Reverend and godly
Ministers in the Land, because of Ordination, you know not what spirits ye are
of, nor whose Design you drive therein; they have the same Seal for their
Ministry that Paul had for his Apostleship, 1 Cor. 9.2, they have by it
converted not a few to Christ, and that too as the truth is in Jesus, which we
do not find to be the property of Antichrist or his Ministers. An orderly call
adds both beauty and efficacy to the Word preached. Take heed by disparaging
them or their Function in the eyes or ears of their People, you weaken not
their hands in the Lords work, for which they ought to be had in estimation,
or of being an occasion of putting out such lights, who have shaken the kingdom
of Darkness, and by the blessing of God upon their labors have made England
famous for powerful Preaching and professing in all the Christian World, and
those of you that are sons and not bastards, I am confident under God have
had them for your fathers. Beware of a spirit of Antichrist amongst your
selves, it is he that pretends to both Swords, and whose coming is after the
working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, viz. salse Doctrine and Error, and the
reason is rendered, because they receive not the love of the truth, which is not
then so light a matter as you take it for, when as the Gospel of peace (if it
understand it self aright) bids us contend for it, against men of heretical
judgments. Dote not so much upon the word gifted Brethren, it is a proud word
since extraordinaries ceased, and makes grace a younger brother, those of you
that are gracious, communicate your graces and spiritual experiences unto
edification as fellow members and private Christians, and be not many Masters
in opinion, do not the work of an Office in the Church (I speak not of cases
extraordinary, which have their extraordinary privileges and dispensations)
Without being an Officer of the Church, one of those that Christ has ordained.
Gifts no more entitle men to public Offices in the Church than in the
Commonwealth or Army, without a call. An outward call is not nothing. Study
not confusion, God is not at all the God of it, and least of all in his Church.
There is no better nor no worse argument agaiust you than that of Christ, The
tree is known by his fruits. Some of your Converts I have seen and talked
with, full of opinion but very empty of grace and the vital Principles of
Religion, put them upon dispute and they are old excellent, but upon Christian
communion and they have not a word to say.

The good old Puritan that is not ashamed of faith and repentance is the name
of substance, your Proselites must needs be strange creatures, that are
strangers to the sincere milk of the Word, borne and bred a among foolish
janglings, for your Sermons which tends to singularity and plurality of
opinions, conduce not to devotion but to disputation, which old Mr. Dod (whose
very name is precious for his practical piety) was wont to say, made his heart
the worse a long time after.

And indeed a practical hearted Christian loves not to hear truth doubted, for
that makes faith take wind, and the whole Soul consequently fare the worse, but
knows they are ordained to other use, viz to be a whet-ston to our graces not
to our wits. Such preaching disputants batch addle eggs, fill empty hearts with
empty notions. How forcible are right words, but what does your arguing avail?
but to distune the soul. Opinion begets pride, and that keeps out every thing
but it self. If you will needs preach, then preach truth and not error, as you
will answer it at the dreadful day of judgment, and gather the sense of
Scripture from its scope and drift, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual; and not incoherently making it speak what it never meant. You have
been victorious over Error, therefore let not error at the last get victory
over you, like the Israelites that having conquered Idolaters, worshpped their
Idols. Cry not up liberty of Conscience to the loss of Conscience, and
countenancing licentiousness of opinion, see ye not how his Majesty himself
pretends deeply to its for the setting up prerogative and Episcopacy. What
Snake may not lie hid under that herb? when once it is grown a word in fashion.
Liberty of conscience will be as common, as not guilty at the Assizes, and of
equal credit. Divine Truth is always the same, of an inflexible nature,
various not according to men's judgments, shall the judgment of a man be the
rule of Gods un-erring Truth? Truth is truth, and error error, whether men
think it to be so or no, principles of nature vary not like languages, and if
they be inviolable, and indispensible, much more is Divinity, for the known
will of God is obliging, which way soever it be revealed, whether by nature, or
by the word, though against nature, as when Abraham was commanded to kill his
son; or above nature, as in the union of the two natures in one person, or the
being of three persons in one Godhead, nay of the two; the word is the more
foreible and binding, because nature is so much defaced; therefore not the Law
given to the Israelites the more obliging, and their sins the more provoking.
Opinion ought not to be the rule of things, but the nature of the thing is
self. There is a Truth of God, and that but one, which we must maintain to
the death (else the Martyrs dyed in vain, if for but opposing another lawful
liberty) not only in resisting impiety, but in opposing heresy. Thus says the
Lord, Jer. 6.16. Stand ye in the ways, and see, ask for the old paths, where
is the good way and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls.

And for Malignants that would fight again to be slaves, though they had more
wit before than to stand to it. For the ingenuousest of them say, that if the
King had got the better, the Kingdom had been undone, they see so far now
into his disposition, and yet they in hope to be sprinkled with Court holy
water, are content to sell their birthright, which their Progenitors nobly
purchased with their blood, and they as ignobly sell it with theirs. They are
weary of peace already, which yet is a cheaper tenure to hold by then
disseising, which would fall to our share if they should paramount, as
themselves stick not to say, and threaten to try us all for Traitors at the
Kings Bench bar, where proud Mallet and pricket Heath should give sentence,
and then there would be old work for new Tiburne. Hambleten and Taffe
denizoned with the Estates of Northumberland and Pembreeke, and their blew
Ribbands to boot; as judging most fit, that they should ride on horseback that
fought for S. George.

But why should we engage again, let them have slavery and bondage without
fighting for it. Those of them whose Ancestors gained their Honors by fighting
for their Country, let them now lose theirs for endeavoring to fight against
it, a doom which their own forefathers would pass upon them, were they alive,
to see such degenerate stems to grow out of such noble stocks, for Nobility and
Gentry ought not to distend by propagation without derivation, not by blood but
by virtue. And those of them who Citizen like bought their Arms and Honors,
let them all be reversed till they renew their Pattents at the old rate, and
compound at Heraulds-Hall for their forfeited honors, by shameful deserting
their Country, more worth them the Kings in Christendom.

FINIS.

