An Elegy, ON THE TIMELY DEATH of John Warner. Late LORD MAYOR of the City of
LONDON.
The Invitation.
TAke in your Horns, and make no more ado,
Shut up your shops, and to's burying go
Kind Cozens, pray, since your Bell-weather's dead,
Advance your heads, and see him Buried:
Your Wives may come; or with their Fore-Men stay;
When the Catt's abroad, the Mice may better play.
Here is no want of Sugar-plumbes, nor Sack:
Nor need you here to cry, What do you lack?
Gentlemen, pray sit down; Listen to me,
And whilst you are served, I Will read his Elegy.
His Elegy.
MOst cruel Death! Art thou past shame, or fear,
That durst Arrest the Cities doughty Mayre?
Whose very Horse did carry in his face
A presence able to control thy Mace.
He Is dead; he is dead, that could appease all stir,
He Is dead! the Cities trusty WARRENER;
He that last Christ-mass day, with might and force,
And Zeal, was hurried on a Hobbyhorse
To pull down Holly and Ivy: it is he
That caused a man there basely killed to be,
Now killed himself; and bloody here does lie,
The fatal Object of each Teare-less eye.
Dead now he is, whose Wisdom could not rule,
The City better then he did his Mule,
Who like a Pampered Jade of Asia,
Turned head, and ran with Mr. Mayre away.
Stop, stop I pray good People, cries the Mayre:
Run horse, quoth the Boys, he hates the Common-Pray'r;
So back he forces home his zealous Master,
Who by the way had a most fowl disaster --
But when he lighted (stop your nose I pray)
Foh, quoth the Varlets, what a smell's to day?
Not of Roast-meat, nor baked; for at a word,
Their Christmasse-dinner was not worth a T --
Each Segeant staring in his fellows face,
Was feign to Rest his Nose with his own Mace,
To know from whence the scent came, all did wish,
At last they found he would Adkiniz'd his Breech;
They all agreed, drew Lotts, and't fell to Trypes,
Who has him in, and the old Shit-breech wipes.
Not long after, for to show his Zeal
For the CAUSE, the State, Kirk, and Commonweal,
Into Moore-fields he goes on the Lord's Day
To keep the Children from their harmless play;
When he came there, his Chain he did off pull,
And looked more fierce then a Colechester-Bull:
The Boys began to run, my Lord runs after,
(I ready was to crack for very laughter;)
At last they compassed him within a ring,
Hollowed, and cried, This Knave will have no King:
Lay hold on them, quoth he, away they run,
My Lord returns, and's Sun-dayes work is done.
But when the profane Bells of Bow did ring,
Last Coronation day, for the KING,
His Honor sent in all the haste to know
What made those jangling Tingle-tangles go?
They sent him word, that he might come and see,
For better men were ringing there then he;
He bids them cease; they bid him cease his hopes,
Or else they would hang his Lord in the Bell-roapes:
My Lord went home, full loath to make a fray,
And took a Purge in honor of the Day.
But when he met with Doctor Kings black Gown,
Brethren, cries he, now Humane Learning's down:
For this same Popish Vestment that you see,
Was lately taken from a boy by me,
It was to Roode-Church going with intent
To break the Parliaments Commandment:
Come hither one of you, and put it on;
That we may act the Whore of Babylon;
Fetch the foul Shirt I took the last Lords Day,
(Carrying to washing) from a Prentice Boy,
And put it on, that so we may defy
That profane Smock of their Idolatry.
Whilst this was acting, in was brought one Drunk
With Sheriff Bydes Ale; His HONOR said he stunk
Of base Tobacco: Sirrah, quoth he, pay
Five Shillings; toth' Counter with him else; away.
My Lord, (says he) I Am of the Gentle-Craft,
And scorn to take Tobacco that is naughr.
Away with him, quoth he, I Will hear no more,
So bids a Sergeant take him out of door.
But pray, my LORD, quoth he, hear me but speak,
I am so poor, I cannot choose but break,
Take but two pair of Shoes of me for it,
(I make no doubt they they will your Honor fit)
And here is Six Pence more lies in my hand,
By St. Hughes-Bones I swear, shall buy no land:
Two pen'oth of your Honors best VARINUS,
And two full pott of Sheriff Bides shall line us.
All Parties were content: away went he,
Fetched him his shoes, and so they did agree.
By this Black-TOM is coming from th'Tower
To visit him, and tells him, that all Power
Is placed in Him; commands him careful be
In the discharging of his Mayoralty:
The simple Mayor presently falls down,
Worships, and says, He well deserves a Crown: 3Corn.

TOM bids him rise, then strokes him on the head,
And instantly he is to a Banquet led:
King Nell came too, and did him so much grace,
As for to teach him what belonged to's Place:
Says he, The more to make thy foes to quake;
On either side thy Gate I Will place a Drake:
Bids him be careful to suppress all those
That moov'd for Peace, such were the States worst foes.
Feasted they were with all Luxurious Fare,
And all good things that the Saints Portions are.
Now all departed, and the Banquet done,
The lustful Major strives to get a Son:
Then up he strides on Ruth his Chamber-maide,
The Spirit moov'd her to be underlaide,
Where they did fructify, and got a Barn,
So turns her off her Living for to earne,
The Wench thus big of a young City Heir,
Went to her Friends; that to him soon repair,
Tells him how it is; Who could not it deny,
But said, in Truth I Will make amends, yea, verily:
So the Old Fox sent her a hundred Pound,
To match her to a Brother that was Round,
Which he provided of the Holy Race,
And put him also in a Guild Hall place.
But now, alas, the Citie-boyes so fright him,
That he was forced again for to be -- him:
Unto the Tower then he Runs in haste,
Beshitten up unto his very waste;
But all appeased, and quiet; Out comes he,
And vows he will make the City bratts to fly.
The Fast Day being next, away he goes
Into Cheap Side, not caring what he does:
An Apple-Woman there he seized upon,
And a Cake-Woman did his Zeal much wrong;
He in a fury takes them all away;
Apples and Cakes, quoth he, must Fast and Pray,
Unto the Counter then his HONOR sent'em,
Where they did lie a fortnight to repent'em.
THese are the Acts add Lusture to his Name,
Fit to be written in the Roll of Fame:
Or be preserved to all Posterity,
And each year mentioned in the Pagentry
Of succeeding Mayors, to make sport
For the young Punyes of the Inns of Court.
His Year concluded, to a very day,
He left this life, and could no longer stay;
Some say he had a Lease on it, and th'Devill
Could suffer him no longer live in evil.
Others do say, 'cause he was never good,
Or else because he had shed Innocent Blood,
He spit blood, pist blood, shit blood, so did he,
And made an end. So shall his Elegee.
His EPITAPH.
HEre lies my Lord Major under this Stone,
That last Bartholomew-fair, no Puppets would own,
But next Bartholomew-faire, who lives to see,
Shall view my Lord Mayor, a Puppet to be,
Which Sight shall for ever continue his FAME,
That he may dye never, but here have a NAME.
FINIS.
John Warner,
junior.
Printed in the Year. 1648.


