A Religious DEMURRER, CONCERNING Submission to the present Power: Contained in
a LETTER Written to some Religious Gentlemen, and Reverend Divines in and about
the City of London; From some peaceable and Truth seeking Gentlemen in the
Country.
Requesting as speedy and satisfactory an ANSWER as they please to afford.
Honored, and Reverend;
IT has been the lot of Gods servants in this Kingdom, for many years past, to
walk upon many snares, which has made their condition very comfortless. We
were in hope, that God, in the multitude of his mercies, would have taken them
off the earth, set our feet upon even ground, and, so smoothed our paths, that
we might have passed the remainder of our pilgrimage safely and cheerfully,
making straight steps to his Kingdom, and no more turned out of the way, nor
been obstructed in our course of holiness and obedience. But such is the
measure of our sins, and such his righteous judgments, that he thinks it still
requisite to permit us to cast such stumbling blocks in one another way, as
deprive us of the joy of our being, and of those few remaining comforts, which,
in his goodness, he is pleased yet to continue, for the support of our
languishing spirits and conditions.

There is now a stuctus decumanus come upon us, a snare more perilous, than
any we can call to mind.

We sincerely desire, to be preserved from the sins of complaining without a
cause, of quarrelling with secondary means, of adding further troubles to this
overtroubled State, of denying obedience to lawful authority, of raising
unnecessary scruples in other men's heads and hearts, of stirring up coals of
further dissension: we desire nothing but satisfaction to our doubting and
distressed consciences; such satisfaction as may render us freely obsequious to
Government, and respectively peaceable to the worst of our enemies. Wherein if
any of you, godly-wise, Magistrates or Ministers, or other judicious Gentlemen,
will please to help us; we shall endeavor to the utmost to pray, that God will
give them their due reward, and that we may requite their love with any
Christian service lying within the compass of our power.

Give us leave, we beseech you, with all meekness and reverence, to spread our
case before you. We are now sundry ways called to submit to the commands of a
new authority, where with we and our forefathers have not been acquainted, and
of whose legality we are not yet sufficiently informed. We have, not a little,
labored with our weak understandings, nor have we given way to the distempers
of our wills, so far as we can discern; we have consulted with some, whom we
judge moderate and prudent; and yet we find our selves left in the dark
concerning these two perplexed Questions.

1. Whether this present Authority, taken up and exercised of late among us, be
indeed lawful and authentic, if thoroughly weighed in the scales of God, or of
the State of England?

2. Whether godly men, who desire to order their steps according to the Word,
are bound in Conscience to yield obedience to such a Government, as in their
most peaceable and inquisitive apprehensions, they judge unlawful, at least
very dubitable?

Concerning the first; we crave leave with all modesty and sobriety, to
propound these our ensuing doubts.

That our judgments may be clearly settled, we are necessited to inquire, as
inoffensively as we may, Whether this, which is now termed our Parliament, be
indeed either formally, materially, or effectually a Parliament, such a
Parliament as is essentially requisite for this Kingdom, either according to
the mind of God, or the necessities of the State?

The grounds of this our inquiry are these.

If we understand either the ancient constitutions of Kingdoms drawn out by
God, or those Systems and Comments of Polity, which intelligent and experienced
Statesmen have left us: All forms of Government are first constituted, by Gods
immediate direction, or by the wisdom of supreme Governors, or by the
prudence of an Homogeneous and In-organized people, fitly ordered to such a
work: By People, we understand totus populus, or at least major pars populi,
denying no degree their due share of Counsel or Vote. Without which, we also
conceive, no form of State can be essentially altered: holding it an it
efragable Aphorism, That no frame of State can be formally changed, but by the
power of those who first constituted it: unless it be by Conquest.

If we should grant, that our State of England was at first framed, or hitherto
continued, by the people, viz. the whole people, or the major part; yet this
modern model seems not to be so.

This was altered by the Commons only, which, in our account are but one State
of the three; yea this was done but by a third part of the Commons, if by so
many.

This excludes the Nobility, as an Integrant party, which are the clarior and
illustrior pars populi, bound jure gentium to be the main pillars of those
political Theaters where they live. We humoly conceive, that, in a natural
body, the nobler parts have proper powers and principles to perform their
vital offices, now borrowed from the inferior members, yet not denying them
their due portions and functions.

We mention not the KING; yet we cannot but observe, that the whole universe is
governed by God, Angels and Men: all natural and subcoelestiall creatures, by
Sun, Moon and Stars: all humane bodies, by an head, a region of vitalls, and
inferior members. Where a Province is rude and illiterate, a Democracy will do
well, ordered by the Optimates: In a State adorned with Gentry and wealthy
Merchants, an Aristocracy will do better, managed by the Proceres: In a Kingdom
flourishing with ancient Nobility and high-bred families, Royalty seems to be
best. Prove. 10.16. Eccles. 8.4. Job 29.25.
God has blessed all three forms, but always when they have been suitable to
the people and places. But the last most of all: Which, both in peace and
war, puts most luster and power upon authority and arms, and most dread upon
profligate persons and enemies. There is a saying, Regis ad exemplum -- Little
do a State consider, what they may gain by the Majestique example of a
religious, virtuous and well circumscribed King (neither too powerful, nor too
chargeable; neither yet too despicable,) if such may be had: and we are not
hopeless, that some of our Roy all Stemmes may so prove. Where a true
proportion of all three sorts may be had in a Parliament, they are so many
sieves and searses to make Laws fine and exact.

This was done without the counsel, and against the consent of two thirds of
the people.

This was done by force and faction, if we may so call it; grounds whereon God
never builds stable structures.

This excludes two third parts of the Commons chosen by the Realm; so that it
is not the elected Parliament of the people, but the selected Parliament of a
faction; and may be said, as of old, that it is Senatus Senatus, and not
Senatus Reipublicae.

We also suppose, that this was chiefly contrived and acted by some members of
the Parliament, which makes the force the more intestine and sinful, and the
authority of the House the more invalid. If forty men were Commissioners to do
an act of public justice, or any ten of them in absence of the rest: if part
of these should by force impede the meeting of the rest, who they thought would
not concur with their minds and aims, and admit only such as they knew would
conjoin with their counsels and purposes: we apprehend this Commission to be
truly void, and the acts of the enforcing party legally null.

We think it a firm Axiom, That when part of any thing is cut off, the whole
qua tale is destroyed, so that it cannot be truly said to be totum or integrum.
Dum cessat forma cessat formatum, and dum cessat formatum, cessat forma; both
which we suppese were done in the late forcible dissipation of the Parliament.

We are not ignorant, that there is an ancient Order of Parliament; That if
forty members, with the Speaker, be present, it is an House.

Should we grant it an House of Commons; yet, that such an House, when the rest
of the members are forcibly kept away, can, by our constitution, be an entire
Parliament (yea or an entire House of Commons) we cannot grant.

It is always to be supposed, That the rest of the members of the House have a
virtuall power, and legal liberty, to assede if they will.

If a foreign enemy should invade and deter away all but forty, which were
not of their faction; we think that the House may hold as an House by virtue of
that Order; and their Votes be reputed valid, at least such of them as are in
derogation to those which cause that force; because the rest, it may be
rationally presumed, would have assented, if they had been present. But in
case, the forty remaining were of their faction, or confederates with those
that thus deterred the rest, and therefore suffered to remain because they are
so, when the rest are therefore deterred or detained because they are not so:
We conceive, there is no reason why their Votes or Acts should be reputed as
Votes or Acts of the whole House, especially such as are in favor of those who
cause this force; because those that are absent may justly be presumed to be
dissenters.

In case the King, when he came to the House of Commons with a force,
intending, as is presumed, to take away five of their members; had actually
taken away or deterred all, but forty, or perhaps fifty, of such as would
concur with some design of his: and this forty of fifty had assented to some
Act by him propounded, (perhaps, That thenceforth there should be no more any
House of Commons, but that either the King alone, or the King and Lords had a
fall legislative power, to make, alter, abrogate and interpret Laws:) We are
very confident, that such an Act could not, in reason, be deemed a valid Act or
Vote of the House of Commons, notwithstanding the presence of the Speaker and
forty members; nor would it so have been reputed by those men who now plead
most for the authority of the present House.

We very well remember, that some Votes passed in the presence of the Speaker,
and more then forty members, were (upon far less ground then what is
supposed, or has been since acted) adjudged, to be null at the time of the
passing, because under a force: so that, it seems, somewhat else was then
requisite to the making of a valid Vote of the House of Commons, than barely
the presence of forty members. And yet, we believe, that the same men who
judged those Null, judge the present Acts valid, though under a greater force;
of which we can imagine no other reason, but, because these conduce to their
designs, the other did not. It seems, that with some men, Veritas non est
perpetua, and, Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem. Some men may better steal a
horse, than others look over the hedge.

Although therefore we may grant, that, in some cases, forty members (with, or
without a Speaker, as in case of his death, sickness, captivity, wilful
default, or the like,) promiscuously ^^et (and not culled out upon design,)
may make a House of Commons, by virtue of that Order; (as when the House it
self has employed some, imprisoned others in a due manner of proceeding, some
be absent by reason of sickness, or occasions of their own, or perhaps
detained by some external violence of a forraigue enemy or the like:) But in
case a faction of subject, or a party of the house it self, should by violence
effect it, for the carrying on of their particular designs, contrary to the
judgments of the rest; the life and strength of that Order seems to be utterly
dissolved and destroyed. It Is an Axiom in Law, and in Reason, That no man may
take advantage of his own wrongful act.

We also crave leave to say, that That Order, if so urged, seems to be against
the order of God, and safety of the State; unless limited to mere prudentiall
and circumstantiall matters of inferior moment. It being a solid Political
rule, That, in things fundamental, essential and moral, nothing ought to be
determined positively, without the presence and concurrence of two thirds of a
Senate.

A further ground of our doubt is this;

Christ says, We shall judge the goodness of a tree by the goodness of its
fruits. It is very hard for rational men to suppose, that that Authority is
lawful, which seems so irrational in many Acts. We shall crave leave to
suggest a few.

1. We marvel, that a Religious Parliament should make so large an
intrenchment upon the highest Prerogative of God that he exercises upon earth;
namely, to dispose of Nations, not only locally, in their several regions and
apt climats, but to give every of them their peculiar inheritance Politically.
Deuteronomy. 32.8, 19. Jer. 18.6, 7. And what an ancient constant heritage he has
given to this Nation in that kind, is not unknown. We much fear, that God is
not well pleased, that the sons of men should peremptorily decree, that this
Realm, always governed by Royalty, should from henceforth never be governed by
a King. We could wish, that those remarkable passages, Isa. 29.15, 16. were
read, and thoroughly considered. And, while we are mentioning this Scripture, we
cannot but observe, what extreme severities and cruelties the Innovators of
States put themselves upon, as follows there, ver. 20, 21. We would be glad
if the contrivers of our new Government would conscientiously avoid such rocks.

2. That they should go about to take our State from off so firm a basis, and
set it upon a quick-sand, or uncertain soil. We stand now like Nebuchadnezzars
Image, upon a mixed footing, part iron, part clay, half sword, half scabbard. It
makes us fear that the words of the Angel, that made that strange and bi-soil'd
station, setting one foot on the sea, the other on the earth, are now
fulfilling; who swore by Him, that lives for ever, that there should be no
more time, Rev. 10.6. at least, no time wherein any man can live; unless he be
Amphibios, or can hang by his hands, well fastened in Heaven, and teeter till
time come again. It may well be accounted no time, that is such a time, wherein
men can enjoy no certain Religion, no sound reason, no peace, no money, no
quiet in their houses, no rest in their beds, nor any hope of seeing an end of
their distractions.

3. To meditate such a Toleration, as that no man shall be compelled to attend
the public worship of God, or to adhere to the established confession of
faith. We think it a less sin, if subjects might have liberty not to submit to
the acts and orders of a State. We presume, obedience to God, is full as
necessary, as obedience to men.

4. We may add hereunto, such a wearisome delay of putting forward
Church Government by Imparative Authority, that there will be scarce pure water
enough left to drive such heavy moving wheels with any life or strength.

5. The constituting of State-Commissioners of such persons, whereof some are
generally known to be in diverse respects very unfit and unacceptable; suiting a
partiship (we are loath to say, a faction,) rather than the weighty affairs of
the Kingdom.

6. That all this, and many other things, should be done at the vast charges of
the far greatest and best part or the Kingdom, who are utterly averse to it.
Not much unlike that of the Spaniards, who cut off the Indians arms at their
shoulders, to beat them about their heads, to make them serve their ends. We
cannot but think, that Taxes, and Free Quarter both, is too heavy an oppression
for an exhausted people to pay, and an idle Army to receive.

We sum up what we have said in this; We fear that the alterations of a
State, by the intestine faction, or force, of any minor part thereof, though,
in their own concoits, the sanior, melior, and fortior part, is utterly
unlawful, whatsoever necessities, providence, and intentions they ptetend.
Such Miranda are only to be expected in Gods time, and Gods way.

The third ground of our doubt is;

From our Protestations, Covenants and Oaths: which having been so strongly and
frequently argued by others, we shall say no more of it but this; That, when a
Religious Nation have pawned their God, their Christ, their Gospel, their
souls, their salvation, and their whole prosperity, to do such acts as were
then, and still continue lawful: We cannot comprehend with the utmost
dimensions of our Understandings, no, not with the purest Chemistry of our
Fancies, no, not with the most perspicacious rays of light we have, either
old, or new, how such a Nation should, not only shake off such sacred chains,
but presume diametrically and point blank to counter-act those engagements,
till they had heard God from heaven protest, vow, and swear, that he would both
have them do so, and freely pardon them for it. Which how he should do, is many
leagues beyond the worlds end out of our intelligence: It being sworn in our
Oath of Allegiance, That no power whatsoever should absolve or deter us from
the performing thereof.

If we slight these Obligations, there seems to us to be an absolute necessity,
to have a select Committee, to treat with God, for two or three Universal
liberties of Conscience: And, if he will not concede, to entreat the Army (we
will not say, to behead, but at least) to dethrone him; and get it Enacted,
That neither Father, Son, nor holy Ghost should ever reign more in this
Kingdom; and an Order, That all the Ministers in the Land shall publish it in
their several Congregations; with a profession, That all truth and power of
Religion is originally in the people.

We come now to the second Question; wherein we shall be brief.

We cordially profess our selves solicitious to yield obedience to any
Authority, that can bear the name of Lawful. But the Reasons of our hesitancy
concerning this are two.

1. We fear, That by our Submission we shall assert that power for good, which
we suspect to be illegal, or at least to us very dubitable.

Would the Army and their party, clearly profess an absolute Conquest, which
is a kind of title, jure gentium, we would observe all their commands in
licitis and honestis, for fear sake, and to avoid offense: as Christ did, in
paying tribute to the Romans. But to a bicipitous and amphidoxous Government,
unless we have two faces, two tongues, two understandings, two judgments, two
consciences, two hearts, two pair of hands, two pair of legs, two purses,
which every honest man has not, we cannot see how it may be done: especially
in such acts of obedience as do necessarily ratify and establish an unlawful
or dubitable Authority. Should our servants in out houses rise upon us, and
command us by threats to perform a lawful act that were but transient; we
would yield, to avoid their force; but if they should affirm, that the
Government of the family were theirs by right, and that they intended to
perpetuate it over us, we should think it a great sin to betray that place and
power, wherein God has naturally and morally placed us.

It is said, That wisdom requires obedience in this present case, because it
is the only visible Authority we now have; and, to slight it, were to cut the
sinews of all present Government, and to prostrate our selves to the rudeness
and rapine of unreasonable men.

We conceive, under favor, There is another, more complete Authority, visible
enough to Religious and Loyal eyes, though for the present it be suspended in
point of exercise, and clapped under hatches for a while. We hold it scarce
lawful, for a man to marry another woman, while his wife is in a swound, or in
a fit of the falling sickness; or, for a woman to marry another man, while her
husband is in captivity, or in prison, willing to come to her if he might.

We also conceive, That we are bound to trust God, who can support a State in a
confusion or deliquium, and rule in a Chaos, and forbids us to do any evil,
that any good may come of it: and not to find out ways of our own, by any
evil shifts either to remove his present judgments, or to prevent his future
mercy. Truefaith makes no haste, etc.

Others say, That such as withstand these present proceedings, do what in them
lies, to withstand those glorious days of Religion and Government which they
think to be now approaching.

We would be as glad as any, if we and our children might have a portion in
those glorious times, which vainglorious men dream of: But if ever God
produces such glorious times out of such ungracious courses, as are now
acting, we are resolved, for our parts, to buy no more Bibles of our English
translation.

It Is quite beyond the Arcticks of our foresight, how true Religion, and a
general Toleration, regular Authority, and lawless Liberty, strict
Magistracy, and rude Popularchy, in one and the same State, can bring forth any
thing but mules and monsters, storms and tempests, unsetlednesse and madness
throughout the Kingdom.

2. Our second Reason is the divine bond of our Covenant and Oaths; which
chain us, by our Consciences, if we mistake not, to preserve that kind of
Government which was then existent, and to which only our intentions and
obligations did then level; from which, we tremble to think, that any created
power should hold themselves able to discharge us.

We have forborne to trouble you with the Statute, and Common Laws of the Land;
which have been better pleaded and pressed by others, than, at present, we can.

We thus conclude; That if any party of the Kingdom shall judge us, by these
inquiries, to be men of malignant, captious, or rebellious spirit: we hope God
will enable us, by our peaceable, and passive submission, and our unfeigned
willingness to receive satisfaction in these propounded Questions (wherein we
pray God to direct you,) to remove all such censures and prejudices.

From our oppressed hearts and houses, May 4. 1649, Yours in the firmest bonds
of truth and peace, A.B.C.D.

A Postscript.
(...) Friends:
(...) and sent our former Letter, some of us have seen a Treatise, persuading
obedience in law. (...) though unlawful. We very much honor both the Author
and his labor, as (...) Yet, we acknowledge, we are not fully satisfied
therewith. Sundry things (...) but we will only mention, and but mention, the
most material.

(...) we conceive, under favor, the holy Ghost rather intends ruling power,
either in the (...) Magistracy; at least in a Magistracy, though not truly
called, yet sufficent. (...) Authority, though by Conquest, Usurpation, or
Obtrusion, may be (...) if it be once well confirmed by the approbation of a
complete Senste (...) or homage of the people; or by a valid continuance or
usage; (...)case, so far as we can yet discern. Yet we do not say, that it may
be acknowledge (...) as a rightful Authority, in derogation of that which has
a truer title; or that those to when (...), are thereby debarred from making or
pursuing their claim, if they be able.

We (...) condition to be as that of Israel, between David and Absalom: We much
question, (...) had not greatly sinned, if they had tendered obedience to
Absaloms commands and (...) as David was loving; and his truer title in nubibus
c^^spic^ls and imminentibus, as we Lawyers (...) much hardheartednesse, to bury
our former Parliament and Government, (...).

(...), which is of God, ought to be obeyed actively, in what hands soever it
be; we (...), (...) to Rebels power, and loyal Subjects misery: yea, we think
it would (...) yet. (...) which joined with our late King, or which have or
shall join (...) wring Rebellion or Invasion, if they verdy believe, and can
plead, either (...) or (...).

(...) that any Gentleman, during the late wars, residing at Oxford, or
elsewhere (...) Army, who should have acted things in themselves lawful, by
virtue of (...) the Greet Seal then at Oxford (suppose, as a Judge, or Justice
of (...) by judged a Delinquent ipso facto, his estate seque stred, and himself
(...) were extreme injustice, if, as is supposed, he were bo^^^ (...) who in
that place had the present power, without inquietude by (...) was no other
visible Authority there to whour they might have (...) unreasonable men, is
very evident: and therefore to (...) was then and there bound to do, were
extreme injustice.

(...); we say, The^^ must all the Kingdom (...); Masters, their Men; and a T^
(...) difference between active and passive (...).

(...) and unlawful power, to be (...) of (...) and lawful power.

(...) always discern or decide true titles from (...) by a full and tr^e
Parliament.

(...) abo^t Oaths; (...) of God has made (...) to be (...) so, is that we may
become (...) possible and lawful, are and (...) of Parlitment or, as it was
then in its (...) we (...) act.

(...) we think they may be taken either is copulative, (...) in the Lady (...)
Gray, (...) the Oath of (...): Yet if then (...) from (...) we (...), that the
(...) of the Oath (...) for as it is not propedy (...), than wholly (...)
Power, we and (...).

(...); but we neither defire, not delight (...).

Fare ye well, (...).


