Good and True NEWS FROM IRELAND.

BEING A True Relation of the taking and burning the Castles of Downdanel,
Montane, and Cargenas; with the taking in of Kil-britain, where many of the
Rebels were Slain, insomuch that the passage is cleared to Cork or Kinsale.

ALSO, The yielding up of Pollalong (upon quarter to the Rebels) to Captain
Aderley, the pillage whereof was supposed to be worth twelve hundred pounds.

WITH The chasing of the Rebels from Killady Bog, where they had built Cabbins
and stood upon their Guard; and after a small Skirmish, their Captain being
slain and 30. or 40. of his Company, the rest fled.

TOGETHER With a great Fig^t near Cork, between my Lord President and my Lord
Muskrey.

MOREOVER With an Order of the House of Peers concerning the stopping of all
kind of Ammunition,

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parl.

Iun. 17. London, printed for ROBERT WOOD.

Good and True News from JRELAND.
Worthy Mrs. Neuce,
ACcording to promise, I do here present these lines; and in them my true love
to your sweet self, whom I wish all happiness to. Your Son, Daughter, and
Grandchild are well, and Mr. Hewet is in this Town at this time. For news here
is so much I know not how to relate it. We are well here yet (thanks be to God)
though daily threatened: and our Soldiers have done many exploits against the
Rebels.

They have taken by force, Downdanel which was before you went, and Montane
Castle, which they burnt, and killed many men. The next was Cargenas, where
Kingsale Troop and Bandon met with Ordnance, and shot a whole day, and made
many small breaches, but to little purpose; there were two men killed, but none
of the Soldiers: They came home that night and lef^ a Guard of Soldiers to
prevent the men from scaping away.

The next day they met again and shot till noone, and they no^ yielding, our
Soldiers fired the Castle, and leaving a Guard the second night, they came
home; and going the third day there was a great cry of men, women, and children
from the top of the Castle, for mercy; our Soldiers gave them the best
assistance they could to help them down, but they were so scorched with the
fire, that they hanged and stifled one another, before they could be helped.

The next day they marched until they came to Pollalong, where after a while
they had plied them with shot, they yielded on quarter to Captain Aderly, upon
condition to be guarded to Kilcre, where Captain Copar guarded them.

There was M. Roch and his Wife of Kinsale and his sons and daughters, and
many other Gentlemen and Gentlewomen. They of the Castle told Captain Copar,
that the pillage was worth twelve thousad pouds.

Afterward our Soldiers went to Killady Bog, where the Rebels had built
Cabins, and stood upon their guard, they were a hundred and well armed, but
there was small fighting before the Rebels ran away, our men killed between 30.
or 40. and one was their Captain, whose horse they brought to Town with a
great Saddle, with 4. more.

There was a great fight near Cork with my Lord Presidents Forces against my L.
Muskrey, where they killed about 100. men and Captain Suggan on our side lost
none but one horse killed with a shot.

Afterward the L. Jnchiquin was set on by the Lord Roches and Caudens ablest
Forces, hard by the Lord Roches Castle, called Castletown: but it pleased God
to bring the Lord Inchiquin off, and his company without any loss, only one
Horse; but there were slain of the Lord Roches men about an hundred and forty,
the rest they forced into the Castle, burnt the outward gate, recovered two
Drums, two Cullars, and some fifty Muskets. And afterward, the Lord Jnchiquin
and Master Jepson burnt and wasted all the Lord Roches, and Caudens Country.

Mr. Savage reported, that whilst he lay for his passage, our Forces have
taken in Kill-Britain, and chased the Rebels from thence, having slain many of
them; insomuch that we may now travail to Cork or Kinsale unmolested, and not
once see a Rebel.

We hope in the Lord, that (through the undanted courage and resolutions of our
Soldiers, who in the midst of danger seem not in the least dismayed) this
Country will be soon settled in a quiet and peaceable and quiet estate. Limmerick
men have built two Block-houses upon the River, and placed Ordance in each, the
one at Cortebarck on Munster side, the other on Thomond side, and chained up
the River between, as it is credibly reported: there is Captain Coals ship and
one more now in the River, but the news is they cannot relieve the City.

Dominick Coppinger, and the Sub-Sheriff Terry, are upon their trials for a
conspiracy discovered, and it is thought the President will or has put them to
death.

Thus at present I have not else to trouble you with, but commit you to the
protection of Almighty God, wishing you all happiness in this world, and
eternal selfcitie hereafter. This shall be the continual prayer of

Your assured loving friend to command, ELIZ. WARNER.
London Bridge, June the 5. 1642.
C R
decorative top border embellished with the English lion and the Scottish
unicorn
Die Sabbathi, 11. Junii, 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That a strict
search and Examination be made by the Justices of peace Mayor, Bailiffs,
Constables, and other his Majesty's Officers, inhabiting, or near adjoining to
all the Northern Roads, for the stopping and staying of all Arms, Ammunition,
Powder, Light horses, or horses for service in the Wars, and great Saddles
that are, or shall be carried toward ihe North parts of England, but by the
privity and direction of one, or both Houses of Parliament; And that the said
Officers shall stay them accordingly and speedily give information thereof unto
one of the Houses of Parliament.

Die Mercurii, 15. Iun. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Order shall be printed and
published.

Io. Brown, Cler. Parl.


