THE VINDICATION OF THE PARLIAMENT And their Proceedings.

OR, Their Military Design proved Loyal and Legal.

A Treatise, wherein these things are ingeniously and sincerely handled; to
wit, 1. That the MILITIA as settled by the PARLIAMENT is lawful. 2. That it is
lawful for us to obey it, so settled by Them. 3. That the PARLIAMENT is not by
us to be deserted. 4. That in aiding the PARLIAMENT the KING is not opposed. 5.
That the PARLIAMENT (as the case stands) may not confide in the King. 6. That
this necessary Defensive WAR of Theirs is indubitably justifiable.


Pulchrum pro Patria mori,

LONDON, Printed in the Year. MDCXLII.

The Vindication of the PARLIAMENT and their PROCEEDINGS.
THe maine thing now looked upon, What is now principally enquired after.
and pried into by all eyes, is the nature of this present Martial and
Military Design undertaken by the Parliament. Now although much has been
writien by many upon this Subject, yet diverse well disposed and well affected
persons, are very unsettled and unresolved, what to think thereof; and the
Reasons hereof I conceive to be these; to wit,

1. 5. Reasons why the vulgar sort are unsatisfied in the present expedition.
That compendious kind of writing which some use in laying down only the
particular Head, by way of assertion, without either amplification, application
or proof; whence he who is not informed or thoroughly insighted into the truth,
and nature of that which is affirmed, is ready to conclude it a fallacy,
Petitio quaesiti, and dare not believe it upon the Authors bare word.

2. That abstruse, sublime and high style which others use in their writings,
thinking all apprehensions as quick, and judgments as profound, and
understandings as clear as there own; and thus not stooping to the capacity of
vulgar Readers, leave them as perplexed and as much unsatisfied as they found
them.

3. That confused kind of writing which some have; for as Method does much
help both the memory and understanding; so immethodicall discourses do
confound both understanding and judgment.

4. That slight and superficial kind of writing which others have, who never
searching themselves into the depth, life and bottom of the point in hand,
leave their Reader just so wise as they found him.

5. That timorous and half handling of the case in controversy, which some
are guilty of; for some have taken the point in hand, but fearing Veritas odium
parit, that Truth will come home with a scratcht face, dare not say what they
can, may should or ought of the point, for the full satisfaction of their
Reader; ^aving him by this means altogether without light in the most material
things which he undertakes to instruct him in.

And therefore because I will never refuse to sacrifice my life, much less
spare any pains for the welfare, safety and pr^^^^vation of my Country, the
preventing of these Civil wars threat^^^^ composing of our present
distractions, and the satisfaction of tender consciences, to the utmost of my
ability, I have with what brevity, sincerity, plainness and clearness
possibly I could, declared unto all, who desire to be satisfied what they may
conceive and imagine of the true nature of the present Design of the State and
condition wherein we a^^, and what seems to be intended and aimed at by both
Si^er.

I will not trouble my self to search Record, nor presume to expound, and
interpret Laws, (being no Lawyer) but only slow the lawfulness of this
Design, as far as the law of Nature, the light of humune Reason, and
experience, and my small knowledge in Religion, will dictate unto me.

Against the Parliament two things are excepted; Exceptions taken against the
Parliament.
viz. their Act, and the Effect of that Act: or, their Action and Intention.

1. Their Action is the putting of the Kingdom into a posture of defense, by
settling of the Militia without the assent of the King.

2. Their Intention herein is supposed or surmised to be the strengthening of
themselves against the King, and the raising of Forces against his power. Now,
of both these severally.

Concerning the Militia two quaere's are ordinarily made; The settling of the
Militia lawful.
to wit, 1. Whether it be lawful for the Parliament to settle it without the
Royal assent. 2. Whether it be lawful for us to obey it, so settled by Them?


Parliament to settle the Militia [which is made the cause of all our present
distractions and dangers] or not, without the Kings Royal assent.

Kingdom into a Posture of defense, both in regard of Foreign and Domestic
Forces and Foes: they addressed themselves to his Majesty, desiring him so to
order and dispose of the Militia of the Kingdom, as it was agreed upon by the
wisdom of his great and grand Council, whose counsel above all others,
Kings in Parliament time, have, and ought to embrace and follow. And therefore
we may imagine that to be lawful which our best Lawyers, yea Lawmakers did so
earnestly sue and solicit for.

Parliament continuing their humble supplications unto the King, his Majesty
was once graciosluy pleased by Message sent unto them, to promise, that the
Militia should be put into such hands as they should approve of, or recommend
unto Him, provided that they declared [together with the Names of the Persons]
the extent of their power, and the time of their continuance, both which they
did, which shows evidently; That there was nothing unlawful in the substance
of the thing desired, [His Majesty himself not excepting against that] but at
the most, that something desired by them did not square with some circumstances
observed in former times.

Parliament seeing a necessity of settling the Militia, thought that in
conscience and humane reason it was much better, fafer, and more agreeable to
that trust which was reposed in them by the Kingdom, That the strength of the
Kingdom should rather be ordered according to the direction and advice of the
Great Counsel of the Land equally entrusted by the King and Kingdom, for the
managing of the great affairs thereof, then that the safety of the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom, should be left at the devotion of a few unknown
Counselors, many of them having not been at all formerly entrusted by his
Majesty in any public office or service, nor confided in by the Commonwealth.
And therefore we may conjecture the legality of the Militia settled by the
Parliament.

Parliament desire not to remove the Militia from the King, but from his
subordinate Ministers, (who by reason of their evil counsels given unto Him,
and their small love, respect, and care showed toward Them) the Parliament
dare not confide in; and therefore only place it upon other Ministers, whom
they have no cause to suspect, nor against whom, (when they were nominated to
his Majesty) He did except.

Parliament long since saw, and still sees (as themselves affirm) the Kingdom
in so evident, and imminent danger, both from enemies abroad; and a popish
discontented, and disaffected party at home, that there was an urgent, and
inevitable necessity of putting the Kingdom into a posture of defense, for
the safeguard both of his Majesty and people: and in all probability, and
likely hood, if the Militia at Land, and the Navy at Sea, had not been settled
in sure hands when they were, we had ere this been exposed to the practices of
those, who thirst after the ruin of this Kingdom, and endeavor to kindle
that combustion in England, which they have in so great a measure effected
already in Ireland. Now the safety of the people being the supreme Law, it
must needs be lawful for the Parliament to settle the Militia, in case of such
necessity.

Militia is placed by the Parliament, is only, to suppress Rebellion,
Insurrection, and foreign Invasion. Now that this power should be put into
some hands is necessary, especially in dangerous, and distracted times; and
into whose hands better, and with more safety, than such as the Parliament dare
confide in, and against whose persons no exception has been taken by his
Majesty: and therefore we need not much question the Legality of the Militia.

Commonwealth intrusts the Parliament to provide for their weal, not for
their woe; and that this Parliament thus entrusted by the People, did by a Law
entrust the King with the Militia, to wit, for the weal of the Commonwealth,
not for the woe thereof: and that this is employed (in that Act, or Grant)
though not expressed, no Royalist, I persuade my self, will question, or deny.
And therefore

I. If the Kings desire, and royal intention be (as we hope it is) to settle
the Militia for the preservation, not perdition, for the defense, not
destruction, for the strength, and safety, and not enflaming, or envassalling
of his Subiests, and people, and that this likewise is the intent, and purpose
of His Grand Council, the Parliament, then the difference who shall establish
the Militia, is but a kind of (...), or contention about words, or a ceremony,
or a quarrel who shall have their will, when both purpose and resolve one and
the same thing: which is to weak a ground, and too trivial a cause to draw
that ruin, desolation, and destruction upon us, which must inevitably fall
upon, and ceaze us, if these Civil wars which threaten us, and hang over our
heads, be not prevented. But

King should intend, and endeavor by the settling of the Militia, to enslave
us, to tirrannize over us, and to rule us (being so curbed, and kept under by
a strong hand of Power) by his own will, then the Parliament, and Law did
never settle the Militia upon Him for that end, or, to be so used: for the
equity of the Law, and not the Letter of the Law is the true Law.

Eighthly, it evidently appears, Aliquid latet, quod non patet, That neither
the Militia settled by the Parliament, nor Hull kept for the King and
Parliament, nor the Magazine of Hull removed by the Parliament, are the true
grounds of the War so violently threatened against the Parliament, by the
malicious, mischeivous, and malignant party of Papists, Cavalliers, and other
ill-affected persons. For

1 There were attempts made to be possessed of Hull, and the Magazine, by
Captain Leg, and the Earl of Newcastle, before ever Sir John Hotham was
seized of it, (much more, before he denied His Majesty entrance thereinto) and
this attempt, desire, and purpose, seems to some, (and that not improblably)
to take its rise from the Lord Digbyes letter to the Queen, wherein he
desires, That the King would repair unto some place of strength, where he may
safely protect his servants, that is, such as will do him service against his
Parliament, amongst whom (most disloyally he says) Traitors bear sway.

2 The Lord Digbie promises in his Letter unto his Majesty before the Militia
was settled to do him service abroad, that is, (as he expresses himself) to
procure for them supplies against the Kingdom, and Parliament, with which he
said himself would return (as he did indeed in the Ship called the
Providence, with store of Arms) although he had been published, and voted a
Traitor.

3. Before this, the same Lord Digby endeavored to raise forces, under the
pretense of a Guard for the Kings person in winter.

4. Before the Militia was settled, there were endeavors, to incense the two
Nations England, and Scotland, and to engage their Armies one against the
other, that in such a confusion, as must needs have followed; the Parliament
might not be able to sit, nor do us any good. For if in this battle we had
been conquered; we might have feared to have lost our selves, and all we had,
to the Conqueror with whom we fought; and if we had conquered, we might have
been sure to have lost our selves, and all we had, to the Malignant Party for
whom we fought.

5. Before the settling of the Militia, there were endeavors to turn the
English Army against the Parliament, as is abundantly proved by them.

6. By the testimony, and allegations of many, the Irish Rebellion, (which
brake forth before the Militia was settled) was hatched by the popish, and
disafected party in England, not to have rested there, but to have ended here.

7. Before the Militia was settled, some Members of both Houses (who were
observed to be most zealous for the speedy suppression of the Irish Rebellion,
which notwithstanding, was so long protracted and delayed) were unjustly
charged with Treason, and after such unjust accusation, were demanded and
required of the House of Commons, by His Majesty, attended with a Troop of
Cavalliers, who had intended to have taken them by force, if they had not been
absent. By all which it appears, That the settling of the Militia was not the
cause why war is made upon, or against the Parliament.

And thus much may suffice for the first quaere, concerning the Parliaments
settling of the Militia.

Ordinance of the Militia thus settled by Parliament.?

Command, and Ordinance agreed upon by both Houses, or the major part of both
Houses (which is all one) for the Militia. I enlarge not this Answer, because
that which follows concerning the deserting of the Parliament, may be applied
hereunto.

Thus much may suffice for the first exception taken against the Parliament:
viz, Their action, in putting the Kingdom into a warlike posture of defense,
by settling the Militia in such hands, as they durst trust.

I proceed now unto the other Exception, (viz) the fruits, and effects of the
settling of the Militia, which are affirmed to be, the opposing of the Kings
precepts and proceedings.

We affirmed before, That if the Militia had not been settled, we had been in
great danger of destruction; and now when it is settled we are neither free from
fears, nor foes, enemies nor evils.







This Question is something like Hydra's heads, for from this little Head,
four maine ones sprout and spring up; to wit, 1. Whether the Parliament may be
deserted, or ought to be assisted? 2. Whether the King may be disobeyed, or his
Commands opposed? 3. Parliament dare not confide in the King, seeing he
promises as much as they can desire? 4. Whether this War undertaken by the
Parliament be warrantable and lawful? Now of all these in this order.


It may first of all (I say) be demanded, Whether we may desert the Parliament
in this time of danger, or is it our duty to obey, assist, aid and stick to
them.

Reasons why this Kingdom ought to adhere to the Parliament, I wholly omit; as
also many Reasons which might have been drawn, from a Tractate, which by many
solid arguments justifies the Scottish Subjects for their defensive wars.

Whatsoever you would, that others should do unto you, do so unto them. Make
the case ours, by supposing us in their places, and they in ours, that is, We
Parliament men, and they private persons; and look what aid, and assistance
we would expect, and desire from them, if we were in such danger, as now they
are, the same we should now afford unto them.

Councels in Divinity, so Parliaments in Policy, may err: and therefore
inquisition, disquisition, examination, and conference are not forbidden us in
any Acts or Statutes.

Members of the Parliament, are chosen by us, and stand for us, yea, are sent
thither, entrusted by us with all we have, (viz) our estates, liberties, lives,
and the life of our lives, our Religion, and the safety of the Kings Person,
and Honor: and therefore in equity, and conscience they ought not to be
forsaken of us.

Parliament men are no other then our selves, and therefore we cannot desert
them, except we desert our selves, the safety of the Commons, and Commonwealth
being wrapped up in the safety of the Parliament. As the Wolves desired the
sheep to put away the dogs, and then they would enter into a League with them,
but when they had by so doing stripped themselves of their best friends, and laid
themselves open to their fiercest foes, they were then devoured without pity:
even so may we fear it will be with us, if we should be so sottish as reject,
and desert the great, grave, and grand Council of the Land, (which consists of
as wise, faithful, meek, moderate, sincere, just, upright, understanding,
zealous, and pious Patriots, as ever any Parliament in this Land was possessed,
and consisted of) and submit our selves to the protection, and care, of
obscure, and unknown, yea malignant, and malicious Counselors, who would
glory so much in nothing as in our misery, and Ruin, as appears by their
deeds wheresoever they come, if they can but prevail.

Kings Majesty has promised (in His-Message. January, 12. 1641.) That He will
be as careful of his Parliament, and of the privileges thereof, as of his
Life, and Crown, and therefore if He assure them so of His adhering unto, and
care of them, then much more should we encourage them, by Promising to assist
them (so long as they stand for us, and our Laws) with our estates, and them.

Kings Majesty and His Parliament, seems to be about law, He affirming that
to be lawful, which they deny, and they affirming that to be lawful, which
He proclaims illegal. Now the King is pleased to profess, That he is no
Expounder of Law, that belonging neither to His Person, nor Office; and
therefore concerning the legality, and illegallity of things, He will be guided
by the judgment and counsel of others: And whose, or what counsel (in all
probability, and reason) can be better, sounder, sincerer, and more worthy to
be followed, then that of his Grand Council? who assure us that what they do
and enjoyne us to do is lawful, that is, according, and agreeable to the Law,
either of God, Nature, or the Land. Now it becomes us (whom they represent
(thus honorably, and venerably to think of Them, viz, They know such and such
things to be lawful, and therefore they do them themselves, and enjoyne them
to us. And not thus (as some pervert it) The Parliament has done, or commanded
such, or such things; and therefore do affirm them to be lawful, and just:
for it is a principle in law, That no unworthy, or dishonorable thing is to be
imagined, or presumed of Parliaments.

desert and now forsake the Parliament, we shall be found guilty before God of
three great sins; to wit,

1. Perfidiousnesse; for as we have entrusted the Parliament with our estates,
liberties, and lives; so we have engaged our selves, to maintain, and defend
them, so long as they pursue our safety, prosperity, preservation, and peace,
according to Law. And therefore, if for our good, or for discharging of their
consciences, and trust, they be endangered, we are perfidious if we leave them,
and for lack of succor let them sink and perish.

2. Perjurie; for all who have taken the PROTESTATION, have promised,
protested, and vowed, with their lives, power, and estate, to defend, and
maintain all those who stand for the lawful rights, and liberties of the
Subject; yea, to oppose, and by all good ways and means to endeavor to bring
to condign punishment, all such as shall either by force, practice, counsels,
plots, or otherwise, withstand or endanger those who stand for our Laws, and
Liberties. Now who stand more, for our Religion, Laws, Sovereign, and
Liberties, then our Parliament? and who are more opposed and endangered for
their zeal, and care for us, and our Privileges than They? And therefore we
are guilty of Perjury before God, and Man, if we in this case assist them not,
but desert them.

3. Treachery; for such as forsake the Parliament, as the case now stands, are
guilty of a manifold Treason: to wit, against the Church, against the State,
against the Representative body of the Land, and against themselves. For by
deserting of the Parliament, and suffering it to be trampled under foot, by
Papists, Atheists, prodigals, Delinquents. Antiparliamentaries, and Viperous
Monopolists, and Projectors; we betray

First, The Church to error, and heresy.

Secondly, The State to ruin, and misery.

Thirdly, The Parliament to blood, and cruelty.

Fourthly, Our selves to poverty and slavery. And therefore I may truly and
boldly say, That it is those who desert the Parliament, who are the Principal
causes of all the blood which is, has, or shall beshed in this War, and of
all the burning, plundering, ravishing, and theeving, wherewith the poor
Subject has, or shall be oppressed.

desert and fall from our Parliament because there has been long great
jealousies, of some grievous mischeife, to be intended against our Church and
State, by those who are enemies to both. Here note, that the jealousies which
men generally have had, that there was, and is still some design a foot, for
the ruin and destruction of the Parliament, and of us through their sid^s, and
of introducing, yea establishing of Popery, and of abolishing of Protestantisme
in this Land, are these and the like: to wit,

1. That Army of 8000. Irish Papists, which was raised by the Lord Strafford,
and ready to come over, either to further the War with Scotland, or (if that
jarre were composed) to join with the English Army against the Parliament.

2. The endeavors and courses which were taken, to bring our English Army out
of the North, either to destroy the Parliament, or to awe and compel it, and
take away the freedom of it.

3. The two Letters sent to Mr. Bridgeman, Ian. 14. 1641. and to Mr. Anderton,
which intimated some sudden, sad and sorrowful blow to be intended against the
Puritanes in and about the City of London; and declared many things of deep
and dangerous consequence, which (considering many passages in the State since)
seem not to be feigned or forged; but to foretell dangerous and divilish
practices really intended against the City, Country, and Parliament, by the
Popish Faction.

4. The accusing of the 6. worthy Members of Parliament, against whom (as yet)
no proof has been brought, nor no particular instances produced (as has been
again, and again promised) of any treachery treason or high and treacherous
misdemeanors, practices or plotts.

5. His Majesty's going into the House of Commons, attended neither with his
ordinary Gaurd, only, nor Pentioners and Servants only but with diverse
Cavaliers armed who by their words and gestures showed themselves to be men of
desperate resolutions and bent them upon some damnable, and bloody design.

6. The endeavors used to the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court.

7. The Rebellion in Ireland, which was raised for the diversion and
interruption of the Parliament, for the weakening of our Land, by the
maintenance of that, and for the strengthening of the Papists and Popish
Faction with us. For when the English Protestants had been plundered,
pillaged, subdued and slaughtered there, (as it was reported, confessed and
acknowledged by diverse of the Rebels, when they were taken) they should have
come hither to have assisted our Papists and Malignants, to have done as much
to and with us.

8. The calling in diverse Cannoneers, and other Assistants into the Tower of
London.

9. The making of Lunsford (a man of a known and notorious debach'd life and
conversation) Lieutenant of the Tower; for he being so apt and fit a man for
any desperate design, or divellish practice, and in that place, having so much
command over the City, made all generally fear, that there was more mischief
intended against the City, then did outwardly appear.

10. The selling of the Crown Jewels beyond the Seas, and buying therewith
Fieldpieces, Pieces for Battery, Culverings, Morter-peices, Carabines,
Pistols, Warre-saddles, Swords and Powder, as appeared by the note of direction
which was sent over, and found among the Lord Digbies Papers. Now although
these were bought in June; yet we must imagine (as appears by the time when
they were writ for) that they were bespoke, and that order was given for the
providing of them long before.

2. The fortifying and guarding of Whitehall with Amuunition, in an unusual
manner, and with men of turbulent spirits; for some of them with provoking
language and violence abused diverse Citizens passing by; and others with their
swords drawn wounded sundry other Citizens passing by (who we unarmed) in
Westminster Hall.

12. The drawing away of many Members of the Parliament, by Messages and
Letters from the Parliament, That the Actions of both Houses might be blemished
and reported to be the Votes only of a few, and an inconsiderable number, yea
rather the Acts of a Party, then of a Parliament.

13. The force raised at York, and the Ammunition provided beyond Sea, for to
be sent unto York that force being gathered (as was feared) to make an
opposition against the Parliament, but evidently percieved to be employed for
the protection, and support of Delinquents.

14. The multiplying of Papists in this Land of late days their frequent
meetings at certain places in and about the City without control, the
audaciousnesse of their Priests and Jesuits with us, notwithstanding our
strict and severe Statutes against them, the residence of the Popes Nunntio so
long amongst us, the College of Capuchins in or nere unto Coven Garden, and
the favoring and prefering principally such as were either Popish, or
Armini^n, who in some points are true Cozen Germans.

15. Lastly his Majesty's absenting of himself from his Parliament,
withdrawing from them thereby both his presence and influence. Here note That
after the King was councelled, and persuaded hereunto, this his absence
followed and attended with this Doctrine, again and again iterated, viz. That
the King absenting; dissenting, and severing of himself from his Parliament,
it was no Parliament neither had they any Power to dispose of any of the
weighty affairs of the Kingdom; which dangerous Doctrine seems to have
been taught by Court flatterers for these ends viz.

1. To discourage, weary and quite tire out our courageous, and indefatigable
Senate.

2. To divert, interupt and retard their consultations, and designs both for
our own Reformation, and the subduing of the Irish Rebels.

3. To take off peoples hearts from the Parliament, to stagger them in their
obedience unto them, to cool their zeal for the preservation and defense of
them, and to make them call in question all their proceedings

4. To annimate all those who stood disaffected to the Parliament, to show
their disaffection, and opposion with more freedom and less fear.

Tenthly, and lastly to this maine question, whether the Parliament may be
deserted or ought to be adhered unto, I answer that of (of necessity) some we
must adhere and stick unto, that is either to the grand and known Councillors
of the Land, or to obscure and private Councillors, that is either to the
Parliament, or to the Cavalliers, Papists, Malignants, Delinquents and
dissaffected Persons of the Kingdom.

Now because Contraria jnxta se posita clarius ^lucescunt, contraries are best
commentaries, we will look particularly upon both and consider the nature,
ends and aims of both, and from thence conjecture whom we may best desert,
and whom with most safety follow; and first I begin with the Cavalliers, and
that side.

First, in that side which consists of Cavalliers, Papists, Malignants,
Del^nquents, ill-affected and Popishly affeted Persons, or (to term them only
so) evil, private and obscure Counselors, we have these two things to
observe, to wit; First, their intentions and endeavors: Secondly, their nature
and ends.

First, their intentions, endeavors and the fruit of their Counsels; for I
conioyne them altogether.

1. Their intentions and endeavors were to raise Civil War, and that both
first in Scotland, and afterward in Ireland, and now in England; And

2. To persuade the King to rule by his own Will. The Lord Faulkland tells us,
That the King was persuaded by his Divines that in conscience, by his
Councillors that in policy, and by his Judges that by law he might do what
he list. Which does directly labor to raze the very foundation of our well
founded State, and to introduce and rear amongst us an Arbitrary Government.
And

3. They endeavor to make division between his Majesty and his Parliament,
(whom God and the Laws of this Land have united in so near a relation) as
appears.

First, By their endeavors and persuasions to draw the King from his
Parliament, which they have effected now for a long time, and still continues
his absence from them; although (I think) the most Shires in England have most
humbly petitioned and besought Him to rejoice and revive all the drooping, dead
and sad hearts of his People, by affording his much and long desired presence,
unto his Parliament. If these Persons (whatsoever they are) who thus counsel
the King to estrange himself from the Parliament, and to oppose and disgust
all their Proceedings, and designs, were but Masters of Hull, the Militia, and
Navy, they would then quickly master both the Parliament and all the Kingdom;
who could expect but bad quarter from such Masters, who by their counsels and
endeavors to divide the King and Parliament show that they are neither friends
to the Common wealth, nor favorers of the public safety; And

Secondly, By their fear that the King should accord with his Parliament. For
the Malignants and evil Counselors stand in great fear That his Majesty is
too inclinable to an accommodation with his Parliament, which above all things
they abhor fearing thereby to be undone, that is, to lose the spoil, pillage
and possessions of this Land, which they have long since hoped for: whence they
have solicited the Queen to dissuade the King by all means from such
accommodation, hoping to obtain their desires (the ruin of this Land) by the
Queens interposing. See the Lord Digbies Letter to the Queen, March 10. 1641.
and Mr. Eliots Letter to the Lord Digby. May 27. 1642.

4. They endeavor to cast aspersions upon the Parliament, persuading the
People, That the Parliament would set up a Aristocracie, take away the Law, and
introduce an arbitrary government; a report so false that no man of common
sense or reason can credit it.

5. They have and do still endeavor and combine together to effect end work
the ruin of the Parliament, or at least to force it, and by forcing thereof to
cut up the freedom of Parliament by the root, and either to take all
Parliaments away, or (which is worse) make them the instruments of slavery, to
confirm it by Law, as the Parliament in Rich. 2nds. time did, when they found
the Kings anger against them, and feared the peoples forsaking of them. See the
Treatise called, The success of former Parliaments.

6. The fruits and effects of the intentions, and endeavors of those evil
Counselors, have been nothing but contention, dissension, division, debate,
decay of trading, and more misery then would fill a volume, if we should
consider all the distractions distresses, dangers, fears, discommodities,
hindrances, and losses, which both England, Scotland, and Ireland have felt,
undergone, and sustained by their counsels, designs, and plots.

And thus much for the Intentions, and endeavors, of evil counselors, and
the fruits, and effects of their evil counsels.

Secondly, we have now to consider, the nature, and ends of these evil
counselors, who desert, and oppose the Parliament.

1. They are men of lost estates, and desperate fortunes; and these aim only
at plundering, and pillaging, desiring to raise themselves by razing others,
and to build no themselves upon their brethrens ruin.

2. They are Papist, and popishly affected persons. The Citizens of London (in
their petition presented to the House of Commons, December 11. 1641. testify.
That information is given to diverse of them, from all parts of the Kingdom, of
the bold and insolent carriage, and threatening speeches of the Papists. Now
those aim either at the introducing and establishing of Popery amongst us, by
the change of religion, or at least, at the gaining of freedom to profess, or
an open to leration of their idolatrous, and superstitious religion. Which
because they can never expect, nor hope for, from the Parliament, (which
labors so zelously for the reformation of our Church, and the abolition of all
popery, and popish innovations) they therefore join, and side with the former
sort, which seek nothing but mischeife and ruin. Or

3. They are Delinquents, Malefactors, and guilty Persons, who have by some
plotts, practices, monopolies, Projects, or otherwise, trespassed and
transgressed highly against the Commonwealth for their own private advantage
and profit. Now these hope, that by siding with the Cavaleirs and Papists
against the Parliament, they shall be protected against it and the justice
thereof. Or

4. They are the ministers of the Land, who are corrupt either in Life or
Doctrine; that is, are either superstitious, ceremonious, contentious,
covetous, Popish heretical scandalous in their lives and conversations of
slothful in the discharge of the work of their ministry. Now these hope by
siding with the former, to keep, and hold fast what they have fearing the
justice of the Parliaments will (for their demerrits) deprive them of those
spiritual or ecclesiastical dignities and possessions which they hold and
enjoy; Or,

5. They are of that number of the Nobility or Gentry of the Land, whose lives
have been very loose, and unbridled. Now these oppose the pious proceedings of
the Parliament, least such restraint should be imposed upon them by that
Reformation which is intended and endeavored by Them that they may (without
punnishment) live as they list, have done and desire still to do; Or

6. They are ignorant Persons. Now there is a two fold ignorance viz.

1. Natural; now they are naturally ignorant who for want of knowledge
understanding, and teaching are neither able to discern of the designs, and
intentions, of the adverse Party, nor to foresee the miseries which will come
upon them by aiding and assisting of, and siding with them: nor to know what is
their duty and how far and in what cases they may aid and assist the
Parliament against some personal or verbal command of the King; And,

2. Affected: Now this mischevous, malicious, and affected ignorance is in
those who will neither read, nor hear any thing which may inform them in the
former particulars, viz. the nature intentions ends and fruits of evil
councels, and counselors: and what is their duty in regard of the great
counsel of the land. Or,

7. They are of that number of the Nobility, and Gentry, who seek preferment
by betraying their Country, to serve, and be made subject to the Court. Or.

8. They are the allies, friends, acquaintance, and associates of some of the
former; who although in themselves they stand not much disaffected to
Parliaments, yet in regard of their friends, they leave it, and cleave unto
them. Or,

9. They are timorous and fearful: who although they wish well unto the
Parliament, yet they dare not show their affection, nor afford any aid unto
them, lest thereby they incur some malice, or detriment through the Kings
displeasure, Or.

10. They are covetous, and desirous to keep their money, and means: and
therefore (whatsoever their heart, and affections be unto the Parliament) they
dare not show their approbation of their proceedings, lest they should be
wrought upon to supply them, and their wants, for the supporr of the State,
their necessities, and occasions, in regard of the land, being great, urgent,
and pressing. Or,

11. They are Macchiavillians, and Polititions; who desiring with the Cat to
fall on their feet, and to be free from blame and danger however the world
wags, will neither side, nor support, neither aid, nor assist, either King or
Parliament.

Let us now seriously consider three things from what has been said of the
nature of this Side, or Party, viz.

First. who are those evil Counselors which we must not adhere unto, but
desert? It is denied, That there are any such about the King; but I conceive,
what I shall say, will not be gainsayd, viz. If there be any about the King,
who first move him to Civil wars, and secondly, persuade him to rule his
people according to his own Will, or an arbitrary power, and thirdly, strive
to divide, and estrange the King from his Parliament, and fourthly, cast (even
in his ears) aspertions, and false calumnies upon his Parliament, and fifthly,
labor to ruin, and destroy the Parliament, and sixthly, by their plots brings
misery and confusion upon the whole land: none (I say) will deny, but these are
evil and wicked Counselors, who deserve to be disclaimed, deserted, and left
free, and laid open to the penalty of the law. Now that there are some such
about the King, or in high favor, power and credit with Him, is more then
evident (though I, and wiser then I, cannot particularly name them) for,

1. His Majesty professes a detestation of war, and yet prosecutes it, which
shows that some puts him upon it. And,

2. He protests to govern his people according to established law, and yet he
has been persuaded to an Arbitrary government, by them about Him, by many
plausible, and fair seeming arguments, as Himself affirms in one of his
Messages. And,

3. He solemnly professes his love unto, and his care of, and his honorable
respect to his Parliaments and their privileges, and preservation; and yet
some has withdrawn his person from the Parliament, and to himself, vilified
the Parliament, yea have had plots upon the Parliament, and have labored that
in them, they might be countenanced, and protected by his sacred Majesty, And,

4. The King again and again calls God to witness, the sincerity of his
heart toward all his people, and how earnestly desirous He is that they may
live happily, and prosperously under him; and yet by following the counsel of
some, many, great, and long evils have pressed all the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland. And therefore it must needs be granted, That
there are malignant Counselors about the King, who work much misery, and
mischief, both to Himfelfe and his People; and that they cannot be unknown
unto Him, if He would please to disclose, discover, and leave them to the just,
and equal trial of the Lovers of the Land.

Secondly, let us consider from this Army of Malignants, and mischievous
Counselors, and party, what in all probability we may expect, and look for
if they prevail against the Parliament. That is, if,

1. Men of desperate fortunes prevail, what can we expect but plundering and
pillaging? And,

2. If Papists prevail, what religion but Popery?

3. If delinquents, what but oppression?

4. If bad Ministers, what but bad preaching, and ill practizing?

5. If loose Gentry, what but prophannesse?

6. If ambitious spirits, what but contempt, cruelty, and disdain?

7. If ignorant persons, what but their own selfe-wills?

8. If delinquents and malignants friends, what but such a measure as we find
from delinquents, and malignants themselves? But from an Army consisting not of
one, but of all these, what can we expect, but all these evils? and from the
wickedness which will be committed by them, the heavy judgment of God to be
hastened down upon us.

Thirdly, let us consider, whether there be any the least probability of
receiving any benefit, or profit, in any regard, from this Side or Party, if
they should prevail against the Parliament.

1. Can we expect that the propriety of our goods shall be maintained, and
preserved unto us, by men of decayed, lost, and desperate fortunes? Or, 2. Can
we expect that the true orthodoxe Protestant Religion shall be maintained, and
preserved, by heterodoxe, and heretical Papists? Or, 3. Can we expect to be
preserved free from unjust impositions, and taxes, by oppressing Projectors,
and Monopolists? Or, 4. Can we hope that our Parliament, priviliges will be
preserved by Delinquents, and contemners of Parliaments? Or, 5. Can we expect
the propagation of the Gospel, or that the sincere, faithful, painful, and
profitable preaching thereof, shall be promoted by lewd, lazy, and corrupt
Ministers? Or, 6. Can we expect that Piety, and the honor of God, shall be
preserved in the land, by loose and profane Gentlemen, and Nobles? Or, 7. Can
we expect that justice, just measure, and equity, shall be maintained by those
who aim at nothing but their own gain, and greatness? Or, 8. Can we expect
that our Laws shall be preserved inviolably, by those who are wholely
bewitched with the love of an Arbitrary, Government? Sense, and Reason will
tell us, that these things cannot be expected from those persons; neither that
any good can come unto the Land from such an Army.
I might conclude this last Answer, to that maine Question, Whether the
Parliament be to be obeyed or deserted? as I began it: to wit,

Side of necessity we must adhere and cleave, that is, either to the evil, and
obscure Counselors, or to the Parliament.

But we must not adhere and stick to the evil and malignant ones, for those
reasons specified before.

Therefore we must adhere and cleave close to the Parliament.

This argument (I say) together with what has been spoken against the
Malignant party, might be sufficient for the amplification of the last Answer:
but as I have said something against the one party, so I will say something for
the other, as I promised, for the better fastening and setting of the Truth home
upon the heart, of whosoever will vouchsafe to excuse this Treatise.

Secondly, in that Side, or party, which consists of the great, and grand
Council of the Kingdom, I will (as in the other Party observdivers things,
for the amplification of this truth, That the Parliament ought not to be
deserted, but obeyed, and assisted: to wit.

1. The ends of Parliaments. 2. Their necessity. 3. Their excellency. 4. Their
utility. 5. The reason why we ought to believe ours.
First, the ends of Parliaments are briesly these two: to wit.

1. That the interest of the people might be satisfied. 2. That the King might
be better counseled.
Secondly, the Necessity of this Parliament shows it self by the miserable
and distressed condition wherein our Land was, and the multiplicity of
agrievances we groaned under; as is to the life declared, in the Parlioments
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, set forth December 15. 1641.

Thirdly, the Excellency of Parliaments is declared by his Majesty himself,
who does highly extol the constitution of this Government of ours, and
especially the nature of our Parliaments, which consist of King, Peers, and
Commons; acknowledging that the power which is legally placed in both Houses,
is more then sufficient to prevent end restrain the power of tyranny. Which
argues plainly, that there is much, and great power, (and that by Law) placed,
and put into the hands of both Houses, or the Major part of both for the good,
and preservation of Peers, and Commons, when the Commonwealth, or Whole is in
danger, and the King being seduced by wicked Connsell, does desert, and refuse
to join with them in their own defense. For if they cannot do any thing (upon
anp occasion, necessity, extremity, or danger, though never so evident,
apparent, or urgent) without the King, then the sole power of managing the
affairs of the Kingdom, does even in arduis, in high, yea in the highest
cases, belonging only unto the King; and nothing at all to either, or both
Houses, except, or but what he alleages. That is, though the Land say a
bleeding, and were invaded by Hoasts, and Armies from abroad, and Papists, and
Rebels at home ( Ireland now is) and the King would make no provision against
them, or, for the suppressing, and withstanding of them, the Parliament must
sit still, and suffer all to be lost, and ruined, having neither power to
raise, nor use any force without the thing.

Fourthly, the Vtility, and Benefit of Parliaments is great: and that both,

1. To Kings, and Princes; and that,

1. In regard of their reputation, same, and honor. Antoninus Pius is greatly
renowned for communicating all weighty affairs, and following public advice,
and approbation in all great expedients of high concernments; and He was more
honorable, and prosperous therein, then was Nero, who made his own will his
Law. And thus always those Princes have gained unto themselves most honor and
renown, who were most willing and ready to listen to the Counsel of the Land
in important affairs. And also

2. In regard of their Crown, state; for the Kings of England by this
representative Body of their People, are always assisted, and that upon all
occasions: as for example.

First, If they lack money for any necessary occasion, the Parliament supplies
them.

Secondly, if they be invaded by any foreign or domestique foe, or force, the
Parliament assists them.

Thirdly, if they be injured, reproched or dishonored by any potent person or
Prince, the Parl. will vindicate and avenge them. All which were seen evidently
in Q. Eliz. time, between her and her Parliament, And

Fourthly, I may ad, that none of our Princes were ever yet happy without the
use of Parliaments: and therefore it is plain that they are beneficial and
utile unto Princes, and consequently not to be deserted of subjects which are
loyal to Princes.

2. As Parliaments are useful and utile to Princes, so they are also
beneficial and profitable unto People: as appears by 3. particulars, viz.

1. Without Parliaments People have no possibility of pleading their own
rights, and liberties, they being too confused a body to appear in vindication
of their proper interests. Whence it comes frequently to pass, that what all
should look after, no man does, and what is committed to no man thinks his own
charge: and therefore some few chosen out by, and from amongst the People, to
consider of their liberties, laws and grievances, must needs be very
advantageous unto them.

2. As people cannot without confusion plead for themselves, so often the
subordinate Magistrates, and Judges of the Land (through fear, flattery, or
private corruptions) do often betray the peoples rights, by unjust sentences
or verdicts: and therefore such Counselors as can have no private aims, or
ends of their own; but are themselves involved in the same condition with the
people, both in weal, and woe must needs be profitable for them. Yea,

3. By this present Parliament we have reaped already many great, and notable
benefits; and therefore may conclude from our own ezperience, with a Probatum
est, That Parliaments are beneficial to people. By this Parliament we are free
from these two grievous arbitrary Courts, the high Commission: (the Purgatory
of the Church) and Satr-chamber, (the terror of the Commonwealth) as also
from the heavy burden of Ship Money, and the oppressions we groaned under by
reason of Menopolies, and other illegal impositions, yea Bishops removed out
of the House of Peers, who having their dependence upon the King, for the most
part would side with him, in any thing, though it were adjudged by the
Parliament to be destructive and hurtful to the Kingdom. This particular is
so abundantly amplified, and that so truly, by the Parliament in their
Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, set forth Dec. 15. 1641. that I will
not enlarge it; but only conclude, that if the ends, necessity, excellency, and
benefits of Parliaments be such as has been showed, then They are worth
standing for, and ought not to be deserted. Now

Fifthly, we will take a short view of some particular reasons why we ought ta
believe, and obey this our present Parl. and not relinquish it. viz.

1. Because they can have no by ends, nor base respects of their own: for if
they aimed at promotion, preferment, and wealth, they might much easilier
attain those, by complying with, then by opposing the designs and personal
commands of the King. It is (or at least has been) an approved Maxim, that a
community can have no private ends to mislead it, and to make it injurious to
it self: and I never heard nor read so much as one story of any Parl. freely
elected and held, that ever (for any ends of their own) did injure a whole
kingdom, or exercise any tyranny over the land (but diverse Kings have done
sundry acts of oppression) for nothing can suit or square with the common
Council, but only the common good, and therefore it is great reason that we
should believe and obey them. And

2. Because no benefit at all can redound unto them by faigning, forging, or
counterfeiting of false fires, fears, chymera's, and dangers which are not.
And therefore we may they better believe what they say. And

3. Because we never yet found them false uuto us. It was the saying of one, If
my friend deceive me once, I will blame him, but if twice, my self; meaning,
that he would never trust him the second time, who deceived him once. Now
charity persuades us to hope, and believe, where we see nothing to the
contrary; and give credit to them in whom we never saw any designs or
endeavors, to betray us, or our liberties, but rather always the contrary.
And,

4. Because they know more then any one of us. Two eyes (we say) sees more then
one; and the Parliament is the eyes, and the ears of the re-publique, and
their information, conference intelligence, experience, knowledge, etc. does
afford unto them some sight and insight into all things, passages, occasions,
affairs, negotiations, etc. both at home and abroad. And therefore it is not
without cause, that we should believe them. And

5. Because they never showed any disloyalty unto the King, that ever yet was
observed by the Commons or Commonwealth, whom they represent. We find in all
their Petitions, royal expressions, humble suits, hearty entreaties unto his
Ma: to comply with them for his own honor and safety, cordial Potestations
of the sincerity of their intentions toward his Ma: and free and full promises
neither to spare pains, purses, persons, nor estates, for the defense of his
person, and preservation of his honor; yea unwearied and (beyond humane
patience) continued supplications to his notice of personal imputations, yea
reproachful aspersions, that has bin cast upon them; still taking (as much as
possibly they can) all blam from his Majesty, and laying it upon his evil
counsel. And

6. Because the King himself does not accuse the Parliament, but only some
few particular persons therein; and therefore that which comes, or is commended
unto us by the whole Parliament, we may believe, and obey, his Majesty
promising to protect them, and their privileges, and to except them in all his
taxes, and accusations. And,

7. Lastly we may believe, obey, and adhere unto the Parliament, because the
King of Kings seems to favor their proceedings. How do we see the Lord
blowing upon all the devices of their enemies, sometimes turning them back upon
themselves, and sometimes turning their wisdom into foolishness. Or what
counsels, what letters, what plots, and practices, what words, and passages,
against Kingdom and Parliament, has strangely been discovered, prevented, and
come to light, to the joy and rejoicing of Parliament and people, and the
terror and amazement of the contrivers, and authors of them. How
extraordinarily has the Lord assisted that honorable Assembly with zeal,
courage, wisdom, discretion, prudence, moderation, patience, and constancy in
all their consultations and desires? How has the Lord preserved their Persons
from imminent peril, and given them favor in the eyes of all Counties,
notwithstanding the base, and bitter aspersions cast upon them by some? When
they had cause to be discouraged, by reason of the strong opposition of
Delinquents, and disaffected persons, what encouragments have they even then
found, from the Petitions, Promises, and resolutions, of diverse Shires?
Wherefore, seeing these are blessings, and such as belong unto the godly, we
may persuade our selves, that the Lord seeing the sincerity of their
intentions, does in much mercy show his gracious acceptance of their zeal,
for the good of our Church, King, and Commonwealth. I conclude this
particular, if the Lord seem to say to our grave, and gratioos Senators, as he
said unto Joshua, Josh. 1.5, 6
There shall be none able to withstand you, because I will be with you, yea, I
will not leave you, nor forsake you; therefore be strong, and of good courage:
then let none who would be the Lords soldiers, and servants, desert the
horsemen of Israel, and the Chariots thereof, yea the Lords Captains who fight
his battles.

And thus by a serious consideration of these grounds, we may easily
conjecture, yea abundantly satisfy our selves in this point, That the Parl. is
not to be deserted, or forsaken by us. I proceed now unto the next Quaere,
which is,

of the Parl. Or whether are we now to obey King or Parliament?

viz. that Princes have no power to do, but what is lawful, and sit to be done.

Gramarians say, Rex regis, a rego, the word King comes from Governing, because
Kings are no other, but more high, and supreme Governors, and Magistrates. Now
some hold (and I think warrantably) that if any Magistrate, or Judge, do pursue
a man, not judicially, and by order of Law, but invade him by violence without
any just cause against all law, that then in so doing he is to be held as a
private person, and as such we may defend our selves against him. As for
example, a woman may defend her self own body against an adulterer, though a
Magistrate. A servant may hold his Masters hands, if he seek to kill wife, or
children in his rage. Mariners, and Passengers may resist him who stands at
helm, if they see that he would run the ship against a rock; yea they might
hold the Princes hands, if being at the helm he misgoverns the ship, to theia
certain shipwreck, without prevention, because by his so governing thereof, He
hazzards both his own life, and theirs, and they by holding of his hands,
prevent both his, and their own ruin, (which seems to be our present case) and
therefore, much more may the whole Body defend it self against any such unjust
and unlawful invasion, as will endanger the safety, and welfare of all.

order of both Houses of Parliament, I imagiue may be disobeied. For I do
conceive that no lawyer will say, that suppose the King should take the broad
Seal of England from the Lord Keeper, into his own hands, that all the writs
whatsoever he should issue forth signed with his own hand, and sealed
therewith, ought to be obeyed: for it is not the stamp and impression of the
Seal which makes a thing lawful, but the Keeper thereof ought to be a Lawyer,
and (by his place) should not for fear, or favor, sign any Writs there with,
but such as are legal, and if he do otherwise, he is liable to be questioned,
and censured by a Parliament. And therefore doubtless, when Writs and Precepts
are issued forth without the broad seal, or without a regal, that is, legal
authority (as of all the Writs and Commissions, for executing the Commission of
Array, are, as is proved both by the Parliament and others) they may be
disobeyed, and withstood, especially when they are destructive to the
Commonwealth.

Richard 2. thought Spencor, and his confederates his best friends, though they
were base sycophants, and bainefull foes, and conceited that his Peers (who
were his loyallest Subjects) were the truest Traitors, And hence Princes being
abused by the slattery of private persons (for some wicked ends of their own)
have followed their private perverse counsels, before the grave, loyal and
faithful advice of their sage Senate. Now that it is lawful for Parliaments
to withstand Princes, who make unlawful War upon their people, is so
evidently proved, by the Author of that lately come forth, and learned and
pious Treatise, called, A Sovereign Antidote to prevent Civil Wars, Page 6,
7, 8, 9, etc. that at present I wholly silence it.

viz. Whether we should obey the King, or Parliament? for the King and
Parliament are not like two parallel lines, which can never meet, nor like two
incompatible qualities which cannot be both in one subject, nor like the Arc
and Dagon, whom one House will not hold, nor like God and Mammon, which one man
cannot serve; for by siding with, and assisting of the Parliament, in those
things which are according to Law, we side with, and serve the King.

Two things are here distinguishable, to wit,

1. In our obeying of the Parliament according to Law, we obey the King. This
his Majesty grants, commands and commends, yea professes, that he requires no
obedience of us to himself, farther then he enjoynes that which is Law,
lawful and just, And,

2. In our obeying of the Parliament in this present Military and Martial
design, we stand for the King, not against Him: that is, for the good of his
soul, person, estate, honor and posterity; of which a word or two severally.

1. They stand for the Soul of their Sovereign, who withstand him (having a
lawful call, and warrant thereunto) from doing those things which (if he do)
he can never justify in the Court of Conscience, nor at the great chancery day
of Judgment, but must sink under the sentence of condemnation, for those
unlawful, and unjustifiable facts. And therefore the Parliament (and we in
obedience unto Them) are friends unto the Soul of our dread Sovereign, in not
obeying, aiding and assisting of Him, to make unnatural, unlawful and
unwarrantable Wars, upon his Parliament and people, which can never be
defended, or justified, before or unto God, to whom the Mightiest, as well as
the meanest, must give a strict account of all their actions at the last day.
And

2. They stand for the Kings Person, who obey, join and side with the
Parliament. His Majesty's Person is now environed by those, who carry Him, (as
far as the eye of humane probability can see) upon his own ruin, and the
destruction of all his good people: which the Parliament seeing, they labor to
free him from such false hands, by this twosold means, viz.

1. By persuading, beseeching and most humbly soliciting his Majesty to forsake
them, and to rejoice and make glad the hearts of his Parliament and People, by
conjoyning himself with Them. But this request, suit and supplication will not
yet be granted, though with much importunity and many loyal expressions
desired. And

2. By laboring to take his evil Counselors from Him, they being confidently
assured, and piously persuaded of the Kings sweet disposition and readiness to
comply with them, in any thing which might conduce to the good, either of
Church or Commonwealth, if he were not overswayed and deluded by the fained
flattering and crafty counsel of those about Him, who look with a sinister eye
upon our State. Now this seems to me to be all that is aimed at, in this
present Military and Martial design: for the Parliament do not purposely,
and in their first intentions, intend by their Soldiers to cut off any (for if
any be slain by them, it is by accident) but to preserve and keep the peace of
the Kingdom, to maintain the privileges of Parliament, the Laws of the
Land, the free course of Justice, the Protestant Religion, the Kings authority
and Person in his royal dignity, and to attach, arrest and bring such as are
accused, or imagined, to be the disturbers and firebrands of the Kingdom, unto
a fair, just, equal and legal trial, which no man can think unlawful in
our Lawmakers. And therefore both Senators and Subjects in the prosecution of
this Design, stand for the safety of their Princes Person. And

3. They stand for his State, Wealth, Honor and reputation, for I conjoyne all
these together. Kings acquire and accumilate more honor, respect, wealth and
power, by their meekness toward, tender love of, and vigilant care for their
Subjects, and their safety (as we see in Qu: Elizabeth and Tiberius, so long as
he was such) then by tyrannizing over, and cruelly oppressing and handling of
them, as we see in Caligula. If our gracious Sovereign, would be but pleased,
to consider the honor and prosperity which his predecessors have enjoyed, by
following the Advice of their Parliaments, and the dishonor our Nation has in
diverse designs received abroad, and the grievous troubles, vexation and
discord we have had at home, since Parliaments have been disused, and laid
asleep, he would then certainly see, that they seek his wealth, honor,
reputation and welfare, who desire to reconcile and conjoyne him unto his
Parliament, and advise him to govern his people by Parliaments, and endeavor
to free him from the power, and hands of those, who being themselves, desire
likewise to make him, an enemy unto Parliaments. And

4. They stand for his Posterity: For as evil gotten goods slip and wast away,
and seldom continue to the third generation: so Kings cannot be sure that
their Posterity shall peaceably and successively enjoy their Crowns, except
themselves rule and govern according to Law, righteousness only establishing
the Crown and Throne, both upon Princes and their Posterity. And therefore they
who assist not the King, in those things, ways and courses, which are
illegal, grievous, yea destructive to the Commonwealth, are His Childrens and
Posterities best Friends.

I conclude this Question, with this Argument,





Therefore the Parliament, and all those who side with them in this present
design, in so doing, obey and stand for Him.

It should seem by what has been spoken, That neither Parliament nor People,
does intend the least indignity, dishonor or disloyalty to the King: and it is
most perspicuously and clearly to be seen, in all the Kings gracious Messages
and Declarations, That he has no design upon his people or Parliament,
neither intends any harm, opposition or oppression unto them, but professes
to rule them according to Law and equity: How then comes it to pass, that
either the Parliament will not or dare not confide in the King?

that influence in his counsels, and are so predominant and prevalent with Him,
that they have often varied and altered him, from his words and promises. It is
a Maxim in Law; The King can do no wrong; for if any evil act be committed
in matter of State, his Counsel, if in matters of Justice, his Judges must
answer for it: and therefore I will not lay any fault upon the King, but rather
impute the faults which have been of late obvious to many, unto some about him,
or in great favor with him. Great discouragements (I grant) the Parliament in
their proceedings have had from the King, but I dare not imagine that they came
originally and primarily from Him, but from some about him, in regard of that
vast difference, which is between his words spoken to his Parliament, with his
own mouth, when he was with them, and the Messages sent unto, and the heavy
charges laid upon them, in his Letters and Declarations, now when he is absent
from Them. He said once, That in the word of a King, and as He was a Gentleman,
he would redress the grievances of his people, as well out of the Parliament,
as in it. Again, That he was resolved to put himself freely and clearly upon
the Love and affection of his English Subjects. Again, we do engage unto you
solemnly the word of a King, that the security of all, and every one of You
from violence, is, and ever shall be as much our care, as the preservation of
us and our children: And yet what actions and passages have of late fallen out,
quite contrary to all these expressions? the Parliament and all who side with
it, assist it, or obey it, in any of the Commissions or Orders thereof, being
assaulted, opposed, yea now at last proclaimed Traitors. Again, his Majesty
does profess the detestation of a Civil War, and abhorres (as he says) the
very apprehension of it. But this mind neither seemed to be in them, who came
with his Majesty to the House of Commons, nor who accompanied him to
Hampton Court, and appeared in a warlike manner at Kingstone, nor in diverse of
those who have been with him and employed by him at York, Hull,
Leicester-sheire, Lancashiere, Sommerset-sheire, Northampton-sheire, and other
places. And therefore we must needs conceive, that the King is put upon these
courses and ways by his evil Counselors, and consequently, that the
Parliament cannot confide in his words and promises, until those Counselors
be put from him, or forsaken by him. And

them or theirs, which did simply and soly concern themselves, they would
believe and obey him, and without any further question confide in him, but they
cannot do this in the case, and place, wherein they are. The trust reposed by
the people in the Parliament, is as well to preserve the Kingdom by making of
new Laws, when and where there shall be need, as by observing and putting the
Laws already made, in execution: And therefore in regard of this trust, they
dare not hazard the safety, preservation, and sole managing of the Land to his
Majesty alone, upon his bare word; because if after such confiding of theirs in
the King, upon his faithful promise unto them, he should be over-swayed, and
seduced by some wicked Counselors, to lay some illegal impositions,
taxations and burdens upon his people (as he did soon after the granting of
the Petition of Right unto the Subject) the Kingdom then would (and might
justly) blame them as the Authors of their grievances, that had so lightly
given away their liberties and freedom, by subjecting them to an arbitrary
power. And indeed, if we will but consider it without passion and partiality,
the case is no other but this, if the Parliament should wholly confide in the
Kings words and Promises, then there were no more requisite in them, then this,
to make a Declaration unto his Majesty of the grievances, burdens, annoyances
and illegal proceedings in all, or such and such Courts or Persons, to the
great oppression and heart-breake of the Subject, and having so done, to
obtain some serious Promise and Protestation, from the King to take-off all
these pressures, and to be careful for the future, that no such shall be
imposed upon them, and then to confide in the King, and to breake-up the
Parliament, and repair every one to his own house. Now if Sense, Reason,
Experience and Knowledge will tell us that this is far from, or comes far
short of the true nature, and duty of a Parliament, then let us think that it
is reason (as the case now stands) that the Parliament should not confide in
the King. And

Solomon, yea as pious as David (yea like him, a man after Gods own heart) yet
it were dangerous for the Parliament so to confide in him, that they should
trust the managing of all the great and weighty affairs of this Kingdom wholly
and solely unto him, and consequently granting him an arbitrary power, to rule
us, according to the dictates of his own conscience, or as the Lord should move
and persuade his heart. This (I say) is not safe, because if they grant, give
or settle this Power upon him, as King of England, then all other succeeding
Kings will challenge and claim it as due; (or think they are not respected as
their Predecessors) whence if any of them prove Tyrants or tyrannous
oppressors, we shall be most miserable and wretched slaves.

Ob. Some perhaps may here object, that although Princes should not use their
absolute power by doing always what they list, yet they ought not to be
circumscribed, limited, or restrained in their Government, by any tie or
obligation of Law.

An. 1. First, it is much better (considering the corruption of our nature) to
be withheld by some restraints of Law and covenant, from that which is evil,
and which we cannot justify before God in the Court of Conscience, then to be
boundless, lawless and left to live as we list, and to do whatsoever seems
good in our own eyes.

An. 2. Secondly, this also is better for others: for as the Crane had better
to keep his head out of the Wolves mouth, then to put it into his mouth, and
then stand at his mercy, whither he will bite off his neck or not, so it is
better for every wise man, rather to keep and preserve those immunities,
freedoms, prerogatives, and privileges, which God, and nature has given unto
him, for the preservation, prosperity and peace of his posterity, person and
estate, then to disenfranchize himself and to relinquish and resign all into
the hands of another, and to give him power either to impoverish or enrich,
either to kill him, or keep him alive.

Quest. 7. I come now unto the last Question, which is this; suppose things
come unto this height and issue, that the King will have the Parliament to
confide in him for all they desire of him, or otherwise he will by wars
labor to have his will of them, then whether is it lawful for them by war
to withstand him? Briefly, whether is this Martial and Military design,
undertaken by the Parliament, against that party which is owned and aided by
the King, lawful or unlawful, and consequently whither may, and ought we to
assist them or not?

An. 1. First in general, I answer concerning means, by these Propositions;
to wit, 1. Means must be used for preventing, and removing of all temporal
evils. 2. The means to be used for the removal of temporal maladies must be
always lawful: for we must never do evil that good may come thereof. 3. The
means to be used must be always conformable, answerable and suitable to the
malady; as for example, a man must not take a sword to quench a sire, nor
think to defend himself against an armed foe, (who comes with his Sword
drawn, or musket charged, or pistol cocked to take away his precious life)
with fair words; but must consider what remedy, or means is most proper for
the preventing of the evil feared. Now there is no means better against
offensive wars then defensive.


An. 2. Secondly, I answer in general again, concerning Actions, by two
Propositions, to wit,

1. That which is not lawful for a private person to do, is lawful for a
public; as for example, it is not lawful for a private person to take away
the life of one, whom he knows to have robbed, or murdered some one or other,
but it is lawful for the Judge upon the Bench, upon good proof, to do it.

2. That which is not lawful for a private person in his own particucular
cause, is lawful for him in a public: as for example, had Faux bin ready to
have given fire to his train, when the Parliament had bin full, and in the very
instant had fallen by a private man's Sword, that act had not bin punishable,
but praiseworthy; but it is not lawful for a private man to take away the
life of one, because he sees, or knows that he intends some mischief against
his neighbor or acquaintance; but is bound only to endeavor to hinder, and
prevent it, or, at least not to fall upon him, except he can by no other means
prevent the death and preserve the life of his brother; and neither is this (I
think) lawful in all cases.

3. That which is not lawful for a private and particular man to do upon his
own head, is lawful for him to do being commanded by authority; as for
example, if it be not lawful for Sir John Hotham to shut the gates of Hull
against the King, of his own accord, yet it is lawful being warranted, and
commanded by the Parliament. If it be not lawful for the Earls of Essex and
Bedford, to take up arms to suppress that party which oppresses the Kingdom,
of themselves, yet it is lawful, by the Order and Commission of Parliament; as
is proved by the sovereign Antidote to appease our civil wars.

An. 3. Thirdly, if his Majesty passed an Act, not only of Oblivion, but of
Justification, to our Brethren of Scotland, for their Wars, or for taking up
weapons against his instruments; then I cannot see wherein, or how our
defensive Arms should so much differ from theirs, that they in so doing should
be loyal Subjects, and we disloyal Traitors.

a Necessary War must needs be lawful; for the power and force of Necessity is
such, that it justifies actions otherwise unwarrantable. The transcendent
(...) of all politics, or the Law Paramount, which gives Law to all humane
Laws whatsoever, is Salus populi, The safety of the people: and this Supreme
Law of Nations, Salus populi, has it is immediate rize from the Law of Nature,
which teaches every worm, much more a man, and most of all a whole Nation, to
provide for its safety in time of necessity. It is not always lawful for us
to kill those who stand at our doors, or who would keep us from coming out of
our doors: but if our houses be blocked up, and we so hindered from commerce
with others, or from seeking relief for the sustentation of our own lives,
that we and ours are in danger to famish, it is lawful then to issue forth
with the forces we can make, to fight our selves free: how much more lawful
then is it to sight for the liberty and preservation of a Church and State? It
seems evident by the clearest beams of humane reason, and the strongest
inclinations of nature, That every private person may defend himself, if
unjustly assaulted, yea even against a Magistrate, or his own Father, when he
has no way to escape by flight: much more lawful then is it for a whole
Nation to defend themselves against such Assassinates, as labor to destroy
them, though the King will not allow them defense. Let us consider the
miseries, and heavy burdens which we must lie under, if we undertake not this
defensive Way, and that will show us the Necessity thereof. Now the evils
which we are in danger of, are of that nature, that if they should fall upon us
(which the Lord in mercy forbid) we would think, that it were better for us to
have no being, then such a miserable being. The present Case seems to many,
who see throwly into things, to be threefold. viz.

2. Whether Popery or Protestanisme? and this doubt arises from the Kings
Assistants and Agents, in his designs, or some who are in near trust, and of
great power with his Majesty, who (for the most part) are either of no
Religion, or of any Religion, or of the Popish Religion, or popishly inclined
and effected. And

2. Whether slavery or liberty? and this doubt arises from the doctrines,
counsels and persuasions of those about the King, who persuade Him that it is
lawful for him to do what he list. And

3. Whether estates or none? and this doubt arises from some speeches fallen
from some in place and authority; that all we have is the Kings; that when
there is necessity he may command of, or take from us, what he please; and that
he alone is the sole Judge of this necessity. The Case being thus with us, it
seems unnatural, that any Nation should be bound to contribute its own
inherent puissance merely to abet tyranny, and support slavery: that is, to
fight themselves slaves, or, to afford aid, assistance and succor, either
with persons or purses to those who desire and endeavor to introduce popery
and heresy into their Church, and to bring themselves into such slavery and
bondage, that they may tyrannize over them at pleasure. And thus the Necessity
of this War shows the lawfullnesse thereof.

Defensive Wars are always held lawful.Now the nature and quality of our
War is defensive, and so the more justifiable. For 1. The Kings Majesty
mislead by Malignants, and malevolent Persons made preparations for War,
before any such thing was thought upon by the Parliament. And 2. We intend not
the hurt of others, but our own peace and preservation; the design being but
to suppress riots, to keep the peace, and to bring Delinquents to a fair,
just and legal trial. And 3. Our Arms will be laid down, as soon as we are
assured of a firm peace, and to be ruled as becomes a free people, who are
not borne slaves.


Sixthly, we may guess at the nature of this Defensive War, An. 6.
by diverse particulars; as namely,

First, by the Persons against whom this Design is undertaken, which is not
the King (as was proved before, and shall be further enlarged by and by) but
the Malignants of the Kingdom, which we labor to suppress, and to bring to
punishment in a legal way. We go against the Troublers of Israel, the
firebrarnds of Hell, the Korahs, Balaams, Doegs, Rabshakaes, Hamans, Tobiahs
and Sanballats of our time. And

Secondly, by the Persons most favoring, and furthering of this Defonsive
war, who are in every place, those who stand most cordially affected to the
good of the Commonwealth, and most sincerely addicted to the purity of the
Church, and the entire profession and practice of Religion. And

Thirdly, by the mercy and favor of God toward the Parliament, the principal
Agents and Authors of this Design. If we consider, 1. How the Lord preserved
their persons, from the malicious intentions of the Cavaliers, when they went
to the very door of the House. And, 2. How He discovered the plots and
practices which were intended for the bringing up of the Army out of the North
against Them. And 3. How He directed them in their settling of Hull, the Militia
and Navy, when things were almost come to their height. And 4. How he has from
time to time, and still does encourage them with, or by the Love, Loyalty,
Fidelity, Faith and firm Resolutions of the most part of all Counties, to
stand and fall, live and dye with them. And 5. How hitherto He has
extraordinarily turned all the plots of their enemies against themselves, and
produced effects quite contrary to those they intended, and frustrated all
their hopes.


If (I say) we consider these things, we cannot but say of the Parliament
House, and Parliament Men, Surely God is in this place, and in the midst of
you, and present with you, and president amongst you; and we confidently hope,
that the Lord will preserve and keep you, and finish the work he has begun by
you, to your comfort, His glory and our good. And

Fourthly, we may guess at the goodness of the Design, by the time, when it
was undertaken; for it was not begun until all other Means failed; and
therefore may be called, ultimum and unicum remedium, the last and only means
left. The old Rule was observed by them, Non recurrendum est ad extraordinaria,
inijs quae fieri possunt por ordinaria, they tried all fair and ordinary means,
and never had recourse to extraordinary and extreme courses, until no other
would prevail. We and They have again and again petitioned the King, but cannot
prevail; and therefore all other politic means failing us, we ought generally
(seeing the misery which is threatened is general) to join heads, hearts, hands
and estates together to sight for our King, Country, Parliament, selves,
Religion, Laws, Liberties, lives and all that is ours, because now all is at
stake. And

Lastly, we may clearly see the lawfullnesse of this Defensive war, if we but
look upon the Causes and Ends thereof, which are many, as namely, 1. The glory
of God. 2. The good of the Church. 3. The propagation of the Gospel. 4. The
peace of the Kingdom. 5. The prosperity of the Commonwealth. 6. The
maintenance of the Kings honor, authority, and person, in his Royal dignity.
7. The liberties and immunities of the Commons. 8. The preservation of the
representative Body of the Realm. 9. The Privileges of Parliament. 10. The
Laws of the Land. And 11. The free course of Justice.


But I will reduce all these to four Heads: to wit, Gods Glory, the Kings
honor, the Parliaments safety, and the Kingdoms preservation.

First, This Defensive war is undertaken by the Parliament for Gods Glory,
and the maintenance of true Religion. Now we may, yea ought to fight, to
maintain the purity and substance of Religion, that it may neither be changed
into the Ceremonious formalities of Popery nor our consciences brought into the
subjection of Romish and Antichristian slavery.

Secondly, This Defensive war is undertaken by the Parliament for the Kings
honor and safety. Now we are bound by the duty of allegiance to defend and
maintain the Kings person, honor and estate: and therefore,

1. It is our duty to labor by all lawful means to free his Person from
those Assassinates, who violently (by their wicked council, assistance, and
persuasion) carry him upon his own danger and the destruction of his liege and
most loyal Subjects. And

2. It is our duty to labor to maintain the Kings honor; and therefore when
he is overruled by those, who (through their subtilty) work so upon his mild
and pliant temper, that they make him appear to his Subjects, yea foreign
Nations to be a Defender of Delinquents and evil Counselors, against his
loving Subjects and loyal Parliament, which tends infinitely to his dishonor:
it is then our duty to labor to unwinde and disentangle him from their
practices, or by force pluck away their Persons from about Him. And

3. It is our duty to maintain his Majesty's estate. Now as the Lord Burleigh
would often say to Q. Elizabeth, Madam, get but your Subjects hearts, and you
need not fear their purses; so I may say, that the love and affection of the
Kings Subjects (which his Parliament labors to enrich him withal, and to
possess him of) will be more advantageous unto him for matter of estate, then
all the Prerogatives and Privileges, which his obscure Counselors persuade
and endeavor so much for, against the will and welfare of his people. And if
we compare our Q. Elizabeth (who would have nothing, but by and from the
Parliament, with the love and affection of her people) with the king of Spain,
who by an arbitrary power tyrannizeth over his Subjects, we shall then see, as
clear as the Sun, that where Princes by joining with Parliaments, labor to
unite, the hearts, and affections of their people unto them, there riches
abound more, both with Prince and people, than in those Kingdoms where all
cruel courses are taken by the King, to impoverish the Commons.

Thirdly, this Defensive war is under-taken by us, at the Parliaments
command, for their safety. Now both Reason and Religion will teach us, that if
our pious Parliament and sage Senate, for the maintaining of our lives,
liberties and laws, and in, or for opposing of it self (not against the Kings
Person, honor or estate, but) against his affections mislead by evil
Counselors, shall be exposed to danger, dissolution or death: then it is our
duty by defensive War, to withstand that power, or force which is levied
against them.

Fourthly, this Military Design is undertaken for the Kingdoms preservation.
Now both the Laws of God and man (as is against all contradiction proved in the
Treatise, called, A Sovereign Antidote to prevent and appease our civil
wars) will bear us out, for taking up Defensive Arms for the safety of out
Kingdom and Commonwealth. That is, if we see endeavors and designs a-foot,
for the reducing of the Government of this Kingdom, to the condition of those
Countries, which are not governed by Parliaments and established Laws, but by
the will of the Prince and his Favorites; then it is lawful for us to assist
the representative body of the Land (whom we entrust with our laws and
liberties) against those who resist and oppose them, that they may the more
easily prevail against, and make good their designs upon us.

And therefore although we will never cease to sue unto the King, and humbly to
supplicate the King of Kings, for peace and unity, yet if we cannot obtain it,
without the dishonor of God, the loss of our Religion, Privileges, Liberties
and Laws, the endangering, yea exposing of our most faithful Parliament, to
imminent peril, and the hazard of his Majesty's Person, honor and estate; we
may then with the peace of God, his holy Angels, and of our own consciences
take up Arms for the Defense of all these.

FINIS.

