GOD IVDGING AMONG THE GODS. Opened in a SERMON Before THE HONORABLE HOUSE of
COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, upon the solemn day of Monthly Fast, March
26. 1645.

By JOHN WARD, Minister of the Gospel in Ipswich, and a Member of the Assembly
of DIVINES.

Psalm. 22. 28. The Kingdom is the Lords, and he is Governor among the Nations.
Published by Order of that House.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1645.

Die Mercurii 26, Martii, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir Roger North, and Mr
Cage do give thanks to Mr Good and Mr Ward for the great pains they took in
the Sermons they preached this day, at the entreaty of the House of Commons, at
St Margaretts Westminster, (it being the day of Public Humiliation) and to
desire them to print their Sermons. It is also Ordered, that none shall presume
to print their Sermons without License under their hands writing.

H. Else. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint Christopher Meredith to Print my Sermon, and no man else.

JOHN WARD.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
AT your Command this Sermon was Preached, by your Order it has been Printed,
and now its humbly offered to your hands, and under your Honorable Patronage
made Publque to the view of the world. I know well that the same Sermon, as to
the life of it, is scarcely the same in the hearing, and in the reading: But
that acceptance which it found when it came from the Pulpit, gives me hope
that it will not be cast aside, as disrelishing or unprofitable; now its come
from the Press. The Lord command a blessing along with it unto you, and make
you and your unwearied labors, a blessing to the Church and Kingdom.

So prays Your most unworthy servant in the work of the Ministry. JOHN WARD.

Errata,
Page 3. lin. 11. read Princes, Princes. p. 13. l. 4 r. part of the glory. p.
15. l. 1. for their r. the. l. 6 r. desired. p. 16. l. 23. r. in the line. l.
26. for Trusters, r. Trustees. p. 17. l. 11. r. within them. p. 18. l. 34. r.
shows. p. 24. l. 12. r. stone for shore p. 28. l. 5. r. line for measure. p.
31. l. 19 r. Tilths. man. p. 27 l. 4. r. they hope. p. 32. l. ^. ^. and
boasting. p 48. l. 36. r* strong to the.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of Commons, at their late solemn
monthly Fast, March 26. 1645.
PSALM. 82. 1. He judges among the Gods.
THere needs no Apology for the choice of this Text at this time, when those
who are called Gods are met in the solemn assembly to judge themselves before
him, who stands daily in the assembly of the mighty and judges among them.

It requires as little labor to make out the context and coherence of the
words; they lie in the very threshold or entrance of the Psalm: and the
Psalms are as so many Islands that have no continuitie or neighborhood with
their fellow Psalms.

And if you read but a little forward on in the Psalm, you may as quickly
discern whither they tend, and what is their scope: and therein also spy
something that will render them both suitable to the Congregation, and
seasonable for the day; for that which is contained in the following verses is
the use and application of the Doctrine that is held forth in this verse.

A twofold doctrine; the one of Gods presence, the other of Gods presidence
among the Gods: the latter of the two is the subject of my Text. He judges
among the Gods.

There are three Mysteries folded together in it; there is one God, and there
be Gods many: and there is one Act, both his and theirs; or rather his amongst
them. We must enquire who He is, who they are; and what it is which He does
among them.

First, who He is; we may see him in the first word of the Psalm, for he that
stands in the assembly of the mighty, is He that judges among the Gods, God
is He.

The Pronoune He does not stand by it self in the Original as in the
Translation, but is involved in the Verb; yet so he is not hidden but
proclaimed, it speaks him that he may be seen, for Gods works are his Name:
and possibly it might be so ordered on purpose, that an hint might be given to
them over whom the Name of God is called, to count it more honor to be known
by the work which they do, and the use they are of, then by the office they
are in, or the titles that they bear.

Our English idiome or manner of speaking, does necessarily require a more
express specification of Him, and a fitter term to decipher him could not be
found: for being the prime Active Being, He cannot be defined by any thing but
himself: and therefore when Moses asked him his Name, Exodus 3. 14.
he gave it him thus: I am, that I am, and bad him tell the children of Israel,
I am had sent him, and speaks himself by the Prophet, Esa. 48. 12.
in these terms, I am He: yet if any man has a thought that this is too low
and unbecoming an expression of the Divine Maiestis; and it had been better to
have mentioned Him by some more excellent Name, or glorious Attributes; let him
think this rather, that if the Holy Ghost moved holy men to speak thus homely
of the Lord of glory, Jam. 2. 1.
the God of glory; Act. 2. 2.
it may well beseem those who are but called Gods to account it no
disparagement, if they be either spoken to, or spoken of, though every sentence
be not larded with the repetition of Titles.

Secondly, who They are. The Gods are All that deal in the managing of
public Affairs; as they stand, (some of them at least) ranked in their order,
and distinguished by their employment, Pro. 8. 15, 16.
Prove. 8. 15, 16. Kings, Princes, Nobles, and all the Judges of the earth, even
All, whether supra or subordinate, from the Head of Gold to the feet of iron
and clay; for so the Psalmist expounds himself in the following part of the
Psalm; Joh. 10. 35.
and our Savior confirms and warrants the interpretation.

Thirdly, (...)
what it is which He does among them: He judges: that is, Rules, or Reigns;
for the word must not be restrained as sometimes in Scripture (for it is
variously used) to the giving of sentence, or doing of justice according to a
prescript law; but must be extended to all that belongs to dominion, or
government; and comprehends all that pertaines to the ordaining, upholding,
directing, and disposing of Magistracy; and ordering, or moderating of humane
affairs thereby.

The Hebrew Text has it in the Future Tense, (...)
to signify the continuation of this act among them through all successions
and in all joints of time; and is accordingly rendered by several
Interpreters, He has, He does, He will judge.

There is yet another word in the Text, and we cannot well pass on till we
know the meaning of that also: Among, (...)
for so it is paraphrased by the Translators: it primarily signifies in the
midst; and intimates as much as in and by them, all and every of them jointly
and severally, superior, inferior, good or bad; whether doing good or ill.
Some observing that it is many times applied to the heart and entrails,
because in the midst of the body, and metaphorically transferred to the
thoughts of the mind, Psalm. 64. 6. (...)
(because nothing is more inward then the agitation of a matter in the thoughts
of the heart) do therefore conceive that the Psalmist intended hereby, Psalm.
64. 6.
an influence of God upon their very thoughts, and the preparations of the
heart. Others expound it openly, and read it thus; He will judge the Gods
openly; Job 34. 24, 26.
as parallel with that of Elihu, Job 34. 26. He strikes the mighty as wicked
men, in the open sight of others, or place of beholders. Now though I know not
whether we may reject the other two; the rather because we may often observe
the Holy Ghost choosing words not of ambiguous, but of manifold signification
to make the sense not more doubtful, but more comprehensive: Yet I choose to
embrace the first, because it seems to be the most natural and Grammatical,
as the most obvious and familiar sense.

Having thus made out the exposition of the words, and thereby the
interpretation of the Text, we may the better take our aim and make our
observations.

The three parts of the Text (for so it naturally divides it self) Who, What,
and Among whom, afford us three points of doctrine.

1. The first is this, That God is the first, the chief, the only universal
Judge, and absolute Monarch: He is Psalm. 50.
The God of Gods, Rev. 19. 16.
the King of Kings, Eccles. 5. 8.
the Lord of Lords, Jude 4. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
Higher then the Highest, Psalm. 83. 18.
the only Lord, the only Potentate; only the most Highest.

2. The second is this, Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
That the judgment is the Lords, and he is with men in the judgment; 2 Chronicles.
19. 6.
or as it is in Psalm. 22. 28. Psalm. 22. 28.
The kingdom is the Lords: and he governs among the nations.

3. The third is this, That those persons who have the honor to have the power
to exercise Authority amongst men, are greater in dignity and nearer to God
in eminency then other men.

The second of the three, that is drawn from that golden tache which couples
the two extremes of the proposition, has in it the marrow of all the Text,
and is the life of the Law in the whole Psalm, for so our Savior calls it,
when he cites a part of it, Joh. 10. 34.
Joh. 10. 34. and therefore I shall pitch only upon that at this time.

I propounded it in the words of the Scripture, and may therefore spare the
labor of citing those places for proof. In other terms take it thus. In the
delegating of power, and substituting of men to bear rule amongst men, He
neither devests himself of any piece of his Sovereign Authority; nor after
the manner of Kings* in their Kingdoms, appoints the office, assigns the
honor, limits the jurisdiction, prescribes the rule, gives the countenance,
concurs sometimes to help, and sometimes calls to account, and otherwise
withdraw himself from the work, and take his pleasure; but is an immediate
Agent in the judgment all along, from the first ordaining the power through
the ordering of every matter, to the over ruling and disposing of the last
issues and events thereof.

There is the same influence of God into Government, and all that bear rule,
or serve in it; and that which is done by them, though they go by their own
principles to their own ends, that there is in the general administration of
providence through the world, the various occurrences therein, Joh. 5. 17.
and the motions of those inanimate and irrational creatures who are acted and
overruled to their ends by a Power without themselves: Quamdiu creatura est,
tamdiu creatur a Deo.
so as it may be truly said of the ordering of the concernments of men, by the
Lord; and in the same sense as our Savior spoke, by the upholding of other
things by the word of his Power; Idem esse quod ab in itio a Deo acceperunt ab
eodem continenter accipiunt.
My Father works hitherto, and I work. He works in the conservation of the
matter and being of things: for by the continual flowing in of the same. Power
upon them which gave them their first existence, they continually receive their
subsistence, as by a continuation of creation: Esa. 44. 24.
He makes all things, He stretches forth the heavens, He spreads abroad the
earth by himself.

He works in the holding up of the frame of heaven and earth, and all things
in them; for they abide not together as a building compact by joints and bands;
but as a chain of rings by the virtue of the Loadstone, as many pieces in the
hollow of a man's hand, which if drawn away they fall in sunder. Colos. 1. 17.
All things consist in him.

He works in the movings of all the creatures, Vid. Psalm. 104. and Hos. 2.
21, 22.
according to their natures, and the order for them in the beginning: He
brings out their host by number, Intelligamus vocem Dei effectricem esse
natura, etc.
he calls them all by names, by the greatness of his might, for that He is
strong in power, not one fails. Every wheel in the great Engine of Creation,
turn that the voice and by the Spirit of him that sits above upon the Throne.
Jussit Deus currere naturam aquarion, ac nunquam deficit, illo perpetuo
compellente ipsam praecepto. Basil. Haxa. Ho. 4. Esa 40. 26. Ezekiel. 1.


In like manner God is operative in the bringing in of Government; the
upholding of Authority; the placing or displacing of Persons; the inclining of
their spirits; the ordering, or confounding of their counsels; the exerting of
their power, and the bringing about of the several effects of all these
things. Romans 13. 1.
He ordaines the powers that be. He loses and binds the collars of Princes.
Psa. 75. 4, 5, 6.
He puts down one, and sets up another. Pro. 21. 1.
He turns even the heart of the King whither soever he will. Pro. 8. 15.
He is understanding, and by him Princes decree justice. Jer. 1. 2 King. 22.
If there be a perverseness of spirit mingled amongst them, He causes them to
err in the work. Pro. 29. 26.
And though men seek the favor of the Ruler, yet every man's judgment comes
from the Lord. And the good or the evil that is in the Land, He does it. Esa.
45. 7.
He makes peace, He creates evil: the Lord does all these things. So that we
may boldly say, there is no power in the world, no person is in place, or has
ability to exercise authority, or has it not; there is not a devise in any
man's heart, not a design in any Council, not a Law made or executed, not an
Action undertaken, not an alteration in any State, but the Hand of the Lord
works all these things: for the judgment is his, and men accomplish his
pleasure though they do not know him, as Cyrus, Esa. 44. 45. and Chap. 45.
they fulfill his charge when they drive on their own designs, as the
Assyrian, Esa. 10. 6, 7, 8. they bring about his purposes when they please
their own humors; as Rehoboam and his Counselors, 1 King. 12. They execute
his judgments, when they serve their own lusts; as Baasha, and Jehu, 1 King.
16. 7. Hos. 1. 4. They do his work when they go against his word; as Herod
and Pilate, and the Gentiles and the Jews, Acts 4. 27, 28. with their wicked
wills they effect his good will, as those that crucified the Lord Jesus Christ,
Acts 2. 28. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge
of God ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain.

To clear this truth and prevent objections we must know, First, that the God
of the spirits of all flesh can flow in upon imperceivably, without
observation, as the soul acts in the body: or as the light enters the air, or
the shadow passes on the dyall without any noise, and irresistibly in a way
congruous to their nature, without any violence to the liberty of the will in
any particular action or election; as a wise man can make the wind which
blows where it lists, to convey his ship, or grind his corn; or use the
sagacity of the dog to seek what he has lost, or fetch what he has cast
aside. And this is the excellency of his wisdom.

Secondly, we must consider that God and man may concur Idem quum duo
faciunt, non est idem.
The holy God does not at any time infuse any lust into any man's heart, but
brings to light and brings to judgment what is in man, ordering well what they
do ill, as in the hardening of Pharaohs heart he offers occasions which may as
well be taken by the right ear as the left, withholdeth the grace which he is
not bound to give, excites and confirms that animosity which is natural, Romans
1. 21. 28.
gives them up to a mind void of judgment, to do things which are not
convenient, who have pleasure in unrighteousnes, 2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12.
that they may be filled with the fruit of their own doings, which is just, and
all this while, as Christ says by the devils when they speak a lie, Nec enim
lex aequior ulla etc.
so it must be said of the children of wickedness when they do wickedly, They do
it of their own.

His working is not confounded with theirs, and therefore his purity not
blended with their ungodliness, nor their unrighteousness blanched by his
justice, more then the beams of the sun and the steame and stinch of the
dunghill in the exhalation. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. 5.
His work is perfect, for all his ways are Judgment, A God of truth and
without iniquity, just and right is he. They have currupted themselves. And
this is the glory of his holiness.

And in this case the manner and course of government in the kingdoms of the
Earth may not unfitly be compared to the music of an Organ, where the men like
the pipes yield the sound, the inspiration of the almighty, like the wind in
the sound-board, gives the life, or the activity, and the harmony or the beauty
of the order is by his disposing, and if there be a false or an harsh note, the
fault is in the pipe, and not in him who sets and plays.

And even these disorders in government like some discords in music, are by him
ordered well, and for good.

For though we sometimes imagine that things would be better if God were in the
judgment, yet the contrary would be confessed if either we did not of
ignorance or unskilfulnesse mistake evil for good, and good for evil, we daily
weight at the common beam of opinion, and see with eyes of flesh as man sees,
whereas if we went into the sanctuary and measured all things by their
conformity to the will of God, Etiam hoc bonum Domine, quicquid divina majestas
effecerit id rectius et melius.
and judged of them by their referrence to his ends, in stead of quarrelling
and complaining we would acknowledge that every thing in providence were good,
and nothing could be better, but whatsoever God does is best.

Or secondly, if we had the patience to wait the end of the Act and a Scene or
two pass in that, when things begin to concenter toward their issues; would
not ye condemn him of folly that upon the first motion of a business, or
catching at some passage in a debate, should go away, and censure your
proceedings before the matter were ripe for the question, why? so is he that
judges before the time.

Surely if we understood the purpose of the only wise God, or could behold
things in their tendency thitherward, whereas now in our have we are apt to
charge God with folly, Psalm. 73. 17.
and say to him, What do thou? we would condemn our selves or brutish
foolishness and adore the depths of that wisdom, Romans 11. 33.
and those ways that we are not able to comprehend.

Or thirdly, if we had the largeness of heart to behold in Lucian his
Icaromenippus we could get on high and have a prospect of the whole series of
order all together; possibly now while we look upon some one particular man or
some one cause, and some few providence about those, abstracted or divided
from the rest, we may think it were better for them if it were otherwise with
them, but if we knew all or could consider that which is done in the reference
to the whole, Propter ordinem univers^.
we would discern and agree that the present state were the best; Read 1 Cor.
12. verse 4 and onwards.
it might be better for every common soldier as to his individual, if he were
a Commander, but it cannot be so for the Army, for as in the natural body, so
in the body politic, if the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing,
etc. there must be disproportion and inequality, and difference of
dispensations, diversity of gifts and administratio^s, that there may be order.
Aliter iudicandum est de eo qui habet curam alicuius particularis et de
provisore universali.
We must therefore otherwise judge of him that commands in chief, and him
that has but a particular charge. He that composeth a song of many parts, must
not carry on the music so full in every part as he that sets but for one
voice; if a gardener had but the care of some one plant to husband it to
perfection, he were bound to tend it for the fullest advantage of its growth,
but when he has the keeping of a garden or an orchard, he must slip and prune
and cut some plants, and foster and manure, and suffer others to luxuriate and
run out as much as they can, that there may be order in the whole.



Again, Numb. 23. 21.
when God beholds no iniquity in a Land, no perverseness in a people; that
is, no public Idolatry, no universally over-spreading pollution, no specially
provoking transgressions; there may then be peace and safety, and liberty,
and every man may sit quietly under his Vine and Fig Tree; Esaias. 6. 3.
and they may call one another: but, If they rebel against him, and vex his
holy Spirit, and he become their enemy, who shall be offended; If He break the
Tables, remove the Glory, call them forth to Judgment, and put the Staff, or
the Sword of his indignation into the hands of men, and give them a charge to
do execution upon one another; especially if the Gods will judge unjustly, and
will not understand, but walk on in darkness, less cannot be expected, but
that God should arise to judge the earth, and all things with good justice on
his part be turned out of course. Even amongst men, when a Kingdom is divided
within it self by the wickedness of evil Counselors, and the madness of a
distempered people; a Parliament may do many things in maintaining a war,
imposing of taxes, imprisoning of persons, and sequesting of estates, in that
juncture of time excusable, nay justifiable, by the supreme Law, which at
another time all the world, even themselves would condemn as most unjust. Do
but take this into the Mount of transfiguration, and we shall instantly lay our
hands upon our mouths, and glorify God and be thankful: whereas now we
murmur and complain there is so much disorder; we may stand amazed, and bless
God there is so little. Genesis 18. 25.
But I need not plead for God, nor give in evidence for the Judge of all the
earth; the rather because there is a conscience in man, both him that
offends, and him that is offended at it, which condemns the guilty, and
justifies God when he is judged.

There is but another difficulty that lies in our way to hinder our passage,
and that is a conceit of the impossibility of this thing, because of the
multiplicitie of operations, and diversities of administrations in a world of
places, in every moment of time. The Answer is, that if the occasions be
various and manifold, suppose them infinite; God is infinite also; and there is
the same proportion of infinite to infinite that there is of one to one: if one
man can do one work, and ye being many, may be held sufficient for the many
concernments of the numerous people of the whole Land; perhaps of the three
Kingdoms, where the number of persons are thousands, many ten thousands more
then your selves, why should it be marvel in our eyes that one God of immense
being, whose perfections are his nature, should be able every where, among all
men, to work all in all: Does not Nature teach us that the Sun has
influence upon all creatures within the Firmament of heaven, and is a
concurrent cause to their being and activitie; now if this may be affirmed of
the creature, how much more may the other be believed of the Almighty Creator?
and this is the praise of his All sufficiency.

As for the imagination of some men, who measuring the glory of God, by the
vanity of man, do therefore judge it unworthy of such a Majesty to stoop
beneath the decreeing in the counsel of his own will, and the commanding of
such things by his word, to the working and effecting of every or some
particulars by his own hand; it is scarce worth the mentioning, for men but
make a virtue of necessity; and therefore Princes do not descend to
particulars, because they cannot, the mean while hiding the infirmity of
nature, under the fantasy and pomp of State. Story has made Xerxes famous
for but distinguishing the persons, and calling by their names the several
soldiers in his vast Army: and Caesar for his being able to dictate to five or
six Scribes in diverse matters at the same time: in what admiration would they
have had the person of that Monarch (if any such had been found) that could
comprehend in his understanding, Prima causa est omnino indeflexibilis, i. e.
usque adeo bona ut semper importet in fluxum ad esse operis.
carry level in his memory, give directions by his command but to every
officer concerning every affair of State? Now go we up by way of eminency,
and this very thing will be found not only the perfection of Gods knowledge,
but the abundance of his goodness.

Having thus spread and opened the Doctrine, and made the light of it clear
and evident, we may now go on to the confirmation and demonstration of the
truth thereof; for which purpose if any further proof be required then what
has already been alleged occasionally,

1. We may see it very plainly in that emblematicall Vision represented in the
first of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 1.
where the living creatures that stood by wheels, and were commanded by the
voice, and moved by the Spirit of him that sat upon the Throne, verse. 5.
had the likeness of a man, and they had the hands of a man under their wings
on their four sides, and they four had the face of a man; as of other
creatures, to signify this; that the ordering of humane affairs is a great
part, the greatest part of God in the administrations of providence; and if
this thing had not been comprehended in it, the Vision had not served for that
end for which it was exhibited, viz. the confirming of the faith, and
corroborating of the spirit of the Prophet, that he might preach the things to
be revealed to him, with the greater confidence, and more full assurance;
because the accomplishment and effecting of them depended much upon the
managing, and the issues of government among men.

2. We may read it at large in many particular instances, Job 12. verse. 9. Job
12. 16.
and from the sixteenth verse. to the end of the Chapter: Who knows not in all
these, that the hand of the Lord has wrought this? with him is strength and
wisdom, the deceiver and the deceived are his; he leads away Counselors
spoiled, and makes the Judges fools; he loses the bond of Kings, and
girdeth their loins with a girdle; he leads away Princes spoiled, and
overthrows the mighty: he removes away the speech of the trusty, and takes
away the understanding of the aged; he pours contempt upon Princes, and
weakeneth the strength of the mighty; he discovers deep things out of
darkness, etc. i. e. The rule, and the power, and the skill of government is
of the Lord; and there happens nothing, whether among the wise and prudent,
but even the wicked and crafty, and such are seduced by their evil counsels,
or overreached by their wiles; so that nothing is done but he restraines it
within certain bounds, and reduces it to his ends according to his most just
and holy will. But there needs no Paraphrase, the words speak their own
meaning plainly.

3. It is all gathered together and abridged into a short sum, Prove. 8. 15,
16.
Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings reign, Princes decree justice; by me Princes
rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. They are the words of a
greater then Solomon, the Lord Jesus Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom
of God: (...)
and they clearly hold forth this truth, that All the great men of the earth
do shine in the beams of his Majesty; the highest of all exercise
authority: Counselors of State give advice; such as have ashare in the
Legislative power, make Statutes and Ordinances convenient for the occasions;
Military men manage the Militia; the Nobility and Gentry are eminent and
useful in a Kingdom; and all that have any hand in the distributing of
justice, or execution of the law, both are and serve in their places, in him
and by him; whether for the land, or for correction, or mercy, Job 37. 13.
as Elihu speaks of the rain, Job 37. 13.

But I shall produce no more testimonies of Scripture, the rather because this
mystery is not among those deep things which are hid in God, and cannot be
discovered otherwise then by revelation; Romans 1. 19.
for that which may be known of God herein is manifest in men, for God has
showed it to them.

1. There is a light of it shining in men's minds by nature. Whence else was it,
Ephesians. 2. 12.
that the very heathens without God in the world did sacrifice to God, A Jove
Prin^ipium.
make trial by Auguries, and consult with the Oracles, in all great
undertakings, and in all difficult and hazardous cases applied themselves to
their deities according to their blind devotions? Quam volum^^ licet nos
amemus, tamen nec numero Hispanos, etc. sed pietate ae religione atque hac una
sapientia quod Deorum immortalium numine omnia regi gubernarique perspeximus
omnes gentes nationesque superavimus. Cic.
Whence else was it, that their Lawgivers pretended to have received all their
rules of Government out of some divine hand? doubtless there was some religion
in their superstition, and some truth in their very fables. Hear one of them
speak for all the rest, what their faith of this was: Flatter we our selves as
much as we please, yet we have not overcome the Spaniards by number; nor the
French by strength; nor the Carthaginians by craft; nor the Greeks by wiles;
but by Piety and Religion: and by this only wisdom, that we have discerned,
and do acknowledge that all things are governed by the power of Gods.

Secondly, there is a law of nature concerning it, and men show their works of
that law written in their hearts by an universal abhorrencie of Anarchie, and
submitting themselves to Authority, rather Tyranny we say then Anarchy; Better
live where nothing is lawful, then where every thing; neither have there any
where, or at any time, been found such sons of (...), as have desire to be
absolutely without a Ruler among them. In the greatest Insurrections and
Rebellions, nothing more has been affected then a change of Government; the
very Anabaptists themselves erected a government among themselves, and made
themselves a King. Thus the currencie of it through the world shows something
more then Gods Image and superscription upon it; for though possibly the
baseness of some people may have given occasion to some persons to put a yoke
upon them; or ambition of some Nimrod may have incited him to usurp Authority
over others; the arts and insinuations of crafty men may have introduced it in
some places; the pomp and luster of Magistracy may have set it up in other;
and the benefit thereof by a benign and prudent administration of it, may have
made many willing to bear the burdens of it; yet considering what an humor
of liberty and Independencie; what an itch of being Gods to themselves runs in
the corrupt blood of all mankind by nature, it is impossible to imagine that
all Nations from the beginning; nay all men in all their generations should of
themselves stoop to government, and yield it honor and subjection, unless
God were in the judgment. It is an Argument like that of the Apostle, for the
greatness of the mystery of Christ, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
(...), without controversy, or by universal consent, etc.

Thirdly, that diverse kind or degree of honor which waits upon men in
authority, according as they use it well or ill, speaks something to this
purpose; Honor goes always along with Power, as the shadow follows the
body, but evil men that transgress in the judgment, receive it blended with
contempt or hatred, or base fear, or flattery, and with much diminution, but
such as are good and do good have it cast upon them with love and reverence,
and abundance of affection. Wicked Magistrates and corrupt Officers are
worshipped, as the devil by the poor Indians, that they may not do them
mischief; but the just and godly men after Gods own heart, are clothed upon
with some of the rays of Gods own Majesty. Certainly the hearts of men would
never after this manner be drawn to or from them that judge in the earth,
unless he that sits in the Heavens did judge amongst them, more then the
needle in the compass would turn to or from a piece of Iron, if it did not act
by the virtue of the Loadstone that had touched it.

Fourthly, this is yet made more manifest (as the heat of the Sunn in the
reflection) by the difference of the spirits of public persons and private
men, in the same men, in the place of Power and out of that relation. Private
persons are self centered like clods of the earth, and their providence is like
that of the Pismire, a wise and industrious creature for it self, but many
times mischievous to the garden or orchard where it is harbored: but public
persons are turned into other men, 1 Samuel 10. 6.
and have a public spirit, as Saul when he was anointed to be King; and the
seventy Elders called to assist Moses to the government. I appeal to your
selves, had you such thoughts, such cares, such designs, your minds so
inclined, so resolved, so prepared, so fixed before you were chosen to be
Trusters for your Countries, as since you came to sit in Parliament? I do not
say every man is thus affected, the more is the pity, but this I say, commonly
and for the more part there is an affection suitable to the relation. And this
also shows God amongst them.

Fifthly, the raising or sinking, the enlarging or straitning of their hearts
according to the work of God in hand, or about to be done, does as manifestly
argue the working of God in them, as the uneve^nesse of activity in the limbs
does prove the animating and the moving of the body by the soul, or the
inequality of valor and strength in Shamgar, Gideon, Samson and other the
Judges and Worthies of old did declare that the Spirit of God came upon them,
and did move them at times.

Sixthly, there is some further evidence and demonstration of this in the
liberty, the confidence, the peace, the triumph, the heaven on the one hand,
and again on the other the pendulousnesse, the fears, the jealousies, the very
hell that is in men's consciences as they less or more conscienciously or as I
may so speak, with the mind that is in God, serve their generations, or do
for, or against him, or the dictates of his deputy with them, The righteous is
bold as the Lion, but the wicked flies when no man pursues. But I shall not
need to allege Scripture or give an instance for this, Romans 2. 15.
when every man's conscience bears witness to it, their thoughts accusing or
excusing one another.

Seventhly, It may be perceived by the slumbering or awakening of an
expectation in men generally, and chiefly by the inclination or disposition of
the hearts of the Lords remembrancers toward God in prayer, according as any
great change is to be made in the kingdoms of the World.

When things are to continue in one stay, there is not perceivable any unusual
stirring in men's spirits; but when the Lord is about to take up a controversy,
and enter into judgment with a Nation, then men's hearts begin to fail them for
fear, and their spirits shrink up and start back with misgivings and
presagings of evil to come, and if the time of deliverance be not yet, there is
an indisposition to, and heartlesnesse in prayer* and even such as wait for the
vision withhold prayer, Job 15. 4.
not of hypocrisy or self-guiltinesse, as Eliphaz charged Job, but as by a
restraint upon their spirits by something from without, as if the Lord were
forbidding them to pray. But if the salvation be drawing nigh, though there be
no appearance of it, nor can one disern any probability of such a thing in the
signs of the times, yet there is a spirit of grace and supplication poured out
upon them, and their souls are drawn forth as to meet the Lord, and salute,
and embrace their mercies; and they reach forth their hearts in an earnest
expectation of some good; and speak one to another. And if God be carrying on
a work in favor of his Church, though many cross providence intervene, yet
they send up fervent effectual prayers; they multiply prayers as the Cocks
crow thick toward the morning, and they follow on to seek the Lord, and give
him no rest till he hear them; as we read in the stories of Daniel, and Ezra,
and Nehemiah. I doubt not but many of us can remember some years since, when
men bare rule over us at their pleasures, and the measure of their iniquity was
not yet full, and the judgment was still in brewing; with what an Asinine
patience we bore all oppressions, and couched down like Issachar between the
burdens, and thought that rest was good, and had no heart to lift up a prayer:
but a little before the wheel began to turn, and since the Lord remembered
mercy in wrath, and revived his work, and made us see our tokens again, who
has not found himself as going bound in the spirit to take hold upon the Name
of the Lord, to wrestle with him by prayer and supplication? and who may not
have observed the alterations in affairs to have answered very apparently this
disposition of heart toward God? Now what ever other men think of these
things, it plainly seems to me, that as the flying of the foul, and the going
of the cattle into their shelters before a storm; and their coming forth
again about the breaking of it away, Job 36.
does show concerning the vapor; so this different frame and temper of spirit
in men about such seasons, and in such junctures of times, does declare
concerning that Divine influence whereof we are now speaking.

Eighthly, though we cannot make observation of the time and way of Gods illapse
upon men and their actions, yet there is something observable in the manner of
the bringing in and carrying on of things that show an higher hand then man's in
the work. I mean the many various accidental dispensations of providence,
very chances as men term them, that create seasons and advantages for several
purposes and start occasions, and minister opportunities for Counsels,
together with the admirable ballancing of affairs, casting of the scales, now
on this side, then on that, sometimes interrupting, confounding, preventing,
disappointing, and tumbling of Counsels headlong; at other times reviving,
advancing, encouraging and prospering of parties and causes that any man may
see it is done on purpose, that there may be time and place for such judgments
as none but God can do, that he may get him a Name. Now though we do not much
mark these things in the instant of time when they happen, yet if we cast our
thoughts back, and bring times past into observation, we must needs make this
judgment, that the things which God first causes to come to pass, do offer
the thoughts, and usher in the devices, and lead on the contrivances of men all
along in all their windings from the beginning to the ending: and consequently
be convinced concerning this, as Saul was for himself when the signs happened
to him, 1 Samuel 10. 6, 7.
whereof the Seer had foretold him, That God was with him, and the Spirit of
God was come upon him, and directed him to do as the occasion served.

Ninthly, This invisible working power and Godhead of God is made very visible,
and may be clearly seen in the issues and events of men's counsels and actions;
compare them with their next causes, the instruments and means appearing in
the work, and they will be found many times so disproportionable to them, so
utterly unlike, so far short or beyond, so much beside or contrary to the
intentions of the actors, and the expectation of all men, many of them such
mavelous works, so fearfully and wonderfully done, as it is very hard to
discern whence they arose, or how they came to pass. We cannot think
seriously of some of them without admiration, Psa. 126. 1, 2, 3.
as the people when the captivity of (...) was turned; and the very enemies are
sometimes forced to confess, as the Magicians when the dust of the land became
lice, Exodus 8. 19.
This was the finger of God; and the Egyptians when their host was troubled at
the Red sea; Exodus 14.
The Lord fights for them. Might I but have the liberty to preach as the
Prophets did of old, or to make a rehearsal of the great works of God done of
late amongst our selves, Deuteronomy. 29. 2.
as sometimes Moses and Joshua did before the people. Joshua 24.
Nothing were more easy then to line this as all the rest of the observations
before mentioned with examples out of our own Story. When the Service book
was first imposed upon our neighbor Church of Scotland, and the first reading
thereof was so violently opposed by the rude multitude; did either party so
much as foresee or forethinke, what has followed upon it ever since? Who put
it into the minds of those Soldiers who were first raised for the North, at
the same time in every corner of the Land to make an attempt, and give the
first overture of a Reformation? How came the wheel to be turned in this
Kingdom, as in the beginning of this Parliament, when no one man was removed
out of place or favor? when the Kings Council advised him to call a
Parliament, had they contrived the remedy of so many grievances, the making of
such Acts and Ordinances, the discovery of such deeds of darkness, the
promoving of a Reformation thus far, with many other happy births of the
present Parliament. When they counseld him to come into the House, and demand
the Honorable Members of it, to set up his Standard and levy war against
his own people, and to publish such Declarations as have been sent abroad in
the world, did they purpose the security of the Parliament, the alienating of
the hearts of the people from their faction, the loss of the lives of so many
great persons of their own party, the engaging of the two Kingdoms, in a
solemn League and Covenant, the provoking and encouraging of the City of
London, and other associated Counties to unite amongst themselves for their
own safety and the relief of others, had they plotted these or almost any
other consequence of those desperate counsels. When Prince Rupert went to York
and marched out again to Marston-Moor, did he intend the Routing and Ruining of
his own Army, and those that he had drawn forth to join with him, that the
City of York might be the sooner surrendered, and Newcastle reduced, and the
strength of the King be broken in those Northern parts for so much advantage
to the Parliament? Doubtless your thoughts cannot but outrun me, and prevent
me the naming of a world of other things that have happened both in counsel
and in war, both within your own walls, and in every corner of the
Kingdom, which if they be laid by their occasions, or by the men and means
whereby they have been done, will either be such as they that had to do about
them, will be unwilling to hear of them, ashamed to own them, or else too
great, too high to be ascribed to the policy or the power of men. Now such
occurrences as these, Hab. 3. 4.
are bright beams out of his hand, hidings of his power, the sparklings and
shinings forth of the Majesty of God, accommodated to our capacity, that by
occasion of such unlikely and unlooked for events, our eyes may be drawn
upwards to take notice of his glory in the governing of the world. They are
like to wonders and miracles in other Providence, and have the same use. We
may read it, Isai. 41. 18. 19.
Isai. 41. 18, 19, 20. I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the
midst of the valleys. I will make the wilderness a poole of water, etc. Rivers
use to run in valleys, and springs flow from the hills. It is a rare thing
to find pooles of water, or see trees that need much moisture, to grow in a
dry and sandy desert; but I will step out of the common round, says God, and
do some things unusual, That they may see and know and consider and
understand together, verse 20.
that the hand of the Lord has done this, Job 9. 11.
and the holy One of Israel has created it, Brallward. lib. 1 cap. 3. p. m.
for the more part he goes by us, and we see him not, he passes on, but we
perceive him not; Therefore sometimes he works some things extraordinary,
that we may be convinced of his hand in all that is ordinary.

Again, consider them, and the working of them out in reference to the first
and highest cause, there is such a consent of all things with the will of God
revealed in his word, both in favor of his Church, and wrath against the
adversaries* such an agreement of them with the rule, the prophecies, the
promises, and the threatenings in the Scriptures; such a correspondency with the
ways of God of old, the paths of mercy and truth wherein he was wont to be
seen to walk, such an analogy with the Nature and Attributes of the Lord, such
praeludes and praesages of his judgment to come, as though a brutish man will
not know, Psalm. 92. 6.
nor a fool understand this, yet, whosoever is wise and will observe these things,
he will fall down and give the glory to God, and acknowledge that God is among
the gods. Verily there is a God that judges among them that have any thing to
do in the judgment of the earth. Psalm. 103. 19.
Doubtless the Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom
rules over all.

I will add but two or three more, which are very obvious, though we seldom
take any notice of them; they are these.

First, the concurrence of many causes to one effect. There is not any thing
done amongst men but if we were so eagle-eyed as to see far, and espy
quickly, and look steadily about us, but we might discern a fore-preparation
and praedisposition of things to it, a complication, and combination of
multitudes of men and means without any communicating of Counsels working
about it; but in some things it is more remarkable then others, as the bringing
of Israel down into Egypt; the avenging of the quarrel of Gods covenant upon
his own people by carrying them away into Babylon; the destruction of that
Monarchy; the turning of the captivity: and in less general matters, the
chastising of David for the matter of Vriah, the rescuing of Mordecai and the
people from the bloody plot of Haman, and what not? Now do but ponder these
things advisedly, and all the fictions of the Poets and the fables of the
Legend may be sooner believed then that these things come to pass by accident
without the texture of a Divine hand working effectually in the weaving of
every web. When many persons go out several ways, no one of them happily privy
to another thoughts, and do after a while meet together in one place and time
about one and the same errand, it cannot be otherwise thought but that some one
hand had the command over them all, and directed the whole business.

Secondly, the order and peace that sometimes has been in the earth, and may
yet possibly be again. Peace is the tranquillity of Order; that there should be
Order amongst such multitudes of persons, is more then a Miracle: There are (it
may be) so many millions of men in a Nation, all of various opinions and
affections, acting by different principles to self ends, most of them ignorant
and unskilful, nay wholly regardlesse of all that belongs to policy and order,
Titus 3. 3.
generally disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in
malice and envy, hateful and hating one another: take them together in their
community and society, and they are like the waters gathered together in the
Seas, an unquiet and restless Element of it self, easily swelling and raging
in the waves of it, James 1. 6.
driven with the wind and tossed. It is impossible there should be at any time
an orderly compliance of these among themselves, and consequently quiet and
peace, unless the Father of spirits who looks down from Heaven, the place of
his habitation, Psalm. 33. 13. 14. 15. (...)
upon all the inhabitants of the earth, did fashion their hearts alike, or
alone by himself without others, and considered all their works.

Lastly, the reducing of Kingdoms and the affairs of men into Order; when they
are once out of course. When the spirits of Princes and people are prejudiced,
estranged, divided, imbittered, enraged, and engaged against one another, and
there is envy, and strife, and confusion, and every evil work, and they bite,
and devour, and consume one onother; whence shall a reconciliation and
redemption arise, if He that stilleth the raging of the waters, that commands
the winds and the Seas, and they they him, do not also rebuke the Beast of
the ^^ds, Psalm. 68. 30.
the multitude of the B^lls, with the Calves of the people* till every one
submit himself? One may as well suppose an instrument out of frame to come into
tune of it self without the hand of an Artist, as that a Kingdom divided
within it self should return into order, and be settled again in peace and
quietness, without the hand of the Lord.

We may loose our selves in the multiplying of arguments of this nature; I have
named a few amongst an infinity, possibly many others far more pregnant and
pertinent may offer themselves to your thoughts; the multitude of them makes
the choice difficult to me, nothing is harder then when one walks on the
beache by the sea side to find the fairest shore. Take all or any of them, and
there is enough to convince an Atheist, not only that there is a God, but that
He judges among the Gods.

If ye now require the ground of this dispensation, viz: Why the Lord should
rule in and by men, rather then prepare his own throne and judge in his own
Majesty alone by himself, like that Miracle of Nature which does more by the
Iron wherewith it is armed, then by its own body without it; The reason is, not
any necessity of Nature, or defect of power in God, as in Princes; but merely
the good pleasure of his will, the superabundance of his goodness in favor
and condescension to man.

If God should judge immediately, the judgment would be more dreadful and
terrible, we could not bear the glory, we should be swallowed up of the
Majesty: we may guess as much by some passages in story of old, when God kept
the matter of government more in his own hand then now, particularly by that
which we read in the 19 of Exodus, Exodus 19. 16.
and 5 of Deuteronomy. when He gave the Law on mount Sinai, there were thundrings and
lightnings, Deuteronomy. 5. 24. 25.
and a thick cloud and darkness, and the whole mount did quake and burn with
fire, insomuch as the people trembled, and the Elders drew near to Moses, and
said, Behold, the Lord our God has showed us his glory and his greatness,
this great fire will consume us: If we hear the voice of the Lord our God any
more, then shall we die. And so terrible was the sight, Heb. 12. 21.
as Moses said, I quake and fear. Now if the pomp of the promulgation of the
Law was so dreadful, (and less it could not be considering the Majesty of the
King, the Lawgiver and the Judge) what may we think would be the terrors of
the Assizes and Sessions, while God should frequently arise to judgment and
execution?

If God should not judge by men, there could not be expected that connivence
and moderation in the judgment, that now is by the indulgence of men of like
passions and compassions toward one another; and I think the Scripture speaks
something to this purpose in that passage in Exodus 33. 3. I will send an Angel
before thee, but I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou art a
stiff-neeked people, lest I destroy thee.

Certainly the Government thus carried is much more convenient and accommoded
to our present condition and relations: we could not meet, and close, and
pass, and part on all occasions with so little disadvantage to our nature and
society; if they that bear rule, and they that are in subjection were not all
of a kind, as the greater and lesser wheels in an Engine all of a metal,
Deinde ipsa charitas quae sibi invicem hominos nodo charitatis astringit, non
haberet aditum refuadendorum, et quasi miscendorum sibimet animorum si homines
per homines nihil discerent. Aug. de Doc. Christ. Praef.
whereas now the communion is is smoothed and sweetened, and love and charity
the easier brought in, and made the more to abound among all men, by the
mutual submission, dependence, and care of each another, unto which they are
obliged and engaged by this administration.

I have been the longer in the clearing and confirming of the doctrine, both
because it is scarcely believed, or but lightly regarded, though commonly
confessed, and almost hourly spoken of, and because there is hardly another
truth in all the Bible of more common concernment, or more general use, while
we live in this world, then this of my Text.

Like a picture drawn to the life, it casts an eye every way upon every person
in any relation, and almost upon every occasion and business; And it is very
big and full of matter, profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
and for instruction in righteousness.

Among other things it lays a sure foundation for the honor and power of
Magistracy, even in the matters of God, and plainly holds forth as sacred and
divine, and not to be touched with common or profane hands, that Ordinance of
God, which is the cement and pillar of humane things, the life and soul of all
order in society and communion, the vital spirits by which so many Millions of
men consist comfortably, Jude 8.
And directs me to put men in mind to be subject, to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and obey Magistrates, that with well-doing they may
put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, and gives fair occasion to
grapple with the Anabaptists and Familists, and other Sectaries, whose
Principles betray them to the despising of Dominion, and speaking evil of
Dignities: 2 Timothy 3.
presumptuous are they and selfewilled, 2 Pet. 2.
such as the Apostles of our Lord fore-described and foretold us should arise
in these latter perilous times. Jude 4. etc. verse 19.
These be they who separate themselves, Gal. 5. 20. 21.
sensual, not having the Spirit. They boast indeed (much) of the Spirit, but
they manifestly do the works of the flesh: They plead for liberty, but it is
licentiousness; liberty of conscience they term it, but it is liberty of
practice, that every man may do what is good and right in his own eyes: They
pretend to nothing but piety and godliness, and seem as if they would be
content if they might but have a bare subsistence in the profession of it. So
did the Jesuits to learning when they they first appeared upon the stage, but
when they had once insinuated themselves into the good opinion of Princes and
States, how well they answered the expectations, and requited the kindness of
those who nursed them up, all the Christian world sees and feels to their cost
at this day. They ask but connivence and toleration, but if they once meet in
a confluence, and find themselves strong enough to run in a stream; let but a
damme be pitched down to restrain or oppose their madness, or men follow not
on to indulge and gratify their humor, it would soon appear whether or no
they would rage and swell and get over, or bear down before them all that
should stand in their way. They did seem a while to cry up the Order of
Parliaments, and of the civil Magistrate, and have their persons in
admiration, but merely for advantage, that so they may get above all
Ecclesiastical Authority; and when they are once up to their height, what they
will do with the ladder, the hope to climb and ascend by, is not hard to
conjecture; they reckon themselves the wheat in the field, and when once they
are ripe, they will easily be content to have all that threshed off, by which
they received their growth. Ye have heard of the fable of the snake and the
countryman that brought it unto the fire. I shall not need to apply it, already
they begin to remove the old land-markes and straiten their bounds, they deny
your claim up to a high water mark, and make their banks, and enclose for
themselves to the very channel side: But whether it be holden fit or
seasonable that these Libertines be decried; for my part I cannot yet discover
by any activenesse to suppress them: Only seeing the evil and foreseeing
the mischief, I have given the warning, that at least I may deliver mine own
soul. I pray God the remedy be not deferred till it be too late, and ye be
driven to play an after-game to an extreme hazard or disadvantage.

But the time admonishes me to set aside many things that might be inferred
out of this text by way of application, and betake my self only to the work of
the day, to the preaching of repentance and amendment of life. That such use
may be made of this doctrine, is more then manifest. He that runs may read
it, in the following part of the Psalm. And though I may not take the boldness
to divide this portion of the word, and deal it amongst you as homely as the
Psalmist does by expostulating, commanding, upbraiding, threatening, appealing
and provoking to God; yet I beseech you all, and more especially, you that have
called me to this place at this time, Honorable and beloved, Hearken to the
voice behind you, within you, if upon occasion of any thing that has been
spoken, it either has, or does, or may offer and whisper to any of you any
thing of that nature, or tending that way, and judge your selves, that ye be
not judged of the Lord.

I profess in the presence of God, whose messenger you have made me to your
selves this day, that to spare you I do not forbear that liberty. Ye have
given me no cause to dread any hard measure from you, in case I should assume
the boldness to stretch my self a little beyond my measure. I think I may say
as the Apostle to the Corinthians, Ye suffer if a man exalt himself, 2 Cor.
11. 20. 21.
if a man smite you on the face, I speak as concerning reproach: There are that
dispute, detract from, and deny the just extent of your authority; they
preach, they print, they practice and profess to do so still, without your
leave so much as asked, and against your power; they falsely slander, and
revile, and libell, and bring railing accusations, if not against your selves
and your own Honorable assembly; yet against those who by your call and
command are subservient and assistant to you in advise, and the parties, and
their fautors, making their liberty a cloak of maliciousness, out-dare
complaints, and think to outface justice, by fore arraigning it under the term
of Persecution: But I abhor their impudence, and cannot praise your
connivence. My conscience would fly in my face, if I should wittingly let fall
a word against the rule, Rebuke not an Elder, (much less an Honorable Senate
of Elders) but entreat him as a Father.

Give me leave therefore to persuade what God commands, (I mean) the
afflicting of your souls before the Lord this day because of his judgments
abroad in the earth. It is a day of Humiliation, and we are met in the solemn
Assembly, Exodus 33.
as sometimes the children of Israel (when they had sinned against the Lord,
and he had broken in upon them, by many signs of his heavy displeasure) our
ornaments put off, to know what God will do unto us, To turn to the Lord with
fasting, Joel 2. 12. 14.
weeping and mourning, if peradventure He will return and repent and leave a
blessing behind him. Surely ye need not after so many Sermons, so many months
and years of fasting and prayer, that one teach you again which be the first
rudiments and elements of this holy Ordinance of God. I know ye all have
knowledge. I beseech you only suffer a word of Exhortation, not so much to the
considering of the work of God in governing the Kingdoms of the world,
(though that also be a duty the Text leads to, and indeed the matter is fitter
for contemplation then discourse) as to the acknowledgement of the hand of God
in the present state of affairs in this Kingdom, and the humbling and applying
of our selves unto him, as his word directs in like cases: Mala ultoria Tertul.
For if he judges among the Gods, then both the good and the evil, that is
in the Nation by occasion of the well or ill managing of the government, Amos.
5. 6.
must be ascribed unto him. And as if there were order and peace, we were to
reckon them his blessings, and offer the sacrifices of praise, which is the
work of a day of Thanksgiving; so when there is war in the gates, and
confusion and every evil work, it must be confessed the judgment of God, and
we must come, and sit trembling before him, and search out the provocation, lay
our hands upon and confess the trespass over the head of the sacrifice, pray in
his pardon and break off our sins by righteousness, that there may be
atonement, which is the business and end of a day of Humiliation; and this is
that which I principally aim at in the Application of this doctrine at this
time.

We need not one to come and tell us, There is wrath gone out from the Lord,
Isai. 21. 25.
the plague is begun, he has powered out upon us the fury of his anger and the
strength of the battle, and it has set us on fire round about. Only, we
have not regarded it nor laid it to heart. A sword, a sword is sharpened and
also furbished, Ezekiel. 2. 10.
The point of it is set against the gates, and the ruins are multiplied. But I
shall not spread the volume of our Story before you, doubtless the roll like
that of the Prophet ^ written within and without, Ezekiel. 21.
lumentations, mourning and woe, has been often read in your ears, and ye
ought to know the state of the land, and the Church of God therein, and without
question ye do know it, the report and the cry from all quarters coming first
to your Cognizance, allow me but to say this (that I may stir up your minds
by way of remembrance) that the sorrows of a traveling woman are yet upon us,
Hos. 13. 13.
and we stay still in the place of the breaking forth of children: what ever
Balm or Physician there may be amongst us, the health of the Nation is not
recovered; and whether the wound and the bruise be incurable as refusing to be
healed, God knows. Though the Lord has revived his work of late very
miraculously beyond all expectation, and from the beginning hitherto has
mingled mercy with judgment; yet one cannot foresee any thing in the signs
of the times whereby we may be able to foretell the end of the Lord; at least
as to the season and manner of it. The cloud still hangs and gathers, rather
then wastes; and there is a sound of abundance of wrath: it is not an easy
thing to discern whether the Lord will debate with us in the sending forth of
the rod or sword, Esa. 27.
and stay the rough wind in the day of the Eastwind: that is, chastise in
measure, moderate the punishment, not coming to a rigorous account, but use the
severity of a Father, not of a Judge, and give us repentance and remission of
sins: or whether he has decreed a Consumption, and will bring an overflowing
scourge, and his eye not pity nor spare, but destroy us til there be no remnant
nor escaping: Whether he be striving with us, as with the old world before the
general Deluge; or carrying on his work as with Israel in the wilderness,
preparing a mercy for posterity after us, the mean while resolved to fill all
the earth with his glory in the destruction of the present generation that see
his wonders, yet tempt him daily, murmr against him, grieve his Spirit, and
harden their hearts through unbelief; or whether he will yet have mercy upon
England, and redeem us through his greatness, for his own Names sake: If we
look upwards, we may see a filthy steame of noisome sins going up unto
heaven, as the smoke over some great City, and we may behold the hand of the
Lord stretched out still: if downward, the provocation is not abated, but
multiplied and aggravated: we are like the pot whose scumme is in it, Ezekiel. 24.
6. 13
whose scumme is not gone out of it; there is lewdness in the filthiness of
the Land. Because God has purged it, Jer. 5. 3.
and it is not purged; he has smitten it, and they have not grieved; he has
consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction, and to return. We
are grown deaf at the terrors of Gods judgments, and sleep under the
sparklings of his fury. The providence of God are wrested, though they be not
very hard to be understood, and many abuse them, as they do the Scriptures, to
the destruction of themselves and others; the grace of God is received in
vain, or rather turned into wantonness; the yoke of Ceremonies, and the
tyranny of Prelacy has been removed, and it is free to preach and profess
according to the Gospel; and this liberty is abused to looseness,
profaneness, and insolency; that which is, or should be the better part of
the Land, that pretends to religion, and has the face or name of the Church,
it is like a piece of ground that has been stirred by the Plough, and the
tils-man does not follow on to give it more earths in due season; it runs out
in weeds and baggage: or as a field which is driven, and the heart of it worn
out, what ever seed is cast in, it returns nothing but Carlock, and such like
raffe; all manner Sectaries creep forth, and multiply, as frogs, and flies,
and vermin in the Spring; and there is variance, hatred, emulation, wrath,
strife, sedition, heresies, envyings, revilings, and the like. Every where
there is mingled a perverseness of spirit, like the Prophets bottles, Jer. 13.
13.
we are filled with drunkenness, and dash one against another: 1 King. 22.
lying spirits go forth to deceive and prevail, and make us mad upon our own
destruction. As to the civil war; it is just now as of old, in the
contention between Vitellius and Vespasian, where families were divided, and
brother fought against brother, and father against son; every man cried out
of the unnaturalness of the thing, but every man went on still to do it.

As to the differences and divisions about matters of Religion; they are
raised, and fomented, and maintained with great animositie, and of boasting of
new light, and knowledge, but with little or no charity, or meekness of
wisdom: they that pretend for conscience sake to separate from our ordinary
assemblies, and keep their distance from their members, yet will not be
persuaded to divide themselves, and stand aside, from those routs of
Libertines, whom they cannot but condemn in their judgments, or declare
distinctly and openly, wherein they dissent from them as from others: but all
meet in one third, and militate under one colors, most apparently striving
for victory, not for truth; and driving a design by party and faction, while
they would be thought to set up the Kingdom of Christ: the mean while they
give overt scandal and offense to them that are without, and divide the Church
and Kingdom within it self: and as the Congregations of naughty men of old:
Psalm. 83.
the Tabernacles of Edom and the Ishmaelites of Moab and the Haggarens, Gebal
and Ammon, and Amalek, they have helped the common Adversary, and troubled and
retarded the Reformation. Alas for the day, for the distemper and the
distraction is great; and there wants either power, or wisdom, or will to
remedy or suppress these mischefes, and their fautors. Now though we can tell
where the fault lies, and whence all this evil arises; as we may sometimes
see from what dunghill, or low moorish ground the vapor ascends, which
afterward becomes a mist, a fogge, or a cloud, and is dissolved in a storm;
though we see not the influence of heaven, in the exhalation; yet because by
faith we understand that this comes of the Lord, that he may be known by the
judgments which he executes. We must therefore make our peace with God, and
return unto the Lord, and hear what he speaks by his former Prophets, and
follow the light and direction of his word, if ever we will have help and
deliverance, or be hid in the times of trouble.

Let us then leave quarelling, and judging, and censuring one another; this is
our folly, our disease, our mischief: let us look up to God, and judge our
selves, and make have, and delay not to turn our feet into the ways of his
Testimonies. We have many base fears, and cares, and projects wherewith we
disquiet our selves; it were our wisdom, and would be our safety, to cease
from men, and fear the Lord, and betake our selves to him. While the State is
diligent in finding out the troublers of our Israel, and bringing delinquents
to punishment, let us search our own hearts and lives, and make enquiry after
our own iniquities; accuse, arraigne, condemn our selves, and cast out the
abominable thing; Impenitencie is the greatest malignancie, and the most
dangerous. We are often very busy and inquisitive about some persons that do
not appear overactive: let every man first pluck the beam out of his own
eye, and with the disciples, suspect himself, Master, Is it I? and ask as the
Publicanes, and the Soldiers that came out to hear John the Baptist: What
shall we do? they that are much abroad, are little at home; those that are
curious about others, are commonly careless and negligent about themselves: we
wast our spirits in froward passions; it were better we spent them in
afflicting our souls, that so much water may not run by wast and grind
nothing. We know well enough there can never be a general or particular safety
for all, or any, when there has been such disorders as of late, unless there
be a pardon, and an Act of oblivion; therefore in all Pacifications that is one
Article; let us transfer the wisdom hither, and seek forgiveness of God
first, Jona. 3. 8, ^.
and cry mightily to the Lord; Who can tell, if God will turn, and repent, and
turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? There is much talk, and
much ado about the new Model. Oh that there were an heart in every of us to
get new hearts and right spirits; to put off the old man, concerning the former
conversation, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and be
renewed in the spirit of our minds; and put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. It is held the wisdom of a State
when they are about an accommodation, to take care for the securing of such
persons as they have in jealousy and may be dangerous, lest they kindle the
fire anew, and it break out again to more mischief: Let us also be careful
to secure our own deceitful hearts, desperately deceitful, and wicked above
measure; set a watch over them, that we may be safe from their treachery:
above all keepings, keep the heart; out of it come murders, etc. For that
purpose let us bring them again under new engagements; let us renew our
Covenants this day: we had need do it often, and be often put in mind to do it;
and to keep it when we have done. It is not yet time out of mind of man, since
a solemn Oath and Covenant was framed and urged with much zeal upon all over
whom there was power; I doubt not but ye remember the grounds and reasons, with
the manner of the carriage of that business. I have heard some speak as if
they repented it, and changed their judgments about the business of
Reformation, and there has been talk and hope of a forbearing to press it
any more upon any new occasions, or a connivence at the refusers, amounting to
an enlargement from it: read the preface to it and wonder how such dreams
should come in any man's head. By what ill dint has it been so blasted, as to
have lost its virtue or necessity? or upon what pretense can any amongst us
imagine themselves or be thought by others so formidable, or so confiding as
they must therefore for the sake of liberty of conscience be left at large, or
be loosed from it? if there be a realitie in such a fancy, Lord have mercy
upon us: how shall the persons guilty of such levitie ever answer it to God or
the world, or their own consciences; or the parties who have been already
yoaked by it? one thing I am sure of, that whatsoever in it may be repented of,
yet there is no shadow or color of cause to depart from this clause and the
obligation to it: And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and
provocations against God and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our
present distresses and dangers, the fruits thereof: we profess and declare
before God and the world, our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own
sins, and for the sins of these Kingdoms --. And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our charge
and power, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation: It were wickedness to decline such a profession, and a
snare after such a vow to make inquiry. Let every man therefore fortify his
purposes, his duty in this, by entering bond anew this day: But remember what
the Preacher says, Eccles. 5. 4. 6.
When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has no
pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed, suffer not thy mouth to
sin, neither say thou before the Angel, It was an error, wherefore should
God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?

And that we may the better prevent a general backsliding, and promove an
universal amendment, let us unite and associate (we that dwell in associated
Counties can speak of the benefit of Associations by experience, and therefore
hope and pray the continuance thereof) that we may so be mutually helpful, and
exhort one another daily, may watch over each other, consider one another, to
provoke to love and good works, and by good example may light and lead on
others; and so make the Reformation more general and more lasting.

Think on these things; and if there be any other thing which God calls us to
in such a season as this; let us hear it and know it for our selves: as
Soldiers receive the word of Command every man for himself, not to jangle
with his fellow. Let us hear and do it while it is called to day. Let us
arise and be doing.

Especially ye Honorable and beloved, for this matter belongs unto you; we
also will be with you; consider it and do it.

For first, were ye all in your own persons as free from the offense as Moses;
could ye apologize for your selves with Samuel; or wash your hands in
innocence with David; yet when wrath is upon the Congregation, or the storm
may be foreseen in the vapor, the punishment in the sin; you ought to rent
your garments, and sit down astonished with Ezra, and deprecate the judgment
with Hezekiah. Ye know the Law in the case of uncertain murder, Deuteronomy. 21. 1,
2. If a man be found slain in the land, and it be not known who has slain
him, then thine Elders and thy Judges shall come forth, etc. He says not the
Elders of the next City, as afterward, ver. 3. but thine Elders, the general
States of the Land, some of the high Court at Jerusalem; the equity and moral
of it reaches you: by virtue of your middle station and relation between God
and the people, the care of making the expiation and atonement lies upon you;
and ye are the men whom God seeks to step into the gap to make intercession.
The reproaches wherewith they reproach him, should fall on you, and ye should
be ashamed and confounded in the stead of the people: and who knows if ye had
thoroughly afflicted you souls in the days of humiliation; Jer. 7. 5.
if ye had thoroughly amended your ways and your doings; if ye had thoroughly
executed judgment and justice, but the plague had ceased before this time?

Secondly, in general judgments where the Phiall in the pouring out
bespatters all, it may well be supposed that all have sinned, and must all
together bring the sacrifice. Sanctify ye a Fast: Joel 1. 14.
call a solemn Assembly: gather the Elders, and all the inhabitants of the
land into the house of the Lord your God, and cry unto the Lord. Without
question ye are involved in the common calamity as well as others; the rod
lasheth you and you feel it, the most of you, who have any thing in the
enemies quarters: I beseech you hear the voice of it, and him that brings it.
Though ye have the privilege of blowing of the Trumpet, for the gathering of
the people, and give law for time and place, yet ye are not thereby privileged
from the fasting, the weeping, the mourning, the crying, or praying, and the
turning with all your hearts together with others: lay your hands therefore
upon your hearts, and let them smite you for your own sins, and your fellowship
with other men's: Levit. 4. 15.
If the Congregation sin, the Elders must lay their hands upon the head of
the sacrifice.

Thirdly, there is something very remarkable in this present judgment that
pulls by the Ear, Aurem vellit, and admonuit.
those among whom he judges, rather then other men. And though all men every
where be admonished to repent, yet more especially you Honorable and Beloved.
The Lord seems to have purposed it, Esai. 23. 9.
to stain the pride of all Glory, Majesty, Authority and Greatness, and to
bring into contempt all the Honorable of the earth: for the very foundations
are shaken, law and order is slighted and violated, and all estates disturbed,
to the dishonor and reproach of them that should bear up the pillars of it,
Arcana imperii.
the secrets and mysteries of State which all policy has ever kept veiled to
preserve them venerable and reverend, are now made common and exposed to every
eye, the originals and fundamentals of Empire and power are searched into, and
debated and judged, every man takes liberty to talk, and write, and print of
them with all boldness and confidence, the skirts of Majesty are uncovered,
and men see the nakedness of it, even Government it self has lost its
reverence, as well as its pomp and luster; every where men rather doubt, and
dispute, and interpret, then obey; contempt is poured, and dung is cast upon
the faces of Princes and Nobles and the Judges of the earth; The child
behaveth himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the
Honorable, Esai. 3. 5.
Esai 3. 5. And if ye mark the course and rage of the war, it is the sword of
the great men which are slains, Ezekiel. 22. 14.
Ezekiel. 21. 14. the fury of the battle has fallen much upon the Nobility and
Gentry. Consider this also, the vial has been poured out for many years
upon Parliments, they have been shattered and broken, their just privileges
violated, their members baffled and imprisoned, the loins of Parliaments have
been girded with a girdle, and it wanted little but they had been made slaves
and bawdes to the lusts and designs of private Iunctoes and Cabinets, yea,
they have been buried under scorn and reproach, and it was a crime to wish or
make mention of them.

And even this present Parliament (though blessed be God for it) in some
respects it has had the advantage of other Parliaments, and the Lord has
honored it above them all, by putting into its hand a greater work to do for
himself and his Church, and opened to it a wider door and more effectual,
though there be many adversaries, and crowned it with more admirable successes
and providence, and brought it on and followed it with more desires and
prayers, then ever any Parliament had before it: yet in some other regards, it
lies under a cloud, and is more shaken. The authority of it is questioned,
quarrelled, denied and opposed, the power of it straightened and bounded that it
cannot reach all the Kingdom through, proclaimed Rebels at home, deserted by
many of your own, and what you suffer abroad God knows: the wheels have
moved slowly and driven heavily, not without disturbance and distraction, your
Ordinances and Orders are not so cheerfully and universally received and obeyed
as happily ye think.

I but offer these things under the notion and respect of a judgment of God
upon authority, and those that deal in it, that ye may take notice of the
hand of the Lord, and be awakened to judge your selves and sin no more, lest
a worse thing yet befall us: for ye cannot but judge this, that (the cloud
being balanced by the hand of the Lord) where the dint of the storm falls
most, thence arose much of the vapor, and there the tempest will be most
violent and destructive, if it be not prevented by timely and serious
repentance.

Fourthly, and I will add no more. Something may be read to this purpose, in
the manner and way of the bringing on, and executing of this judgment; if ye
have observed it, it has been brewed, and wrought, and tunned, and broached,
and drawn by the wickedness or the weakness of those among whom God judges; by
the folly or miscarriage of governors and government, whether in the Church or
State; the disorder we complain of was first begotten between the ambition of
great men, and the unfaithfulnes of counselors of State, brought forth by the
unrighteousness and baseness of the Judges, nursed up and gotten strength by
the pride and flattery of the Praelacie and Praelaticall Clergy, and by the
unworthiness of many of the Nobility and Gentry complying and subserving. And
now it walks abroad through the Land by the same means by which it has come
thus far; and He that judges among you either hides away wisdom, or weakneth
your hands, or troubles your Counsels, or obstructeth your way, so as there
is no remedy but the divisions and the mischiefs of them continue, and
consume, and devour us daily.

Now let God be righteous, and every man a sinner; it has been commonly said,
and there is a truth in it, The King can do no wrong: it is not for me to tell
you the meaning of it, you give us the proverb and the interpretation thereof,
I beseech you make the application of it also: Consider with your selves, would
the God of order thus tumble all things headlong, turn every thing upside down,
or suffer this confusion, if he were not mightily provoked to it? It is his
strange work: he delights not in it, we have given the cause, our destruction
is of our selves; our own ways and our doings have procured these things to
our selves.

For certainly what ever may be said of the corrections wherewith the Lord
chastises a particular man, yet it cannot be denied but that a general
visitation of a Nation is the punishment of their sin. Now if we were to make
a discovery by Lots, wherein, and whose the sin has been, and all the chief
of the Kingdom were to stand on the one side, and the body of the people on the
other side, as when the trial was made between Saul and Jonathan and all
Israel, 1 Samuel 14 40.
who should be taken may we think? and which of them should escape? or if we
might enquire of the Lord as David did when there was three years famine in the
Land, 2 Samuel 21. 1.
might we not find the answer in the words of their report to Ezra Ez 9. 2.
Ezra. 9. 2.
The hands of the Princes and Rulers has been chief in the trespass?

Now what is to be done in this case? the story that follows will tell us, even
by the light of the next verse, we may read that the hand of the Princes and
the Rulers, (though they had no hand in the trespass) must be chief in the
repentance, in the humiliation, confession, deprecation, in the making of the
atonement and the reformation: And because others will not, ye must; and the
fewer come in to the Work, the more it lies upon your hands.

I beseech you therefore, (Honorable and beloved) Hear ye give ear and be not
proud, but humble your selves; sit down astonted, Jer. 13. 15. 18.
and mourn, because of the transgression; search out the sins of the State of
our Princes, Ezra. 9. 3. etc.
and Nobles, and Judges of our Parliaments, former and later, and weigh out (if
possible) the trespass with the aggravations; ye have begun well (blessed be
God, who put it into your hearts) ye have taken special notice of many
national sins, and commanded public acknowledgement, and deep humiliation
for them: Follow on, I beseech you, to seek the Lord, and turn unto him; make
yet a further and more diligent enquierie into the sins of the State, of our
Kings, our Princes, Jer. 5. 5.
our Parliaments, as of the Kingdom, and see if the great men have known the
way of the Lord, and the judgments of their God, if rather they have not
altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds. Some sins, and some men's
sins are open going before to judgment; They declared them as Sodom, they
hid them not: others (though done in the dark, and there was digging deep to
hide them, yet have of late by the wonderful providence of God, been brought
to light, and proclaimed upon the house tops; it is like ye may have seen more
then we that stand at further distance, Ezekiel. 8.
and if we might have the Prophets privilege, might we not discover greater
abominations then have as yet been revealed?

Give me leave to offer some few Interrogatories, upon which ye may examine: May
not God possibly be now visiting the iniquity of our fathers upon us? may not
we be the children within those generations, who are threatened in that Law?
Has there at any time by Law and practice been such a departure and separation
from Rome, as may undoubtedly declare a due dissent from, detestation of, and
humiliation for the idolatry of our Ancestors? may not the constant connivence
at Papists, the common compliancie with their superstition in matters of
ceremonies, and the formalities of public worship, the late toleration of
Popery, the general revolting, and backsliding thitherward by erecting of
altars and other innovations, and joining in affinity with the people of those
abominations, revive the memory of our fathers sins? Esaias 40. 2.
and wrap us up together in the crime? and with good justice make us receive
double from the hand of the Lord; (...) duplicia pro omnibus peccatis, sc. pro
suis peccatis and parentum.
while both their sins and ours meet together in one condemnation? The Lord
our God is a jealous God, and we are not an holy people.

Did we ever yet requite the Lord for the riches of his grace and wonders of
his providence, Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
in choosing us to be a people to himself, in the day when he lifted up his
hand to our fathers, and brought them out of the rage and flames of
persecution, and made himself known to them? remember the kindness of the
youth of this Church, and the love of its espousalls; Jer. 2.
did the priests say, Where is the Lord? and they that handle the Law, 2 Chro.
15.
did they know him? did or Prince or people seek the Lord with all their
hearts, as in the days of Asa, or as Josiah and Hezekiah did for their own
parts? was the Reformation carried on to the height and purity, which it might
and ought to have reached unto, considering the opportunity and advantages of
that season?

May not God take up a controversy against the Parliaments of this Kingdom
for the lack of knowledge that is in the Land? what provisions have been made
for the establishing of a preaching ministry in every Parish in the Island?
what countenance and encouragement to the painful labourer in the Harvest?
what laws have been made for the preaching of the Word every Lords day? put the
case there were never a Sermon in any Church on a Sabbath day in all the
Kingdom, what Statute were broken?

Consider, I pray you, if the Land be yet purged of the blood of the Martyrs in
times of persecution; of the blood of War shed in peace by Duels and more
treachereus ways. There was a time when many great men fell almost together,
and it was feared that blood touched blood; ye can remember the murmures and
whisperings then were, and what artifices to prevent the judgment; why may not
the land be made to mourn for these things now? can this Kingdom wash its
hands of the blood of Germany, Rochel, Ireland? blood is a crying sin, who
knows but that the Lord to whom vengeance belongs, remembers now, and
makes inquisition for blood?

Has there been a like zeal for the matters of God (who judges among you) in
all the course of the government of this Kingdom the long time of peace we had,
as for the matters of the King; for the Church and gospel of Christ, as for the
safety of the Commonweal? We remember how carefully prerogative was
maintained, and the puntillo's of man's honor stood upon; yet the same time the
power of God and Christ usurped upon, the morality of his Law disproved and
decried, and his Sabbaths even prostituted to profanation; and in a sort
commanded to be violated. Judge ye your own selves, whether the Magistrate has
for his part kept both or either of the Tables, been for the praise of those
who have done well, and for the terror of evildoers, and how far partaker with
the sins of the whole Land.

Come we to the present time since this great distemper and division. It may be
your thoughts are at Oxford, and the Court, and those armies. And I confess if
the division were to be made, as 1 Samuel 14. it were not hard to guess where
the lot would fall; but if as Josh. 7. 14. who might not fear?

Go ye nearer home, consider your selves the Assembly of the Mighty,
generally as a body, particularly every man in his relation to that
representative body; Have ye been careful to be as quick and fervent in the
building up, as in the pulling down of the Order and Government of the Church,
the suppressing of Sects and Heresies (which are the bane of the Church) as in
the rooting out of Episcopacie? as zealous in the keeping, as ye were in the
making of the Covenant? How faithfully and in the fear of God with a perfect
heart, have ye every man walked between Law and Commandment, Statute and
Judgment, and the Controversies and Difficulties which have come before you?
Could I tell how to speak so as to point every man into his own conscience,
and one man's eye might not be on another, or particularize in this great and
mixed Assembly, without uncovering the nakedness of any before the
Congregation; I might cut out much of your work for you this day; whereas now
I can only humbly offer a few enquiries, to lead on your thoughts to some
other particulars: but though I am bounded, ye are at large; though the
Minister must deal in generals this day, and tenderly in public; yet I
beseech you, do not you with your selves in private; for ye ought to
sanctify the day, and keep the Fast in private, as in public; in your
families apart, as in the Church; alone by your selves, as with company.

When therefore ye are in your Closets think on these things, and if there be
any other thing which ye can find out, or God shall bring to remembrance fit
to be repented of and amended, do not lightly regard it, but spread it before
the Lord; together with the misery and the perplexity the Land is in by
reason thereof; in your own behalf, and in the name of all the people of the
Land. Be afflicted, mourn and weep: Jam. 4. 9, 10.
Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Let
him not alone till he suffer himself to be entreated. Hold not your peace,
give him no rest. Let not your fervencie and perseverance in prayer, Esai. 6. 2.
abate or wax cold, till he establish his Church, and make it a praise in the
earth: And he give us yet, L^imer.
Once again, Once again the Gospel with peace. So much as in you is, both in
your own families, and in all the quarters of the kingdom procure a more
solemn sanctification of the Fast days. It is a great grief of heart to all
godly men, to see how negligently the work of the Lord is done on that day
every where, how formally and slightly, if it be not wholly omitted, while your
Ordinances go forth to compel the unwilling to come in under no other
penalty, but a threat of the return of their names. I beseech you therefore
revive, and double your care for the general and more orderly keeping of that
day, and promove and expedite the so long expected, and so much longed for
Reformation. And because ye see many seek out interpretations of evasions and
inlargements from their covenants, and begin to play fast and loose with that
most solemn Oath and Obligation; I beseech you in the name and fear of God,
rather renew the Covenant with as much severitie as Asa did that in his time,
then let it fall or die away, remembering to go before others in the example of
all due reverence and observation of that great engagement, the Oath of God,
and let there be care taken that the Name of the Lord our God be not taken in
vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

But not to instance any further in particulars, the sum of all is this. Its
fully manifest by the light of that principle which this Text holds forth, the
influence of God into government, that as well the disorderly as the orderly
managing of affairs amongst men, is ordered by the foreknowledge and
determinate hand of God; so as there is no evil in a Kingdom, but by his
express judgment: And if we understand the sense or scope of the Prophets
Sermons in like cases, or their doctrine be our instruction: Zach. 7. 7.
The Lords voice cries to the City, (...)
and the man of wisdom shall see the name; Hear ye the rod, (...)
and who has appointed it. Or as Iunius reads it, thy name shall see that
which is: Micah 3. 9.
(and where the reading or interpretation is various, to comprehend them is the
safest.) The Lord cries as well by his judgments as by his Ministers. His
glorious Majesty sees all things, and brings them into judgment, and who so
is wise will see and consider it, and walk humbly with his God, and he shall
understand that these occurrences are not casual chances, but proceed from
divine providence and justice, to warn men when they feel the rod, to look
up to the hand of God, who put it into the hands of men, and enquire for what
cause, and for what end they are thus judged of the Lord, and be zealous and
repent. What ever be the follies of men, God must be acknowledged and
justified. True and righteous are thy Judgments, O Lord: It is Gods
controversy; he is pleading with his people, and it is our duty, especially
of those who are between him and the people, as well in the Magistracy as in
the Ministry, to step in to heal up the breach, and make the atonement.
There need no other words to be sought out by the Preacher as goads and nails
for the fastening of all this, but those of the Prophet Amos: Can a bird fall
upon the earth where no gin is for him? Amos 3. 5.
Shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all? Shall
a trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Shall there be
evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? The lion has roared, who will
not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but Prophecy? Consider what I
say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Having thus dispatched that use of this doctrine, which more properly and
directly concerns the work of the day; Bear with me yet a little longer, (and
indeed ye do bear) while I pursue the farther application of it, in such other
things as it fairly points us unto, and cannot well be baulked, without a
wrong both to you and the Text. I will but briefly offer them in a word or two
of exhortation, and leave them upon your hands, or your hearts rather for
meditation and practice.

First generally, to consider the work of God which we may behold, in the
governing of the Nations, the goings of God among the Kings and Princes,
Princes and Nobles and all the Judges of the earth. The judgments of God in
judging among the Gods.

Shall I say, Let us examine our selves whether we have duly heretofore
understood and regarded this thing, heard his voice commanding, taken notice of
his Spirit moving, as well the living creatures as the wheels. Have we known,
have we acknowledged in the administration, and the manifold events and issues
of government, that the hand of the Lord does all these things? possibly we may
find matter of humiliation upon a diligent inquiry. Certainly there is a
very general ignorance and unmindfulnesse of this matter, Esai. 42. 20.
seeing many things, but observing not; opening the ears, but not hearing;
willing ignorance, gross negligence. They will not see, Psalm. 82. 5.
they know not, neither will they understand, but walk on in darkness,
slightness of spirit, in overly and superficial inquiry, Acts 17.
Athenian curiosity, hearing and telling of news, Psalm. 10. 45.
great contempt of God and his providence: The wicked in the pride of his
countenance, will not seek after God; God is not in all his thoughts, thy
judgments are far above out of his sight. Nay, unbelief, even to Atheism
and blasphemy, Ier. 5. 12.
they belie the Lord and say it is not he. It is a manifold sin and has its
gradations and aggravations, a mighty provocation. Esai. 5. 12.
They regard not the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his
hands: Psalm. 92. 6.
therefore they are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge, etc.
Its very brutish foolishness not to know nor understand this, and who knows
but for this very cause God may be so grieved with this geneneration, Psalm. 95.
10, 11.
who err in their hearts, and have not known his ways, as to swear in his
wrath that they shall not enter into his rest? It is a sore and heavy judgment
to have seen the great signs and wonders of God, and to want an heart to
perceive, eyes to see, and ears to hear to this day. Deuteronomy. 29. 4.

Let us awake at length, and be ashamed, and turn aside, and see what God does.
Psalm. 111. 2.
Come and see, come and behold the works of the Lord. Or for all their delights.
The works of the Lord are great sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein: and truly there is a mine of pleasure, (...)
and profit too, in the contemplation of the works of creation, and common
providence; there is much Divinity to be read in those books of nature, the
Holy Ghost reads us many Lectures out of them, and holy men have not thought
even those unworthy their most serious meditation; but there is more in the
special providence of God about men, the moderating or ordering of humane
affairs by and amongst men: Psalm. 19. 1.
Every handiwork of God is glorious, but far more of his glory is shed
abroad in these, especially if we consider them in their reference to the
Church, they show all his glory, and the invisible things of God are by them
made very visible and very legible in the fairest Character, they are his Name
in great letters; They are an excellent explication of the Law of God, copying
out the righteousness and justice of it in particular instances and examples,
Hose. 8. 12.
a clear Commentary upon all the Word of God.

Oh let them not be counted a strange thing, Esaias. 29.
a sealed book, especially our own story, the ways of God amongst us some few
years last past, and unto this day, where almost every work of God in judging
amongst us is not like a great lettser in a book with a gaye about it that
takes up a great deal of room, but has nothing more then another in
pronounciation; but as Hieroglyphics, and emblems, and some kinds of
Characters, full of moral and sense, a Book, a volume of mavelous works,
wonders repeated and multiplied. The Bible new translated and printed in a
letter that best fits the Worlds dull and decayed sight, the old stories
wrought over again, the Promises fulfilled, the Prophecies receiving their
accomplishment, a revelation of the Revelation which God gave unto Jesus
Christ, Reve. 1. 1.
to show unto his servants things which should come to pass: an interpretation
of of the visions which were seen of old, a Key to open the dark and heard
things in former praedictions, the unclasping of the sealed Book, that even
they that cannot read, may yet see and consider and understand together, that
the hand of the Lord has done all this. A praelude or praesage rather of the
great day of the Lord, and the judgment to come.

He that stands with the wise man in the window of his observation, may see
God preparing his throne for the judging of the great Whore, bringing Babylon
into remembrance, calling his people out from thence, delivering the cup of
trembling into the hands of the Nations. etc. Or as Moses when he was put in
the cleff of the Rock, may behold the glory of all Gods goodness made to pass
before him, in moderation of judgments, patient forbearance, unlooked for
deliverance, sudden and unexpected rescuing from off the praecipice and Brink
of ruin.

May perceive the rolling and yearnings of his bowels and compassions toward
his poor afflicted people that pray. May see him triumphing gloriously, in the
greatness of his excellency, lifting up himself above his adversaries in the
things wherein they deal proudly, raising the Trophies of his Glory out of
oppositions, contradictions and impossibilities. May observe the bright shining
forth of his manifold wisdom in out-witting cunning men, turning crafty
counsels into foolishness, frustrating the tokens of liars, and making
diviners mad. May take notice of many evident demonstrations of his
faithfulness, in remembering his promises, hearing prayers, and showing himself
nigh unto his people, in all that they call upon him for. 2 Chro. 16. 9.
One may see his eyes running to and fro through the earth, to show himself to
the hearts of them whose hearts are toward him, with very remarkable
testimonies of his justice in judgments and executions done upon his enemies,
and may receive abundance of instruction, and learn much righteousness. But I
forget my self, and tire out your patience. Therefore

Secondly, and more particularly to you, Honorable and beloved, yet another
word of exhortation, to judge for God, and as God judges.

1. For God. 2 Chro. 19.
There are matters of God, as well as matters of the King, or Kingdom; the
care whereof must be upon you as well as upon us. His Church, his Kingdom, his
City, his House, his People, his Spouse, his Children, his Body; ye, as
nursing fathers, must tender the good, and welfare of them, that they may find
harbor and protection, enjoy their just Privileges, and Liberties, wherewith
Christ has made them free: not such licentiousness as is abused for a cloak
of naughtiness. Ye must see to Order and unity amongst them, that there be no
rents and Schisms; surely our Savior that ascended into Heaven, and gave
gifts to men, some Apostles, etc. that we might all meet in the unity of Faith;
and has diverse times, and after sundry manners given that very thing in charge
to his ministers, would not have the magistrate left at large from providing,
Ephe. 4.
and endeavoring, that speaking or following the truth in love, we may grow
up, making increase by edifying our selves and one another in Love. Ye must do
that, which we are to pray that ye may do* viz. Take a course that Christians
may live a peaceable and quiet life in godliness and honesty, not in strife
and contention.

There is -- His Name. It may not be blasphemed, dishonored. His day, it must
be sanctified; Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath, thou and thy servants, etc.
and the stranger that is within thy gates. Remember Nehimiahs Zeal, and do
likewise.

4. His Gospel. Ye have authority, and it is your duty to provide that it be
duly preached, so as the excellency of the knowledge thereof may abound in
the Land (...) the sea; that it be truly taught: not blended, adulterated, made
another Gospel. His worship; it must not be corrupted by Idolatry, Matthew. 15. 9.
Superstitions, Innovations, lest God be worshipped is vain, while they teach
for doctrines the commandments of men. His ministry; and it ought to be
purged, planted, lights set up in every bowl of the Candlestick, encouraged,
maintained, Nehem. 10. 35.
and abetted in the work of the Lord. His Sacraments; it is your Honor as your
duty to see that they be kept pure in the celebration and ministration of
them. 1 Cor. 9. 9.
There is a bookcase for it, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Number. 9. 7. There were certain men, etc. This is clear from that Text, Numb. 9.
7.
and will be granted, that notwithstanding the general Law, and common right,
yet in some cases, cases of overt pollution and offense, such persons must
abstain, and be suspended from the present use of their liberty; and though it
be not expressed; yet it may be inferred upon like moral equity, that as well
the bold intruder as the wilful forbearer was to be cut off: and it cannot be
denied but the keeping of all that particular Law fell under the common
sanction of the whole Law of Ordinances. He that transgresses shall be cut
off. And the Jewish interpreters tell us, that if there be witnesses of the
fact, the civil Magistrate was to draw the sword: but if this be not full, the
presidents 2 Chro. chap. 15 chap. 30. and chap. 35. will rule the case for the
civil Magistrate, and make out this, that where the doctrine and discipline of
the Church does not, or cannot prevail, the Magistrate must interpose his
Coercive Power for restraint and remedy. -- In a Word, God has many things
amongst us that must be protected and maintained; and the matters of God have
many adversaries, which must be watched, and suppressed; for ye be are not the
sword in vain, ye are Gods ministers attending continually upon this very
thing. Romans 13. 4. 6.
Magistrates and ministers have (as ye see) one common style of office, that ye
in your place, as we in our function and order, should mind and promove the
things of God, ye by the sword, and we by the Word; you are keepers of both
Tables, the first (...) great Commandment, as well as the second that is like
unto it, both come sometimes, as occasion is under your Cognizance. And ye know
what a brand sticks to this day upon Gallio (though an Heathen Magistrate) that
he cared not for the matters of the Law and Worship, Act. 18. 12. etc.
according to the Law, when question was brought, no, though there were
insurrections and tumults upon that occasion: and for Gamaliels counsel, Acts
5. 38. 39.
Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work,
be of men, it will come to naught: but if it be of God, ye cannot everthrow it,
lest happily ye be found even to fight against God. Though it be found within the
Bible, yet it is not of like authority with one of Solomon's proverbs or
maxims of Policy: it has no otherwise the approbation of God for good, Exodus
1. 10.
then the design of Pharaoh, or the crafty counsel of Ahitophell, 2 Samuel 17.
1.
which are also recorded in the Scripture, it will not consist with other rules
of the word, and it has been condemned as unsound, and unsafe by many godly
wise men; we have more sure words of Scripture, out of which we draw the
doctrine of the Magistrates power and duty in the matters of God and religion,
then the loose speech of such a Neutralist and time-serving Politician as
Gamaliel was. Go on therefore, I beseech you, as ye began; take us the little
Foxes as well as the ravening Wolves; provide against the insolency of
Libertinisme as the tyranny of Episcopacie: ye have done something against
Idolatry, swearing, and Sabbath breaking; (happy were it if there were life put
into them by another Ordinance for the execution of them) what lets that ye
should not do the like against Errors, Haresies, and Schisms? Why should the
first Commandment be left out of protection more then the other three of the
first Table?

Secondly, to judge as God judges, to exercise authority as God does, with
the mind that is in God, in his way, or according to the rule of his word, and
unto his ends.

First, with the mind that is in God, without the mixture of a private spirit,
with incorruptnesse, gravitie, sincerity, justly, uprightly, faithfully, with
such a free public unbyased, unprejudiced spirit, such liberty and courage
from a principle within, not popular arguments from without. Authority is a
ray or beam of divine Majesty, and shines best when it is least blended with
any lust or passion of man: ye know what God said to Moses when he first
called him, to set him over the people; Exodus 3.
Pull off thy shoes, etc. id est, according to Theodorets Allegory or
Interpretation, carnal, earthy, sensual, beastly passions, or all
inordinateness of affection; imagine it spoken to your selves: It is his
judgment. Rulers are but the channels, the pipes through which it flows and is
conveyed; its their duty to let it run as little royled as may be. Set him
therefore before you as your copy, Primum in unoquoque genere, etc.
the pattern of government, Your excellency consists only in conformity to
him.

Secondly, according to his word. His law is a glass into which is shed the
image or species of his righteousness, imitable and practicable, as well by
Rulers in their Spheres, as other people in theirs. If ye look into that
glass, ye may see how to dress your selves, and how ye ought to be, and do in
place and exercise of power, only go not away, and forget straightwayes, what
manner persons ye are or should be, but continue in the meditation and practice
of it, that ye may be blessed in your deed. James 1^
The law of God is your rule; for the Theorie of all policy, and for the
practice too, even for making of laws, the beam and standard by which all laws
must be weighed and tried. There is a Law above laws, said the most learned
among Kings, King James in a Speech in the Star Chamber.
Free and supreme, by which all Municipall laws must be governed, and except
they have dependence on this law, they are unjust and unlawful. It is your
guide also for the administration of the government; and all the Bible,
especially the Historical part, is the exemplification of that law, lining the
rule with examples: if ye exercise your selves to the reading of it, as David
the man after Gods own heart did, ye cannot be to seek either for
principles, or for presidents; and give me leave to tell you, that though you
have power to give law to others over whom ye judge, yet ye must take law
from God, who judges amongst you. I confess indeed, because ye share in the
Legislative power, ye are not so bound up, by, or to the laws of the land
already prescribed, as inferior officers in courts of judicature, etc. But as
to Gods law ye are no more at liberty to go from, or step beside the Moral
equity and justice of it, then he that comes forth to sing a Song set to his
hand, may vary from the Notes or Dittie in the book, only he may order his
voice for the better grace of the music, and that must be his care, and
therein lies his skill.

Thirdly and lastly, all must be directed to Gods ends. First, his glory, the
dignity and peace of his Crown; that they which live under your power, may
fall down and glorify God, and say, God is amongst you of a truth. Secondly,
the public safety and welfare of the people; not your own personal honor or
profit, but the commonwealth: for though all advantage may seem to flow unto
you, yet ye do receive the same, but as the sea does the waters, to convey
and transmit all back for the benefit of the land.

Now that we may draw to a conclusion both of this use and of the Sermon: For
helps to the better practice of these things, and that Magistracy may reach
these great and excellent ends; Be pleased to receive these directions from God
by the mouth of his unworthy messenger.

First, James 1. 17.
derive all your sufficiency from God the Father of lights, Coloss. 1. 19.
and from the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom it pleased the Father that all fullness
should dwell. Rest not in natural parts, or what is gained by reading and
observation, learning and experience, but receive something more of his Grace,
from whom comes down every good and perfect gifts, and out of his hand, who
is the image of the invisible God: even common skill for the most ordinary
business is taught by him. God instructs the Plow man to discretion. Esa.
2^. 27. 28. 29.
The Fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the Cummin with a rod,
bread-corne is bruised, etc. This also comes forth from the Lord of hasts,
who is wonderful is counsel, and excellent in working How much more wisdom
and knowledge, 1 Kings 3. 9.
with an understanding heart to judge the people, 2 Chro. 1. 10.
and discern between good and bad; for who is able to judge a great people?
It will therefore be your wisdom, whatever your breeding or other advantages
be, to take in daily from God and Christ, (as the pipe from the conduit head)
by due acknowledgement and dependencie. No man ever had so much prudence and
largeness of heart, as Solomon, who took it in from God; There cannot be so
much found in a cisterne or pond as may be drawn from a spring, neither will
the supply be so certain and constant by nature and morality, as when it
comes down from him with whom is no variableness or shadow of change; the
wind from the bellows is not as continued and uniforme, as the breath from the
lungs, where Gods visitation preserves Spirit: Job 10. 12.
nor can it be trusted to and relied upon, as that which he more immediately
gives and sanctifies. Vbi non est sanctitas, fides pietas, instabile regum est.
Job 6. 15.
Brooks and Torrents though they sometimes swell high, and show much, are but
waters that will fail: My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, as the
streams of brooks they pass away; But a fountain that is fed from the Ocean,
a rill or riveret from the spring, fails seldom or never, they that come
thither are not ashamed, they are not confounded because they hoped: Mere
natural or moral parts and abilities, like ditch water may corrupt; the
wisdom of Egypt, Exodus 7. 21.
like the waters of Egypt, both by the judgment of God, and the wickedness of
man, may taint and stink, and become unwholesome, nay possibly turn into blood.
The wisdom that is from beneath is earthly, sensual, devilish, but the
wisdom that is from above, Jam. 1. 15. 17.
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy
and good fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy. Neither can a man
merely by Art or Nature be made active for God and Religion, though
peradventure he may be a good Patriot for his Country. Water will not rise
higher (unless it be forced) then the spring from whence it came, and ye will
also find it, that at one time or other even the luster and reputation of such
men and such faculties, will fade like faint colors that are not woaded or
grained: Whereas the credit and esteem of the other is laid deeper, and is
more solid and lasting: 1 Kings 3. 28.
They feared King Solomon, because they saw the wisdom of God was in him, to
do judgment.

Secondly, Pray much and often for grace, guidance, and blessing. The great men,
the Worthies in matter of government were praying men, as Ezra, Nehemiah, and
before them Moses, David, Solomon, etc. and the great things for which they are
so famous, were obtained by prayer. Its very like that Phinehas was a praying
when he was moved to do that extraordinary piece of justice on Zimri and
Cosbi, Numb. 25.
by which the wrath of God was appeased, and himself became renowned, else why
should the Holy Ghost direct the Psalmist, recording that Heroic Act, (...).
to choose a word that signifies as well to pray, Psalm. 106. 30.
as to do justice? Then stood up Phinehas, and prayed (says one translation)
and executed judgment (says another,) (...).
and the plague was stayed; and that was counted to him for righteousness unto
all generations for evermore.

Thirdly, undertake and do all both in Counsel and War in his name, as David
when he went out against Goliath, in reliance upon him, as Asa when he fought
against the huge host of the Ethiopians and Lubims, an host of a thousand
thousand, 2 Chro. 14. 11.
and three hundred Chariots: Help us, O Lord our God, 2 Chro. 16. 8.
for we rest upon thee, and in thy Name we go against this multitude: and the
Lord delivered them into his hand, because he relied on the Lord. For it is
God that girdeth with strength, and makes your way perfect; he gives you the
shield of salvation, his right hand has holden you up, and his gentleness has
made you great: Therefore as the Wiseman counsels, Pro. 3. 5. 6.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not on thine own
understanding, in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

For motives and incitements we shall not need to go out of the compass of
the Psalm to find them: First, there stands one in the threshold of my Text:
God stands in the Assembly of the mighty. Verily, God is among you, there
needs not an empty seat be placed in the midst of your House, wherein ye may
imagine God to sit. He judges in the midst of you. He does not stand
hearkening at the dangerous door, or behind the hangings, or a far off,
hearing and seeing imperfectly at a distance, nor receives information by his
Spy, and Intelligencer within you, though such an one there is, but himself
(without any breach of your Privileges) is in your house, Vid. sup page 4.
in your thoughts, in your hearts. As sure as God is in heaven, He is among
you, yea, within you. There is no an Act that ye do, not a word that ye speak,
not a thought that ye think, not an aim that ye have, not a design that ye
drive, but he knows it better then you your selves: when he makes inquisition,
he shall not need search the Parliament rolls, look your journall books,
break open your studies, send to search your pockets: He himself is more in
the midst of you, and within you, every of you, then you your own selves. If
any man among you should have taken the covenant with his lips, his heart not
consenting; should pretend for God, and intend for himself; look to
Westminster, and row to Oxford; give counsel here, and intelligence there,
should cast in any thing to trouble your proceedings, retard the reformation,
or spinne out the War, etc. does not God know it?

I beseech you, in the fear of God, consider this, and regard it as the most
fixed and resolved truth, that ye may not trespass against God in the
judgment, either within doors or without; God stands in the assembly of the
mighty.

Secondly, There are two or three more folded together in the Text, two offer
themselves in the translation, He judges among the gods.

First, All your Counsels, and all your works move by his influence. The
whole disposing thereof is of him, the guidance and success of all your
actions depend upon the Lord, and they are cursed or blessed according to his
pleasure: look as they cross or comply with him, so they prosper, and so will
the issue be. Pro. 19. 21.
There are many d^^^^s in a man's heart, nevertheless the counsel of the Lord,
that shall stand. If any man, or men, consult or go against God, his Church,
his Cause, his Way, Psalm. 2.
his Word, his Ends, they imagine a vain thing, disquiet themselves in vain,
Pro. 21. 30.
-- There is no wisdom, nor understanding nor counsel against the Lord, Esa.
54. 17.
no weapon that is formed against him or his, shall prosper. They consult shame
to themselves, and sin against their own souls: Psalm. 9. 16.
The Lord is known by the judgments which he executes, the wicked is snared
in the work of his own hands. Let them multiply their party, and join heads
and hands, Esaias 19. 11.
they are never the nearer; Associate your selves. Jer. 8. 8.
O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird your selves, and ye shall
be broken in pieces; take counsel together and it shall come to naught, speak
the word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us. The Machiavillian is the
most errant fool in the world, Esaias 31. 1, 2, 3.
and so are they that take counsel, but not of God; and cover with a covering,
but not of his Spirit; or trust on means, because they are many; on helps,
because they are strong, and look not to the Holy One of Israel, neither seek
the Lord: yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his
words. Let them try the conclusion when they please, Jer. 44. 28.
they shall know whose word shall stand, (says God) mine or theirs.

Again, if ye concur with God in his Way, and in his Ends, who shall harm
you? If God be with you, who shall be against you? Piety is the best policy:
they are on the s^^^^ side, and have more then wind and tide; the wind and
the Sun, that have God on their side.

Receive it, I beseech you, as an encouragement to follow on to seek and serve
the Lord in the work of Reformation, and what tends to it, the Work is not so
much yours as Gods, and is carried on, not by your might nor power, but by his
spirit: Zach: 4. 7.
Mountains shall become plains before Zerubbabel (the agent whom God sets on
work) and he shall bring forth the Head stone thereof with shouting, Grace,
Grace unto (...). Possibly your hands that have laid the (...) also finish it.
Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good.

Thirdly, God is concerned in the Government, and the manner of the carriage
thereof by men: What is done by them among whom be judges, is to the glory or
dishonor of his name who judges among them. If good motions should be
smothered or diverted, the weighty and necessary concernments of the Church or
the Commonwealth be neglected, or retarded, matters in debate carried by party
and affection, not by judgment and reason, if the just complaint and cry of
the poor should not be heard, if justice should not be done, or there be
unrighteousness in the non-discharging of debts, or unfaithfulness in the
deceiving of trust, or any such like, which God forbid, the damage indeed will
be to the Public, or to this or that man; but the sin is against God, and
his Name is polluted thereby: the reproaches that fall on them that do such
things, fall also upon him, in whose stead and place they are which do them:
through them he is evil spoken of: 2 Chro. 19. 6.
Take heed therefore what ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord,
who is with you in the judgment.

Fourthly, Vid. sup. page 4.
There is another argument may be found in the various reading of the Text, He
will judge the Gods openly. There is One in Authority over them, that are in
authority over others; and they which judge others, must be judged themselves,
1 Samuel 2. 30.
and ye know what he says, Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that
despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. Many times God performs it in this
World, our eyes have seen it; Pro. 11. 31.
Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth; how much more the
wicked and the sinner? But there is no escaping the judgment to come: for the
time comes, the day is appointed wherein he will judge the World in
righteousness, Reve. 19. 12.
the small and the great must stand before God, and be judged according to
their works. Foresee, therefore, Job 31. 14.
and fore-consider the terror of that day; think the thoughts of Job, When
God rises up, what shall I do? and when he visits, what shall I answer him?
Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed ye Judges of the earth: serve
the Lord with fear, rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry,
Psalm. 2. 10.
and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed
are all they that put their trust in him.

We may yet espy one Motive more in the last verse of the Psalm. Arise O God
and judge the earth. There are prayers for, or complaints of you daily sent up
to heaven, and these like the vapor that ascends, will be dissolved, either in
a shower, or a storm, will bless or blast their persons and their ways, for,
or against whom they are directed. How lightly so ever men regard prayers, or
appeals, when God makes inquisition he remembers them, Psalm. 10. 17.
and forgets not the cry of the poor. He that prepares the heart of men to
pray, will cause his own ear to hear, and that with the saving strength of his
right hand.

Lastly, that every one may have something to carry home with him, let us close
upall in a further and more general use of the doctrine. Since God judges
among the Gods; let us improve the knowledge of it, both for the public and
our own private a double way.

First, for the time past, and for all the evil which has befalne us by any
error or disorder in government, or by any miscarriage, in any undertaking by
the one side or the other; (for the sad thoughts of those judgments are more
proper for the day;) let us be silent because the Lord has done its Refrain
from froward quarrelsome complaining and murmuring, and give glory to God:
snarle not at the stone, but acknowledge him that cast it; It is of God, he
has done what seemed him good. 1 Samuel 3. 18.
Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I will not
offend any more; That which I see not teach thou me, Job 34. 32.
if I have done iniquity I will do no more.

And for the time to come, let us engage God by prayer. In nothing be careful,
Phil. 4.
but in all things, let your requests be made known to God by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving. Had we never so sure a word of Prophecy or
Promise, by which we might determine the time, and the manner, and the nature
of the issue of all these judgments abroad in the earth; yet we ought to pray
and make our confession as Daniel, Eze. 36. 37.
Dan. 9. 1. There is a rule for it: I the Lord have spoken, and I will do it,
I will yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them. Be
the matter never so perplexed, and seemingly impossible, Prayer is an Engine
can help at a dead lift; Prayer will draw down from heaven the influence of
God upon Parliament, Assembly, Commitees, Armies, Navies, and all that serve in
them, and is done by them, that they may do the work of God, and prosper. If a
man should busy himself in turning the lesser wheels of his Watch with his
finger, how long and how evenly should he make it go? but let him wind up the
spring and it will keep its course, and measure the time exactly. Neglect this
and we labor in vain, our confidences will distress us and not help us: but
if once we can prevail with God, to plead our cause with them that strive
against us, to stand up for our help, and lay his hand upon the hand of those
who are the instruments of the preservation of the Land, and the Reformation of
the Church, that which they advise and do, will be the Arrow of the Lords
deliverance; But this use is best made in kind.

Let us pray, etc.
FINIS.

