A TRUE RELATION of the late Expedition into KENT By the appointment of both
Houses of PARLIAMENT. As it was expressed in a Letter from a man of good
credit, who was in the Action, Dated from Dover the 29. of August, 1642.
WHEREIN My Lord ROPER, and Sir PETER RICAVLT, were taken into custody and
Confined unto Vpnar Castle, and likewise how we took His Majesty's great Ship
called the Sovereign of the Seas, and furnished her with a sufficient guard. As
also News from Cambridge, and the bringing in of Dr. WREN Bishop of Ely, with
good store of treasure, to the Tower of London.

September, 2. Printed by T. FAUCET. 1642.

Good News from KENT.
MY love to you remembered, and your son his duty, being both of us in good
health praise be given to God.

When we went from London, the first place we staid at was Dertford in Kent,
where we quartered our selves for a night. The next day we came to
Cobham-Hall, an House belonging to the Duke of Lenox, from whence we took
three Barbary Horses, valued at 200. pound a piece, and five loads of
Ammunition. The next day we went to Rochester, where we had very good respect
from all, and made our abode there two days: Our next remove was toward
Maidstone, where by the way at Ailsford two miles short of that Town, we found
the House of Sir Peter Ricault, who also has a fair House in London near to
the Stocks, he dwells in Ailsford next door to Sir William Cooper; from him
they took certain Plate and some Money, and committed his person to
Upnar-Castle over against Chatham, which Castle we took, and all the Ordnance,
and put in a Garrison of Soldiers, who keep and hold it for the King and
Parliament. At Rochester we light upon the Lord Roper, and sent him to
Upnar-Castle likewise to bear Sir Peter Ricault company. After this we came to
Sir William Butlers house not far from Maidstone, where we found good store
of Plate, Money, and Powder, all which we took possession of, but vvithall
our Soldiers stumbled upon such plenty of Sugar and Svveat-meats, as served to
take away the stomachs of the most of them for that day and the next. When
we came to Maidstone, many gave us good words, but we might perceive by
the countenances of diverse of them, that we were not so generally vvelcome as
many expected. From thence we advanced as far as Canterbury, only by the
way we called in at Sir Edward Deerings, and made bold to plunder his house,
albeit we found very little, either Money or Arms. After we were entered
into Canterbury, we took out of the Deanes house great store of Arms, about
some three Carts lading beside 14. Barrels of Gunpovvder, vessels about the
bigness of a beer-barrel; diverse of our Troop having got into the Minster,
pulled down the Organs, and pulled to pieces the Rail about the Communion
Table, and removed that they called their high Altar into the body of the
Chancell.

From thence we removed toward Dover, where we found our selves least
welcome of any place we yet came to, for scarce any one would vouchsafe us a
good look, yet we made shift to possess our selves of the Castle for all
that, and have furnished our selves with about seven thousand pounds, all which
we have made bold with out of the houses of Recusants.

One thing I had almost forgotten, that at our being at Chatham we possessed
our selves of the Kings great Ship, called the Sovereign of ehe Seas, and have
put into her a Guard of Soldiers. We suppose our next moving will be toward
Rye and Hastings. Having no more to write at this time, I rest,

Yours, J. W.
Thursday the 1. of September, 1642.
THis morning early Nevves came to London by a Minister who came from
Cambridge yesterday, that by Order from the Honorable House of Parliament,
certain Troops of Horse have surprised diverse Heads of the Colleges, who
were suspected for sending Moneys and Plate to the King, and imprisoned them,
and have searched their Colleges, and taken away such Plate and Money as they
found there: And this afternoon Doctor Wren Bishop of Ely was brought up to
London, with other Doctors and Heads of Houses, being guarded with 500.
Horse, who were scene coming thorovv West-smithfield in London, with a Cart
load of Treasure brought up to the Parliament to be disposed of by them, and in
the mean time the Bishop of Ely was conveyed to the Tovver, with others in
his company, till the Honorable Houses of Parliament shall determine what is
further to be done.



FINIS.

