A VINDICATION OF THE ENGLISH CATHOLICS FROM THE PRETENDED CONSPIRACY AGAINST
THE LIFE, AND GOVERNMENT OF HIS SACRED MAJESTY Discovering the chief lies and
contradictions contained in the Narratiue of TITUS OATS.

The 2. Edition with some Additions: and an answer to two Pamplets printed in
defense of the Narratiue.

JTEM A Relation of some of Bedlows pranks in Spain, and Oate's Letter
concerning him.

Nec nobis ignominiosum est pati, quod passus est Christus: nec vobis gloriosum
facere, quod fecit Judas.

Cyp. Epist. 55. Permissu Superiorum.

M. D.C. LXXXJ.

A PREFACE TO Mr. I. PHILLIPS.
SIR.
VEry lately, and al most at the same time, J received two Pamphlets both
written against my Vindication of the English Catholics; one by you, the other
without any name: I intend in this second edition to answer what is material in
both, although this Preface is directed particularly to you, 1. Because you name
your self. 2. The other speaks more to my Vindication, you more to me, and
for that reason may in ciuility expect a return. 3. Because you pretend to
more intimacy with me, then ordinary, to be my bosom friend, and to know the
secrets of my heart, and my Consessions too: for page 13. you tell the world; I
abhor the King in my heart; and a little after you say: I never call the King
sacred, but I receive Absolution. This expresses a greater familiarity, then
Oats pretended with the Jesuits: if you go on, you may stand fair for a
witnesses wages, and vie with the pretended Doctor himself, in the Art of
Discovering Plots.

Notwithstanding all this you declare that you know not who am, and seem very
much concerned to find it out. Page 2. In the first place, it behoues us
strictly to examine who this Titan of a Vindicator is, and page 44. you must
come, and tell us who you are. In fine all, that you can discern of me, is
contained in these words; page 2. There is no question to be made, but that I
am a Roman Catholic. So all your strict enquiry affords you no further light,
then which serves to discern my Religion. But as for my Person you know not
whither I am little, or great, black, or white, a German, Indian, Spaniard,
or English. And yet you boldly assure you know my heart, when you do not know my
face!

You blame me for using uncivil language: I wish you were less obnoxious to
that blame. You say page 5. We Profess a profligate Religion, a vicious and
misshapen mixture of Ceremony, and superstition, that will not pass the muster
of common Reason. And p. 48. A religion of no credit, founded upon forgery, a
sort of Devotion, that no man of Reason can admit into his Belief, or
Conscience: in the practice diametrically contrary to all the precepts of
Christ, Our Saints to be sported with, as the train of Heathen Deityes.
Transubstantiation rather to be contemned then disputed against. Our mi^a^les
as fabulous as Mandauil's travels. Our Pomp, Pride, Luxury, Sodomy, infamous.
Our superstitions, and Ceremonys Foppish, and Ridiculous, Infine a Religion
vilified with our own mouths.

Of all our Clergy: page 9 they are Dunces, Block heads, Ignoramus, stupid
Theologists, and opinionated head strong Mules. page 12. Bloody Canaille page
17 obstinate, wilful vermin Item. apacke of Knaves page 43. Fugitives,
Traitors, and conspirators. Homines triobolares, Propertius's Damae, Tressis
Aga^ones.

Of a Venerable Prelate page 9. He lives under the ill character of an Exile, a
Renegado, he has renounced his Allegiance: a hedge Archbishop.

Of my self. p. 12. Fop of a Vindicator. p. 20. nick a poope of a scurritous
Vindicator. p 23. Pumpkin of a vindicator. p. 31. pitiful, idle, nonsensicall
vindicator. p. 41. Caitif of a Vindicator. and Priapus of a vindicator p. 11.
Poor silly wood pecker. p. 21. fool and Concombe. p. 26. I shall be canonized
for a fool. p. 30. Fool, and will turn changling. p. 29 hardly worth
hanging. p. 44 Empty skull, hollow perioranium. p. 27. My brains are drier
then brickes. p 34. and 35. Brain of a Tailor. And as if English did not
afford ribaldry enough you borrow of Greek, Latin Italian, and French a
supply. p. 37. Afinego. p. 41. Chenalopex. p. 43. Monsieur Homme de rien, and
Pomarius Hercules. Infine p. 18. that I am not worthy to hold an vrinal, to D.
Oats, or feed his hogs. And you seem in that place to reduce all my good
qualitys, to two heads: fool, and knave. J will leave the later to you and
your pretended Doctor: and for the other, the more I deserve it, the more
credit will be given to my words: for fools speak the truth.

These are the ornaments of your civil language, when you blame mine, as
uncivil. Did I not perceive, that you are well stored, with such coin, I
should think you would be soon out of purse, you spend so freely. But you have
an Indian mine of such metal, and a mint in your Brain.

I find no cause, given by me for all this riboldry, but 1. that p. 2. I said
out of Pamphlet that Oates's Phisognomy was an Index to all villainy, and that a
lettred man may read Rogue in his face. And 2. that I call his untrue
Depositions, Lies. To which I answer.

As to the first: I cite my Author, out of whom I cite those words. I am
certain they are there: and am not further concerned, whither true, or false.

To the 2. seeing the Depositions are false things signified in word, with an
intent to deceive: which (as you say p. 18.) is the definition of a Lie, I
thought I might put the Definitum, for the Definition, his Depositions being of
that nature. And though the word ought not to be used in civil company, to a
man of honor, or honesty, yet in a speech directed to Mr. Oats, who shows so
little of either, I thought it myht pass, no other of the like signification
occurring. Yet seeing they are not only known untruths spoken with intention to
deceive; but also confirmed by Oath, I shall hereafter term them Periuryes. It
may be this word will less offend your tender ciuilized ears, If not, I know
not how to help it: for we must either not speak of things, or call them by
their names, a boat, a boat, a spade, aspade, and a Perjury by its proper name.

You tell me p. 27. You expected I should have shown my wit and Rhetoric, the
cream of my Eloquence, have strewed flowere, Metaphors, and sorites, and have
gored the Doctor with forked Dilemma's. Elsewhere you reproach me, that I show
no reading, cite no Authors, etc. And upon this you ground all those
Characters, which you give of me, Sot, fool, Dunce, Blockhead, etc. And had I
done so, you would have blamed that, and have said, that Truth stands not of
need of these meretricious dresses, to make her seem lovely: and that all was
to delude the Reader. Thus whateuer we do, whither we Pipe, or mourn, we must
be blamed. Learned Sir, when I began that work, I looked on it not as a combat
of wit; but of Truth: I designed not to show my learning; but our Innocence:
Nor to compose an Oration; but an Affidauit out of the Attestations of Persons
of known integrity, to confute the Periuryes of one infamous man. J say
infamous, for so he is, in the eye not only of Catholics who know his
Depositions to be false: but likewise of the far greater part of Protestants
themselves, some where of though deserving nothing less have felt the weight
of his tongue, and the malice of that Faction, whose jnstrument he is: and
others hitherto untouched, may justly fear the like.

What a piece of Pedantry would it be, not to speak of water without citing
Pindar's commendation of it, telling what Philosophers held it to be the first
principle of all things? that Moses was taken out of it in scriptures, and
Venus in the Fables: what Poets say of Neptune, and Thetis, and how
Mathologists understand them? etc. who could with patience hear a man upon the
naming of aboate, or ship, run up to the Argonautes, and to Noak's Arc: should
then endeavor to show when sails, when the Rudder, and when the compass was
first in use? How long men kept to the shore? when Audax Iapeti genus first
lanched into the deep beyond all land-markes, without any other guide, but the
stars, and should lard into his discourse shreds of Poets, and Orators, Latin
and Greek and make up his speech as a beggars coat, of patches? This you
seem to require of me: and would with much more reason have condemned me, for
it, as an impertinent Pedant, and a babbler without sense, or reason, had you
found any such thing in my Vindication.

We speak of matters of Fact: viz, whither Oats was at S. Omers all April,
and May 1678, as we say with truth; or went into England, (as he falsely
deposes) to assist at a Consult of Jesuits in London? What light, to decide
this question, can Homer, or Ennius, Hesiod, or Plautus, Orpheus, or Virgil,
Moses, or Esayas, or the Psalms, the Greek of Latin fathers, give in this
question, which they never mentioned, and where of the greatest part dyed
before S. Andomarus himself was borne, All were removed to another life, before
Oats his being at the town which bears that name? To what purpose should
they be produced, as witnesses in a cause, of which they knew nothing, and
therefore must stand mute, unless we take the freedom with them in matters of
fact, as your Ministers do with scripture in points of Faith wrest their words
to what sense, we please, not only besides; but contrary to their true meaning?

Discourse is as use less in matters of this nature: for by what topicke can
you prove, that Oats went into England, in April 1678. with Sir Robert Bret,
and Sir John Warner? Or, that Mr. Blundel carried about with him in London a
bag of Tewxbury Meestard bals? Nothing but sense can decide such matters, and
the Depositions of witnesses, to which I have had recourse, and from which you
endeavor to withdraw me, by provoking me to show wit, discourse, and learning:
As we may believe those Philophers did, who denied motion, and that snow was
white.

J am so far from joining issue with you in this manner of reasoning in my
Vindication, that were I to write it again, and had all the Erudition of S
Hieroms. the strength of wit of S. Austin, and the Eloquence of S. Chrysostom,
I would not use them. And if any where your objections occasion me to
discourse, or cite Ancients, it shall be with that moderation, as shows I do it
unwillingly. I had rather be censured as an Ignoramus, by such as you, then as
a Pedant by the learned, and judicious: who k'now with Aristotle that it is
equally irrational to require Demonstrations always, and never to admit them.
Wherefore do our laws in England require Categoricall answers in Trialls,
cutting off all Rhetorical digressions? was it to conceal the Truth of Fact,
from the eyes of the Jury? or because they Judged them both unnecessary, and
vnvse full and therefore the way of witnessing by word of mouth, when Persons
were present, and Affidauits, or Attestations when they were absent, was
established?

I suppose you will deny that S. Paul that vessel of election was either fool,
or sot; yet he took that way, which I did, as may be seen Act. 24 for being
accused of raising sedition against the Jews, and profaning the Temple. His
answer was: I arrived here only twelve days ago in this time I never entered the
Temple, but purified according to the law. I never made any Conuenticles, or
unlawful assemblyes, either in the Synagogues, or the City. And they cannot
prove what they charge me with. He says he was not where they said he was: so
do we of Oats, that he was nether at Madrid, nor Paris. He says he attempted
nothing against the Temple: and we say we never, attempted any thing against
the King. He says, he never made any unlawful assemblys; so do we. He assured
the Jews could prove nothing which they charged on him: we say the same of
Oats, and you to boot, Sir: you can not prove any one material point, of the
Narratiue, which we deny; nor disprove any one material point, which we
allege in our defense: for after near three yeare's toil, you are as much
in the dark for your proofs, as when you first began, like a horse in a mill,
always moving, never advancing What reason does S. Paul confirm his denial
which? what scripture, what Philosopher, what Poet, does he cite? no more of
that in him, then in us. Jf you dare, dart your Censures of Sot, fool, and
hollow Pericranium, at him; or spare us, who imitate him.

I must confess, I find a precedent for your proceeding, and that recorded in
scripture too: for Herod with his courtiers mocked at, and despised Christ, for
alike reason, as you do us, for not answering his curiosity. Luc. 23.11. You
see whom we initate; and who is your pattern. I may say, as S. Cyprian on
alike occasion: Nec vobis gloriosum est facere, quod fecit Herodes: nec nobis
ignominiosum est pati, quod passus est Christus.

Thus much may sufficise for an answer to your sucurrility, and Billings gate
language. I shall not take notice hereafter of any thing of that nature. I
leave you to learn more civil discourse, for your own sake, it being more
indecent for you to speak, then for me to hear such language. I am yours etc.

Postscript. One word to Anonimus: so I shall call the Author of the Account
of my vindication. page 5. he complains, that by asserting our Innocence, we
render the British Nation odious, and contemptible in the eyes of other
Countries. He is very much mistaken: we do not accuse the Nation, but a
factious part of it, who by this buzzle hope to gain more Power then is due to
them; who by the noise of Popery alarm the People, and awe (I fear) both
court, and the sober part of the Parliament we need not inform externes how
things are carried in England relating to Papists: the public Gazets speak
enough, to disgrace ten Nations. I think it our duty to let you in England know
what opinion the learned world abroad has of your proceedings. Cease to
accuse Innocents, and these will be silent: If you continu to condemn us as
Traitors, although we are not such, we satisfy the utmost rigor of the Law, by
suffering the Death of Traitors in obedience to the King, as Christ, and his
Apostles did in obedience to the Emperors. But to require of us, that we
should own our selves Guilty, when we are not so, to be offended, that we
should attest our Innocence, is more then any Law Divine, or Humane requires,
it is what the Pagans never exacted of the Primitive Christians, nor the Jews,
of Christ.

COURTEOUS READER
THE Pamphlet, I here examine, is singular in its kind. It is an Original: for
its Author found none to copy, and I hope none will ever copy him. No Work of
the Ancients so like this True Narratiue, as Lucian's True History: both are
alike True, per Anti Phrasin. Yet there are these differences betwixt them, that
the True history is Witty; the True Narratiue stupid: that delights; this
greiues: that Laughs; this bites: that as Innocent, as a lie can be; this as
malicious, as the Father of lies could desire. Lucian in that intended only to
recreate those, who never did him any good; Oats in this designs the ruin of
those, who never did him any hurt; but intended him much good, if his bad
nature had been susceptible of good advice.

J. P. p. 7. He does well, to confess it is an Original, for then we are sure
it is Authors own.

Answer. I grant it is own, not only as to the composure, or form; but also
as to the matter, which he is as much Author of, as Homer, of what he relates
in the battle betwrixt the frogs, and mice, or Heliodorus of what he writes in
his Aethiopica.

I never saw the Man: and so can know nothing of him, but by hear say, and
his Works, which discover sufficiently his better part, his soul. In a
Pamphlet Scand. Magn. p. 24.
his Phisnomy is said to be an Index to all Villainy: and that any Man of
Letters may as plainly read ROGVE in his face, as in his Brother Bedlow's
shoulder. It is certain, that he being presented with many others, to receive
the Sacrament of Confirmation, to the Bishop of S. Omers, his Lordship stopped,
when he came to Oats, vutill he heard, he belonged to the English College, and
was presented by its Rector. The stop was noted by all present. The reason of
it he was pleased to declare afterward: viz, that he doubted whether Oates's
heart was prepared to receive the Holy Ghost, the spirit of love, in whose face
he perceived signs of great malice.

J. P. He Berogues the man he never saw, upon trust: the more knave he for
pains: for he is not certain of it.

Answ. J am certain the Author cited by me, says it, that is enough for me,
who vouch him for my warrant, and profess I speak only on his word.

He styles himself Doctor of Divinity, and says, he commeneed Doctor at
Salamanca. Which cannot be: for 1. he never was at Salamanca. 2. none, but
Priests, are admitted to that degree in Catholic Vniuersitys, and he never was
Priest. He writ to the Archbishop of Tuam to give him Holy Orders, Attest. A.
but was refused, by reason of the very ill Character, which his Gracec, had of
Oates's life and manners, for which he was afterward expelled the College of
Valladolid. 3. He never had learning sufficient for any degree in a Catholic
University. At Valladolid from the 18. of October, when schools begin, till
his dimission (soon after) he went as a scholar, to Logic. At S. Omers he was
put to Rhetoric, and in that school there were many better scholars then he,
although by reason of his age superiors did not exact of him that attendance in
schools, and punctuality in Themes, as of others. Now is it probable, that one,
who had commenced Doctor in Salamanca, and to that intent had performed his
Exercises in Philosophy, and Divinity, with applause, should be put to begin
his Logic amongst the Junior sophisters, or learn Humanity amongst school
Boys? His Doctorship, and Papists Treason were both hammered on the fame Anuil
his own Brain: the one by his Pride, the other by his Malice.

J. P. p. 8. q. The Doctor says to the first, he was at Salamanca. Answer. Had
you accepted the challenge of the accurate Autbor of the compendium of the
trialls, and sent to Salamanca, you might have discovered, whicher says Truth:
and if you found he had been there, you had showed one truth, which we gainsay.
But that is not your business. He told the lesuits at S. Omers, that he had
been Burser of S. John's College in Cambridge. I think the best, and indeed
the only way to know whither he said true, would be to consult the College
itself. If you know any better, impart it to us.

J. P. He says to the second: one, who was only a Clericus minor, was made
Doctor. Answ. He may as well be a Clericus minor, and Priest, as a Jesuit, and
Priest, the Clerici minores being a Congregation consisting Chiefly of Priests,
as well as the Society.

J. P. to the third he says, our Graduats in our Vniuersitys, are Dunces,
Blockheads, Ignoramus's; Ergo he could not rejected for insufficiency. Answ. He
never was proposed, for a Degree, nor ever was thought fit for it. He began his
Logic at Valladolid, and his Rhetoric at S. Omers, and the scholars of
those, whom you call Dunces, were his masters, is it likely, that the Jesuits
should procure him to be made Doctor of Divinity, and after send him to schools
amongst the schole boys, to learn the first principles of Philosophy, or his
Grammar?

J. P. Fenwick's papers witnessed before the Lords, that the Charges of his
commencement were paid by the Society at London, Answ. show this, and I will
yield the whole cause. Let me tell you, Sir, that this is an untruth, and
deserves to be ranked with those of Oats. Few such would qualify you for a
King's evidence, and deserve a Pension: and if you have none yet, it is want of
friends; not merits.

Anonimus p. 7. Our Attestations run upon negatiues, and ought to have no
effect upon the Positiuity of an Oath. Answ. Suppose Oats should positiuely
swear he was on such a day at york before the Mayor and Aldermen in the
towne-house, where he heard them speak Treason: by showing the Attestations,
first, of the said Persons and others present, that he was not seen there by
any secondly by producing those of some at London, who saw him, would not his
false Deposition be sufficiently confuted? Doubtless if the Accusations regard
a Protestant. Now because this accusation falls on Papists, how ever it be in a
like manner disproued, it must stand good. Why so? They have no better and some
they will have: as the wolf resolved to worry the Lamb, whither he showed
himself harmless, or not.

His ignorance in the things he speaks of, proves that he never was employed
by Jesuits. He says, Colman's trial. p. 27.
he had seen the name of the General of the Jesuits forty times, and that he
knew his hand, and seal. Yet he never hits the name right, although he vary it, as
often as Prekering did the charging of his gun. Sometimes it is d'Oliua
Colman's trial. p. 27. and Narrat. p. 58.
sometimes it is de Oliua; Irland's trial. p. 28. Langh's trial. p. 11.
in the french translation of Colmans trial, it is Di Oliua, that De being
french, and Italian. Yet all miss the true name as may be seen by the Letters
taken in Mr. White's Chamber, and in any College of the Society, in which are
at least the Patents of the Rector. And as for the Seal, he says Colman's trial
p. 27. and Langh's trial p. 11.
the Inscription is I. H. S. with a Cross. Yet there never was a S in any
Iesuit's seal. And not one of those letters are the Inscription of the seal.
Two of them with a third are the substance of the seal: the Inscription
contains the Office of him, who writes the Letter, and sometimes the place of
his Residence. Which may be seen in the Patents of the Rector of S. Omers
produced in open court at the Old Bailey, as to that of the General. Many other
instances of his ignorance in Iesuit's customs will be taken notice of
hereafter. All prove he never was employed by Iesuit's, and weakens not a
little the credit of the Narratiue.

J. P. p. 11. It is frequent to sue persons by names mis-spelt: yet such a
misnomer does not inualidate the Action. Answer. Is it frquent for a Lawyer not
to know the name of his Client? Or for an Ambassador, that of his Prince who
employes him? Jf not, the improbability is not answered: seeing Oats pretended
to have seen the hand, so often: received, and distributed commmissions signed
with it, etc. And I dare say that those who have either heard, or seen the true
name, and compare it with what Oats has deposed, will be apt to think, that
he never either read, or heard the name, so far does he roue from what it is.

J. P. p. 11. Through out the whole Narrative; the Doctor does not tell the
jnscriptions of the Jesuits seal: concerning the form or fashion of the seal
there is not one syllable. Answ. I do not say there is in the Narratiue; but
there in Colemans and Langhornes trials, as you cannot deny: and those
discover, that he never saw the Jesuits seal. To this you say nothing (nor
Anonimus nether,) but call me poor silly wood-pecker, who come to work with
dull tools. A very satisfactory answer! Oats pretends to have distributed God
knows how many commissions sealed with the seal of the General of the Jesuits:
I show that is not true, for he never saw the seal, as appears by his
ignorance of what it is. Hence follows also, that Oats was perjured twice
swearing that the seal had a S which never had any. And more, that he little
regards what he swears, seeing he swore without any necessity, what was to him
uncertain, and only coniecturall. I expect some answer to this: and all I
find, is that it is adull tool. Jf you have many such answers, you would do
well to print them, I assure you, all the natural, and artificial Logic in
the world affords none such.

Nothing can more weaken the credit of a witness, then speaking
contradictions. Truth, as having a real ground is al ways the same; falls hood,
being built only on fancy, changes as this does. Now Oates's contradictions are
so frequent, that it is an endless work to reckon them all. I will give here
some Instances: he says, Irland's trial p. 18. that three or four days after
the Congregation he returned to S. Omers (which must be within the month of
April, or first of May, seeing the Congregation was ended on the 26. of April,
and stayed there till the 23. of June. Yet in Irland's trial. p. 24. he swears
he was in England on the latter end of May. Now in reality he was for sworn
both times; for he was in England neither in April, nor May. He swore, he had
not seen Mr. Langhorn since April 78. in Colman's trial. After he swore he
had seen him in July and August in Langhorns trial. He first declared to the
Parliament he had no body considerable to accuse, besides those he had named;
after he accused some of the very Prime, whom before he had not named

Judge hence what credit he deserves who is so evidently Perjured, as he must
be once in each of those instances, unless he has an Art to verify
Contradictions which surpasses the Power of the Almighty. The Rule of the law
says: semel, malus semper praesumitur malus, in eodem genere mali. A man once
convicted of Perjury is always suspected of it: whether the conviction be by
Legal sentence, or evidence of the Fact. The Apostle speaks of both
convictions, 1. Tim. 5 24. Quorundam hominum peccata manifesta sunt,
precedentia ad judicium, quosdam autem and subsequuntur. The sins of some men
are evident before judgment, those of Others, after it. Whether in the eye of
the law the first conviction is regarded or no, I know not: it is enough for
me, the Holy Ghost regards it.

I. P. p. 11. The feeble vindicator has rifled the Compendium for this, and
then sends me to the its answer: where besides railing I find nothing more then
here. Then he tells his Reader, that with a scrap of Latin, and a Text of
scripture, I think my self satisfied. Truly, Sir, your answer is so far from
diminishing my satisfaction, that it has increased it, because by it I
perceive you can not answer to what I said: and I believe any rational man will
judge you speak loud, and say nothing to the purpose, yet hope, that your
clamor and confidence shall supply the want of reason.

Anonimus. p. 8. Certain persons have examined the Trials, and find the
Passages not so directly contradictory, but that jngenuity, and good will may
reconcile them. A pretty piece of no sense! They are contradictory; but not so
contradictory, as not to be reconciled by good will. They are it seems
Contradictions, this he grants: how are those circles to be squared? By a good
will. How so? Does the Doctor accuse a Papist of Plotting Treason in April at
London? He must be believed, to have been there, and the Papist hanged for it.
Does he accuse an other of treasonable words spoken at the same time at S.
Omers? Oats must be believed to have been at S Omers then, and that Papist
hanged too. Now how are these things believed, which are contradictions? A good
will does it, a will I say, to hang all Papists, that are brought to the Bar.

Again, the manner of his Accusation is such, as any knave who dares tell a
Lie, and confirm it by Oath, by it may bring any man or men how Innocent
soever into question. We have a long story of Treasonable words spoken, and
Treasonable Letters waitten, by several, who all protest they never heard of
any such thing, till Oates's Narratiue appeared. And although the greatest part of
these Letters were sent by the Common Post, yet not one line appears after so
long and diligent search, to confirm the Deposition. I lately learnt from a
printed Pamphlet that one Packet with Letters of that nature was sent from
London to Windsore for Mr. Bedding field: which had it fallen, as was designed,
into other hands, would have been used as a Confirmation of the Plot, and an
evidence against Papists. But by a singular Providence of Almighty God, he
passing accidentally by the Post Office as the male arrived, called for his
Letters, and finding in these such unexpected horrid contents, he humbly
beseeched a very great Person to carry them to the King: and at the same time
assured him, they were not written by the Persons, whose names were subscribed.
Who writ them, God knows: and Mr. Oats, Kerby, and Tongue were they thoroughly
examined, would discover. Mr. Beding filled did, what was his Duty, in getting
them conueighed speedily to the K. The Author of them is alone answerable for
the Treason, they contained. But he has his Pardon, which secures him from the
Justice of Man. I wish by true Repentance of these crying sins he may avoid that
of God: otherwise he will be deceived, for God is not to be mocked. Gal. 6.7.
Or as Mr. Whitebreade said, he will do himself more harm, then others have
suffered from him, though that has been a great deal.

J. P. p. 11. Grants that any Knave by an Accusation how improbable soever,
backed with an Oath, will bring any man how innocent soever, into question. But
Accusations, says he, of that importance as are contained in the true Narratiue
are too high attempts to be carried on by ordinary Knaves; but only such
extraordinary Knaves, as themselves. Answer: We carry on no Accusation in the
Narratiue; but are accused in it, from one end, to the other. Oats is the only
Accuser; and seeing none could carry that Accusation on, but an extraordinary
Knave, you own him to be such a one. I readily subscribe to you: I grant him
to be a Knave of the very first. Magnitude, that he is not to be paralelled in
history, that he is singular in Knavery, as well as his Narratiue in Untruth.
Yet so as your self come very near him, who undertake his Vindication. And for
company sake you may take in, your unbaptized namelesse Brother. And although I
compared him to Judas in my title page, I must grant he far surpasses that
witness, by perseuering in his Knavery: for Judas having brought to Death one
Innocent man, was troubled presently with simple scruples, and not being fable
to endure the reproaches of his Conscience, for grief hanged himself. Our
Knight of the Post's Knavery is of a more manly Temper, it is of a Bow dye, it
never alters: his Conscience is hardened against all remorse, as his fore head
against all shame. The dismal thoughts fryghted him a little at their first
appearing, as the Devils did Julian, another Apostata; but by custom they are
become familiar, and a subject to Glory in. He deserves to have that quality
engraven upon his Tombee Stone: Here lies the second Judas, that extraordinary
Knave, in the Opinion of his Vindicator, I. Philips. Whither you slept, or
preuaricated here, I know not: certainly you spoke a great Truth against your
self.

My relation of the Packet directed to Mr. Bedingtild does displease both J P.
says, I have it out of a Pamplet scribled by one of my confederates: Anonim.
says it is out of our Printed Pamphlets. And sends me to Kerby's, and Tonge's
Narratiues. Answer. I had it out of the case of the E. of D. p. 15. and 16.
That Nobleman will scarce thank either of you, for calling him our Confederate.
If the Narratiues of Tongue and Kerby contain all they know of that Packet, we
need not seek further for its contents, the Letters being of their
composition, jointly with Oats. It is worth the enquiry, how otherwise they
could give that Earl notic of that Packet in Oxfordshire soon enough, for him
to come to windsore almost as soon as it.

How to reconcile these Vindicators to one another is as hard, as to reconcile
them to truth. J. P. p. 12. Beedingfeeld knew a packet lay for him at the Post
house, and sent a friend for it, not daring to fetch it himself. Anonimus, p. 9.
Beding field waited the coming of the Mayle, contrary to custom. J. P.
Bedinfild, having delivered the Letters, shifted for himself; Anonimus;
Bedingfild stayed to Represent the whole matter as a Forgeery. I will leave
them to confer notes, if they did it not already. Although all conferrng of notes
is insufficient, where it is against Truth; as appears by the success of the
witnesses who disagree notwithstanding their collation.

I intend to follow the de deponent step by step, without omitting one. or
Item, unobserved: and what I say shall be confirmed by undoubtedly true
Attestations: for although in Equity our Denial ought to be preferred before his
Asseueration accompanied with so many contradictions, or even without them
seeing In dubio fauendum est Reo, potiusquam Actori. Yet I will wave that Title,
and Prove irrefragably what I advance, with such evidence, that unless our
Aduersarys shut their eyes very hard, they shall see our Innocence and the
Wrong done us.

J. P. 12. It is utterly denied him, that, In dubio sauendum est Reo potius,
quam Actori. Which is as much as to say, that whither we be, or be not guilty,
we are to be hanged.

I give a summary of each. for greater cleernesse, in which I omit nothing
material, wittingly: except only several seditious, and Traitorous words of
his Majesty's sacred Person: Which tending only to lessen that Reverence, which
by all Laws Divine and Humane is due to him, shall never be repeated by my
mouth, nor pass my pen. It is not without danger, that they peep abroad, when
so great a part of our commonalty have lost so much of that Veneration to his
Majesty, to the Royal Family, and to the Government. Certainly they were never
spoken by any Papist, Monk, or Jesuit: wherefore many suspect Oats to have
heard them from his Father during his youth, and to be the Relics of the Dirt,
which the seditious Rabble gathered up during the Troubles; and which now is
again dispersed, (with what design, is easily guest) although it be don under the
name of Papists, that the Authors may avoid the rigor of the law. I will not
answer for the Truth of this Judgment, but certainly it is not Rash.

J. P. p. 13. He will not repeat the traitorous words of his Majesty's sacred
Person, that is to say, he ownes them all to be true. Answ. You imitate Oats
very perfectly, drawing Treason out of the most innocent words. Let mine be
read over again, and see whither there be one syllable importing an
approbation of those Treasonable expressions? or owning that any English
Catholics were guilty of them? which is another Calumnye. I expressly deny,
that ever Papist, Monk or Jesuit spoke them. I say none but the seditious
Rabble (even in the time of troubles, when Rebellion was Paramount, and the
King termed the Common Ennemy) reported such things, and that it is dangerous
to spread such things, when so many are ready to shake hands with their
Allegiance: and that not to offend in the same nature, I would nether in word,
nor writing mention them. And candid Mr. Philips will thence infer; that I own
them to be true. Yet I do not much wonder at it: for having made scripture teach
Treason, it is not much you should make me speak, it, although nothing be further
from the true meaning of both.

J. P. next gives us a charge of what some did against Henry 3. and Henry 4. in
France. That Claude Matthieu, was called the Courier de la Ligue. What is all
this to the English Priests, who were not borne then, and it may be they
condemn it as much, as any of the Ministry? Dic jam postume de tribus
Capellis, speak to the businessein hand, charge us not with other men's faults,
of which we are not guilty; confine your self to our Personal Actions: or
own, that in them you find not matter sufficient for our indightment.

Did I foresee these Observations would be offensive to any in Authority, and
need an Apology, I would follow Cato's advice, and suppress them. But I think
no Authority concerned in it, but that of Titus Oats. The Lo^ds Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament assembled ordered the Printing of it. And we are so far
from opposing that Order, that we think our selves highly oblidged by it:
because by letting us know what we are accused of, with the Persons conspiring.
Time, and Place, where, and when they Plotted, etc. we are enabled to vindicate
our selves, which was impossible, whilst we heard nothing but the general
Terms, of Plot, or Conspiracy, Popish Nobility, and Gentry, Priests,
Benedictins, or Jesuits, etc. At the end of this Narratiue we find the name of
one Magistrate, sir. E D M. B. Godfrey: but he only attests that it was sworn
before him, which may be true, though the thing be falls in every part. Dr.
Tongue, and Chr. Kirby are also subscribed as Witnesses to Oates's Oath, and no
more. Yet if my Intelligence deceiues me not, they had a greater hand in all,
then I will speak at present.

J. P. p. 14. It Is well enough; for though this sentence be an Impudent
reflection upon the supreme Authority of England, yet some compassion may be
showed to his pretended Blindness. Answ. This is vnconceuable, that it should
be well enough, and yet be an Impudent Reflection upon the supreme Power. Sir,
I examine Mr. Oates's Narratiue and I see no other Approbation to it, but that
of the Parliament ordring its printing. I do not examine the Trials, nor censure
the Judges, or Jurye, I leave them to God, and their consciences, to see
whither there was no hard mesure. The True Narratiue was not produced against
any of the Prisoners: and when some of them alleged some points of it, in
their defense, the thing was rejected, as no record, nor evidence. How comes it
now to be so sacred a thing, when we attempt to answer it? What law forbids a
man accused of a heinous crime, to vindicate his Innocence in the best manner
he can? Does not the denying this, much more odiously reflect on the Authority
of the Nation, then all we say? can it be supposed, that any Law obliges a man
to own a Guilt, when in his Conscience he knows the contrary? Name the Pagan,
the Turk, the Jew, the Tyrant, who ever was offended, that an Accused Person
should endeavor to clear himself. Do not all Prisoners at the Bar, answer,
not Guilty? And what Court thought its Authority concerned in such an Answer?
you speak in your address to the Lords, and Commons assembled in Parliament,
of the Infallibility of their Counsels, granting to them, what you deny to the
whole Church^ Nay you ow^e in them a greater Infallibility, then Catholics
Divines own in General Councils: for although in matters of Doctrine we never
question their Decrees; yet in matters purely of fact, such as these are, the
Church does not exact an interior assent. whence some Catholics have excused
from Heresy the Persons of Origin, and Theodoret, not by questioning the
malignity of the Doctrine charged on them; but endeavoring to show that they
had not delivered it. Now you never saw, never shall see me vindicate the
Crimes charged on us by Oats, which I absolutely own to be treasonable, and
that whosoever is really guilty of them, deserves to dye the Death; but we only
say, that we are not Guilty of those crimes; nay quite contrary, that we detest
them as much, and more sincerely, I fear, then Oats himself.

J hope his Majesty will not be displeased with harmless endeauours to
vindicate Persons wrongfully accused. I have learnt of the Holy Ghost, Prou.
16.12. that It is an abomination to Kings, to commit wickedness: because their
Throne is by Ryghteouness established. And I intend only to clear the Truth in
this great debate, to make way for Rychteous Judgments, that his Throne may be
by them established; and not shaken by unjust shedding of Innocent Blood, whose
cry is loud in the ears of the Kings of Kings, our Just, and Merciful God. To
him our daily Prayers are offered, that the Blood spilt under color of this
conspiracy; but for what real intent God knows, may like that of Christ, call
for Mercy; not, like that of Abel cry for Justice, or Reueng.

J. P. 14. What is all this clamor for? Only for putting to deserved Death a
company of varlets, and vagabonds, who deserved to have been hanged, only for
being within his Majesty's Dominions. Answer: If you hold all for varlets, and
vagabonds, who are forbidden by civil Powers the entry into some country, so
many, and those so venerable for sanctity, will be such, as will even honor
these otherwise infamous names. Were not the Primitive Christians such? and the
Apostles? and Christ himself, was he not forced to conceal himself, and fly,
until the time designed for his Passion, and the Redemption of of the world
was come? S. Paul. Hebrew. 11. having spoken of some, who endured as Catholics
have done, mockings, and scornings, and bonds and imprisonment: that were
stoned, sawed asunder, slain with the sword: of others, that they wandered
about in mountains, in deserts, and in Caves of the Earth. Does he conclude as
you do, that they were varlets, and vagabonds? quite contrary: of whom the
world was not worthy. You see, Sir, how different your sentiments are from
those of the Blessed Apostle. I know from what Ghospel you learnt this
Antichristian Paradox: Hobs is your Apostle, and his Leuiathan your scripture.
He, is the Holy Ghost, who inspired these Principles into you.

Yet if granted what you pretend, that Priests deserve to be hanged for entering
into his Majesty's Dominions: Do they deserve to be hanged for attempting upon
his sacred Person? Can not a Priest be there, but he must of necessity plot his
Death? Have not some served under his Royal father, when such as you (for any
thing I know) fought against him? Did not some of them concur to the saving of
him after worcester fight? why may there not be some others still alive of the
same Loyal Principles? Now suppose there be some such, how can all be charged,
as Oats does, with treasonable practices? For 1. it is an untruth; 2. it is an
untruth in a matter of greatest moment. 3. It is a Perjury. I know not, whether
Hobs's Leuiathan iustifyes all this but I am sure the Ghospel of JESUS Christ
does not.

But are only Priests accused in the fabulous Narratiue? Are there not some Lay
men, Commoners, Gentlemen, and Noblemen? Sure there are, will you style those
varlets, and vagabonds, who deserve to be hanged for being within his Majestys
Dominions. Have I not occasion enough to fix on you some of those titles, which
you so liberally bestow on me?

In fine: the Apostles and their Disciples asserted their in nocency against
the Pagans, and Jews. The Apologetiques of Tertullian, Justin, Cyprian,
Athenagoras, for the Christians are still extant; as also the writings of Cyril
of Alexandria, Basil, and the two Gregoryes against Julian: and we never find
the Pagans offended with those Labors. Why should you represent our state in
England more severe then all those mortal enemies of the name of Christ? Did
not writing against Papists in this time as another Baptism Sanctify all
Persons and things, and remit both the sin, and the penalty due to it, I should
apprehend that so odious an Aspersion would not pass unpunished.

Defense of Life, and good name is commanded by the law of nature. Should we by
silence seem to admit the Reproaches, of Traitors, Conspirators, Plotters,
King-killers, etc. we were unfit to live in any state, Conscientia mea mihi
necessaria est apud Deum, says S. Austin, Fama apud proximum Our first care
must be of a good Conscience; our second, of a good Reputation. The first
recommends us to God; the second, to our Neighbor. None can deprive us of the
first; without out own fault: but experience shows, that the second depends on
other men. Yet we are obliged to maintain it against all Calumnys, by all
lawful means, having as much right to it, as any man has to his estate, or
life, unless we forfeit it by some real fault, which we do not acknowledge in
this particular To comply with this Duty offensive to none who seek Justice, in
defense of Justice I undertake this work. Having given thee an account of my
design, I will hereafter direct my discourse to the deponent.

Here my two friends J. P. and Anonimus join in one verdict that we are not fit
to live in any state, and therefore have been banished out of several states.
But 1. what does it concern the whole Clergy and Lay Catholics, that Jesuits
have been banished? I speak for all of the Catholic communion, and you answer
one part of it has suffered banishments. 2 If I suits themselves were banished
some Countries, they were not banished others: why should not the approbation of
some other countries as well ground an opinion of their fitness, as the
condemnation of some others of their unfitness to live in a state? 3. those
very states, who banished them, recalled'em. And why should not this later
sentence, reuersing the former deserve to be considered?

CHAPTER I. Observations on the Epistle Dedicatory.
Mr. OATS.
IF all you say in your Narratiue be true, if the Conspiracy be real, the ruin
of City and Country, the Death of the King, the chang of Government, and
slavery of the Nation were designed as you Depose upon oath, and if your Zeal
of the Weal Public moved you to make this discovery: if it be an effect of
your inbred indelible Loyalty to King, and Kingdom, you may challeng not only
a Gracious Hearing from his Majesty; but an ample Reward, as one who by that
honest endeavor has preserved his Person from Death, his Government from
subversion, his Royal City from fire, and his subjects from Destruction. But
if the Plot be feighned, the whole Information a heap of Lies, the accused
Persons Innocent, nothing against King or Government, City or Country
designed, your address to his Majesty criminal: you may justly fear the
Punishment du by Law not only to Liars, and False witnesses, but also to the
disturbers of the Public Peace: as having by your lies disturbed the City,
disordred the Government, allarmed the Kingdom, and been cause of the Death of
many Innocents, for no other intent then to supply your Wants out of the
Public Treasure, satisfy your Malice and desire of Reueng with the sword of
Justice, and feed your Ambition, with the vain title of Savior of your Country.

So the quality of your Address depends on that of your Depositions. If these
be true, no Reward can be too great: If falls, no Punishment but will seem too
little; as no crime can be greater then yours, except that of attempting
immediately upon the life of his sacred Majesty: for next to that in esteem of
the world, is the Public Peace, which you have endangered, if not broken.

To this my namelesse friend professes p. 10. he willingly subscribes to. But
Mr. J. P. p. 14. and 15. is resolved not to let it pass so. And it would make
the Philosopher who never laughed but once, when he saw an Ass mumbling
thistles break his spleen, to see how he tumbles and mumbles this in his mouth,
and at last finding it too hard for his rotten teeth, he is forced to let it
pass whole: for once we will grant it. Yet before, thus he wittily descants
upon my words: If all you say in your Narratiue be true, if the Plot be real, --
then so. But if the Plot be feigned -- then so. And then adds a Devout Prayer
that all the Gods and Goddesses provide me a Barber. This is the first attempt:
here is an other: If it be so, -- it is so -- If it be otherwise -- it is
otherwise. from whence you argue: If the Logic of S. Omers, be no profounder,
it may easily be fathomed. Sir, it is so deep that your line is too short to
sound it: That Logic is better then London fooling.

You boast of your inbred Loyalty, which nether your Education under a Father
inferior to few in hot blind zeal for the good old cause, nor your words in
familiar discourse confirm: What sense you have of Loyalty appears by your words
here, for you call concealing Treason, and concurring with Traitors, (the
subject of his Majesty's Pardon) Humane frailtyes, as if you esteemed them
little Peccadillos venial trespasses, scarce sins.

J. P. p. 15. He came from his Fathers Education to you to S. Omers for
breeding: why did not you teach him better? Answer. Did your Salamanca Doctor
of Divinity come to learn breeding at S. Omers, amongst School boys? You will
find it harder to answer this question, then for me to answer yours: we taught
no better, because he was capable of no good instructions. What is bred in the
bone, will not out of the flesh. The first noisome tincture could never be well
purged out of that vessel: and for that reason he was cast out, that he might
not annoy others.

Anonimus. p. 10. thinks J indict Oates's father, and vouches Cornelius Agrippa
for it, a man who was dead before either of us was born: and so could speak much
to the purpose doubtless.

Papists many Encroachments upon Princes for these thousand years, prove, say
you, their Inclinations for the future. What will the Encroachments of
Presbiterians, sine they appeared, prove? who have shaked not Kings; but
Kingship, not Monarks, but Monarky it self? which Encroachments were carried
on with that stubborn violence, that they produced wors effects in four years,
then those things you mean of Papists could in all probability have don in four
thousand. To prove this, we need not examine Records, or read Historys; our own
memory furnishes examples enough, which should not have been so lightly past
over, had not his Majesty by an vnparalelled act of Mercy forbidden all speech
of them, nor mentioned, did not your Impudence oblige me to it. Ets^ coram
hominibus dur^ sit f^ons tua, erubescit coram Deo men's tua. Your conscience
gives the lie to your words, how confident soever they seem. The disorders,
which happened in Catholic times are like an Ague in the spring, painful not
dangerous, and Leave the body more healthy, then before: Those of
Presbiterians, are like Putrid feauers, or the Plague, which leaves scarce
hopes of Life.

J. P. p. 15. The encroachments of Presbiterians are no excuse of the
encroachments of Papists. Answer. nether did I allege them as such; but only
to show whence Monarky is most endangered: and to admonish our Pilots, that to
avoid a few floating reeds, they run not their ship upon a rock.

You are offended, I say that Disorders of Catholics are like Agues in the
spring, painful not dangerous, and leave the body more healthy then before:
those of Presbiterians are like Putrid feauers, or the Plague, which leaves
scarce hope of life. Yet look on hystorys, and you will find my words true in
both parts. The Barons wars left the Authority Royal much better settled then
before: so did the commotions of Jack straw, and wat Tyler. That betwixt the
two branches of the Royal family seems to me no rebellion, the titles of the
two parties were disputable, and a King was fought for by both sides; yet that
ended in Monarky too. So France after its civil wars in the time of Henry 3.
Henry 4. and Lewis 14. was composed under Monarky much more absolute, then
ever. Whereas the Presbiterians cast down King, Monarky, house of Lords,
Bi^hops, etc. when did Catholics broach such Anti-Monarkicall principles, as
appear of late? That the King is but one of the three estates. That it is not
treason to take arms against him, unless it be against the other two estates.
That the house of Commons made the King. That the succession of the Crown
depends on the Parliament. etc. It is nether the Tiber, nor the Seine; but the
Leman Lake, and Holland Bogs, which send forth these Pestilential vapors. They
were not heard of in our nation, till some Sir Politic would be, began to
dance the Geneua gig. What hopes of life, where the body politic abounds with
such peccant humors?

J must take notice of your Presbiterian honesty in citing my words, I said,
Papists Rebellions were like spring Agues, painful; not dangerous you p. 15.
l. vlt. make me say: nether painful, nor dangerous. As if there were any Agues
not painful. This dishonest shif show that my vindication pinches hard, and
gives you no real ground to confute it, seeing you are forced to falsify my
words, before you can answer them.

Anonimus p. 11. after saying much and proving nothing, concludes that
Rebellions of both Papist and Presbiterian are bad enough. Answer: we agree in
that: may I say they are too bad; but the later are still worser of the two. He
aduises us to change our Principles, for his: but does not tell us what those
are. The passage from a Protestant to a Presbiterian is as natural, as from a
Caterpiller to a Butterfly: there are in ward principles in nature for this,
and in Doctrine, and Religion for that. Which both experience and reason show,
and a Presbiterian is half a commonwealth man, ipso facto. He may therefore
conclude for the embracing our Principles

Lately in the low-countrys one (such a friend to Jesuits, as you are) charged
them with the first murder in the world: for Cain and Abel were their
scholars, and the master gave them a play-day, that Cain might wreak his
malice on his Innocent Brother. Nay the eating of the forbidden fruit was
charged on them too: for another Jesuit Confessor of Eve told her she might eat
it without scruple. With a like reason you accuse Papists, of what? why, it is
known K. James escaped not their poison. To whom is it known? and by what
Revelation? Those of that time are silent. The Parliament held a while after
charged the fact upon a great Peer, no Papist. But K. Charles I. who had best
means to discover the Fact and most reason to examine it declared there was no
such thing. Upon what Author of equal credit, is your knowledge grounded?

J. P. is silent here. Anonimus attributes the charge of Abel's murder, to a
sneaking monk; as if there were no other men in the Low-Countryes. Then he
cites whole pages out of the Mystery of Iesuitisme: to as much purpose, as if
he had cited Tom Thomb, for this would as well have filled up the Page.

You pass then to charg Papists with our late barbarous wars: which were you
wise, you would never have mentioned. Because the Papists in those hardest
times complied with their Duty to their K. and Country; and Presbiterians
failed in all. The Papists, say you, were the contriuers of the unnatural war.
The true Authors of it had a far different opinion: who began their Rebellion
by disarming Papists, carried it on by the death of Priests, and even some
laymen, who f^ll into their hands, and would have ended it with the extirpation
of them all, if fear of their fellow rebel, the Independent had not diuerted
their thoughts from seeking the ruin of others, to seek their own preservation.
Name one Papist who bore arms against his Majesty: thousands according to
their duty fought for him. This the Rebels knew, and therefore where they
prevailed, Papists were persecuted either as public enen yes, or private ^pyes.
Yet you say they were chief Actors in the Rebellion! How many lost their ^^ues
in Battle? How many were killed in cold blood? How many lost their estates by
confiscation, or then Liberty by imprisonment? How many were banished their
Country, merely for being Papists? we would be silent in these matters, and
rest content with the Testimony of a good conscience to God, and the Glory of
having don our Duty, before men, did not your slanders force us to remember
them.

Wherefore to your impertinent questions, I give pertinent answers. Who
contrived the Rebellion? Presbiterians. Who inflamed Parties, and Passions
Presbiterians. Who carried on the War with Purse, and hand? The Presbiterians.
Who broke the Vxbridge treaty? the Presbiterians. Who imposed the Covenant? The
Presbiterians. Who defeated all designs of Peace? The Presbiterians. Who
enslaued their Country? The Presbiterians. Who ruined the King? The same
Presbiterians; For it was wisely observed by an understanding man, that the
Presbiterians Killed the King: and the Independants murthere^ Charles Stuard.

The Presbiterians labored indeed to hinder the last horrid Act of tha^
Tragedy: but their past, and following Actions persuade, they did not this cut
of love to their King; but to themselves. For they entertained no serious
thought of restoring his Majesty till they found the sword, which they had
wrencht out of his hand, stolen out of their own by their younger brother
Rebel, the Independent, and felt the smart of it on their own shoulders. And
when they offered it to its Right Owner, it was on such Conditions, as should
lock it in the scabbard, and keep themselves the Key: so as it should be
neither drawn nor used but by their Directions. Yet these are your Assertro^ of
Monarky which they bind up hand and foot with Chains: and Papists its Ennemy,
who leave it the full Liberty of the Law.

Keep then the Dirt of your Rebellion which you still love to your selves;
throw it not at others who hate it by a Principle of Religion. Your lives were
by law forfeited, for treason: and you enjoy them only by the King's gracious
Pardon. When you pretend to Innocence you renounce that Pardon, and forfeit
that only tenure of your breath, and make your selves obnoxious to the Penaltys
due by law to Traitors.

J P. p. 16. rifles all hystoryes he can think on, copyed chiefly out of E. C'S
Narratiue which having been answered already in a particular book, may excuse
me the trouble of writing it over again. Yet I will answer you in brief. The
Presbiterians in Parliament began with disarming Papists, and persecuting them,
as they did of late. Then they proceeded toward the rest in his Majesty's
Dominions, and threatened to destroy all in Ireland root and Branch Thus they
were the true causes of that horrid Rebellion. Let us hear the late King: The
preposterous rigor, and unreasonable severity, which some men carried before
them in England, was not the least in^entiue that kindled and blew up into
horrid flames the despair of discontent. -- Despayr being added to their former
discontent, and the fears of utter extirpation to their wonted oppressions, it
was easy to provoke to an open Rebellion, a people prone enough to break^ out
to all exorbitant violence, -- The Rebels were exasperated to the most
desperate Resolutions, and Actions by being threatened with all extremityes, not
only to the known heads, and chief incendiarys; but even to the whole
community of the nation: resolving to destroy all root, and branch men, women,
and children. Thus his late Majesty. By whom you see the charge of that
Rebellion is brought to the Door of those, who promoted that preposterous
rigor, and severity: and who those were I need not tell you. And the
readiness, with which the Irish accepted a Cessation of Arms, when without
it, the Protestants would have been destroyed, as the King said, showed that
they sought only self preservation; not Destruction of others.

As to the Albigenses, and Piemontois they were Rebels to their natural
Princes: and suffered as such; not for Religion; but for open, and actual
resisting them. And as for that common reproach of a Clement, and Rauaillac, we
may as easily find a Polirot, and an Andelot amongst the Huguenots. It is no
more reproach to a great body to have had a wicked villain of it, then to the
Apostles to have had a Judas. Yet if this were a reproach, you are more
obnoxious to it.

I leave your seditious doctrines, and come to your practice: you came into the
world like the Cadmean brood all armed, and your several Princes almost as soon
felt your hands, as they saw your faces. In Geneua, you cast of the authority
of your Bishop, Prince of the town. In higher Germany you shaked the Authority
of Charles V. In lower Germany you withdrew many Provinces from the Obedience
of their King. You usurped upon Rudolphus the Emperor in Transiluanta, upon
Christiernus in Denmark, and upon Sigismond in Swedeland: you fought for the
Crown of France against Francis II. Charles IX. and Henry III. In Charles IX.
's time you coined money in the name of one you held for King.

In England you set up Jane Gray against the lawful heyr Queen Mary. You bore
arms against another Mary Queen of Scotland, brought her into restraint,
forced her to depose her self, and fly her Country: kept her Prisoner
nineteen years, and at last barbarously put her to a violent death by the
hand of a common executioner, a thing till then never executed on a sovereign
nor since, but by your selves on her Grandson. Your perpetual insolencys
against your Sovereigns, your encroachments on the Royal Prerogative, and the
seditious maxims you advance, are known too well both at home, and abroad. I
challeng you to show, that ever any Catholic designed upon his Prince what you
have acted on yours Charles I. Remove this beam out of your eye, before you
point at a moth in ours Thus much to J. P.

Anonimus charges the commotions in Scotland on Papists, because Richelieu had
a hand in them. Which although supposed to be true, yet is nothing to the purpose.
For that great Prelate, and Minister of state, was a subject to a foreigne
Prince, not bound by any Allegiance to any, but his own Master, whose interest
he was obliged to promote by all lawful means: and he did it to the
astonishment of all the world. Why did that Prelate address himself (if he did
so) to Presbiterians; and not the Professors of his own Religion? The reason is
clear: he knew the Catholics to be so fixed in their Allegiance, as no art, no
promise could remove them from it: and the Presbiterians to be mere Gunpowder,
so that the least spark would set them on fire, and blow all to pieces. And
your Apology it self is a sufficient proof of this: does a foreign Minister of
state hold up a finger? The Presbiterians take arms. Is a discontented party
at home stirring? The Presbiterians grow insolent, and labor not to oppose
either foreigne, or domestic enemy; but to humble their King, still ready for
sedition, never wanting will, but power, or rather occasion to do mischeife.
Yet it is these are the men, whom you commend for their Loyalty! I think
Princes have little reason to desire all their subjects should copy them.

One thing I add, that the Prologue to all their Tragedys, is, and has ever
been, a clamor against Popery. In Scotland 1637. In England 1642. and those
designed lately 1680. Their first attacke is upon Papists, and Popish Lords:
the next upon Popishly affected, and Bishops: and the third upon the King. So
that when you hear the cry against Popery, you may conclude the Faction is
teeming.

You accuse Joseph Simond, and Carleton Compton offering a thousand pound for
his Majestys discovery after his escape at Worcester for no other reason, but
that you know the names of no other Jesuits then alive. At that time they were
both at Liege, the one Prefect of studys, the other Master of scripture: and
both together had not one pound at their disposal. Your own Father can inform
you of Others nearer home both able and willing to disburse that, and a much
greater sum for a work so aduantageous to the good old Cause.

A Convent of Benedictins, say you, was maintained by the Usurper, and Manning
of the same Red letter was executed for treason. That Convent must be in
Viopia; for in the known world there is none such. Manning whilst a Catholic
had faithfully served his Prince: and began to be a Traitor, when he ceased to
be a Catholic, as he declared before his Death.

By your honesty in relating things done in the sight of the sun, and known to
all men, we see what credit you deserve in things don in corners and known only
to your self.

J. P. p. 16. Whether it were Joseph Simonds, and Carleton Compton or no, it is
no matter as long as it was a Papist. Which is just as to say, whether Oats
speaks truth or no, it is no matter. You vindicate very well! How do you prove
that any Papists did offer that sum. Can we think, that those who had furnished
such vast sums to carry on the war against the King and Papists, and when money
failed, brought in their wives Thimbles, and Bodkins, when the work was
completed to their hands, should have a Cramp in their hands and expect till
the Papists wheeled about and supplied them? You have undertaken a very hard
Province to make good all Oates's dreams: and it is not to be wondered you
should speak so little sense to the Purpose.

Anonimus is pleased very disingenuously to charg three untruths upon me. The
first, that I said I knew those nearer hand as able and willing, as Simonds and
Compton, to give the 1000. l. I said only that Oats senior knew them.

The 2. by my answer I would have it thought there were no such men as
Benedictins in the world. I said only there was no Convent of theirs mantained
by the usurper: I know very well several conuents of theirs; but none of them
had a maintenance from the usurper.

The third that I pass my word for Manning's honesty whiles a Papist. I said
only, that he declared so much before his death.

You ask very wisely: What Arguments can persuade them to be true to their
Natural, who profess Allegiance out of conscience to a foreign contrary
soueraign. I answer readily: no English Papist does so. The Pope, as a
soueraign, is no more regarded out of is Temporal Dominion by us, then the Duke
of Parma or the Prince of Monaco. We consider him only as the chief Pastor,
head of the Church on Earth, successor of S. Peter Vicar of Christ: and that in
Spiritualls only; for in Temporals he is not obeyed, as appears by the
practice of Catholic Kingdoms. And in this sense he is Foreign to no part of
the Church, all making one Vinyard in which he is the Chief Workman, one
family of which he is the Father, one body of which he is the head under Christ
God Blessed for evermore.

Anonimus here says little: but I. P. speaks enough for both p. 17. These are
his words: I say Bellarmin thou lie: for if the English Papist do not so, he
is no Papist; but a mungrel. -- It is the positive Doctrine of the Papists that
by mere Divine Right, the Pope is supreme, and sole Monarch of the world; and
that all Monarchs and Princes are his Vassall's: which includes his authority
in temporalls, as well as spiritual. And then cites for proof some words of a
Legate to an Emperor. that he held the Empire at the Po^e's pleasure. Where it
is hard to say whether his jgnorance or his confidence be greater. His
Ignorance in advancing as apoint of our faith what nether is, nor ever was an
article of the Catholic Faith. His confidence, in speaking as if it were ex
Cathedra I will not say; but ex tripode, as of a thing not to be doubted of.
The mean while let him but either at Paris, or Madrid, or Vienna, or Venice,
etc. say that the several supreme Governors are Vassals to the Pope: and I
will undertake to defray all he shall spend out of those towns, on his return:
he will hear another lesson, and that Papists are not Mungrels. His two reasons
are proportionable to the rest. The first is: thou Lie. Very elegant, and
strong! his other, the words of the Legate, which weygh little with Catholics,
who owe no Obedience to, and own no infallibility in any legate whatsoever. So,
Sir, if you dam over ten times more, yet nether my self, nor any English
Catholic does acknowledge that article of our Faith: that the Pope by mere
Divine right is sole Monark of the world, and that all Monarks are his vassals

Then you lay down the Person of an Hystorian, and take up that of a Privy
Counselour, and very gravely advise the King to trust to, and rely on his
Parliament, (which has proved sometimes such a staff to our Kings, as Egypt
was to Israel, Ezech. 29.6. and 7.) not to erect an Imperial Paramount
self-end, or lust, nor to Rule by Will; but by law: that it is more stately to
be King of Kings (that is a King without subjects) then a King of slaves, so
you are pleased to call those who obey the lawful commands of their
soueraigns. Where it is hard to say whether is greatest, your Presumption in
giving these seditious aduices to his Majesty, or your Folly in thinking them
necessary, or your Malice in presenting them, as if they were. You had seen
your self represented as king, in a Pack of Cards, and would willingly be so in
reality: that the King's state might be greater, not by commanding, no have a
care of that; but by being the first amongst such Kings as you would be.

And how long you will let him be, first, appears by your following discourse:
The chief end, and work of all supreme Powers being to suppress Vice, and
encourage Virtu, which is don by banishing all Vicious Livers (such as the D.
Of York) from their Presence and Converse, and advancing the Virtuous (such as
your self, and D. Tongue) in their stead, By the neglect of which principal part
of their Royal Trust and Office, Princes DEPOSE themselves as VSELESSE before
God, and their own conscience, what ever may be their state, and Glory in fact
and by humane laws, and Power before men. Before: you raised yourself from the
condition of a Private man, to that of a King; now you lay a Principle to bring
any King to the quality of a Private man, by making his Royal Authority depend
on a Condition morally impossible: for such is that of banishing all Vicious
Livers, (who in all states are the greatest, though not the best part of the
whole) and advancing the Virtuous in their stead. Seditious Doctrine. Wherefore
I leave it to Authority, to be abolisht by Public Fire.

J pray God, your study and Prayers for the long life of his Maejesty, and the
Peace and Felicity of his People be sincere. I know none who have endangered
the loss of those Blessings, more then your self by your Lies: which I now
Will begin to discover, having sincerely wished that you may truly Repent, and
make due satisfaction as in conscience you are bound.

J. P. p. 17. says nothing to this: not knowing I suppose how to excuse ehter
the Parliament of 1642. at which I hint, or Mr. Oates's words from Treason.
Anonimus is content p. 14. and 15. to transcribe Oates's words, and leave them
to shift for themselves. I think they took the wisest course; Though not the
honestest: for they finding the words presumptuous above excuse, and evidently
treasonable, they should sincerely have acknowledged so much.

CHAPTER II. Two untruths in the address to Reader.
TO tell untruths seems as natural to you as breathing: Nothing come from you
without them: which this Preface shows. For you say

It (the Narratiue) was presented to his Majesty, the thirteenth of August
last. This is false: for it contains things, which as you say, happened on the
3.4.6.7. and 8 of September following, as may be seen from 76. to 81. inclusiue.

J. P. p 17. thinks he has squared this circle, by saying the deponent
presented it privately, and undiscovered till the 8. or 9. of September. But
did his remaining undiscovered, inspire him with a Prophetic spirit, to fore
see on, or before the 13. of August, what would happen near a month after? Here
is the difficulty: to which his being, or not being undiscovered signifyes no
more, then wearing a gray, or black suit of Clothes.

Again: It was sworn upon Oath on the sixth of September following, before Sir
Edmund Bury Godfrey by your self. Another untruth: for page 62 your self and
sit Edm. B. Godfrey assure it was sworn on the twentieth seven of September.

J. P. ibidem: This is false: the date signifyes only that it was sworn; not
that it was sworn that day. One of us two here must be guilty of speaking an
untruth known to be such. Let us recur to the book: page 62. Titus Oats,
Clerck makes oath -- witness his hand the 27. day of September 1678 Titus
Oats. September 17. 1678. sworn before me -- Edm. B. Godfrey. That makes in
the present tense, deserves to be taken notice of: which is enough to decide
the cause.

You see what pitiful shifts the good man is put to, to delude his Reader.
Being conscious of his bad cause, he imitates Orators in a bad cause who, as
Cicero says, recurre to clamours, as lame men to horses. Here is a prodigious
yelping, and bawling, says he, beyond all the yells, and dins of Green Hastings
and Maccha rel. -- The lesuits are a pack of knaves that must be looked after.
The vindicator a great knave, a pitiful, idle, inconsiderate both fool, and
knave: not worthy to hold a chamber -- pot to Mr. Oats, or to feed swine. I
believe the impartial Reader will think you worthy, to be put to either of these
two offices: and will be ready to recommend you to such a Preferment. I hope
you would give more satisfaction to your self in either, then to your Reader in
this Chapter.

Anonimus is not so furious. To the first he pretends that the deponent plainly
declares it was only part of it, that was delivered as is above specifyed. Well
sir let it be a part of that which was presented on the 13. of August, still
what I said, was true, that this was presented on that day And indeed the
Deponents words are clear: I here present thee with a short Narratiue, -- It
was presented to his Majesty the 13. of August last Now I ask, whither that
It, imports the larger narratiue, which he promises, or this part. If this
part: I have my intent. If the whole, that whole contains this part: and so I
have again my intent.

To the second untruth he says, that I should have searched other pamphlets in
which I might have found, that he swore the original on the sixth of September
and afterward swore many copyes together. But seeing he names no Pamphlets,
where this deep secret is to be found I believe he had none. Indeed he is less
to blame, then the Hector J. P. for he ownes, he had nether means, nor leisure
to be rightly informed. He might have then held his Tongue, rather then in
matters of fact, to shoot at rouers.

Yet he will retaliate, and score up two untruths on me, as I did on Oats. The
first, that himself, the Deponent assures, it was sworn 27. September. When
the Deponent says no such thing. Ad paenam libri. page 62. of the narratiue he
says, Titus Oats Clerk makes Oath -- the 27. day of September. 1678 The 2. that
I refer to fol. 62 When if I had put on my specta les I should find it only the
60. folio. And I desire him to put on his spectacles, and he will find it is,
as I cited, (not folio but) page 62. So I am clear from those untruths, and
they lie still at Mr. Oates's door. O, but in your book it is otherwise say
you. You should have don well to have told us, whither you live on this side of
the Line, or no, that we might with less trouble consult your book: although your
confident advancing of untruths shows you live in England, where they abound,
and flourish more then in all the world besides, since they are watered with
golden showers. For my justification it is enough, that in my book it is, as
cited, and mine was printed by Parkhurst, and Cockerill, by Oates's
appointement.

By this your Reader may guess what sincerity he is to expect from you in the
following Narratiue, of which he meets so little in your Address to him.
Indeed your writings like the Cadmoean brood fight against, and ruin one
another. They arelike Chymeras, which being composed of Contradictions, one
part destroys the Other.

I have been longer in this point, to give my reader atast of the sincerity of
these two worthy Champions, of Oats. Let him by this foot measure their body,
by this essay, judge of the piece.

CHAPTER III. Periurys contained, in the seven first. which contain his
informations from spain.
PAge 1.. 1. R. Strange Prouincial, I. Keynes, B. Langworth, I. Fenwick, and
Mr. Harcourt, Jesuits, writ a Treasonable Letter to F. Suiman about their
contriuing (...) Rebellion in Scotland of Presbiterians against Episcopal
Government. And that Mat. Wright, W. Morgan, and Mr. Ireland, were employed to
preach as Presbiterians to the Disaffecte^ Scots. etc. Observation. Here are
two Periurys. The first, that there was ^ letter with those contents. There
never was any such letter. See attestation G^ And it appears it could never
be: for it never was practiced amongst Jesuits, that many should sign their
names with the Prouincial, see Attest. C. And I desire this betaken notice of,
the same mistake frequently occurring, whence we man see how little you know of
Jesuits letters.

Your other Perjury, is that any were sent to Scotland. No English Jesuit wa^
ever sent thither. As for those three you name: M. Wryght was infirm and
though^ Consumptiue, and went to England for his health, and was shortly after
recalled t^ finish his studys. M. Morgan never was in Scotland nor out of
England all that yea^ The same of M. Ireland.

J. P. p. 18. wonders I should deny that any English Jesuits went to Scotland
to raise a rebellion, seeing there was a rebellion soon after. He takes it seem^
for undeniable, that no factious man in the three Kingdoms designs any thin^
against the state, unless he have a Jesuit at his elbow. It were happy for the
state all the rest were of so peaceable a temper, but I fear none but yourse^^
are of that opinion: it is so contrary to daily experience. You are displeased^
(...) say the Jesuits never use to sign many with their Prouincial: and
Anonimus from p. 17. to p. 20. inclusiue,, out of the Mystery of Iesuitisme,
endeauours to prove the contrary, although that libel speaks no more of many
signing with their Proui^cial, then with the Great Mogul, or the Sophy of
Persia. Well what I said, I s^^ again: and I appeal to any Jesuit in Europe, if
they do not all unanimously sa^ there nether is, nor ever was in the Society
any custom of many signing (...) same letters, I will yield the cause.

Narrat. p. 2. 2. At Burgos the Deponent broke up the said letters (...) found
those contents in them. Observe. Here is another Perjury: for seeing there w^^ no
such letters, you could not open, and read them.

J. P. p. 19. This is just their silly pleading at Newgate. Answ. There more
honesty, and reason in this pleading, then in your discourse: for how could
Oats read those Letters when there were no Letters of that nature? Prove first
there was any such a thing, and then there may be some possibility, that Oats
in this was not perjured. But you will prove that ad Grecas Kalendas so till
then we shall be conceived, that Oats is guilty of that crime.

Anonimus p. 20. This Booby's play, they would never endure in a Protestant:
why should we heed it in a Papist? Answer: here is a very expedite way, to
confute all our Replys. Show one example, when a Catholic denied such a Play,
as this: there were no such letters: ergo they could not be read: and erit mihi
magnus Apollo. The mean while, fear the Reader will judge, there is more of
the Booby, in those that deny; then in those, who grant that consequence.

I think it not necessary to take particular notice of such trifling answers,
as these, which yet are the greatest part of both the Pamphlets. So unless
something material occur, I shall hereafter spare the Reader the trouble of
reading them.

Narrat. page 2.. 3. R. Ashby, R. Peter's, N. Blundel, and Chapter Peter's sent
twelve scholars into Spain, as appeared by their Patents, eight to
Valladolid, and four to Madrid who were obliged by the Jesuits to renounce
their Allegiance to his Majesty of Great Britain, in the hearing of the
Deponent.

Observe. Here are many Periuryes. The 1. that the students were sent by four
Jesuits. Their sending is always by the Rector alone, and in his absence by the
Vice-Rector, and none else meddle with sending any from one place to another.

The 2. that this appeared by their Patents. Never any Patents amongst Jesuits
had more then one name, whether made by a Rector, a Prouincial, or the General.
None but a Superior signs them: wherefore none of these could sign them
besides R. Ashby he being the only Superior.

The third, that they renounced their Allegiance to his Majesty. There is not
one word of that in the Oath of those Colleges. All it contains is, to demean
themselves peaceably in the College, to take Orders, when thought fit by
superiors, and to return to their Country.

The fourth is, that this renounciation was made in your hearing. The four sent
to Madrid could not take the oath till they were there: and you never were
there. Nether could you hear those at Valladolid: who did not take it till
they had past a whole year in that place to try whither they would be fit, for
such a Vocation. And for this reason it was never tendered to you because you
had not been a year there.

Narrat. p. 3.. 4. D. Armstrong brought letters subscribed by sieve Jesuits. In
which was expressed that the Jesuits in London intended to dispose of the King
within a year, and of his R. H. if he did not answer their expectation.

Obseru. you have two Periuryes here. The 1. that those letters were signed by
then the Rector. See Attest. C.

The 2. that there were any such thing in those letters sent by D. Armestrong.
see Attest. D. K. O. Q The Persons named Protest they never heard of any such
thing till they saw the Narratiue. And F. Thom. Fermor, one of the five
pretended subscribers, was not then at S. Omers, nor had been there in seven
years before. See Attest. K. And the book of Liege proves this, he being there
all that time studying Philosophy, and Divinity.

Narrat. p. 3.. 5. F. Suiman writ that the K. of England was poisoned, and the
Duke should be so too, etc.

Obseru. Here is another Perjury: nether F. Suiman, nor any other ever heard
any such news.

Narrat. p. 4. R. Strange F. Gray, and I. Keynes in a letter, (which the
Deponent saw with the Archbishop of Tuam at Madrid, in F. Suiman's Chamber)
said. They used all means to procure Persons to dispatch the King.

Obseru. It is false 1. that ever R. Strange writ any such letter. See Attest G.

It is false 2. that ever you were at Madrid. See Attest. A. B. L. On the 1. of
June you arrived at Valladolid: and from that till the 30. of October, when you
were turned out you never lodged one night out of the College of Valladolid,
so unless you were in two places at the same time, you were not at Madrid.

Narrat. p. 4.. 7. At the same time in Madrid the Deponent saw a letter from R.
Strange, F. Gray, Keynes, B Langworrh, I. Fenwick, F. Ireland, and F. Harcourt,
which expressed their sorrow, the business was not don through the faint
hartedness of their man William.

Obseruat. here you continue in the same false story of your being Madrid.

Another untruth is that many Jesuits should sign a letter with their
Prouincial. Which I have often noted to be falls.

A third, that there ever was such a letter. see Attest. G. and R.

Narrat. p. 5.. 8. On the 3. of November. st. nou. P. Petro Hier. de Corduba
Prouincial of New-Castile sent a letter by the Deponent to R. Strange, which
letter R. S. showed him.

Obseru. Here we have many Periurys. The first, that P. P. H. de Corduba was
Prouincial of New-Castille, he never had any thing to do within New-Castille.
And which is yet more, there is not in all the society any Province so called.

Anonimus very disingeniously says, p 23. I will grant the Jesuits of
New-Castile are under the jurisdiction of those of old Castile. Whereas I said,
the Prouincial of Old Castile had never any thing to do in New-Castile. And I
say it again: he has as little to do there, as in Peru, or the Philippins.
Which appears by the Catalogue of the Provinces of the Society, printed above
forty years ago.

The second: that he sent you from Valladolid on the 3. of November and there
gave you the letter dated on that day. You left Valladolid on the 30. of
October, and arrived at Bilbao on November the 3. see Attest. M. you are very
unfortunate in timing your Depositions.

A third, that ever there was any letter. see. Attest G. Who, (unless as
shallow headed as your self) can believe, 1. that the Prouincial of Castille
should with such a reward allure the English Jesuits to attempt that which as
you say he knew already they designed, and needed rather a Bridle then spurs in
that business? 2. that he, whose Authority was confined to his Province, and
could not dispose of any monys belonging to it, but for the good of his own
Province should dispose of such a sum for such an intent? 3. that he should
trust you with such a letter, whom he newly cast out of the College, and sent
thence disgracefully for your insuffrable qualitys, and who was not taken for a
good Catholic.

Thus much for what you say of your Negociations in Spain, and the Treasons you
heard or read there. How come you to forget those with D. John of Austria,
which when your fable first appeared took up a considerable part of it I cannot
guess; but am sure it was not omitted on a scruple of Perjury, otherwise you
would have omitted the rest.

J. P. page 20 and 21. thinks to defeat all our Attestations, by feigned case
his ill luck is such, that the cases are no more alike, then an Apple is like
an Oister. He says: suppose I, and another as bad as my self, should steal a
horse: the other escaping, I should be taken, arraigned the matter of Fact
proved: and I should allege, in my defense, 1. that the Presbiterians stole
the horse. 2 that I knew nothing of the horse stealing till I was indicted, and
3. that my confederate should give it under his hand, that I did not steal the
horse. Then he asks very wisely, whither I think these occasions would save me
from being hanged? And kindly inuites me over to try conclusions: assuring me,
Newgate is furnished with Dungeons, and Irons, for my entertainment, till I be
thence sent to my Grave by hard usage or promoted to the Gallows. Dear Sir, we
have reason to believe you have as great a kindness for the Roman Church, as
Caligula had for the Roman Empire, you wish it had but one neck, that you might
strike it off at a blow, or thrust it into one halter. Without any experiment,
I readily grant, that Play to be ridiculous: and for it I should deserve to be
twice hanged, once for a fool, if folly be felony another time for a Theife.
But suppose there be no horse stolen, that none but an infamous perjured man
should depose the Theft, that upon search, it shoud be found, that the hedges
were entire, the gate untouched, and the steed feeding in the grounds, where
his Master left him, in fine, that after all diligence imaginable, nothing
should appear to confirm the Deposition of that Knight of the Post, and prove
the fact, but his worthless word: that upon examination it should appear,
that this fellow at the time, when the pretended theft is said to be committed
was 200. miles off the place, where he swears he saw it, and that all these
particulars could be proved by witnesses unblemished, I believe, Sir, you will
not think it folly to allege these witnesses, and produce their Affidauits,
for my discharge, in case they could not appear without danger of what befell
to Honest Medbourne, or Mr. Gerard, who both dyed in New gate: I believe this
defense would be regarded by a rational Jury. This is something like out cases.

CHAPTER IV. Periuryes delivered from. 9. to 27. Containing what he heard and
read at S. Omers.
NArrat. p. 5.. 9. R. Strange and nine other Jesuits writ a letter to R. Ashby,
that they had procured a man to stab the King at Whitehal: and if that
sueceeded not, a Physician should Poison him. And that P. Leshee had procured
ten thousand pound for it.

Obseru. you deliver here two Periuryes. The 1. that R. Strange writ any such
letter. This is most false see Attest. G.

The 2. that nine Jesuits subscribed with their Prouincial. This was never don
by Jesuits. see Attest. C.

To hear you speak, a man would think nothing more ordinary in Jesuits letters
then to write of poisoning, shooting, stabbing, cutting-off, dispatching, etc.
Kings. Yet I hear that most or all their Letters of several years were found
and perused by Authority, and not one word found insinuating any such thing.
Which sufficiently confutes your stories of this nature.

Narrat. p. 6.. 10. The same Fathers writ other Letters to Leshee, with thank
for his Charity, and care of propagating the Catholic Religion. Which Letters
the Deponen carried to S. Omers, and thence to Paris, and delivered them into
the hands of Leshee.

Observe. your whole Iourny to Paris, is a Fable you arrived at S. Omers on the
10. of December stilo nouo, and stayed there till the 23. of June, excepting
only two days which you past at Watten. see Attest. D. X. I hear that when you
were asked in what house of the Jesuits you saw P. de la Chaize (that is his
name) you answered in the Jesuits house, which is close by or next door to the
King's Palace, the Louure. If this be true, it shows you as great a stranger to
P. De la Chaize, as by another answer it appeared you were to Don John,

Narrat. p. 6.. 11. R. Ashby showed the Deponent at his return from Paris a
letter from R. Strange and others in London, showing that they had stirred up
to Rebellion the Seots Presbiterians, and that 20000. would be in Arms, if
France broke with England. That a way was made for french to land in Irland.
That Irish Catholics would rise, and 40000. Black bills were ready for them.

Obseruat. Here you have as many Periuryes, as Periods. for 1. You never
returned from Paris, having never been there. see Attest. D. 2. Never was such
a letter written. see Attest. G. 3. No English Jesuit ever dealt with scots
Presbiterians. 4. Nor Irish Papists disposed to Rebel. 5. Nor any Blackbills
prepared. 6. Nor way made for French Landing.


Narrat. p. 7.. 12. F. By letters of the 18. of December it was specifyed that
Thomas White, alias Whitebread was made Prouincial; who ordered F. Georg Coniers
to preach in the Sodality Church on S. Thomas of Canterbury's day agvinst the
Oaths of Allegiance and supremacy; and exhorted the Fathers to stand by the new
Prouincial, who would be as Zealous to promote Religion, as his Predecessor.

Obseru. you give here a whole couy of Lies. first Mr. Thom. White bread was
not declared Prouincial till the 14 of January 1678. so could not order that
sermon for S. Thomas day in December, before he had any power to order.

Again it is impertinent to say the Prouincial at a distance should order, who
should make a particular sermon. That is left always to the Rectors, who being
upon the Places know the conuenience, which each one has for such a task.

Thirdly it is false, that he was ordered to preach against the Oaths. He himself
and those who heard that sermon, protest there was not one word of the Oaths in
it. And this appears in the Copy he keeps of it.

4. It is a fiction of your shallow brain, to say that F. Coniers should be
ordered to exhort all to standby their new Prouincial. This was never practiced.
As Soon as the Prouincial is declared and all acquainted with it, each one knows
his Duty to him: and comply with it without any further exhortation. And if
this should have been necessary, F. Con. would not have been employed in it,
who (although of excellent parts, and great expectation,) yet is amongst the
youngest. Nether was the sodality Church a place convenient for such a sermon,
this being a place designed for the Devotion of the scholars, whither the
Fathets rarely come. As great confident as you make your self of Jesuits, you
do not know the place, where their domestic Exhortations are made, at S.
Omers. Lastly, those letters were of the 18. of December, say you, from London,
which according to the Newstile is the 28. the day before S. Thomas of
Canterbury's. I desire you to tell us, what man in his senses would write from
London beyond seas, to be speak a sermon for the next day? And if any was so
mad, how his Letter could be delivered in time, as you say this was, or else
you are Perjured?

Narr. page 7.. 13. Thomas Whitebread and twelve others whom you name, and more
whom you do not name by Letter dated the 26. of December ordered, that R. Ashby
should write to F. Leshee that they had met to contriue the advancement of the
Design of the happy Disposal of his Majesty, and of his R. H. if he answered
not their expectation.

Obseru. Your first Perjury is that so often noted, of many Jesuits writing
letters with their Prouincial. Which is never practiced.

Your second, that Thom. White was Prouincial on the 26. of December 77. he was
not declared till the 14. of January following.

Your 3 that there were in any Letter such contents. see Attest. G E Indeed if
they had a Design to give such informations to P. Leshee, they would have
directed their letters straight to him: unless you pretend they could not
write Latin in which Jesuits are seldom defective. But why they should send
such a letter to S. Omers, thence to be conueyghed to Paris, I know not except
it were, with intention it should be shown to you, their great Agent.

Narrat. p. 8. 15. In the same Letter was specified that Richard Nic. Blundel
was by Patent from the Prouincial made Ordinary of Newgate to visit the
condemned Prisoners: and to Catechize some youth in the City of London whom he
teaches Treasonable and mutinous Doctrines.

Obseru. You here deliver many Periuryes, the first is that there ever were any
such Letters, as I said already.

The 2. that Jesuits should become Ordinarys. Their being ordinary is a thing
unheard of even in Catholic countries.

The 3. That this was don by Patent from the Prouincial. The Prouincial gives
no office by patent.

The 4. That that Father (whose name you know not) should teach the youths
Treasonable and mutinous doctrine. This is not only falls; but improbable also:
and Jesuits might be begged for fools, if they delivered such doctrines to
Children, or youths.

If the Prouincial did employ one in works of charity, did order him to visit
the Prisoners, sent to them some Alms, according to his ability, recommended to
the same Person, to comfort the unfortunate condemned Persons in their desolate
condition, to exhort them to sorrow for their sins, which brought them to that
disgraceful end, and to prepare them to end well this miserable life if I say
he did so, and did it out of these motives I know none besides your self so
great an Atheist as to blame him for it. The Thing is so conformable to right
Reason, and so clearly recommended in the Ghospel (Mat. 25.36.) that he must
renounce both, who condemns it.

Narrat. p. 9.. 15. Other Letters dated on the 1. or 2. of January came to R
Ashby from Thom. White, and others, ordring them to persuade the D. de
Villa-Hermosa, that the K. of England would not assist Spain in this war. That
Fonseca sent his Letter to S. Omers from Bruges to be sent for Spain to inform
that King, that the English Merchants endeavored to transport their estates,
and to advise him to seize on them.

Obseruat. I will note here only two of your Periuryes: The first, that many
Jesuits joined to give those orders, and signed those Letters. Which was never
done, as is often noted.

A second that Thom. White as Prouincial writ them. He was not Prouincial, till
the 14. of January, and came not to London, till about the 12 so could have no
hand in these pretended Letters, dated on 1. or 2. as you say. But more of
these letters, on the next.

You seem quite thorough your fabulous Narratiue to represent S. Omers, as the
center of all Jesuits Transactions and Letters. Those from or for London,
Bruges, Brusselles, Paris, Madrid, Rome, Vienna, Valladolid, etc. all pass
that way. For what reason I know not, unless it were, because that great man,
you Mr. Titus Oats, was there: for all who know S. Omers, know there is scarce
a considerable town in the low country's worse served with Letters, then that,
whilst it was under the Obedience of the Spaniards. Which is in some manner
amended since it changed its Master; yet still it yields to most other towns
of the same bigness in certain and speedy correspondence. Nether can you
pretend it should be in consideration of the College, seeing that of Liege take
places of it. But you were at S. Omers and as the loadstone draws Iron, so you
drew all correspondence to you.

Narrat. p. 10.. 16. On the 3. of January in the after noon when the Letters
above mentioned came from England E. Neuil, and Th. For nor in the Jesuits
library at S. Omers, said: they would not let..... the King go to his Grave in
Peace, and that the Duke's Pasport was ready when be should appear to sail them.

Obseru Seeing you heard these words when the Letters were received, you never
heard them, for there were no such Letters. see Attest. E. K. Q.

Your untruths in this and the precedent article do interfere. These Letters
were written at London, on the 1. or 2. let it be on the 1. it must be on the
2. early before they left London, and you say here they were received on the 3.
at S. Omers, in the morning for on the afternoon you heard that discourse after
their receipt. Now I appeal to the Post-Officers, whether Letters go at that
rate, as to be in little more then 24. hours carried from London to S. Omers.
Unless you will pretend that the Jesuits used some winged Mercury or Eastern
Pigeons, for their Messengers. And if we consider that Letters from London are
dated always according to the old style, and days counted at S. Omers according
to the new, those Letters dated on the 1. or 2. and received on the third must
have been received 8. or 9. days before they were written. What think you, sir,
Are not these pretry fables to trouble the world with?

Narrat. p. 10.. 17. Letters were sent by Richard Ashby and seven other Jesuits
of S. Omers, and by F. Williams, and two others of Watten to the Emperor's
Confessor to acquaint the Emperor that the K. of England had treatherously
plotted the ruin of the Confederates, and the German Empire especially, that he
had sticred up the Hungarian Rebels, and found them money to go on with their
Rebellion, etc.

Obseru. There never was any such Letters or Letter as you mention. Not one of
all those named by you ever received, or sent any Letter from or to the
Emperor's Confessor. see Attest. E. K. O. Q And we need no further disproof of
this fable then to see so many Jesuits writing the same Letters: which is a
transcendental fiction.

Narrat. page 11.. 18. Letters from Talbot Arch Bp. of Dublin expressed the
vigilance of Jesuits in Ireland to prepare People to rise. That in case of war
with France a place should be open to receive the French army, and that E. N.
and W. B. carried this intelligence to F. Leshee.

Obseru. All this is false. All the Jesuits of S. Omers unanimously protest
they never heard of any Letters but by the Narratiue: and none went to Paris,
on any such account. see Attest. E.

Narrat p. 12.. 19. Letters subscribed by Thom. White, turned the speeches of
his Majesty, and the Lord Chancellor, and the votes of Parliament into
Burlesque, and gave notice that Pickering's attempt upon the King miscarryed,
the flint of his pistol being Loose. Whose negligence afflicted them all.

Obseru. I wonder you did not say, that Mt. White writ Lamentations on so
doleful a subject as that miscarriage was: but that in such a doleful
conjuncture he should be so pleasant, is very extraordinary to all, who know
how far he was always from that Ioaking Leuity. The mean while both points of
this Letter were as great news to the Jesuits at S. Omers, as to any in
England, for not one of them ever heard of them, till you began to deceive the
world with your Periuryes.

Narrat. p. 13.. 20. Charles Peter's on the 29. of January spoke treasonable
words of the late King Charles I.

Obseru. Here is another of your groundless Periuryes. see Attest. O. The said
Mr. Peter's protests he never heard nor dreamt of that foul Calumny till he saw
your Narratiue. Which confirms me in that opinion, that these stories you had
from your Father during the troubles, which now you spread under the name of
Jesuits, to make them odious, and the Royal family contemptible. Let those to
whom it belongs consider, whither this be suffrable in a Kingdom.

In your following Items 21.22.23. and 24 we have nothing but your cold
Cabbadge served up again, more Letters containing like treasonable matters.
Against all stand our old exceptions: that never were any such Letters written
Were ever any such Letters intercepted? were ever any such found? or any thing.
like them? no. after two years and a halfes search the world is as far from
any light as at first: and all still relyes on your worthless word, or more
worthless Oath. All persons named to have either written or received those
Letters protest they never heard any thing of them but from you. So I will
score them all up together amongst your Periuryes: and pass to your 25. where
there is something new.

Narrat. p. 16.. 25. Th. White, and other Jesuits writ a Letter on the 10. of
March, in which were very reproachful contemptible expressions of the Clergy.

Obseru. You throw here an Apple of Discord on purpose to sow Division betwixt
the Clergy and the Society. But you will miss of your aim: for the words bear
so evidently the Caracter of your wit, that we need not seek their Author.
Nether Mr. White, nor Jesuit ever spoke such words or entertained such
undervaluing thoughts of that great Body, in which are many men admirable for
learning and virtu, who by their infatigable labors have eminently deserved of
God, the Church, and their country. Hence I am persuaded none of them ever
harbored any suspicion of such words being really spoken being conscious of
their own worth, and that they are above such unworthy reproaches, which none
can easily believe were truly said of them, but who think they deserve them.
Had you moderated your Malice, and mollified your expressions, you had found
more credit, and by aiming at less hurt, would have done more. Whereas by
ouerdoing the thing you have don just nothing; and your Calumny like the spe
are in the fables cures the wound it makes.

Besides this, we have those general exceptions against this pretended Letter
First that many Jesuits signed it, and secondly, that none alive ever heard of
it, but out of the Narratiue. see Attest. E.

Narrat. p. 16.. 26. The Deponent saw a Letter from Th. White, mentioning that
Attempts had been made to assasfinate the King in the Park, and on his way to
the Parliament by William, and Pickering, but opportunity did not offer it
self: for which the former was chidden, the later had twenty strokes with a
Discipline.

Obseru. Here is another sleeuelesse fable, of which no body ever heard, but by
your Narratiue. I defire you to give the world a reason, why William should
only be Chidden, and Pickering whipped? or upon what score Mr. White should be
more meek to one, over whom he had jurisdiction, then another over whom he had
none? For William was you say his man, and Pickering, was of another order.
Again, why should he be angry with them if opportunity did not offer its self?
If you had said, an opportunity presented it self, and was let slip, you had
said something which might displease a man so hot upon that design as you
describe M. White to be. I suppose in the fuller account, you threaten the
world with, you will correct this absurdity, as you have done already some
others, in this.

To this I find no reply, but only in I. P. that Pickering was under the hire
of the Jesuits, and in Anonimus, that he was, a bigoted Priest. Which are as
much to the purpose, as Grantham steeple to Godwinsanas, although granted to be
true: when really they are false: for Pickering was not Priest; but a
Lay-Brother, and never was taken from the Chapel by Jesuits.

Narrat. p. 17.. 27. Letters from T. White, and others of the 5. of April, gave
an account, that W. M. and M. L. were returned from Ireland: who said 40000.
Irish horse and foot were ready to rise at ten days warning: that many Persons
had received Commissions from the General of the Jesuits. And that the
Prouincial summoned a General Consult, to be held at London. And that the
Deponent was summoned to assist at it, as a Messenger from Father to Father.

Obseru. You have not a word of Truth in all this Item, except the calling of
the Congregation which was not don in April but in March, to the end, those who
were at a great distance might prepare for the Iourny: so even in that you
embroder a ly upon a true ground. F. Louel never was in Ireland: nor F. Morgan
in that, or the two precedent years The 40000. men were never any where, but
in your addle head, and false Narratiue. It would have cost you no more to have
put 400000. and all had been alike true. Of the Commissions I shall speak here
after. Of the Congregation, in the following Chapter.

CHAPTER V. Of the Congregation.
THere having been an account given to the public of this Congregation, (which
you impertinently call a Consult,) and no exception made against any part of
it, as I am sure none can with Truth: I will give a summary of it, which shall
ground our true Answers to your untruths.

Prouincial Congregations all over the Society are held every three years by
their respective Prouincials. And the year 1678. was of course assigned for
them. So the Congregation was nothing peculiar to England, for the same time
like Congregations were held all over Europe in each Province of the Jesuits.
And the like Congregations have been held by the English Jesuits every three
years, since they were a Province by themselves, and will be, as long, as they
continue so, unless some very extraordinary thing hinder it.

The intent of these Congregations is expressed in these words of their
Constitutions: Ad eligendos tertio quoque anno Procuratores. Formula Congreg.
Prou. c. 1. p. 51. to choose one whom they call Procurator to go to Rome, to
inform their General of their private affairs. For Confirmation of this I
appeal to the Constitutions of the Jesuits which are in the hands of many
Protestants and may be found in S. Paule's Church yard (as I hear) and to the
Testimony of any Jesuit living.

The number of which it is Composed is not to exceed forty: which is made up
out of first the actual superiors; secondly the Procurators of the Province:
thirdly, so many of the ancientest Professed Fathers, as with the others make up
that number. And of just so many that held in 1678. was composed.

This Congregation had but two meetings on the 24. and 26. of April, stilo
veteri. And several of those who met, on that very day 26. of April left the
town: all hastened away as soon as possible. The Rector of Liege had the longest
Iourny, yet was at that place on the 16. May stil^ vet. (as may be seen by the
Day book of that College) although he had a very slow passage by sea, stayed one
whole day at Roterdam, another at Antwerp, and a third at Brussels.

The truth of all these particulars concerning the Congregation will be
attested by all those, who were present at it, and are still alive. I now
return to reuiew what lies our Deponent frames on this occasion.

Narrat. p. 18.. 28. April the 24. 1678. still. nou. F Warren, Rector of Liege,
Sir Th. Preston Baronet, F. Marsh Rector of Gant, F. Williams Rector of Watten,
Sir John Warner Baronet, Sir Robert Bret Baronet, F. Poole, Edward Neuil, in
all with the Deponent about nine or ten, went from S. Omers toward London.

Obseru. Here you give us almost as many untruths, as words. For first the
Rector of Liege was not of the number, nor near S. Omers. At Antwerp he took
shipping for Holland see Attest. I.

2. Sir Thomas Preston never stirred all that time from Liege. see Attest. H.

3. Sir John Watner remained at Watten, and supplied the Rector's place. see
Attest. F.

4. Sir Robert Bret, F. Pool, Edward Neuil, and you Mr. Oats, continued at S.
Omers see Attest. D. E X.

I think it superfluous to mind the Reader of your contradiction in relating
your fellow trauellors, having convinced you of so many Periuryes already. How
in Colman's trial p. 29. you make Pool a monk and one Charges of the number,
yet I am assured there are no such men in the world. And you made of two
Rectors four men, (or else your Arithmetic is like your sincerity) for so you
reckon: The Rector of Liege, F. Warren, the Rector of Watten, F. Williams. And
you say they were nine, and unless these two make four, there will be but
seven. I intend chiefly to examine your Narratiue, and so pass that over.

Narrat. p. 18.. 28. These met in London in Consult with John Fenwick, F.
Blundel, F. Gray, and others, to the number of Fifty Jesuits, at the White
horse Tavern in the strand.

Obseru. Here you Depose three vnthruths. The 1. that these three Person I
named were of the Congregation. Not one of them was there.

The 2. that there were Fifty Jesuits. There was only forty, and according to
their Constitutions could be no more. Form. Cong. Prou.

The 3. that they met as the White-horse Tavern. They are all ready to swear
they never met there: several have protested to me they did not know of any
such Tauern in the strand till you informed them of it.

Narrat. Ibidem. At which Consult held in the month of May the Deponent was
present to attend the Consulters, and delivered their Concerns from Company to
Company.

Obseruat. You advance two untruths here. One that the Consult, as you ca^^ it,
was held in May. It was ended on the 26. of April. And very many of those
assembled were at their respective Residences before May.

Another untruth, is that you were there: you were all that time at S. Ome^ How
you have altered your story! Colman's trial p. 20. By a Patent from Jesuits yo^
were of the Consult. Now you are cited only by the common Letter, and are not
o^ it but attend it as Letter carryer. It is strange the Jesuits, whose fac
totum and gran^ Agent you were, should employ your rare talents in so mean an
office, which any boy, or common Porter would have done! Or that your high
spirit did not disdain that employment! But it seems you would rather play
small game, then sit out: so finding your story of the Patent, and your being
of the Consult ridiculous, you thrust your self upon it, as a mean Attendant.
But if this were all your employment; what need of your calling from beyond
seas? Those who had trusted Treasonable Letters so long together to Common
Posts and their Factors, might have trusted these Concerns to the first Porter
they met: or have made use of Honest William, or awkward Pickering, or some of
those thousands, whom they had engaged in the Plot. I desire you to satisfy
these doubts.

Narrat. Ibidem. A little after, they left the White-horse Tauern, and divided
themselves into soueral clubs, or Companys. All which did contriue the death of
the King.

Obseru. You are so puzzled with studying to hammer out your Fables, that your
head is giddy. Just now, the Consultors were divided into Companys in the
Tauern, and you were busyed in carrying their Concerns from company to Company.
The next line, they divided into Companys, after they left the Tauern. But the
real Truth is, they never divided into, or met in several Companys, that being
against the nature of a Congregation according to all Orders; and what soever
had been in that nature acted, had been ipso facto null.

But what a fit subject to deliberate on, do you, the Taske-Master appoint
them! you relate the King's death, as a thing resolved on about a twelue-month
before, that all their Letters to France, Flandres, Spain, Italy, Germany,
Scotland, Ireland, and several parts of England, spoke of it, as a thing
resolved on: That men were hired to effect it by Pistol, by Gun, by Dagger, by
Poison: That some of these Ruffians had been punished for not performing what
they had undertaken. After all this, as Consult, forsooth is called Fifty of
the Prime Jesuits summoned to meet, to resolve it. Just as in some Barbarous
nations, a man suspected is hanged, and then his cause examined, to see whether
it were well don. When I consider our Nation capable to be imposed upon by such
ridiculous storys, I am half ashamed to own my self of it.

Narrat. Ibidem. Within three or four days after, the Deponent went to S. Omers
with the Fathers, that came from the other side of the Water.

Obser. You could not return with them, first because you were not in England
all that time. Secondly because those Fathers did not return together. The
Rectors of Liege and Watten returned immediately to their several stations, the
one by France, the other by Holland. He of Gant stayed some days in England but
far from London. And these three were all that came from beyond seas to the
Congregation.

Thus much of the Congregation. The truth of the more essential parts, is
euidenced by the Attestations already drawn up. The rest will be by others,
when called for: there being not one word related by me, which is not known to
many, who will depose it upon Oath, when required.

To this Chapter of the Congregation I find little to the purpose, in these two
Pamphlets, excepting railing in P. and very disingenious representing my mind
by Anonimus. Only the first p. 26. vrges that seeing the meeting was not at the
white-horse Tauern, the Jesuits should discover where it was. And the later
page 28. says a Traitor, and an English man are direct contradictions.

To the first I answer, I do not believe the Jesuits will satisfy his curiosity
in that it would be an ill requital of the favor received from him, who did
not refuse their meeting under his roof, which would render him obnoxious to a
violent malicious Faction. It is enough for our purpose, that by showing the
meeting was not at the white horse Tauern, we convince Oates's Perjury in
swearing it was there, and that he never was at it, seeing he knows not where it
was.

To the second, I answer it were happy for England that his words were true, and
that that Land had as great an Antipathy to Traitors as Ireland to venomous
beasts. But sure he was in a dream when he writ this: and velut aegri somnia
vanae finguntur species. Or else he dropped newly out of Viopia, and hearing all
speak much of Loyalty (and those chiefly who are most disloyal in their hearts)
took all for gold that glisters. Were they not Englishmen, and even the
Representative of all English men, the Parliament, who waged war on frivolous
pretexts, against the Late King? And were they not Traitors? And are not those
who in all appearance endeavor to act over again the like tragedy, English
men? Nay do they not arrogate to themselves that title, as peculiarly du to
them, whilst they term themselves true Patriots, and blast all Loyal men with
the odious names of Courtiers, Pensioners, etc? What opinion has this good man
of his Readers, who dares advance such Paradoxes contrary to all sense, and
experience, as if upon his credit, we should believe it were bright day at
midnight! well: my vindication stands secure enough as long as it cannot be
impugned but by such non sense.

CHAPTER VI. What happened after his return to S. Omers, till he left that place.
NArrat. p. 19.. 29. Th. White came to S. Omers on the 10. of June 1678 and on
the 11. spoke Treasonable words against the King and Duke, in the presence of
Rich. Ashby.

Narrat. page 19.. 30. Th. White told Rich. Ashby a minister had endeavored to
render Jesuits odious, by Englishing their Morals, and the Prouincial sent the
Deponent to England to kill the Translator, which the Deponent undertook to do,
having 50. l. reward promissed him by the said Prouincial. And the Prouincial
said, he and the Society London would procure the death of Dr. Stilling fleet,
and Pool.

Obseru. All this was spoken by Mr. White in the presence of R. Ashby, and your
self. Now the two first are gone to receive their reward for their Actions and
sufferings in the other world. Yet the dying speech of the former iustifyes him,
and the later before his death signed an Attestation that all this is false.
See Attest. E.

Narrat. p. 19.. 30. R. Ashby told the Deponent that the Rector of Liege, when
he was Procurator at Paris, did reconcile the late Lord Chancelour Hyde upon
his death bed.

Obseru. When your Narratiue first appeared, this was news to all Jesuits in
the World. The Rector of Liege declared, he never had the honor to see that
Lord in his life: although he would always have been ready to do him any service.

Narrat. p. 20.. 32. On the 23. of June, the Deponent was sent for England, to
attend the Motions of the Fathers in London, with 4. l. for his charges, and a
promise of 80. l. for his services in Spain, and else where, etc.

Obseruat. Your Memory is as bad, as your Will. For not only in Ireland's
trial page 20. but in the foregoing page of this Narratiue, you told us, you
were designed to kill the Translator of the Jesuits morals, with a promise of
50. l. if you did it. Now that Commission is forgotten, and the Reward too: and
another pitched upon, to attend the motion of the Fathers. True it is, they did
lend or give you 4. l. to bear your charges to London, either out of Compassion
to a man, who might otherwise have starued by the way, or upon your promise to
repay it, when you sold your library. Whitebreads trial. p. 43. But it is
false, they recommended any business to you, besides the care of your
salvation, which they thought you stood in need of. It is also falls they ever
promised you 80. l. or that you ever did them any service in Spain, except it
was in exercising their Patience, by your insufferable manners, and
Conversation. You arrived at Valladolid on the 1. of June, 77. betwixt four and
five in the evening, from which time till October the 18. (when schools began)
you did nothing, but eat, drink, and sleep. Then you went to Logic school
till being found incorrigible, on the 30. of October following you were
dismissed. What services here are to deserve a Reward!

For a further proof of your lack of sincerity, in this Relation. Many still
alive can witness, that things past in a far different manner betwixt you, and
Mr. White. This good man, being Prouincial, and arriving at S. Omers, received
an humble address, from you to be admitted into the Society. He had then no
acquaintance with, and but little knowledge of you: yet that little did not
recommend you much. So for that time he dismissed you, with some good words in
general, and some good advice: and took time to inform upon the place of your
behavior. This he quickly found to have been intolerable as well to
superiors, as to equals: your words offensive, your carriage insolent, your
whole life irreligious without any sign of the fear of God, or respect of men
much better then your self. He found, you had often been admonisht to correct
these faults; but in vain, for the hopes of your amendment vanished, as soon as
the fear of a present dismission was past, although with whining faces, great
exterior submission, and sober protestations, you had promised amendment, and
had profred to submit to any correction, they should enjoin for what was past.
But of this last, superiors made no other use, then to comfort themselves with
hopes, that you might be at last brought to a more Christian disposition: for
they would not permit, you should undergo the Penance inflicted on Children,
although you seemingly desired it, and really deserved it.

The mean while, in discourse with some alive to whom you discovered your
desires of being a Jesuit, they giving you little encouragement to hope for
good success, as indeed those who knew you, had reason, you said: I shall
either be a Jesuit or a Judas. And to another you said: If am not a Jesuit I
shall be damned. When the Prouincial had informations as far, as was necessary
to frame a Judgment of your good parts and qualitys, he caused you to be called
to his Chamber, and having told you what was blamed in you, and advised you to
be for the future more considerate in your words, and civil in your behauior,
otherwise you would draw on your self some Mischief or at least be unfit for
any civil Company, he told you he thought it not convenient to admit you into
the society. This refusal you took as a great affront don to a man of your
parts, that after all your hypocritical insinuations you should be rejected: So
in a great Passion you said: By the living God, I will be revenged. The night
before you went from S. Omers, you were found upon the Altar in the Sodality
Church, with your arms streched out. And being asked what you did there, at
that unseasonable time? (it was late.) you answered: I am taking my leave of
Jesus Christ. Upon this I will make no Commentarys, nor guess at your meaning,
or intention; but only relate, as an extrauagant Action, as indeed all yours
are: and I am of opinion, that those, who converse with you in England, since
your return thither, can increase this legend, if they please.

By this manner of your commission from S. Omers, the Reader will easily see
how falsse all your following relations are, of the Confidence of Jesuits with
you, and their communicating their Letters, and Treasonable Designs to you.
(see Attest. X.) So this might serve for a general answer. Yet I will follow
you.

My Anonimus friend touches this Chapter p. 29. very gingerly, as being afraid
to burn his fingers. J. P. like a man of more mettle falls on most desperately
but to as little purpose: for having endeavored to divert his Reader with S.
Francis wife, and stop my mouth with a Rasher of Bacon, he very gravely assures
all I say, of his demanding to be admitted into the Society is fabulous,
because our Attestations assure he was admitted into the College six months
before. I perceive he makes no distinction betwixt being admitted, as Scholar
into that Seminary, and being admitted into the Society, as if all the
scholars were Jesuits. Whereas not one of the scholars either is, or ever was
one: and many never had the least thought ofentring into the Society. This he
might have learnt of his friend, and client Mr. Oats, had he desired to know
the truth. The Reader may by this gross error learn how little these men
regard what they say, whilst they contradict us.

What I said here is true, and our Attestations are true too: and one truth
cannot destroy another, though one falsehood does, as we find in Oates's
Depositions. He entered the Seminary at S. Omers on the tenth of December 1677.
as a Scholar, and continued so, till June following He pretended then to be
admitted into the Society, and demanded it of the then Prouincial. Who refused
it, as thinking him unfit, not only for the Society; but also for the College
it self and the Scholars; and for that reason ordered him to be sent away out
of the College. If I. P have any common sense, he will understand this; if
not, I know not how to help him.

But he thinks it ill done of the Prouincial to dismiss Oats, who had
declared, he should turn Judas, and be damned, if he were not received. Answer:
the Proui^cial had little probability to hope for better, if he were admitted,
finding no amendment after so many admonitions, which gave more reason to fear
he would, if admitted, prejudice others, then to hope he would mend himself Had
he been admitted, his bad manners would have oblidged him to turn him out, how
much more will it excuse his non admission? Does not our B. Savior in his
Ghospel order the stocking up of the barren tree, and cutting off the
fruitless branches of the vine? Did he not reject a man, as unfit to be his
Disciple, who having put his hand to the plow, looked back? Lu. 9.62. Did not
the Apostles and Apostolical men of the Primitive Church retrench from its
body, with the Award of Excommunication such persons, as defiled it by their
wicked life? Do not all communitys endeavor to purge out such, as will not
live Peaceably with the rest? How then can the Prouincial be blamed for an
Action, the lawfulness whereof such a cloud of witnesses attest.

CHAPTER VII. What he relates since his return to London Concerning Jesuits
from. 33. to. 53. inclusiue.
NArrat. p. 21.. 33. in July R. Ashby came to London with Instructions how to
dispose of the 10000. l. procured by F. Leshee: and that he should treat with
Sir Georg Wakeman to poison the King. Item to procure that the Bishop of
Hereford be assassinated.

Obseru. R. Ashby before his death declared all this to be falsse. see Attest.
E. And indeed had there been any such thing, how improbable is it, that he
should communicate it to you, whom by the Prouincial's order, he had
disgracefully, dismissed, and who since your return into England had given new
proofs of a vicious and malicious life and malicious disposition?

Narrat. p. 22.. 34. You give us a long pretended discourse of R. Strange about
the burning of London. You tell us, as from his mouth, what hand the Jesuits,
the Dominicans, and others had in it: and what plunder they got.

Obseru. In all this article, there is not one word of Truth. see Attest. G.

You still pretend great intimacy with Jesuits: although many can witness, that
since your dismission from S. Omers your addresses were as of a poor miserable
man to beg some releif: which some of them afforded you, according to their
power, sometimes out of compassion, sometimes out of fear, least you should
return to the Ministry to get bread. Ireland's trial p. 33. you went also
begging to Pickering Sir G. W. S. trial. p. 73. and he bid the maid shut the
door upon you. much you knew such a design, and we use you in that manner!

Narrat. p. 25.. 35. R. Ashby before he went to the Bath had a conserence with
many Jesuits (you name seven and say there were others) to send messengers into
Scotland to promote the commotions there. At which conference the Deponent was
present.

Obseru. R. Ashby before his death protested all this is falsse. So Does F.
Blundel, one whom you name also, as present. see Attest. E.

Narrat. p. 26.. F. Harcourt told F. Ashby he would do well after the bath, to
make a progress into Somersetshire.

Obseruat. F. Ashby before his death protested all this is false. see Attest. E.
Indeed a man Bedrid, as he was, was not very fit to make Progresses.

Narrat. p. 26.. 37. On the first of August came Letters from T. White bread
to John Fenwicke, to treat with sir G. W. about the concern of poisoning the
King.

Obseru. The dying speeches of those two worthy and loyal men are an abundant
conviction of this untruth.

Narrat. page 37.. 38. Th. White writ to London to I. Ferwick, that be had
ordered twelve Jesuits to go for Holland, to inform the Dutch that the P. of
Orange intended to make himself King. But they got no further then Watten, by
reason of a mischance on the way. Which Letter the Deponent saw.

Obseru. Your Perjury is Malicious and Ridiculous. Malicious in charging such
an odious business on the Jesuits. Ridiculous in supposing that the English
Iefuits have either credit or acquaintance with any of the states of Holland:
who would rather have thought the quite contrary, had any Jesuit told it them.
Again what mischance could (naturally) befall twelve Jesuits in the way to
Watten from S. Omers, and that so great, as to divert a business of that
concern, in case they had resolved it? The day book of Watten shows that on
that day 31. July 1678. not one stranger, Jesuit, or other, lodged there. Mr.
Th. White was then at Liege: whence he let out on the 9. of August for Louen so
could not write from S. Omers? The certain truth is, the Jesuits never had any
such design: there were no Jesuits nor Jesuit sent about it: there never that
year were at S. Omers at once six Jesuits, who could be spared from the
Seminary upon any design. And lastly they would never have showed you that
Letter, you being by that time well known.

Narrat. p. 27.. 39. Th White in a Letter of the 10. of August, acquainted the
Fathers in London, that Ireland was arrived at S. Omers. And blamed them for
not acquainting him, how Sir G. W. liked the Proposal. Which Letter Blundel
showed the Deponent.

Obseru. Blundel protests he never heard of any such Letter. see Attest. E. At
that time, when you say Mr. Ireland arrived at S. Omers, he was setting out
from London for Staffordshire, or actually on his way. And White was on that
betwixt S. Trons, and Louen: so it is very improble he should write Letters.

Narrat. p. 28 40. Th. White writ that 365. should lie as low as ever 666. did,
and if Poison would not take the K. away, fire should: for Catholic Religion
would never flourish, unless IHS. took this course. Now 365. is put for
Westminster, 666. for London, and IHS. for Jesuits, they using it always.

Obseru. No English Jesuits ever used any such Cipher. see Attest. C. so this
whole. is evidently a Perjury.

Natrat. p. 28. 41. I Fenwick told the Deponent that the Jesuits, have 6000. l.
per an. and 100000. l. in bank: and lend money at 50. per cent. etc.

Obseru. Here is a great untruth, without any proof, but your only word. It
would almost empty the two greatest private purses in England to make up, what
the Jesuits want of that sum, as I am assured. And were Jesuits so void of
conscience and shame, as to demand 50. per cent, I am persuaded there are none
so void of sense, as to give it.

Narrat p. 29.. 42. Four Jesuits said, they were resolved to raise a Commotion
in England, and Scotland, which also by several Letters showed to the Deponent
in August appeared.

Obseru. Here you advance another untruth, without any sign of Truth. Produce
any one of those many Letters, for Public satisfaction: which you would not
have let pass out of your hands, seeing you were engaged all the first part of
August in composing your Narratiue, it having been, as you say, on the 13. of
that month presented to his Majesty. What a commotion you have raised in
England all the World sees. How will you answer this, if you cannot legally
prove one word of your Deposition? will your spyght against Jesuits justify all
Periuryes, disturbances of the nation, and breaking the public Peace? Has the
hatred of the Jesuits the virtue, of the true love of God to cover all sins? 1.
Pet. 4.8. If not, you are in danger

Narrat. p. 29.. 43. F. Moore and F. Sanders, alias Brown were sent to Scotland
to preach to the disaffected Scots, etc.

Obseru. whom you mean, God knows, for no Jesuit that I can hear of knows any
of those names: nor of any English Jesuit sent to preach in Scotland.

Narrat. p. 29.. 44. The Jesuits purchase secrets to send to P. Leshee, and
Keep in see the Clerks of Parliament, and Counsil, to that intent.

Obseru. All this is false. Never any Jesuits in England kept correspondence
either directly or indirectly with P. de la Chaize. And it is needless to keep
Clerks in fee, whilst the common Coffee houses, those Nurseryes of sedition,
stand.

Narrat. p. 30.. 45. These Jesuits drive several trades in town as Merchants,
Tobacconists, Goldsmiths, scriueners: by some scriueners they discover Men's
estates; by others, their Religion. Which the Deponent heard from John Keynes.

Obseru. I. Keynes is not so weak as to tell such untruth what Probability is
there that Men who have past 20. or 25 years poring on a book should be fit
for such trades? Or that some scriueners should Keep Registers of men's
Religion? Heretofore some, as giddy headed, as your self, said all Redcoates
were Jesuits: you now say tradesmen are such. I expect, that some other one day
will say the same of all the City and country.

Narrat. p. 30.. 46. Letters from S. Omers expressed great Joy, that Sir G. W.
had taken the business in hand. Yet ordered that Pickering and William should
not desist.

Obseru. It is falsse that ever Sir G. W. undertook that business as appears
by the Public verdict of the Jury at his trial. It is falsse that Pickering,
or William ever designed any such thing, as appeared by their dying speeches:
and it is falsse there ever was any such Letter, by Protestation of the Jesuits
of S. Omers. see Attest. E.

Narrat. p. 31.. 47. Because William Berry was about to print something in
Vindication of the Oaths, B. Langworth, and others Jesuits offered 10. l. to the
Deponent to get him killed.

Obseru. The Jesuits never thought themselves much concerned in what William
Berry did or could do. His unconstant Nature appears by his frequent changes,
first a Protestant Minister, then a Papist, after a Jesuit, them a secular,
then a Protestant Minister, then pretended Catholic, and Penitent. And what
next God knows. He professes he thinks himself able to invent a wiser Religion,
then either Protestancy, or Popery. He was once stark mad: and is ever since
cracked. You show in this point something of gratitude: He brought you first to
some Jesuits, and represented you as a considerable person, who had lost much
for your Religion, and was in danger on that score: to requite this courtesy,
you bring him to Protestants, and to recommend him by the same topic, you
framed this lie, representing him as a considerable man, upon whose head the
Jesuits had put a Tally. Thus these two scabby Creatures claw one another!

Narrat. p. 31.. 48. Richard Heath a Lay brother of the Jesuits held
treasonable discourse of the King.

Obseru. There nether is at present, or has been these last ten years, any
Richard Heath of the society. There is indeed one Heath; but he has been at
Liege ever since the 2. of January 1678. so could not speak in your hearing in
London, on the 9. August of that year.

Narrat. p. 31.. 49. John Groves gave the Deponent an account of the firing of
Southwark as don by ^im, and Three Irishmen, whom Dr. Fogorthy procured. That
the Jesuits got 2000. l. by it and gave 1000. to the Agents. Which R. Strange
acknowledged.

Obseru. Here we have a blank accusation to be filled by any man, whom you, or
another as malicious, shall mark out for ruin. Groves, Fogorthy are dead, the
one in prison, the other executed: both protested their Innocence to their last
breath. The same does Ric. Strange. see Attest. G.

Narrat. p. 32.. 50. F. Ireland on the 17. of August. still. nou. writ from S.
Omers, etc.

Obseru. How could F. Ireland write from S. Omers on that day, when he was in
company of Sir I. Southcot and his family, on the way to Tixhal, and went on
that very day from Northampton, to Couentry? see Attest. T.

Narrat. Ibidem, and p. 33.. 52. You give an account of many treasonable
Letters, written in Ciphers in which 48. stands for the King. Mum and
chocolate, for the house of Lords: barley broth, for that of Commons: Magpyes
for Bishops, etc.

Obseru. The Jesuits never had any Cipher. see Attest. C. since 1636. they they
have had no Cipher, but one, whereof a copy was taken with the Prouincial's
Papers. To this I appeal for a further confutation of this untruth.

Narrat. p. 35.. 53. Smith, alay-brother of the Jesuits told the Deponent, as
from Mr. Ienison, that if the Catholics had courage enough, they might rise,
and cut the throats of 100000. Protestants in London.

Obseruat. Here you deliver three Periurys: the first, that Smith is a Jesuit.
He never was, nor is one.

The 2. that Ienison said those words. His discretion, peacable and quiet
temper is well known to all, who knew him.

The 3. that such a Butcherey could be effected. This is a Bug bear fit to
fryght only children, and fools with. Protestants in number compared to
Papists, are in London above two hundred, to one. And if we consider the
advantage of Authority, Arms, watches, and conueniences to meet, which are all
on their side, we may reckon them 1000. nay ten thousand to one. Catholics
must be mad, if they entertain such a thought: and Protestants fools, if they
apprehend it.

Anonimus upon this chapter has nothing worth answering. J. P. page 30.
reproaches the Jesuits, that the Prouincial and Rector of Doway, as Thuanus
writes, got one to Assassinate William of Orange. Whereas there never was such
a thing, as the Prouincial of Doway. But suppose it were true: what is that to
the English Jesuits now alive, who were not born when that happened? Are all the
Presbiterians Murderers, because Poltrot killed a Prince near Orleans.

Again he thinks the pretended Doctor spoke too modestly, when he said the
Jesuits had 60000. l. per Annum: and assures they have 500000. l. It would have
cost him little more pains, to have added three ciphers more, and made it
amount to near the revenues of the whole nation and both would have been alike
true.

P. 31. he wonders I should say, there is no Moore or Sanders alias Brown,
amongst the Jesuits, the names being so common, that a number of nine cannot be
found without them. The mean while I stand to what I said, there are none of
those names amongst the Jesuits: so there may be, and is, a company of 100.
without them.

He concludes the chapter p. 32. with these words: the rest of the Chapter is
so ridiculous, that I pass it over, as being unwilling to tire the Reader with
Impertinencys, that may be anoyded. Which is the true reason, why I pass by the
rest of his reflections.

CHAPTER VIII. What he relates concerning Jesuits, and others, from. 54. to.
81. inclusiue.
NArrat. p. 35.. 54. Medburn, Penny, Mannock, Sharp, Seddon, Smith, Euerard:
Jones, Kemmash, at a Club, said the house of Commons was the Deuil's
representative, not the Nations: the Deponent was ordered by the Jesuits to give
them great Respects, and thanks in their Names.

Obseru. You bring new Persons on the stage, and show that all your Malice is
not spent upon Jesuits; but show you have store enough for others, even for the
whole Nation, which many others have experienced, and more will find, if you
are permitted to go on, as you have begun. This story is a ridiculous untruth
1. because the club would little value Jesuits thanks 2. because Jesuits would
never give any commission to you. 3. because all is false.

Narrat. p. 36. 55. Ienison said that if the K. did not become R. C. (Roman
Catholic) he should not long be C. R.

Obseru. This a groundless untruth. Yet had he said any such thing, it had
been because of Presbiterians; not of Papists. None but such, as are wilfully
blind can miss that Party, which endangers Monarky it self. What character K.
James in his Basilicon doron gave of the Presbiterians all know: Which is by
their un interrupted seditious practices confirmed. Whither these do not boad
the down fall of Monark, if not prevented in time, I leave the Cousidering
world to Judge, and those, to provide a remedy, whom it concerns. For in fine,
let them affect the voice of la ob never so much, their hand are still the
hands of Esau.

Narrat. p. 36.. 56. A packet from the Prouincial, the Rector, Procurator,
Fathers, and masters of Humanity of S. Omers, specifyed, that the twelve
Jesuits were got into Holland, to cause a commotion there and that Apple Tree
Will ( that is the P. of Orange) should not be great.

Obseru. to make your impertinence more conspicuous, you should have said, that
the lay brothers, their servants, and their great Dog had written too. It is
false, that any went into Holland And it is false that any English Jesuits
called Persons of that high rank of the P. of Orange by such a name.

Narrat. p. 37.. 57. I Fenwick told the Deponent, he had written to S. Omers,
that the K. was gone to Windsore, and that Honest William, and the Fathers, were
ready to attend the court.

Obseru. You can advance nothing without the mixture of an untruth. His
Majesty's Iourny being known to all the Kingdom, probably might be put into a
Letter. Yet that Fenwicke should write of William, or the Fathers following
him, is false. As also, that Fenwicke ever communicated to you the contents of
any Letter. He knew you: and that was enough.

Narrat. p. 37. 58 I. Keynes preached a treasonable sermon, at which were
present twelve men of quality.

Obseru. Here in a blank Accusation you lay a train to blow up any noble man,
whom you, or others like you, shall hereafter mark out for destruction. It is
only swearing that Nobleman was of the twelve, and his business is done. That
use was made of alike accusation of the four Ruffians, hired to kill the King:
and the like we may see of this, if Perjury continue Paramount, and knaves be
rewarded.

Narrat. p. 38.. 59. Keynes, and Fenwicke advised a Gentleman in, or about
Westminster, to remove thence, least God should destroy him with the sinners of
that City.

Obseru. That canting phrase, not used by Jesuits; but familiar to Oats, and
Presbiterian Ministers, shows whence it came. Keynes protests, he never said
any such thing: and any man, who knows both, will take his word, before your
Oath.

Narrat p. 38.. 60. I Keynes said, it was endeavored to dispatch 48. at
Winsore. That Mr. Corker, and other Benedictins had promised 6000. l. for the
Design. That two these owned it, and that their business was to remove the
Stuarts out of the way, and that Mr. Coniers laid 100. l. the King should not
live to eat any more Christ-masse-Pyes. etc.

Obseru. Now our Poet begins to bring the Benedictins on the stage, and next to
Jesuits, they bear the greatest part, for what reason I know not, except it be
because you desired earnestly to be admitted to their Holy order, and were by
them refused. This was alleged against Mr. Corker, and he was cleared by the
verdict of the Court. Mr. Coniers I believe would submit to a trial, if his
Preist-hood might be laid aside.

Narrat. p. 40.. 61. Keynes took the Deponent to an assembly of the Domicans,
where six were met in the name of the rest with their Prouincial, to comply
with the Fathers of the Society. There met also five Jesuits. Keynes demanded
of the Dominicans money to carry on the business of Killing the King. The
Dominicans answered they were poor? but would give their assistance, and
counsel. Hence the Deponent was sent with the proposals to the Carmelits: who
answered, their Prayers to God, and our B. Lady should not be wanting: and that
was all they could give.

Obseru. Here are two whole Religious orders consisting of many virtuous men,
made guilty of a most heinous crime upon your worthless word, and more
worthless Oath. Those who know, what emulations have been, and still are,
betwixt the two learned Orders, Dominicans, and Jesuits, will scarce believe
that those should meet to comply with these. And no rational man will believe,
that all those men should at first sight treat such things before you, a man
unknown, or too well known to be trusted with any thing.

Narrat. p. 41.. 62. Blundel said, his Workmen wanted Oil: by which is meant
sheep fat, Coniers said the Hill people were fools to set upon 48. at
Windsore: but he would speak to his worship in other language, then in
Tormentilio. But would burn his shirt, if it knew how.

Obseruat. Blundel never had any workmen. see Attest. S. And nether he, nor
Coniers ever spoke such words.

Narrat. p. 42.. 63. On the 21. of August. a Consult was held by Jesuits and
Benedictins in London, about Letters from Talbot Arch Bishop of Dublin, which
contained that four Jesuits had undertaken to kill the D. of Ormond And if they
failed Fogorthy should succeed; And that a Legate in Ireland asserted the Popes
right to that Kingdom.

Obseru. Here you present another blank accusation to be filled with any
Benedictin, or Jesuit when you please. It was accordingly charged upon Mr.
Ireland, although he was at Woluerhampton in Stafforshire on that very day. (see
Attest. T.) and upon Mr. Corker, of which he was, at this trial acquittted) as
appears by their several trials. Dr Fogorthy had Cured you of a venereal
sickness, and you reward him with this Accusation, as Vipers bite the breast
which warmes them. You say, you had this acount from Keynes and Blundel: and
they both are ready to swear they had had it from your Narratiue, as never
having heard of it, till this appeared.

Narrat. page 43. 64. That Fogarthy is a maine Agent in this Hellish Plot: was
present when Sir G W was contracted with That he told the Deponent, he had
hired the four Irish Ruffians, to mind the King's postures, at Windsore.

Obseru. We thought your attendance on D. Fogorthy, was to get your self cured
of your fulsome disease; but it seems it was to get informations of the Plot.
If the other were intended, you have paid off your Doctor completely: even as
you have don the Jesuits, who releiued you in your want. Your whole report of
the Pretended Consult, is one untruth. The contract with Sir G. W. a second.
The hiring of the four Ruffians, a third.

We have seen what use may be made of these blank Accusations. This, of the
four Ruffians was filled by Ienison's naming four Innocent Persons, for no
other reason, but that he might get a false witnesse's reward where with to pay
his debts, and supply his wants of money. And who can assure himself, his name
shall not shortly be inserted into some of the other blanks? It is evident to
the whole world, that some Innocent Persons have been accused, and condemned,
merely because it pleased these King's Evidences. No man can be secure, who
stands in the way of a Mad Dog, or an Impudent lying Witness, as long as the
clamours of the Rabble are so loud, that nether Justice, nor Reason can be
heard. Those are wisest, who embraced a voluntary Banishment, foreseing no
security, as long as this Plague reigns. Let those who stayed behind, look to
themselves as they can: they will never be secure, until you be gagged, or all
credit denied you.

Narrat. p. 44.. 65. That the Deponent at Madrid had seen the Lord Ambassador,
Sir William Godolphin, at mass: and was personally informed by the Arch Bishop
of Tuam, that the said Ambassador holds great correspondence with that
Archbishop, and a Jesuit. That a Jesuit had read to him Philosophy, and
Divinity. That Swiman, a Jesuit in a Letter to the Deponent, of the 30. of July
new style, did specify, that Sir William was as industrious as any Man could
be, to answer the expectation of the Society.

Obseru. Here you give us as many Periuryes, as Periods. For 1. It is false,
you ever were at Madrid. see Attest. A. B. L. N.

2. It is false, that you ever saw the Archbishop of Tuam (see Attest A.) or
F. Swiman.

3. It is false you ever had any discourse with either of them. For all the time
you were in Spain, they were not at Valladolid, nor you out of it.

4. It is false you ever saw Sir William at Mass: for he residing, according
to his souueraign's order in Madrid, how could you see him, who never were
there?

5. It is false, that Archbishop (the same of the Jesuit) ever had any
correspondence concerning affairs of state with the said Lord Ambassador. see
Attest. A.

6. It is false, that ever F. Sviman writ any such Letter to the Deponent. J
challenge you to produce, at lest that Letter, which being directed to your
self, you might without offense to any, or suspicion, have Kept. And it being
written at Madrid on the 30. of July, could not come to your hands till about
the middle of August, that very time, or after it, when your Narratiue was
presented to the King. It is incredible that you should make away such a
Letter, which would be, at least, some Confirmation besides your word, of this
great assayre, of which hitherto we have seen no other ground, but that: your
not showing this Letter will be looked on as a conviction, there never was any
such.

Jf the Lord Archbishop of Tuam, or that Jesuit being subjects of the King of
England, waited on, and profred their service to his Majesty's Ambassador, they
did but their Duty. And if his Lordship received them ciuilly, having no
express order to the contrary, I hope none are so barbarous, as to blame him
for it, But that there ever past any intimate correspondence, chiefly relating
to any Public concern, it is absolutely false. see Attest. A.

Here I must take notice of the disingenuity of the Managers of the indictment
of my Lord of Stafford, p. 30. and 31. of that trial; who produce one to prove,
that Oats was at Valladolid. Which was never denied by us: although Mr. Treby is
pleased to say p. 31. it had been controuerted, whither he had ever been in
Spain. So if they cannot prove what we deny, they will make us deny, what they
can prove.

Narrat. p. 45.. 66. On the 22. of August. in the name of the Prouincial, and
the society, money was sent by a servant of theirs, to supply the Charges of the
four Ruffians at Windsore. The sum was eyghty Pound, which the Deponent saw
told.

Obseru. Here is another blank to receive any man's name, for whom you, or your
associats, shall have a spyght. A servant of theirs! such shall any man be,
when you please. In the name of the whole Society! This you say to inuolue all
in the guilt, although had you had the thousanth part of that intimacy with
Jesuits, to which you pretend, you would know, that the Prouincial alone is
answerable for his actions, and none else.

But where was this money told? on the 28. of November, it was at Wildhouse
(Coleman's trial p. 24.) on the 7. of December, it was at Harcourt's lodgings.
(Ireland's trial p. 25.) on the 13. of June, it was again at Wildhouse (White
breades trial. p. 16.) What do these contradictions prove, but that the whole
story is built on your fancy, and therefore shifts the scene, as often as that
changes? and how come your Patrones to let them pass abroad uncorrected, but
that in this, God blinded them, that they might remain to posterity an
everlasting unanswerable proof of the injustice of their Judgments?

Narrat. p. 45. 67. John Grove brought an order from Harcout, I. K. Richard
Blundel, Mr. Iennison, M. W. B. L. and four other Jesuits, that lay at
Sommerset house, to pray the Prouincial to acquaint Leshee how things stood in
Ireland: that the Deponent read the Memorial, and saw their names. At two in
the afternoon he met those Fathers at Mrs. Sanders: who appointed him a meeting
at four in the afternoon, at Mr. Keynes's: where he saw Letters from Blundel,
I. F. and one from F. Ireland at S. Omers. Had an account of fourscore Letters
written to the (...) in England, and one to Mr. Peter's. That I. K. and Mr.
Coniers were designed for 440. by which is meant Windsore.

Obseru. Here are many Periuryes. The first, that four Jesuits lodged at
somerset House. I am credibly informed, that not one English Jesuit lodged
there at that time, or thereabouts.

The 2. that there was any such message. It is a mere fable. see Attest. R. S.

The 3. that F. Ireland writ from S. Omers. In his trial he was said to be in
London about that time. Yet he was nether at S. Omers, nor London; but in
Staffordshire. see Attest. T. so all that Letter is feyghned, unless you will
have him in many places at once, which you deny Christ's body can be.

The 4. that you saw Letters from Blundel. Blundel was one of those, who met
you: the same of J. F. But it seems they writ their Letters, and brought them
themselves.

The 5. that they would have any informations sent by P. de la Chaize to the
King of France.

The 6. that 440. stands for Winsore. There never was amongst Jesuits any such
Cipher. see Attest. C.

Narrat. p. 48.. 68. The same day, the Deponent went to Dr. Tonge's: but not
finding him, he went into Gray's-Inne Walks, and met there with Mr. Coniers,
who showed him a Dagger, with which he intended to kill the King by stabbing
through his cloak. And that thence he went to Dr. Tonge's, and met him.

Obseru. Is it not strange, that a man, who two days before, (on the 20. of
August, as may be seen. 62.) was resolved to Keep his way so secret, as to
say he would burn his shirt, if it knew any thing of it, would so frankly
discover it, and brandish his Dagger, and that in a place, as open, as a favre?
He had been mad, if he had done so, and those are fools, who can believe he
did. Mr. Coniers gives a far different account of that conference: that you
complained of your Poverty, which forced you to walk there sometimetimes in
stead of a dinner: that you wondered no better Provision was made in the Roman
Church for men of your parts, that you had been employed to preach before the
Judges that you had lost 4. or 500. l. a year for your Religion: that the
Bishop of London offered you great preferments, upon condition you would return
to the Chapter of England: etc. And desired him to prefer you to teach some
Gentleman's children: that meat, drink and 10. l. a year would satisfy you.
see Attest. V.

Narrat. p. 48.. 69. The same day, the Deponent met with Blundel, with a bag of
Teuxbury Mustard-bals, a notable biting sauce: who said he would furnish
Westminster, when he had enough. the Deponent says, they were Fire-bals.

Obseru. Blundel protests he never dealt about Fire balls: nor ever heard of
Tewxbury mustard balls, but from the Narrat. (...) est S. He had no cloak; but
a Jumpe, and he filled that pretty well himself, and no room left under it for
such a bag, containing mustard balls designed for a great city. And if you
say, he carried it on his back, you may add to the other trades of the
Jesuits, that of Porters.

It seems this 22. of August was pretty well employed, although you had nether
eat, nor drunk, nor stopped all the day long, you go to Mr. Harcourt's in Duke
street, and Wildhouse, and in both places find the same Persons, providing the
same 80. guinys for the Ruffians, and Cilman giving the same Guiny to the
Messenger: thence you go to Fenwick's lodging, there you hear the commission
sent to Fenwick to desire the Prouincial to inform Leshee with the Irish
affairs. That you read the Memorial, and saw the names. Thence you go to Mrs.
Sanders, meet the ten fathers, hear the contents of the memorial, and the
Instructions from their mouths. After you go to Mr. Keynes's, Meet with D.
Fogorthy, see Letters from Bedding-fild, Blundel, and Fenwick: another to
Bedding-field: Take an account of fourscore other Letters, their contents, to
whom directed, how sent away, etc. Item of another Letter to Mr. Peter's, with
its contents, and saw it vncyphred. Then you post to meet with D. Tongue, but
missing him at his lodging, away you hasten to Grays-Inne Walks, and meet
with Mr. Coniers, from whom you receive an account of his stay in town: of his
design to Assassinate the King, the Dagger provided for it, where this was
bought, its Price, and the manner of using it. Then you return to Dr. Tongue,
and meet him. After that you meet with Blundel, and a bag of Mustard balls, or
Fireballs, or what you please. A biting sauce it was: and indeed after such
labor, it was time to think of meat as well as sauce. Sure this day had been
as long, as that on which Iosue fought the Palestins, and your self as bury,
as Menechmus seeking his Brother But you are a Poet, and have a Tragedy in
hand: and can dispose and order the stage, as you please, and appoint your
Actors, to meet you when, and where you please, and lay what you please.
Certainly never more unlikely Fable, then this, was feyghned by any Poet.

Narrat p 48. 70. On the 24. of August, Blundel told the Deponent, that the
Catholics would shorten the Kings days: and that Protestant Religion stood on
its last legs.

Obseru. You have nether Honesty to tell Truth, nor wit to feyghn a probable
lie, nor discretion to hold your Tongue. Had you produced this saying at the
b^ginning, it had been tolerable; but to bring it in, after you had produced
Benedictins, Dominicans, Carmelits, Jesuits, and who not, agreeing in it, and
Blundel with the rest, communicating the substance, and contriuances of the
Plot to you, then, I say, to put these words into his mouth, as containing some
news, is like the rest, sens^^^sse.

Narrat. p. 48. 71. Blundel showed the Deponent a paper describing the manner of
firing Westminster. In this his task was assigned (although it had never been
proposed to, or accepted by him) and 1000. l. promised him, besides the 80. l.
for his service in Spain, (which it seems the Jesuits have not paid, nor I
believe ever will) which paper signed by Th. White.

Obseru. Blundel protests he never heard of any such Paper. Fenwick's chamber
was searched, all his Papers seized on, and carefully examined, and nothing
like this found. So I leave you to make it out, by any thing besides your word:
which there is little reason to esteem.

Narrat. p 50.. 72. Blundel showed the Deponent, a Bull, by which the two
Arch-Bishopricks, 21. Bithopriches, two Abbys, and six Deanryes are disposed
of. Nay there is not one Prebendary, or other place undisposed.

Obseru. You show as much skill in the Cancellaria of Rome, as in the
Secretaria of the Jesuits. That such Benefices should be disposed of without
the King's consent! All contained in one Bull! This Bull so carelessely sent,
so negligently kept, so causelessely produced! not one Benefice left for such
as may deserve well in that great change! Not one of the Protestant Party to
continu in his living! No man living know of this Bull, but from your
Narratiue. That all Persons concerned in the Promotion should be ignorant of
it! Those who can swallow these mountains of incredibilitys, need to strain
nothing.

Narrat. p. 52.. 73. That the Deponent saw a Packet from the Fathers met at
Edinburgh, acquainting them, that 8000. Papists were ready to rise, and assist
the disaffected scots, when required by the Scotch Jesuits there. That a
servant of Louel the Jesuit destroyed Westby.

Obseru. Not one true word. For 1. there never was a meeting of English Jesuits
at Edinburgh. Nor 2. any English Jesuits in Scotland. Nor 3. Louel, nor 4. any
man of his ever there. Nor 5. any correspondence of English Jesuits in
Scotland. Nor 6. any knowledge of affairs of that Kingdom, but from the
public Gazettes.

Narrat. p. 53.. 74. The White writ from S. Omers on the 4. of September nou.
still. to Rich. Blundel, that twelve Jesuits were sent into Scotland with 1000.
l. from the French King to keep up the commotions there, that he might land an
Army. And that they were to carry themselves as Nonconformist Ministers
amongst the Presbiterians.

Obseru. We have here many Periuryes. First there is no Rich. Blundel amonst
the English Jesuits. 2. there never was any such Letter received. see Attest.
S. 3. the sum of 1000. l. for such a design is ridiculous 4. that Jesuits
should pass for Non Conformist Ministers. No Jesuits takes the quality of any
Minister at all.

Yet it were for the public good, that this untruth were believed by the
Presbiterians, to diminish the credit of those Ministers, who are Flabella
seditionum, Trumpetters of sedition, and Rebellion. Were they silenced by that
loss of credit, the Public would enjoy more quiet, then can be hoped for,
whilst those factions Men have influence on so Proud, so stubborn, and so
Potent a part of the Nation. Jf such use were made of this Perjury, it would,
scorpion like, cure the poison it spreades.

Narrat. p. 35.. 75. That Th. White writ to Blundel, that some discovery of the
plot had been made; yet he should not desist the business in hand. That he
should thank Fogorthy for his care of the business of 48. the K. as also those
in Ireland, for whose good success he would pray.

Obseru. It is false, there ever was any such Letter. see Attest. S. Had there
been so horrid a Plot, as you describe, and he heard it was discovered, he
should have ordered all the Conspirators to desist, secure their Persons, make
away their Papers, and do some of those things, which Fear on such occasions
suggests to Guilty Persons. But to command them to go on, is Nonsense: and
none can believe it, but such as have as shallow heads, and as little common
sense, as the Inuentor of these Fables. Here again 48. is taken for the King, a
thing unheard of amongst Jesuits. It is no less unreasonable, that thanks
should be ordered to Fogorthy, and the Irish. Had you said, he (Mr. White) had
desired their Prayers, for the Preservation of himself and his whole Province,
and all Catholics, you might have been believed, this carrying some Proportion
with the state into which they were unavoidably entering. But that black Malice
which appears in you, and common sense, or the use of right Reason, are
inconsistent in the same mind. God darkning the understanding, when man leaves
his Will to the workings of Malice: that the untruths, they spread, may be more
easily discovered, and more clearly confuted.

Narrat. p. 54.. 76. The Prouincial came to London on the third day of
September, at night: and the Deponent was ordered to wayt on him the next day.

Obseru. In Ireland's trial p. 25. you swore he was at supper, when you came,
and after supper admitted you, and treated you, as the next. relates. Here you
say, you were remitted till the next day.

Narrat. p. 54. 77. That the Deponent went to the Prouincial on the 4. of
September who asked: with what face he could look on him, since he had
betrayed them? and struck him with his cane, gave him a box on the Ear. Yet he
would be reconciled to him again, if he would discover the Parson, who went
with him to the King, whom he would have secured, and killed. That the Deponent
should prepare to be gone beyond seas, within fourteen days: that he would pay
for his coach, and lodgings on the read, that he might not cheat them. Told him
his Innes at Sittingburg, Dover, and Callice. And that Rich. Blundel was to
take care for the burning of Wapping, in the Deponents room.

Obseru. Never any such incoherent non sense came from any man in his Wits
None, who knew Mr. White, even when in his vigor, will believe it probable,
that he should beat so stout a man, as you show your self: much less, when he
was in so weak a condition, as he came in to London, as being almost cast down
by the sickness contracted at Antwerpe, which carried away his Sodus, Mieo,
and brought him to death's door. Is it probable, that either he, who could
scarce stand, should have so much Courage, as to beat you? or you so much
Patience, as to bear it, from a man, whom you could run down with a finger? let
that pass.

Mr. White having vented his undigested choler, comes to himself again, and
offers to for give what is past, upon condition you would discover the Parson,
who went with you to the King: telling you, he would have him secured, and
killed. And that when you had betrayed your friend to death, you should be sent
beyond seas, there to receive a like reward doubtless. And he heartily tells
you, you should nor deceive him, no: and for that reason, he would give you no
money for your Iourny; but would hire you a coach, and defray your charge on the
way. Just as if a Constable should bid a Theife first to discover his fellow,
whom he would hang: and then go to such a place, where he would find some men
ready to seize on him, and secure him from escaping out of their hands, would
carry him to a safe lodging, which would be paid for him by the Public.
Wondrous Wife! Yet this is not all. As if Mr. White had forgotten, that you
endeavored to prevent the mischeife intended to Wesiminster, by the discovery
you had made of it; but still were a Zealous conspirator: he bids you not to be
solicitous for your share of that work of Darkness, because another would
supply your place.

I shall desire of those, who can believe this nonsense, one favor; which I
think cannot in Justice be denied, that when ever they hear Jesuits called
Politians, they say it is a Calumny: for they are the stupidest, sillyest
creatures, that walk on the face of the Earth. For such must be the chiefest of
t^^m, if what is here said be true.

What I know of that meeting, is this. You made your addresses again to Mr
White after his return to London, to be admitted into the society But your
Petition was as coldly received, as before. Then you desired a Gentleman to
intercede for you, either to procure your admission, or a Pension to subsist
with beyond seas: and told him, that if either of these things were granted,
you would give up to him an Accusation consisting of above fifty articles,
which at the next Parliament would be exhibited against the Jesuits, which you
said, you knew would be believed, although they con^ained not one word of Truth.
We have since learnt by Printed Pamphlets, composed by such as had reason to
know all the particulars, that some part of this Narratiue had been presented
to his Majesty before, and you in your preface to the Reader say so too (and
happily Mr. White had received some inkling of it) and by that you had engaged
your self to make it as good, as little wit, great M^lice, and perjury could.
What could then have moved you, to renew that request, which you were sure
would be rejected, I know not; unless it be, that had either of the two things
been granted, you would have thence either confirmed your intimacy with
Jesuits, or alleged it as a bribe profred to corrupt you. At least for these
reasons Mr White resolved to leave you to your own courses, to vent your
malice, as you had begun, and would continu: relying the mean while upon his
own Innocence, the Justice of the nation, and the Mercy of the King: arming
himself as he had reason, with Patience to suffer what extremity might befall
him, and his. Accordingly he kept his ordinary lodging, removed no Papers, left
all those under his conduct in their ordinary stations, etc. Which had he, or
they, been conscious of the least Guilt, could never be. This alone to
Posterity will be a conuincing proof of his Innocence, were there nothing else.

Narrat. p. 55. 18 On the 6. of September, Pi^kering told the Deponent, that
Coniers was gone to Windsore, and would thence go to my Lord Brudnel's house.

Obseru. This Perjury is incredible: for by that time, all about the Court, and
many Papists in the suburbs, knew you to have malicious designs. But this
untruth may comfort the Jesuits, because others are represented as great
fools, or Mad men, as themselves.

Narat. p 55. 79.. The Deponent at nygh^ heard White, and others talk of
disposing of a Person, w^o had betrayed them, by feeing a Coach man, to take
him up, and carry him beyond seas, and there make him confess, who had been
with the King. Hearing this, he slank away, and changed his lodging that night.

Obseru. What should so fryght you now, who were so vnconcerned before, when
the Prouincial declared to you, that very method of conueyghing you away, I
cannot guess: unless it were, that before you were certainly meant, and here
you knew it only by conjectures, no body being named.

Narrat p 56 81. That the Deponent, returned to his lodging the day following:
where Grigson told him the danger he was in, for offending ^he Jesuits. That
that night one Stratford, employed by Jesuits, assaulted the house, with
intention to kill him, broke down a door: but being observed by servants, he
broke some quarryes of Glass, and retired.

Obseru. Your sudden return to your own lodging, and your inclination to the
sex, gives occasion to surmise your loging abroad that night, to have proceeded
from something else, then fear of Jesuits: Otherwise you would not so soon have
exposed your precious self to such merciless Ruffians, as it seems, the
Jesuits are, especially your fear being renewed by Grigion Suppose your lodging
was really assaulted, of which J doubt, as having no ground to believe it,
besides your Lying word) how do you know the Assailant was Stratford? or that
he is a Papist? or intended to kill you; and not to steal? or that he was set
on by Jesuits? Why was not he pursued, or taken in Flagranti, being observed by
many servants? Here you slept, as all great wits do sometimes, or else you
would, after your ordinary manner, have introduced some Jesuit acquainting you
with all. But, which is more, in Irland's trial, you swore White bread was the
man who assaulted your lodging. And when any man else is to be tried, it shall
be he, if you have no other matter against him.

Narrat. p. 57.. 81. The eight day Neuil a Papist told the Deponent, he must
either destroy the Jesuits, or they would destroy him. Item, that the Bishop of
Rochester said: he (the Bishop) would lead them such a dance, as they never
followed since the sool their Founder, appeared in the world.

Obseru. You have made as good use as you could of that freindly advice, and
have don more toward the ruin of Jesuits, then could have been imagined,
considering the cleernesse both of their Innocence, and of your untruths and
Perjurys. Yet your work is not don: some Jesuits are yet alive, and the world
begins to be weary of shedding their Innocent blood, to satisfy your desire of
Revenge. Which is an Antidote against your Poison.

As to the Bishop of Rochester, I never heard he had a Papist of his bosom
counsel: nor that he thought the Jesuits Founder a Fool: the wise, and learned
world, of which he is a Part, has a far different opinion of the Jesuits
Founder. It is also news; that he, or any other Protestant Bishop (amongst whom
I scarce reckon him of Lincoln) lead this dance: if any did, they soon
desisted, foreseing it would dance them out of their Revenues, and Churches,
and the whole state into Confusion. At which the Presbiterian Party, whose
Instrument you are, aims, and which they endeavor by a Persecution of Papists
in 1679. as they compast it by another, less violent, 1642.

J. P. p. 33. aduises me to come to Newgate, where I may learn a better way of
Pleading. It seems his going thither was not only to suborn Witnesses, and
persuade honest men, such as Medburn to turn Knyghts of the Post He went to
learn Eloquence, and substantial ways of Pleading: and I perceive he is so
persuaded persuaded of the advantages of that School, that he endeauours to
draw others to it too. But I think no honest man will follow his counsel: but
leave that place to such as it is intended for, such as his friend Oats and
himself.

P. 35. You are to consider, whom this brain of a Tailor calls the Rabble:
None but the Lords and Commons of England, and the whole body of the Nation.
Answer: This is a most malicious slander: I mean only those factious fellows,
who at the Old Bailey, houted, and shouted, and clamoured, as if they had been
at a Bear baiting: Those who offered violence, struck, wounded, and were like
to Kill the Wit-nesses, who were produced in favor of the pretended criminalls.
Those who disordred the court so, as it could scarce hear for along time any
thing relating to the case in hand. Was there any Lord, or any member of the
Honorable house of Commons amongst those dis-orderly, cruel, savage Persons? I
doubt not but they did dislike, condemn, detest those barbarous proceedings: of
which disorders I discharge all honest civilized Englishmen, by charging them
only on the Rabble the skum of the Nation, and none else is capable of such
inhumane actions: where of we find no precedent in the civilized world, and it
is not to be paralelled, but by the brutish Cannibals in America, who with such
like howlings, and yawlings satiate their thirst of Revenge upon their Captive
Enemies.

He endeauours an answer to the rest of the Chapter, but he shows so much of
Newgate breeding, and so little of civil discourse, or common sense, that I
shall only desire my Reader to compare both together, and use his own Reason
to judge betwixr us. Indeed what need of answering these two reasons, with
which p. 39. He shows, that Mr. Whitebreade, then scarce able to stand on his
legs, could cane Oats: for 1. S. Denis carried his head above a league in his
hand, when it was cut off: ergo Mr. Whitebreade tho never so weak could beat
Oats. 2. hewas able to stand at his trial in June, with out the help of Aqua
mirabilis (when he was well recovered): ergo he was not so weak in September
when he was sick, and in very great danger of Death. Should I discourse so
idly, how would he fill up whole pages with those Billings gate elegancyes
Sot, Dunce, Blockhead, etc.

Anonimus from p. 30 to 34. in many words, say, just nothing to the purpose. He
would feign assert Oates's having been at Madrid: which the Managers of the
cause against My Lord of Stafford, are willing to let fall: yet least they
should seem to do nothing, they prove that Oats was in S^ain and at
Valladolid. Which no body ever denied. Sic magno conatu magnas nugas agunt. My
Lord of Stafford pressed afterward, as an Evident Perjury that story of
Oates's, being at Madrid, and seeing Don John of Austria: and his Patrones
employed all their cunning to keep the leaky vessel from that rock, where it
would certainly suffer shipwreck Yet although they could elude all that that Lord
said, they can never make the world forget, that Oats had sworn he had been
there, and had treated there with D. John: nor persuade any reasonable man,
that that is not false. They declined the examining it, as a precipice to his
honor, by which they tacifly owned a Perjury, tho they would not seem to
acknowledge it.

CHAPTER IX. Of the Commissions given to Noblemen.
NArrat. p. 58. A list of such Noblemen, and Gentry, as are in this Conspiracy
whose names occur at present. Lord Arundel of Wardour, Lord Chancellor, etc,

Obseru. Here is another Accusation, with a blank left for any, whom you shall
here after design to ruin: whom in due time you will call to mind.

Narrat. All these had their Commissions or Patents, stamped by the General of
the Jesuits Ioannes Paulus d'Oliua.

Obseru. How comes it, that you having had the distribution of these
Commissions, (as you said before the Parliament, and in several trials, and in
this Narratiue p. 59.) should not have kept one at least of them, to Convince
the world, there is something true? How comes it about, that not one of all
these Noble men, and Gentlemen, should know of their own Commission, or of the
Design? that not one Commission should be found by all these searches? how
happens it, that you should not know the General of the Jesuits name, nor seal,
as I have said in the Preface? If your Memory failed you in a matter so often
occurring, what credit does it deserve in things, which occurred but once? And
if you are foresworne in this, who will believe you in the rest?

Let us consider the probability of this story, from the qualitys of the
Persons who are said to have given, and received these Commissions. You say, a
superior of Religious men by his Patents makes a Chancelour, the Secretarys of
state, the General and subordinate Officers of the Army, in fine disposes as
Soueraign, of all Offices, Civil, and Military of the whole Kingdom. An
attempt not to be paralleled, but by that of Lucifer, to be like God. All the
world knows, that the Authority of Religious Superiors, as such, even in
Catholic Countries, is confiued within the Walls of their Order, and reaches no
persons, but such as by their own Voluntary Act submit themselves to it: That
the General of the Jesuits has no power over his own Religious longer then
they continu such: for if any of them be raised by a superior Power to an
Ecclesiastical Dignity, or dismissed for their misde meanours, his Authority
reaches them not. This being known to all, who know any thing of the Catholic
world, who can imagine such a Superior should on a sudden take upon him Regal
Authority, and dispose of all Temporal Dignitys, and Offices, which is an Act
of supreme Jurisdiction?

As for the Persons receiving Commissions, they are the English Catholic
Nobility, and Gentry. And although many of them never dealt with Jesuits, even in
spiritual things, had little kindness for them, further then they are obliged
by being parts of the same mystical Body, the Church: yet, as you say, all
unanimously submit to the usurpation of that Religious man. They all knew, that
their Ancestors, of the same Principles of Religion to God, and Allegiance to
their Prince, had constantly refused to own any Temporal Authority in the
Pope, although grounded, as was alleged, on the King's free gift. Yet now
this same body of men is said to own a much greater Authority in one of the
Pope's Under-officers. This strange Transaction is made, and nothing of, or
about it appears, but in your Narratiue! Not one of them refuse to submit or
at least demur! not one disdain to become subject to a Poor Religious Man! Not
one acknowledge the fault, although they were assured of their Pardon, and a good
reward to boot! That even those, who to free themselves from vexatious Prisons,
changed their Religion, should be constant in denying the Plot and the
Commissions And which is more this thing so ridiculous, so incredible, so
morally, or even Physically impossible, is to be believed upon the single word,
and Oath of a man Faithless to God, and Honourlesse to men: one who scarce
ever spoke a true Word, and who deserves no credit even when he speaks probable
things. The Devil was a Liar from the beginning: and you, from your cradle. A
Wise man having weighed these motives seriously, although he knew nothing of the
particular Facts, concluded, that either what Homer, and Ovid writ of their
Gods, Aesop of Beasts, were no Fables, or the English Conspiracy is a Fable.

Yet O Just Iudment of Almighty God! The finger of God is here. It has found
credit. Indeed our Nation or a great part of it, having rejected many Divine
and saving Truths revealed by the H. Ghost the spirit of Truth, preached by the
Apostles the Doctors of Truth, and handed down to us by the Church the Pillar
of Truth, deserves such blindness, as to believe improbale Lies, suggested by
the Devil, the Father of Lies, and desiuered by you, who are a faithful
Disciple of that Faithless master: to whose instructions of Lying, you have
always adhered, in whose school you are such a Proficient, that no hystory to
my remembrance furnishs your equal. Hear the Apostle: Quia charitatem
veritatis non receperunt, vt salui fierent: ideo mittet illis Deus operationem
erroris, vt credant MENDACIO; Vt iudicentur omnes, qui non crediderunt
veritati; sed consenserunt iniquitati. Because they received not the love of
Truth, that they might be saved, therefore God shall abandon them to the
Working of Error, (illusion) so that they shall believe a LIE, that all may
be Judged (damned) who would not believe the Truth; brt consented to (this)
injustice. 2. Thessal. 2.10.11.

Narrat. p. 62. Titus Oats Clerk makes Oath, that the Information set down in
these Papers containing 81. articles, all written and subscribed by his own
hand, are true in the whole, and in every particular thereof. 7. September.
Titus Oats.

Obseru. Here is a Perjury not unlike to Hobs's Leuiathan: for he represents
this as one Body composed of many thousands of Persons; so is this one PERJURY
Composed of many thousands of Periuryes. You swear all you have said is true, we
know, and will prove all is false. You stand alone in asserting the Truth of
this Oath; we show its falsehood by many Witnesses: To you lying, and Perjury is
as familiar as eating, or Breathing; our Witnesses are of unblemished
Reputation. You story is incredible and morally impossible; ours evidently
probable, and morally certain: your Tale is every day changed, as being the
Offspring of your fancy, and having no substance, but from it; ours always the
same, as being grounded on real Facts, In fine all your Art, though directed
by some more Wise then your self, and seconded by Bedlow, and such fellows,
could never make out the Truth of any one material point, questioned by us,
nor the Falsehood of any material point, alleged in our Defense. So the lying
spirit does evidently discover it self in your Narratiue: and the spirit of
Truth is as clearly seen in our Apology. We suffer with Truth, we suffer for
Truth, and Truth will free us Veritas Liberabit vos. Joan. 8.32.

J P. 40. Not finding what to say to this Chapter, is content to let it pass.
Yet he very wittily, as he thinks, retorts the Wise man's saying upon me: for
says he, there is some Truth in Homer's and Aesops fables: ergo there is some
Truth in this Plot. What say you, Courteous Reader, to this? Is this not a man
who can draw oil out of a Pumice stone, and prove the snow is Black? well: J
will grant them alike true. The truth in Homer's fables, is, that they are untrue
storys of the Gods: that of Oates's Narratiue is, that they are untrue storys of
God's servants. Those had all their Being from the Poet; these had theirs from
the Deponent! those are sacrilegious untruths of God: these are a sacrilegious
taking God to Witness Untruths. Jn Aesop's Fables under false storys of
Beasts, and Birds are couched some Passions of men, and moral directions, and
precepts: these are wanting in the Narratiues, under which is couched only
Oates's ground less spyght, to those, who never did him any hurt, and an
endless malice of the implacable enemies of the Catholic Church. That
Nobleman spoke a great truth, who said: We, who have no Religion, are going to
Persecute those, who are thought to have some. Yet in Aesop there is one fable,
much like their proceeding with us: viz that a wolf accused a Lamb of
troubling the water with which he was to quench his Thirst. And although the Lamb
replied, that could not be, because the place where he drunk was much lower,
then that where the Wolf was: yet this play was over born, the Lamb sentenced
to Death, and worryed.

Anonimus tells we p. 35. I bewray my nest. But he is very much mistaken: I do
only show what he, and some factious spirits do, to the defiling of it. Jf
this be a fault, Daniel was to blame, who trauerst the sentence of the wicked
Judges past upon chaste Susanna: Hester is inexcusable, in pleading the
Innocence of her Nation, after a solemn sentence had been pronounced against
it by Assuerus. All the Christians are to be condemned, who assert the
Innocence of Christ, and his Apostles, notwithstanding their conuictions, and
condemnations by the Supreme Magistrates of those times. Are we returning to
the Pagan superstition, when Rapes, and thefts; murders and Adulterys were
consecrated, when committed by those men, whom the credulous vulgar adored as
Gods? Does God Alm-contrary to scripture admit of any distinction of Persons?
Is not his Law Common to all? And if it be broken by any, how great soever may
not he be minded of his Duty? Nay is there not an obligation imposed on all,
Church men and others, to mind them of it, with that Respect, which is du to
their calling? was Nathan, was Elias, were the other Prophets blame worthy, who
admonisht David, Achab, and others, Princes, Priests, and People of their
faults? How shall we excuse S. Paul's second Chapter to the Romans, our B.
Saviors rebukes of the Scribes, and Pharisys, the writings of the Prophets and
Moses, in which are recorded the sins of the People of God? Are all these foul
birds, that bewray their own nest? Jf so, which are the clean? Where will these
men's extrauagancyes end? To what absurdityes will they lead their silly
Disciples? When they shall show us greater Authority, then that of the Holy
Scriptures, greater precedents, then those of Christ, his Apostles, and the
Prophets, and better rules of morality, then those of God, and his Divine
spirit, we will own our selves Guilty, although we are not so: But not till then.

CHAPTER X. A word of Advice to the Deponent.
I Have followed you through all your wanderings, with greater tediousness,
then may be imagined, finding no entertainment all the way, but evident
untruths, infamous perjurys, and sometimes some insipid lests. It has been
some labor to examine all the particular Facts you mention, when Persons
concerned are at so great a distance. Yet I have gone thorough all willingly
for the public satisfaction, and for a clear conviction of such, as though
there was some fire where there was so much smoke, if still there are any such
in the world. I hope it may be for your own good too, who by this discovery of
so many shameful Periuries, being disabled to follow the trade of a Witness,
may be obliged to take to some more honest though less gainful way of living.
This may be a means to save your soul, for there is a Confusion, which brings
Grace and Glory. Ecclesiastici 4.25. and the Psalmist Ps. 82.16. Fill their
Face with shame, and they will seek thee, O Lord.

J have advanced nothing material, but what is certainly true. The chiefest
points are attested by Witnesses of unblemished Reputation. I now appeal to one
who is incorruptible, your own Conscience, which within you confirms all, I
say, and sets before the eyes of your soul, your guilt, more lively then any
one can do. It is that, which before you took on you publickely, without any
cause given by any Catholic, the Person of an Informer, when the first Idea of
the many Lies, and horrible Perjurys occurred to you, forced you with signs of
great anguish of mind to say: No body knows what DISMAL THOUGHTS, I have had in
that Chamber, showing that where you then lodged. It was that, which at the
trial of the five Jesuits made you ready to Faint: and howeuer with
vnparalelled confidence you accuse us before men: Yet before God, and in your
own heart, that absolues us, and finds you Guilty. Or if it does not, if it
ceases from that function, or if you are so hardened, as to be insensible of its
remorse, your condition is the more deplorable, there being little or no hopes
left of your salvation.

Should I say, that some of your Accusations are of words spoken by your self,
and charged on others, who often reprehended you, and at last quite abandoned
you for them, I should say no more, then your familiar discourse even since
this fit of Zeal for the safety of his Majesty's Sacred Person came upon you,
will justify, as I am informed. My Lord chief Justice told you (in sir G. W.
s. ttiall. p. 56.) You have taken a great confidence, I know not by what
Authority, to say any thing of any body. This is a true saying: and how long
that Confidence so Publicly known will pass unpunished, I cannot tell. J am
sure the Wise man said: Qui inconsideratus est ad loquendum, sentiet mala.
Prou. 13. 3 He that is inconsiderate in his language, shall feel mischeife.
Here is one great Mischeife, justly to be feared, hanging over your head.

Another, and that much more terrible, is that of eternal Damnation justly due
to False Witnesses, and Murderers. Now that you are a False witness, appears
by the foregoing discourse; and that you are a Murderer, is evident, having
murthred as many Persons, as have innocently suffered, upon your Depositions.
Thus S. Austin in Psalm. 63. Ille occidit, and vos, o Iudaei occidistis. Vnde
occidistis; Gladio linguae. Our Sauiour's blood was justly charged on the Jews,
who killed him, with their false Accusations: and as justly are you charged
with the murder of all those, who have as unjustly been accused by you, and
condemned, and executed upon your Accusation.

I have related two sayings of yours, at S. Omers. One: I shall either be a
Jesuit or a Judas. The other: If I am not a Jesuit I shall be damned. You have
verifyed the first most compleately, in the sight of all the World: and are in
a fair probability to verify the second, if by a sincere, and timely
Repentance of these horrid Crying sins, you do not prevent it. Be not mistaken:
God is not to be mo^ked. Gal. 6.7. and all the giddy rabble of London will not
protect you from the stroke of his hand, which never falls heavier, then when
it is most slow in striking: th^n when the time allotted to appease his Wrath,
and disarme his Justice is spent in provoking him, and treasuring up unto our
selves Wrath, against the day of W^ath. Romans 2.5. That you might avoid this
greatest of Evils, was the hearty Prayer of Mr. White-bread, and his fellow
sufferers at their Execution, and is daily heartily prayed for by many suruiuing
Jesuits. And if this freindly admonition (happily the last you will receive in
this Kind) does contribute any thing toward your real Conversion, I shall
think my Labor well spent, and have my hearts desire.

J. P. page 41. thinks he nicks home, by saying: Good Counsel ought to be
without respect of Interest, for the sole benefit of the Person, to whom it is
given: But my Advice is quite contrary. Answer. Suppose you should fall into
the hands of a Hygh-way man, who intends to Rob, and Kill you. Would you not
dissuade him from it, if you could, by showing the Law of God forbidding Theft
and Murder? And is not that Advice good tho you be concerned in it? But says
he p. 42. the Parliament requires him, to go on. And so did the Sanedrin
require of Judas; which hindered not Christ's reprehension: Betrayest thou the
son of Man with a Kiss? Luc. 22.48. Should all the states in the World, Rome
with the English Parliament concur in abetting Perjury, yet it will be good
Advice, to dissuade men from it, minding the of them Commandment: Thou shall
not bear false Witness: For although in all indifferent matters, where it is
dubious whether the thing Commanded be a sin, they ought to be obeyed; yet
where there evidently appears an opposition to the Law of God, we must, with
the Apostles conclude, to obey God, rather then men. Act 5.29. And this no
Parliament man can be displeased with, unless he condemns the Primitive
Christians, and the Apostles, and renounce Christianity, by erecting that
Tribunal of a Parliament above that of God himself, and making the
Commandments of God vayl to an Act of Parliament.

Anonimus p. 35. assures the world, I beseech Oats to recant, promising him in
that case the easiest place in all Purgatory. I desire my Reader to judge of the
sincerity of these men: for in all my advice, there is no mention of Purgatory:
yet he puts it in different characters to make this Untruth the more
conspicuous.

Page 36. He says, we are Felones de se ipso facto, for not keeping private,
what we have to say for our selves: seeing by publishing these things, we
capacitate our Aduersarys to hang us. Which is a fair acknowledgment, that the
faction aims neither at Truth, nor Justice, nor punishment of real Traitors;
but at finding pretenses to ruin the Catholics, whether Guilty or not. Our
publishing these things shows our confidence of their Truth For we desire no
better then that they should be examined, and to that intent we spread them as
much, as we can. And seeing our Aduersarys have never heen able to disprove any
one point alleged by us in our Vindication nor to prove the Truth of any,
which we deny, all impartial men will conclude that Truth is on our side. When
we consider how unwilling the Managers of the Accusation against My Lord of
Stafford were, that any mention should be made of of what past informer trials:
that they pretended to doubt whether Oats had ever Deposed his Being at
Madrid, or having seen Don John, to save him from Perjury, and they pretended
there might be (o pitiful shift!) in that Court, some other who personated D.
John to whom Oats, the great Negociator, was directed by the Court, as to the
true D. John: when the whole Transaction, and several other material points of
his Depositions being mentioned, they demurred upon it, pretended ignorance of
his ever having deposed any such things, required witnesses, etc. where I say,
we consider this, we may conclude, they were very little satisfied, of the
Truth of his Depositions. Which is one good effect of these Writings I assure
you, we will make no difficulty to own what we have all along alleged, that
Oats never was at Madrid, nor Paris: that he was not in London in April, or
May 1678. nor Mr. Ireland after the middle of August, till the 14. of September
following. We will not expect you should produce Witnesses to prove, that these
things had been said by the Catholics at their several Trials: Nor question
the sincerity of our Prints; when those Managers refused to stand to these
Printed by public Authority. Truth stands not in need of disingenuous, and
unworthy shifts, and which wheresoever they are found, we may be certain they
are used only to hood wink Justice, and oppress Innocence: and conclude, that
cause is crippled, and will not walk far, which moves only on such Crutches.

FINIS.
ATTESTATION A. Of the Lord Archbishop of Tuam. That M. Oats never was at
Madrid. And concerning Sir William Godolphin.
BE it known unto all Persons of what degree soever, that I James Lynch D. D,
and Archbishop of Tuam having been desired by several, as well Roman
Catholics, as Protestants, to declare what I know concerning Mr. Titus Oats,
or Titus Ambrose his Person, or his having been in Madrid; and also concerning
my acquaintance with the Right Honorable Sir William Godolphin, Embasse. from
the most serene K. of Great Britain etc. in this court: have thought fit, for
their true information, and of all others, whom it may concern to protest, and
declare by this writing signed by my hand, as follows.

That I do not know, nor ever saw Mr. Titus Oats, or Titus Ambrose, (both
which appellations the same person has named himself by) and do not believe,
that ever he was in Madrid, for that having made diligent enquity to know
whither he was, or not, by the means of both English, Irish, and Scotch
residing here, I could never understand that the said Titus came nearer to
Madrid, then Valladolid, which are about 100. miles asunder) where he lived in
S. Alban's College five months, viz from the first of June to the 30. of
Octobre 1677. without sleeping one night out of the same, as I am informed, by
the testimony of grave, and Religious Persons, both Churchmen, and Seculars,
and particularly of the Rector of that College, and others, who were daily
conversant with him, during his abode there. Moreover that I verily believe, if
the said Titus had come to Madrid, he would not have omitted to visit me, for
that he had by Letter from Valladolid pretended to my assistance toward the
conferring on him holy orders, which I could not allow of, by reason of the
very ill Character I had received of his life, and manners, which afterward
caused his expulsion out of that College.

Likewise I do Protest, and declare that although I do know the most Excellent
Lord Sir Will Godolphin, his Majesty's Embassadr. in this court, yet I never
had any intimate Communication, or freindship with him: nor ever made unto, or
heard from the said Embass. any public, or private discourse concerning any
religious matter whatsoever, nor concerning the Government, or state of
assayres in England, Ireland, or Scotland, or concerning any chang made, or to
be made in the Government there of, nor concerning any office to be exercised
by him, the said Embass. in England: and that I never received from any Person,
any Letter, or paper whatsoever directed unto, or intended for the said Embass.

All which I do declare by my Consecration, and ex abundami, per sancta Dei
Euangelia, to be true, and am ready to confirm the same by any oath, and solemn
manner. and before any Public, and Competent Authority, when ever the same
shall be required of me. In witness whereof I have here unto set my hand, and
seal. This 10 day of February in the year of our Lord 1679. according to the
new style. Place of the seal. (...), James Lynok Archbishop of Tuam. The
Archbishop of Tuam did sign and seal this paper in the presence of William
Cook, George Wakers, Du Moulin, David Blake, Francis Arther, Theodore O
Rorque, David White.

I Julian Hidalgo Aluarez scriuener of his Catholic Majesty Charles H. K. of
Spain, and public Notary of Cuenca, and its Territory, do testify that on the
day under written, in my presence, and before the witnesses under written the
most Illustrious Lord James Lynch D. D. and Archbishop of Tuam, residing at
present in this of Cuenca, whom I testify, that I know, his Lordship said, and
declared, and expressed that this Paper in English, is a true copy of the Original
made by his Grace at Madrid, in presence of the witnesses above named. And for
greater Confirmation, in my presence, and of the witnesses following, he again
declared, and tatifyed the same, and all its particular contents. Witnesses
John Hiacinthus de Velmar, Antomy Lopez, and Peter Aluarez H^dalgo, Cittizons
of Cuenc^, Made on the 6 of April, 1679. Julian Hidalgo.

We under written Notarys of the City of Cuenca, do testify, that Julian
Hidalgo Aluarez, who has signed this paper, is a Public Notary of this City,
whose Acts, writings and Instruments are held for authentical, and of credit.
Made at Cuenca 6. of April 1679. Antony de Sepuluenda, Blas Lopez de Haro.
Martin Gom^z.

ATTESTATION B. Of Richard Duelly: that Oats never was at Madrid, never saw my
Lord of Tuam. and of his behavior at Valladolid.
I Richard Duelly of Loughreagh in the County of Galloway in the Kingdom of
Irland, at present Resident in Madrid; do declare as follows. That having
lived in Valladolid about three years, and particularly throughout the whole
year of our Lord 1677. I was there very intimately acquainted with Mr. Titus
Oats, who commonly past there under the name of Titus Ambrose, and that I know
his hand very well, and have seen several papers signed by himself, sometimes
with the name of Titus Ambrose, and sometimes of Titus Oats. And that the said
Oats came to the said City directly from Bilbao, and immediately entered into
the College of S. Alban on the 1. of June 1677. where he remained till 30. of
October following on which day he was expelled and returned directly to Bilbao,
where he arrived without turning out of the ordinary road between that place
and Valladolid, which I know by relation of the Mul^man, that accompanied him,
and his own Letters written back on his arrival at Bilbao, giving account of
this Iourny. And that I know he never came to Madrid, having been almost daily
conversant with him, during his residence in Valladolid: in which time he was
wont to express great resentments at the course of study, he had undertaken,
complaining exceedingly of the strict obseruances, and disciplin^ of the said
College, and of the recollected manner of living there, which he was not able
to endure: and also that he was not preferred before the rest of the Collegians
by several exemptions, which he pretended to, by reason of his age, and
aduances in learning, as he thought, and especially of his great preferments,
which he said he had left in the Church of England.

Moreover I declare, that I know very well the most Reverend Doctor James Lynch
Archbishop of Tuam, and that his Lordship was not at Valladolid, any part of
the time of M^ Oats his being there: for that having all that time
communication with his grace by Letters, I was acquainted with all his motions,
and could not but have known it, if he had come to Valladolid, or had any
personal meeting with Mr. Oats, I never heard of, and am well assured was not
possible during M. Oats his being in Spain, my constant Correspondence with
the one, and the other enabling me to know that they never came together, all
that time. Likewise I do declare, that I have seen the most Excellent Lord Sir
Will. Godolphin, his Majesty's Embassado^ in this court of Madrid, but that I
never had any communication, or Speech with his Excel. in all my life.

To the truth of all which abouesayd, I do voluntariy swear in verbo
Sacerdotis, and by the Holy Ghospel. and will Confirm the same in any other
solemn manner, and before any public authority, Tribunal, or Court of
Justice in England or Spain, whereunto I may be called. Witness my hand this
10. February 1679. new style. Richard Duelly. For the seal. Witness besides
those of the other Attestation, Peter Leuet. this Deposition is attested by
Julian Hidalgo Aluarez: and his Attestation confirmed by by Blas Lopez de Haro,
Ant. de Sepulueda, and Ferdidinando Chill^on y Barea.

ATTESTATIONS C. Of many Jesuits. That many Jesuits never signed any Letter, or
Patents with any superior. Nor ever was any such cyper as he mentions, nor a
S. in any of their Generals seal.
WHere as M. Titus Oats page 2. of his Narratiue art. 3. says, that twelve
Missioners were sent into Spain by Richard Ashby, R. Petres, Nic. Blundel, and
Chapter Peter's, as appeared by their Patents: and whereas p. 1.. 1. and p. 4.. 7.
and p. 5. 9. and. p 15.. 23. and. 24. and p. 36.. 56. and elsewhere, he speaks
of several Letters, whereof each was from some superior of the Jesuits, signed
by him, and by several others jointly.

We whose names are subscribed to the original deed do call God to witness,
that it nether is, nor ever was the custom of the Society of Jesus since its
settlement, to sign more then one person, any deed, either Patents, or Letters.
And that none ever sign any such thing with the Superior.

And whereas p. 28.. 40. and p. 33.. 51. and p. 34.. 52. and p. 38.. 60. and p.
42.. 62. and p. 46.. 67. and elsewhere, he speaks of a Cipher used by Jesuits,
in which 48. signifyes the King, 365. Westminster, 440. Windsore, 666. London,
Barley broth the house of Commons, mum and chocolate the house of Lords, magpyes
the Bishops, IHS, Jesuits etc.

We do in a like manner declare in the Presence of Almighty God to all men,
that we never heard of any such Cipher before the Narratiue appeared; and that
we are most certain there never was any such used by Jesuits. And to confirm
this, we appeal to that, which, with other Papers, was taken in the Chambers
of Mr. Whitebreade, and Mr. Mico.

And where in the trial of Mr. Coleman p. 27. he says, that the Inscription of
the seal of the General, of the Jesuits, is I. H S. we declare as above, that
there never was a S. in any seal that ever we yet saw of the said General. For
a confirmation of this we appeal to some Patents, and Letters of his, found in
the Chambers abouesayd.

In testimony of the truth of these our Protestations, we have set our hands to
this Attestation.

Sigilli Provincialis M. K. I. F. I. W. R. S. W. M. H. W. C. B. E. N. A. H.


ATTESTATION D. Of the City of S. Omers: that Oats was not in England during
the Congregation.
WE the Mayer, and Sherifs of the City of S. Omers, being surprised at the the
report, that the English Fathers residing with us, had about the beginning of
the present year (by the negotiation of one Titus Oats in France, and England)
contrived and plotted a wicked Bloody Treason against their Natural Lord, the
most excellent King of Great Britain, and being the more amazed at it, since
they had given through a long series of years a rare example amongst us, not
only of Learning, and Piety in particular, but Obedience in general to all
Civil Magistrates and Gouvernours, a thing which makes the whole Society of
Jesus hyghly respected, and esteemed by most of the Christian Princes of the
World: we say, that being surprised at this report, we took (as far, as we
could the Examination of the matter into hand, and therefore certisy, That it
has appeared to us, by the Oaths of several of the best, and ancientest
scholars of that Seminary (the whole College having offered to make the same
Oath) that the said Titus Oats was not only effectiuely in the said Seminary
at the end of April, and beginning of May 1678. but did constantly reside
there, from the 10. of December 1677. to the 23. of June following, without
ever being absent from thence, except one night in. January, at which time he
was at Watten, two leagues distant from us. The said Deponents also have
alleged as a reason of this their knowledge, that they lodged, conuersed,
drank, and eat with the said Oats in the said Seminary, all that while, he
being at a distinct table alone, and did particularly take notice, that he was
there in April, and May, as above said, as having seen him at that time
constantly perform the office of Reader in the Sodality of the Students in the
said Seminary, and as being present at the departure of one Killembe^k, alias
Poole, an English Scholar, who went from this City the fifth day of the said
month of May new style, to take his Journey into England. Jn witness whereof
we have caused the seal of the said City to be hereunto put: this 28. of
December 1678.

Loco Sigilli. I. Hanon.

ATTESTATION E. Of the Jesuits of the Seminary of S. Omers. That all, that
Oats Charges them with, in general or particular, is false.
WHereas M. Titus Oats in his Narratiue, Articles 9. 11. 12. 13. 15. 18. 19.
21. 22. 24. 25. 26. 27. 39. 50. 74. 77. charges the Fathers of this Seminary,
in general, or some of them in particular, as F. T. S. Richard Ashby, N. B. and
G. C. with having received Letters, or sent them, signed by one or many Jesuits
containing treasonable matters, as killing the K. or the D. and changing the
the Government either by tumults from within, or succor from without the
Kingdom: we having examined seriously this charge, declare upon Oath, jointly,
and severally, that the charge is false in the whole and in every part of it.
And we moreover declare that it is unheard of amongst us, that others should
sign Letters with their Superiors, as is said in the articles 1. 7. 9. 11 and
others.

And whereas in the articks 4. 17. 18. 23 25. 36. 46. 56. accuses the Fathers
Masters, and Lay brothers, of the said English Seminary in general, and some of
them in particular, viz. T. S. Richard Ashby, E. N. E H. G. B. C. P. and George
Walker, of having jointly, or severally written, signed, sealed, sent, or
carried Letters containing Treasonable things, as of killing the K. or D.
changing the Gonernment, etc. We the said Jesuits, having seriously examined
each particular point of this charg, do protest in the presence of Almighty
God, that the whole and each point of the charg against them, or each of them,
is false And they add that besides being Knaves, had they designed such
things, they must have been fools, and Madmen in writing them in plain terms
for so long together: seeing any one of those many Letters intercepted, would
have convinced them of Treason.

And whereas in the Articles 28. 35. 61. 63. he accuses the Fathers Richard
Ashby, N. B. and E. N to have assisted at Consults or Conferences, or to have
related the resolution of them, in which were debated, and concluded
treasonable matters, as of making away the King's sacred Person, by Poison,
shooting or stabbing, by changing the Government, by raising the subjects in
England, or his other Dominions, or aid of Foreign Princes or Prince: The said
fathers having considered the horrible crimes, with which they are charged,
declare by Oath in the presence of God, that they never were present at any
Metting, Consult, Congregation, or Assembly, nor ever heard, or spoke of any,
where any Proposition was made, of such a horrid Nature. And as for the
Congregation, which he calls a Consult, held at London the 24. and 26. of April
st. v. of which he speaks Art. 28. they declare it was a Prouincial
Congregation, which every three years they hold: that not of their Seminar
assisted at it, Richard Ashby being hindered by sickness, and the rest not
capable to enter into it, for want of Antiquity of the order. And whereas Titus
Oats has often sworn, that he was present at it, we declare it is notorious
to the whole Seminary, consisting of 200. persons, that he never stirred from
S. Omers all that time, as has been deposed by many, who conuerst with him
there all that time.

And whereas the said Oats in the Articles 12. 16. 20. 29. and 70. accuses the
said Fathers, and some of them in particular, as Richard Ashby, E. N. N. B. C.
P. and G C. to have spoken, or heard words, made sermons, or held discourse
injurious to his Majesty, or his R. H. intimating an intention, or design, to
attempt upon the Person of both, or either of them: and alter the Religion or
Government by force, and violence, or to derogate from the just ryghts of
either. We, the said Fathers, do protest in the presence of God, and swear, that
we never spoke such words made such sermons, held such discourse, or took any
resolution, or deliberated about changing either state or Church by force, or
Violence.

And whereas Oats Art. 30. says or insinuates, that F. Richard Ashby was
present, when the death of him, who put into English the Jesuits morals, of D.
Stillingfleet, and of Poole the Author of Synopsis Criticorum, was resolved:
as also charges him with bringing into England instructions to procure the
death of the Bishop of Hereford. The said Richard Ashby protests in the
presence of God, that he never assisted at any such bloody deliberation, nor
ever brought any such instructions, or Memorials into England.

The said Fathers, Masters and Lay Brothers declare that they omit in this
Affidauit the crimes charged on F. Robert Bret, F. Ant. P. and F. T. Fer. in
the said Nararatiue, the first being dead, and the other two removed from this
Seminary, when this Declaration was demanded of us.

We do in alike manner declare, that if there be any other thing charged upon
them in the said Narratiue, not specifyed here, it is omitted merely by
ouersyght; and not for any truth contained in the Accusations, what ever they
be: and we hope, that Oats being clearly Perjured in so many points, will find
no credit in the rest.

Th. Stap. W. P. I. C. Richard Ashby E. H. W. C. E. N. C. P. W. W. N. B. W. C.
T. R. Ant. Selosse F. W. George Walker


ATTESTATION. E. Of the Rector of Watten. That Oats was not at the
Congregation, His behavior at S. Omers and causes of his dismission. About the
Letters to the Emperor's court, etc.
BE it known to all men: that R. F. Fran. Will. Rector of the Nouiciat of the
English Province at Watten in the Country of Flandres, appeared before us, the
Bailey, and Sherifs of its Preuoste, the day of the date of this deed declaring
he was the man named in several parts of the Narratiue of Titus Oats, deposed
upon Oath what follows.

To the contents of the 17. Article, that he never held correspondence with the
Emperor's Confessor, or any other in that Court: That he never read, saw,
writ, sent, or consented to any Letter directed to any Person in the Imperial
court and is fully persuaded there never was any such Letter written, it being
flatly contrary to the practice of the Society, to write such Letters, or
meddle with such intrigues of state.

To the contents of the 27. and 28. Articles, concerning the Congregation, he
declares in a like manner, that he began his Ionrny from Watten for London, on
the 14. April, that on the 30. April he left London, and arrived back at Watten
on the 5. of May following. That he went in Company of R. F. W. M. Rector of
Gant, and met R. F. I. W. Rector of Liege at London, he having taken his way by
Holland. Which three are all, who came from beyond sea, to the Congregation.
And he declares upon Oath; that during all those 21. days of his absence from
Watten, he never saw Titus Oats; by sea, or land, on the way or at Town: for
as or the other persons named in the Narratiue to have come over, viz, Titus
Oats, Sir I Warner, Sir Robert Bret, Sir Th. Preston, Baronets, M. Neuil, and
M. Pool, is is certain none of them came over, as appears by the Attestations
of the several houses, where they resided. For Sir I. W. remained at Watten
Vice Master of Nouices during the absence of the Deponent, where four times a
week he made Exhortations, or spiritual Lessons to the Nouices: and directed
the Workmen in a reparation of a building there. sir T. P. stayed at Liege, and
sir Rob. Bret. at S. Omers.

Moreover he declares, that the Congregation met only on two days, the 24. and
26 of April: and that was nether at the white horse Tauern, nor any other place
in the strand: that it never divided into clubs, or Companys nether was there
ever any proposition made of Dividing in that nature.

To the contents of the 38. Art. he says in a like manner upon Oath, that
during the seven years of his Rectorship at Watten, no Missioner designed for
Holland came to that house: that it appears by the day-book of the house, that
on the 31. of July 1678. not one stranger lodged at Watten: that at that time,
Mr. White, was at Liege on the borders of Germany, as can be proved by Letters
dated thence, which are to be seen at Watten, yet Oats swears Mr. White was
then at S. Omers, which two places, Liege and S. Omers, are 50. leagues, or
150. miles asunder.

The Deponent does declare in general, that the English Jesuits never treated
or deliberated about any matters of state or any conspiracys, and had he
perceived any such thing, he would never have entered amongst them. That Titus
Oats could never be employed by them in any business: he being unknown to
them till the year 1677. that then he was received as a mere Neophit, without
any Language but his Mother Tongue, and a little Latin: wherefore they sent him
to Valladolid. That although he gave so little satisfaction there, that he was
turned away after about four months stay, yet by his importunity, and promises
of amendment he got admittance into the Seminary at S. Omers, where he was put
to study amongst the Rhetoricians. That within a fortnyght after his settling
there, he was found to be of a bad, and hypocondriacal humor, rash,
indiscreet, turbulent and vindicatiue, a great flatterer, boaster and Liar. Jn
so much as some reflecting on his little Devotion, and bold and inquisitiue
humor, suspected him to be sent as a spy by some enemy to Religion. His
greatest friends thought him to be but half a Catholic, all suspected in him a
secret auersion to Monarchical Government, and to the Royal family of England;
for which he being reprehended by the Deponent, he excused it by allea^ging his
breeding amongst the Puritans. All which this Depenent knows to be certainly
true, as having been of the Consult, when M. Whitebread proposed his admission
into the Society: in which it was resolved to dismiss him, as being nether a
good Christian to God, nor a good subject to his King. That the Deponent writ
to Mr. Ireland, to acquaint Mr. Keynes, Mr. Fenwick, and others, to have care
of dealing with him, because of his murmurations, calumnyes, and threats: and
of spyght, and desire of Revenge. (By which any one may guess how probable it
is, he should be so intimate with all those Jesuits, after his return to
London.)

The same day appeared before us R. F. William Sanky, alias Dichseild, named in
the 17. Article of the Narratiue, as joying with the Rector, and Sir I. W. to
send a Letter to the Confessor of the Emperor. Who deposed upon oath, that he
never saw, nor heard of any such Letter: nor ever held any Correspondence with
the said Confessor, or any other Person, or Persons of the Imperial Court.

In witness of this, we have ordered this deed to be signed by our Greffier,
and sealed with the seal of our Lordship and Preuoste. This 27. of October
1679.

Loco Sigilli. DE LA FOSSE.

ATTESTATION. G. Of Mr. Stange. Concerning tumults in Scotland, Burnings of
London. etc.
WHereas Titus Oats in his Narratiue, through many. most falsely, and
injuriously slanders me, Richard Strange, of many treasonable, and horrid
Proceedings, in vindication of my Innocence from them all, J do by these in the
sight of God, and upon the word of a Priest, and Religious man, and by all that
is sacred, testify, and assert that nether in the generality of them, nor in
any one Particular, there is not one true word, much less Deposition: and I
take it upon my Salvation, that I never treated with the said Titus Oats in
all my life about any Matters of such a Nature.

And to descend to Particulars: whereas he says. 1. that I. Ric. Strange writ a
Letter to F. Swiman, or Sweeteman in Spain, about the embroyling of Scotland,
and sending some thither for that end: I call God to witness, there is not one
word true, As nether in the 4. where he deposes, that the Prouincial of
New-Castile writ to F. I. K. and me, that if the King could be dispatched, we
should have 10000. l. for our pains. As also what is contained in the former.
7. of which, as to the one, or the other, or any part of them, not one word of
Truth.

Item, what he deposes. 11. of a Letter sent by me the said R. Str. and others
of the Society at London, to those at S. Omers about stirring up the
Presbiteriam in Scotland, and all the other Riff Raff, of that. is as false, as
any thing the Devil ever spoke.

Item, what he deposes in the 9.. of a Letter writ by me, and others, of an
intent to stab the King at Whitehall to the FF. at S. Omers: or by a Physician
to Poison him: and what he writes. 13. of another Letter sent to S. Omers, for
F. Leshee, about advancing, and designing the Death of the K and his R. H.

Item, what he deposes,. 34. and 49. so long, and loud with Lies, about the
burning of London, and Southwarke, by the said Ric. Str. what hand he had in
it, and what booty, and plunder he made in it: which none will believe, but
such as are as great fools, as himself. In disclaim of all these damnable
ealumnyes, I appeal to the God of truth, and subser the my name At Gant 24.
November 1679.

Richard Strange.

ATTESTATION. H. Of Liege That Sir Th. Preston stirred not thence.
WE, the Escheuins of the High court of Justice of his most serene Highness,
in the City and Country of Liege, To all those, to whom these presents shall
come, greeting. We do certify, and attest, That a Petition being presented to
us in our ordinary Consistory, in the Palace of his said Highness, on the be
half of Sir Thomas Preston Knight, and Baronet, residing at the English
College of this City, that whereas the said Sir Th. Preston during the
greatest part of the year 1678. and more especially in the months of March,
April, May, and June, did constantly reside in the said College, he, the said
Sir Th. Preston having petitioned, that we in favor of the Truth, would hear a
great many witnesses, which he had to produce, we condescended unto his said
Petition as reasonable and just, and have accordingly heard upon Oath fourteen
Creditable Persons, who have all unanimously, upon their respective Oaths
declared, and attested that the said Sir Th. Preston Knight, and Baronet did
reside all the time aforesaid, at the College aforesaid, and particularly in
the months of March, April, May, and June, in the year 1678. and that he was
not absent so much as one night during the said time: and they further have
attested that they knew this to be true in that they resided all in the said
College, and there saw, and conuerst daily with him. Given at our Court of
Justice this 28. of March 1679.

Loco Sigilli By order of the High Court of Justice above said DE BERNIMOLIM
per BONHOMME.

A like certificate came from Watten, showing that Sir John Warner never stird
thence, during the time of the Congregation. It is signed by ten Persons. The
same is also contained in the Attest. F.

ATTESTATION I. That I. W. went by Holland into England.
THe year of our Lord 1679. on the 1. day of April, at the request of I. W.
Jesuit there appeared before me Daniel Guyot, Notary of this town of Antwerpe,
Michael Knobbaert stationer, and Alexander Goetiers, both Citizens, residing
in this City, known to me, the said Notary in the presence of the Witnesses
underwritten, who said and deposed upon their Oaths, that they were present,
and saw the said I. W. in secular clothes, take shipping on the 19. day of
April of the last year 1678. in the ordinary boat of the Hague, William
Carnelissen being Master of it, to pass thence into England. And in testimony
of this Truth, the said Deponents desired me to give this Act in due form.
Which was done and past in Antwerpe in the Presence of Joseph vander Cruissen
Notary, and Henry Paim^ert, as Witnesses. And the Deponents signed the Note of
this Act in the Register of my office.

Witness my hand and Manual signer D. GVYOT, Notary.

Observation. Oats in his Narratiue calls this Father, John Warren. He
mistakes in the name, but this Attestation concerns the Person he means, viz,
the Rector of Liege.

ATTESTATION K. Of Thomas Fermer.
WHereas Mr. Titus Oats in the 4. Art. of his Narrat. says that he saw at
Valladolid certain treasonable Letters sent thither by the Fathers of S. Omers,
and by me with the rest dated on the 10. of June 1677. J call God to Witness,
I never signed any such Letters, nor heard of them, till the Narratiue
appeared. And that I was not then, nor had been in the seven forgoing years,
at S. Omers.

And whereas in the 16. Art. he says, that I. and E. N spoke treasonable words
to him, in the Library. I do in a like manner protest, that I do not remember,
that we three ever met in that place: but I am certain I never spoke any such
words, or word.

And whereas in the 17. Art. he names me, as Joining with others in a Letter
sent to the Emperor's Confessor, containing several Malicious and Traitorous
Reflections, on the King's intentions to the Consederates. I in a like manner
protest in the presence of Almighty God, that I never writ, or concurred to the
writing of any such Letter, and never heard of any such thing, till the
Narratiue was made Public.

Witness my hand. T. F.

ATTESTATION L. Of Vallado'id. That Oats never was at Madrid.
I Joseph Morales Notary Royal, and Burgess of the City of Valladolid do
testify, that on the day underwritten, R F. Manuel Calataynd Rector of the
College of S. Alban, and R. F. Domingo Ramos Procurator of the said College
came before me, and upon Oath declared in due form, that it is certainly true,
that the named Titus Ambrose, alias Oats, came to the said College, on the
first day of June, 1677. betwixt 4 and five in the Evening, as appeared by the
day book of the College, and from that day till Saturday, the 30. of October,
he never past one night out of it. They said that he was of a Low stature,
thick shouldred, Brounish hayr, his beard more reddish then his head, about
thirty years old. At their request I have given this Testimony in Valladolid
20. of December 1678. And they declared that they had given an other
Declaration to the same Purpose.

Signed Manuel de Calatayned. Domingo Ramos.
In Testimony of Truth Joseph Morales.

And three other Notarys Ped^o de Le^ora, Iuan Mir Martinez, and Gaspar
Rodriguez de Los Rios, testify that Joseph Morales is a Public Notary.

ATTESTATION M. Of a Muleman.
ON the same day, Iuan de Sandobal a Muleman deposed upon Oath before the same
Notary, that he accompanied Oate from Valla^olid to Bilbao, where he arrived on
the 3. of November. He mentions several pranks of Oats upon the way. This
Oath is attested by the same Notary.

ATTESTATION N. Of Bilbao Merchants.
IN the town of Bilbao on the 2. of January 1679 stilo nouo, came before me,
Iuan Baptista de Asturiaza^a, Notary of the said town, Edward Sal, Michael
Hoar, and John Grate residing in it: and upon Oath, which they voluntarily
made, they said, and declared, that they know Titus Ambrose alias Oats, an
English man that he came to this town on the 16. of May 1677. new style, in the
Biscay Merchant, Lucas Ro^h being Master of it: that he stayed here about ten
days, and then set out hence for Vallidolid, with Martin de Lorniz Espinosa, a
Muleman of this town, who upon his return assured us he had carried him
straight to that place, and left him in the College of S. Alban: where they
heard he continued till he came back to this place, where he arrived on the 3.
of November of that same year. And lodged in the house of John Grace, one of
the Deponents, till he took shipping in the Bilbao Merchant, Thomas Richard
Master, for Top sam, on the 10. of November of the same year, stilo nouo.

On the same day appeared before me Martin de Lorniz Espinosa, who upon Oath
declared, he knew the said Titus Ambrose, as having accompanied him from this
town to Valladolid, where they arrived on the beginning of June, and left him
in the English College there. That he believed Oats never stirred out of the
said College, because as often as he past that way, he called at the College,
and found Oats there. That about the end of June he went with William Baron,
and Michael Hoar, hence to Madrid, and stayed with them till the 24. of July,
and then on his way home, at Valladolid about the end of July he found Oats
there. And that at the beginning of November, going hence to Valladolid he met
Oats on the road hither, with a Muleman of Valladolid. The Deponents declare
they know Oats very well, because Michael Hoar, and John Grace releiued him
with money. And all the Deponents signed this Deed, except Martin who cannot
write.

Edward Sal. Michel Hoar, John Grace.
I, the public Notarys above named, do testify, that the Persons above named
made the said Oath. Iuan Baptista de Asturiazasa, Publ Not.

And two other Public Notarys of the same town testify, that he is a public
Notary. viz: Francisco de Galbaruarte, and Antonio de Hostend.

ATTESTATION O. Of C. P.
WHereas Titus Oats charges me in the 3. Art. of his Narratiue to have given
Patents to certain Missioners, to go into Spain: I declare in the presence of
Almighty God, J nether did it, nor ever had power to give or sign any Patents.

And whereas Art. 4. he charges me with subscribeing treasonable Letters to the
Jesuits at Valladolid J declare in alike manner, I never writ, or subscribed
any such Letter to any Jesuit, or Jesuits in Spain, or any other who soever.

And whereas Art. 20. he charges me to have spoken treasonable words, of K
Charles I I declare in the presence of Alm. God to all the world I never said
any such word, and that I never had heard of any such thing, till the Narratiue
was printed.

And whereas Art. 17. he says I with others sent a Letter, or Letters, to the
Emperor's Confessor to advise him to inform the Emperor of some bad
intentions of our King toward the Confederates: I declare I never writ, nor
heard of writeing of any Letter whatsoever, to the Emperor's Confessor or any
Person in Court. In witnesses whereof I set my hand.

C. P.

ATTESTATION P. Of W. M.
ALl that concerns that R. F. has been so evidently confuted, and what has
been said in his defense is so notoriously true, that I have not thought it
necessary, to desire a particular Attestation of him, to confirm it. Which
otherwise he is ready to give, having often protested all is false, that is
contained against him in the Narratiue.

ATTESTATION Q. E. N.
ALl that is charged upon E. N. being expressed in the General Affidauit made by
the Jesuits of S. Omers, and he having signed, and sworn to the truth of it,
with the rest, that may suffice.

ATTESTATION R. Of B. L.
B.L. appearing before the Bailey, and Escheuins of Watten, upon Oath made
before them declared, that he was accused by Titus Oats of many horrid crimes,
viz, of conspiring against the life, and Government of his Majesty, of
promoting an Insurrection of Puritans in Scotland, to have written treasonable
Letters to Spain, to have suborned a Ruffian to murder the King: to have
resolu^d in a Consult at the Whitehorse Tavern in the Strand, the King's
death, to have promised 10. l. to Oats, to kill William Bury, for writing in
favor of the Oaths: and that he had plotted with some Irish, about an
Iasurrection in Irland

The said B. L. upon his Oath declares, that he assisted at the Congregation on
the 24. and 26. of April 1678 that it never met in the strand, That nether
Oats, nor F. Ant. Poole, nor the three Baronets Sir R. Bret, Sir I. Warner,
nor Sir Th. Preston, nor the Fathers E. N. G. Gray, N Blun. nor John Fenwicke
were at it, that there was no Proposition made in it against the honor, or
life of his Majesty's sacred Person, or the Peace of his Government; but only
of the private affairs of the Society. That he never heard of any conspiracy
in Scotland, or Irland: nor ever corresponded with any Person, who writ about
them to him. That he never spoke to Oats or any other, about marthering Will.
Berry. In fine he declares in alike manner, that he never writ, or received
any Letter, or Letters, to, or from Spain, or any other part of the world,
concerning any attempt whatsoever made, or to be made upon his Majesty.

In testimony of all, and every part of this Deposition, the Magistrates of
Watten caused this to be signed by their Greffier, and sealed with the seal of
the Lordship. 27. October 1679.

Loco Sigilli. DE LA FOSSE.

ATTESTATION. S. Of N. Blundel.
WHereas Titus Oats in his Narratiue accuses me N. Blundel, in the 14. Art. of
having taught children in London seditious Doctrines, and in the 62.69.71. and
77. Articles, to have undertaken to burn Westminster, and Wapping, with the
vessels upon the river, as also Tooly street, Barnaby street, etc. and to
that intent to have prepared fireballs, which I called Teuxbury-mustard-Balls;
And in the 72. Art. to have showed Oats a Bull from the Pope, by which he
disposed of almost all the Bishoprics, Prebendarys, and Dignitys of England.
And Art. 74. to have received Letters about commotions in Scotland, and Jesuits
sent to promote them. And Art. 75. to have received another, about the
discovery of the Plot. I declare to all the world, in the presence of Almighty
God, that those accusations are false in whole, and in ea^h part: and upon Oath
I declare, that I never knew in what part of the world Wapping was situated,
till I had enquired about it, since the Publishing of this Narratiue, finding
in it my self accused of designing to fire it.

N. BLVNDEL.

ATTESTATION T. Of Mr. Irland.
WHereas Mr. Oats on Monday the last of September 78. produced a Letter and
took his Oath, that I writ it from S. Omers about the middle of August before,
and the other witness in Court, that he saw me in Mr. Harcourt's Chamber in
Dukestreet about the later end of the same August. I say, that having bought a
horse of one Mr. Thomas Eccleston out of Lancashire, standing at the Red Lion
in Drury Lane, on Saturday the third of August, 1678. about two of the clock in
the afternoon; having paid Richard the Hostler for the standing of my horse, in
the presence of Mr. Perkinson Master of the Inn (as I took him to be) and Mr.
Fenwick, I took horse, and that pyght came to Standen beyond Ware. Sunday the 4
l dined with Sr. Edward Southcot, Mr. Francis Gage, Mr. Persons, Mr. Hind the
Parson of the town, and other chief inhabitants, invited by my Lord Aston.
Monday the 5. J went with my Lord, Sir Edw. Southcot, Mr. Gage, and servants,
to S. Albans, and joined Sir John Southcot, his Lady, Children, and Servants,
at the Bull, as I take it. Tuesday the 6. we lodged at the Georg in
Northampton. Wednesday the 7. at the Bull, as I take it, at Couentry. Thursday
the 8. we came to Tixhall, stayed there the 9.10.11. and Tuesday the 13. leaving
my horse to have his Back cured by the smith, I borrowed another and went with
Sir John Southcot, Sir Edw. Mr. Francis Aston, Children, and Servants, Item my
old Lady Aston to Nantwich, and lodged at the Lamb, as I take it. Wednesday the
14. I lodged at the star in Holy-well. Thursday the 15. J came back over the
Sand, and lodged at Chester, at the Greyhound, as I take it. Friday the 16.
came back to Tixhall, Saturday the 17. went upon my own horse to Woluerhampton
to see two Aunts, stayed there the 18.19.20.21.22.23.24.25. in that time I saw
Mr. Pursal, son to Mr. Pursal, come from London to see his Father, and friends.
Item Mr. Charles Gifford came to see his brother Thomas, where I lodged, with
my Aunt Harewel. Once I dined at Mr. Winfords, where was his Niece, Sir John
Winfords daughter. After dinner came two of Esquire. Luson's daughters, and others,
to play at Cards. Friday the 23. I went with Mr. Windfords daughter and Niece
etc. to Litchfeild, dined at the George, and were showed the Minster by Mr.
Shirly Schoolmaster of the place, and his Wife, their Kindred, and returned to
Woluerhampton. Monday the 26. J went back to Tixhal. Tuesday the 27 I was at
the Horse-race, at Edginhil, where Sir H. Goff, distanced Mr. Chetwins.
Wednesday the 28. I dined at Bellamour, invited by Mr. Walter Aston, with
others. Thursday, the 29. at Tixhal Bowling Green I saw Mr. Chetwin, spoke
particularly with Sir Thomas Whitgraue, Mr. John Powtrel, and his Brother
William of Westhalam in Darby shire, Mr. Walter, and Mr. John Aston, Mr.
Fowler, and his Sons, etc. and that night went home with Mr. Heueningham, and
Sir James Simons, his Son-in law, to Aston, and part of the way with Mr.
Draycot, and one Mr. Collier. Friday the 30 stayed there. Saturday the 31. I
went home with Mr. Richard Gerard of Hilderston. Sunday the first stayed there.
Monday the 2. with him I dined at one Mr. Cromptons, with Mr. Bidle my Lady
Goring's Son-in law, and through Stafford, and Pancridge came that night to
Boscobel. Tuesday the 3. of September, stayed there. Wednesday the 4. came again
to Weluerhampton, to my Aunt at Mr. Thomas Giffords, stayed there the 5. and 6.
Saturday I went back to Tix-hal. Sunday the 8 stayed there. Monday the 9. with
Sir John Southcot, my Lady Children and Servants, I came to the Bull, as I take
it, at Couentry. Tuesday the 10. we lodged at the Altar-stone in Banbury
Wednesday the 11. I met Robert Hill Mr. Benjamin Hinton's man upon the Road,
and spoke to him: baited at Alisbury, and lodged about 11. miles beyond, I have
forgot the town, and Inn. Thursday the 12. we bayted at Kingston, and came home
to Mestham. Friday the 13. I stayed there, and sold my horse for 7. l. to Mr.
John Southcot. Saturday the 14. I came upon him, with William, Sir John's man,
to lead him back, set up in Southwarke, and came over to Somerset House
Stayres, to my Lodging at the White-hart with the said William. This 23. of
December 1678.

W. Ireland.

ATTESTATION V. Of Mr. G. Coni. Extracted out of a Letter, dated 26. February
1680.
Hond. Sir.
THough I have seen the Book (Oates's Narratiue) yet I never thought it worth
the while, to read Romances, at this age. Yet to Comply with your desire, I
will give you a true, and full account of what I know of M Oats. About the 9.
or 10. of August was a twelve month I went to wish a good iourny to two
Gentlemen of my acquaintance, then in London: there I found a third Gentleman
also of my acquaintance, and a Fourth, whose face I had never seen After the
ordinary ciuilitys, and declaration they had no business together, I made one
of the Conversation. The Discourse was common, and Innocent: where this Fourth
person brought in something out of scripture concerning the tribe of Benjamin,
so far from any thing of what was talked of, and delivered his notions with so
ill a Grace, that I entertained this opinion of him, that he was a weak, and
forward Man. That discourse being soon ended, I afterward learnt, he had been
a Parson, was turned Roman Catholic, had been some time at S Omers: his name,
Oats. To my knowledge I never had heard of the name of Oats before, nor saw
him since, till

About the beginning of September following, walking alone in Grays-Inn-Walkes
betwixt 11. and 12. this Mr. Oats thrust himself alone into my Company: when
having given the same Character of himself. he fell, in my Judgment, to
downryght begging: for having told me, he had lost 4. or 500 l. a year in
Benefices for his Religion, what considerable Preferments My Lord Bp. of London
had offered him, to return to the Chapter of England: how he wondered no better
Provision was made in the Roman Church for Persons so well qualified as
himself. That his Faculty in Preaching was much taken notice of, his Chief
employ having been to preach before the IVDGES. He told me, he was reduced to
that necessity, that he was forced some times to take such a Walk instead of
his dinner: and desired me of all kindness to prefer him to some Gentleman to
teach his children: meat, drink, lodging, and 10. l. a year would satisfy him.
This, hond. Sir in the presence of God, is all I know of that Mr. Oats, or any
of his name, and all the times I ever to my knowledge saw him, and all the
discourse I ever had with him. You cannot doubt how willing I was to ridd my
self of such a Man, who for ought I knew, might be any thing, as well, as what
he represented himself to me, or others, with whom he found more belief, then
with me, or a better opinion of his parts, and virtue: and so with the Ordinary
Ciuilitys, I dismissed my self of him. I am Your etc. G. C.

P. S. I am informed this Oats swore against Coniers, that he manifested his
treasonable design in Grays-Inn-walks. Nothing but a Madman could do so, in a
place of as Public resort, as a Market.

ATTESTATION X. Of Joseph Forster.
WHereas Titus Oats in his Narratiue art. 10. says he went to Paris, and
about the 18. of December 1677. delivered there certain letters to P. Le She
(as he calls the Confessor to the King of France) Item art. 29. that he with
8. or 9. others went from S. Omers to London, and met in Consult with Mr.
Thomas Whitebread and other Jesuits, and that within 3. or 4. days after he
returned to S. Omers with the said Fathers who went with him.

J. Joseph Forster haueing been constantly Porter of the English College at S.
Omers when T. Oats arrived there on the 10. of December 1677. sty. No. about
3. or 4. a clock after Dinnar, and continued in that Office till the 21. of
June 1678. without being absent (if at al) above one half day from the Gate all that time, do declare in the presence of God Almighty, that the said Titus
Oats never went out of the College but only once to Watten, where he stayed
only one night or two at most; of which I am most certain, because by reason
going about the house to call people to the Gate, I frequently met him. Moreover
during his abode at S. Omers he sat alone at a table almost opposite to that
where I sat, and this every day, except some 5. or 6 on which he was sick in
the Infirmary, and the two days he was at Watten, and I think also some few
days whilst he was in the spiritual exercises that he came to the second Table
Al which I declare to be true, upon my hopes of salvation. So the contents of
the 10. and 29. Articles are mere lies.

I do in a like manner declare in the presence of Almighty God that neither Sr.
Robert Bret Bart nor F. Antony Pool, nor F. Edward Neuil went from the said
College to England upon Score of the Congregation or Consult, as he calls it:
which I know because I converst with them al those two months April and May, as
before and after: wherefore I am certain these three, as well as T. Oats were
at S. Omers all the time of the Congregation.

And I do in a like manner and upon the same Protestation of my hopes of
salvation declare that neither the Rector of Liege whom T. Oats calls F.
Warren, Nor Sr. Thomas Preston ever were in the whole months of April or May
1678. at the said College of S. Omers unless they were invisible.

Item whereas T. Oats from Art. 11. to Art. 32. of his Narratiue swears he
saw, read, or heard read several letters of dangerous consequence, as if he had
at that time great commerce, familiarity, and intimacy with F. Richard Ashby
then Rector. I declare that by reason of my Office of Porter I had daily
several occasions to go to the said Rector to carry him all the letters that
came, and Acquaint him with all Comers and Goers and such things as happened
about the Gate, and that generally speaking he opened the letters which I
brought in my presence, and sent me to call those whom they concerned, but I
swear he never called T. Oats at least by me: and that I never found or saw
Oats with him in all the frequent visits, which my Office obliged me to make
to the said Rector; Nay I was so far from perceaueing any familiarity betwixt
them, that quite contrary I often heard great complaints against the said T.
Oats as that he was unfit for that house; that his company was dangerous
among the young scholars, and that the Provincial ought to be desired to Order
his speedy removeal thence: some said he had no more Religion then a D^g: some
told him this openly, and said, that he was either a knave or a Fool. Besides
sometimes he was heard to hold dangerous discourses of Persons much better
then himself, for which he was once beaten by a scholar, and often severely
reprehended by some Superiors. Item that when he fell out with some of the
Scholars (which by reason of his foul mouth and offensive language happened very
often) he applied himself to me to procure him audience of R. F. Rector. Al
which considered I leave to any rational man to judge whether it be probable
that he had such free access and general communication of letters and
businesses, as he pretends with the Rector. Jn witness of the truth of al
these things here declared upon my Oath and in the presence of Almighty God, I
set my hand.

Joseph Forster.

APPENDIX Bedlow's travels, and Plots.
WIth the leave of the pretended Doctor, I will give a short, yet true Account
of his Confederate Bedlow's journey through France and Spain, to ailay his Lying
Ghost, which walks about in a false Deposition given up during his last
sickness, as is reported.

He and his Brother acted by turns the Master and the man: and both concurred
to impose on those, whom they cheated: so I shall speak of both.

Jn the summer 1677. he came to Gant; taking the name of My Lord Newport: and
thence to the Holland Camp, at, or near Bruges and cheated Capt. Floyde of an
English horse. He went thence by Doway (where he spoke with Dr. Gage President
of the English College) to Cambray, taking the name of My Lord Cornwallis, and
borrowed of Mr. Lionel Sheldon, twelve Pieces. Thence he went to Paris, where
with the same name he borrowed (as was said) 100. pistols of Dr. Gough bought
very rich Linen, and bespoke a suit worth 80. pistols of Groin an Irish man,
dwelling rue de Seine aux trois Poissons Faubourg S. Germain. Thence he past to
Rouen, and borrowed twelve pistols of Mr. Price Confessor to the English Nuns
there.

Thence he past into Spain, and at Bilbao taking the name of the Lord Gerard,
found credit with Mr. Franklin for 300. Doblons. He past thence to Salamanca,
where on the 29. August, he visited F. Hierome Lincol, Rector of the Irish
College, told him he was going to Porto Porto to meet his train, and equipage:
with which he expected a Blew Horse, which my Lord of Essex had given him, and
he would present to the Duke of Florence. That he had some doubts about
Religion: which none but his Holiness should answer. He hired thence Mules for
Porto Porto, and was advanced on his way thither as far as Lamorra: where he
was overtaken by a Sergeant of the Chancery of Valladolid, at the request of
Mr. Franklin, who having heard he was a Cheat, pursued him, to recover his
money.

The two Brothers were thence conueyghed Prisoners to Valladolid, but being set
free, they visited Mr. Oats in the English College there: who left them in
Chamber, whilst he went to get them a dinner, and they the mean while were not
idle, for finding ten pieces of eight in a Drawer, they took them away as
appears by a letter written by Oats to F. Suiman: which is to be seen at S.
Omers: in which he laments the loss of his money, and much more that of a Book,
which they stole from him at the same time. Thence they went by Santiago to
Corunna (la Groin) where they embarked for England.

Now I grant that Capt. Bedlow went Plotting thorough Flanders, France, Spain,
for this whole Relation discouers it: but his Plotting was not against his
Sacred Majesty's Person, or Government but against the purses of honest men,
whom he and his Brother endeavored to cheat. In the Original Relation of his
travels in Spain, as also in Oates's Letter, several more pranks of his are
specifyed, which will be made public by another pen. Hence it appears, that,
if he did at his Death depose the things, which are published, he dyed as he
lived, Cheating, and Lying. Qualis Vita, finis ita. God Bless all Christians
from such a life, and such a Death.

THe Originalls of all these Attestations, or Authentical Copyes of them are
kept in the English Seminary at S. Omers, (that being thought the most
convenient place) and shall be shown to any, who desire for their satisfaction
to see them.

Delatores, genus hominum publico exitio repertum and paenis quidem numquam
satis coercitum, per praemia elicitum. Tacitus lib. 4. Annal. Informers, a sort
of men found out to procure the Public ruin: whom no punishments could
sufficiently curb or bridle, were invited and encouraged by Rewards.
FINIS.
THe Courteous Reader is desired to correct several falts chiefly against
Ortography, which happened by the Printers being a Stranger and ignorant of
our Language.


