To the supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND; The
humble Petition of several that have adventured, and are willing to adventure
to Greenland, whose Names are hereunto subscribed:
SHOWS,
THat the Fishing of Greenland for making Oil there (being of great concernment
unto this Commonwealth) has been for many years engrossed in great measure
into the hands of the Greenland Company, who have by force (and sometimes
bloodshed) endeavored to suppress all others who have attempted to fish there,
under pretense of a property in several Harbors, by virtue of a Patent, and an
Act of Parliament made in the 8. year of Eliz. which Act your Petitioners
humbly conceive in no sense can be construed to warrant their actions or
pretenses.

That several of those Harbors wherein they principally claim an interest and
propriety are large bays and are some of them about 20. or 24. miles in
breadth at the going in; and about 14. miles within, and comprise in each of
them diverse large, convenient, and commodious Harbors, where may be pitched
many tents by several adventurers, and Coppers erected for boiling places
several miles distant each from other, without any an noyance or prejudice to
one another, and every one have more fishing then their utmost industry can
improve (the Hollanders at this time through the means of the Greenland
Companies restraint of free. fishing for all Englishmen, employing annually. 3.
or 4. score sail of Ships to fish in Greenland) and yet the Greenland Company
strive to hinder all Englishmen, saving those of their own Company from fishing
there, which are an inconsiderable handful of, about 30. or 40. persons and yet
they do nothing near send out sufficient shipping to supply this Commonwealth
with Oil or Whalefinn.

That the Greenland Company have lately and strongly endeavored at the Council
of Trade to prevent all Forraigners from importing fish Oil and Whalefin, and
all Englishmen from fishing freely in Greenland but themselves, whereby they
would have all Fish Oil and Whalefinn in their own hands to inhance the price
at their own wills, and in case their fishing be not succesful any year
according to their desires the whole Commonwealth must suffer thereby,
pretending it is impossible that other Englishmen, besides themselves should
fish there; but by the Seamen there will be blood shed, although it is well
known that in or about the year 1645. when the Parliament was pleased to grant
and make a severe order for keeping the Peace, there was no disturbance.

That in case the said fishing were free for every Englishman (as of right and
justice we humbly conceive it ought to be) there would be twice or thrice as
many Ships sent every year for Greenland, as a renow by the Greenland Company
(as by the particulars under written may partly appear) whereby that fishing
would be reserved from al forraigners, and this Nation supplied with a full
quantity of Fish-Oyls at cheap rates, without the help of forraigners; yea, and
in a few years be able to transport into foreign Nations for their supply, as
now some of them do to us, for ours. And the Navigation for this Commonwealth
very much increased, and industry (the support of a Nation) encouraged.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, That it may speedily (for the
encouragement of these present years fishing) be declared by Parliament, that
the fishing in Greenland and making fish-Oyl and Whalefinn there, shall be free
for every Englishman, and the same Oils and Whalefinn there made to be freely
vended in England, and that the said Greenland Company may make a just
satisfaction for that innocent blood that they and their agents have shed
there, and a full restitution and satisfaction to all those English men they
have any way wronged by taking away their goods, etc. Contrary to Law, and that
a severe and exact order may be made for the future keeping of the peace
amongst all those Englishmen that shall repair to Greenland to fish; forasmuch
as already the chiefest of the Greenland Company give out desperate threats
against any Englishmen that are not of their Company that shall dare to fish
in the Greenland Harbors.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Richard Warner, an Adventurer of a whole
Ship at his own charge two years together last past. Jo. Pibus, who has been
for this Ten years together there a Fishing, and is now a Master of a Ship
trading for that place. William Welsh, who has been Nine or ten years there,
and now a Master of a Ship. John Warner, who has been Three years there, and
now is Master of a Ship. George Baker Adam Cliffe John Cliffe Simon Sylks Which
four are now joined with the Four before-named; all Eight of which intend this
year to set out shipping for 250 Tunn of Whale Oil, besides Whale Finn.

From Hull the last year went two Ships that never adventured before, and as we
are credibly informed, the same Persons intend this year to set out Ships for
250 Tunn of Oil, etc. Mr. Thomas Hoth of London this year himself intends as we
credibly understand, to adventure for 400. Tunn of Oil. Alderman John Hayes
Col. John Hardwick Simon Weeden Roger Pears Edward Whittwell Thomas Howlet
James Baker
All seven of them Sopemakers, with others of their associates, if the Trade be
free, intend and desire (as we understand from some of themselves) to send out
shipping to Greenland this year for 700 Tunn of Oil. All which adventures in
the gross, makes up 1600 Tunn, and the whole Greenland Company seldom in one
year adventures for above 1000. Tunn of Oil; so that the advantage the Nation
will get by a Free-trade is clear: Free-trade only being the means to beat the
Hollanders out of that Trade.

The Original of this Petition in Writing, remains in the hands of the
Honorable LUKE ROBINSON, to be presented to the House.


