A CONVOCATION SPEECH, BY Mr. THOMAS WARMSTRY, one of the Clerks for the
Diocese of WORCESTER: AGAINST Images, Altars, Crosses, the new Canons, and the
Oath, etc.

(...)
(...)
Monander. LONDON, Printed in the year, 1641.

A CONVOCATION SPEECH, BY Mr. THOMAS WARMSTRY, one of the Clerks for the
Diocese of WORCESTER. AGAINST Images, Altars, Crosses, the new Canons, and the
Oath, etc.
I Am not unsensible how far more unfit it is for me to speak in so grave and
reverend an Assembly, than for many others, whose riper years and more mature
studies have furnished them with far greater abilities. But since it has
pleased the Clergy to make choice of me for their Servant, I crave leave to
discharge my conscience.

We cannot be ignorant of the rumors that are abroad, the great exceptions
that are taken against the late Canons, the great and general accusations that
are laid upon the late Synod, for the making and contriving of them. And it is
strange, me thinks, when every body talks of it, that we our selves should be
silent, whom it most concerns. It will be small credit to the Church, that
others must be feign to correct those errors that we have committed. It cannot
be, I conceive, either piety or wisdom in us to desert the cause. If we be
justly charged, we are engaged to a redress; every man is bound to fill up the
pit which he himself has dug. If unjustly, we have a tie upon us to use
our endeavors to remove the scandal, and slander. It must needs lie upon us
either to make good that we have done, or to amend that which we have misdone:
lest to the rest this blemish also be laid upon us, that we are busy, when
there is nothing to do; and altogether remiss when we have most work; or
that we have hands to wound, but none to cure. I should be glad that our
business were for Justification; but I fear there is something else to be
done. For mine own part, it is not unknown, I believe, unto many that are
here present, that I was against many things in the said Canons, in the
agitation of them in the last Synod; and particularly against the Oath. And as
I opposed it then; so I continue still in my dissent from it: Not that I
dislike any thing that the Oath intends principally to guard. I disrellish
neither the Doctrine, nor the Discipline, nor the Government of the Church. Not
the Doctrine, I embrace it hearily; and I conceive the Church of England may be
herein the pattern of the world: and that if ever any Church has taken that
living water clearly and purely from the fountain, it is the Church of
England. Not the Discipline, I entertain it willingly, so far as it is
established by law: I wish indeed there might be no private Innovations. I
love outward reverence in Gods worship, so that it be directed to the right
object; not to Altars, not to Images; but to God. I love all Ceremonies that
truly tend thereunto, or to decency, or to uniformity, which I acknowledge to
be most necessary in religious actions. But I desire that in affectation of
reverence we breed no contempt; that in contrivance of decency, we bring in no
blemishes: That the Church may not seem to be infected with the humors of
some women in this age, that never think themselves handsomely dressed, but when
they are in some new and fantastical fashion: That while we endeavor
Uniformity, we do not multiply division. We may be so busy in drawing the
two ends together, that we may break the staff in the midst. That we be not
so careful to preserve Uniformity with others that are without, that we make
dissentions within our own Church. The truth is, I wish there might be nothing
scandalous, nothing frivolous in the Church. Nothing scandalous, not so much as
a title. Though I love the sacrifice of Alms, and Praise, and I hope should
not refuse my self to be a sacrifice unto God, though a burnt one; yet I know
no need of any material Altar: because I know no material Sacrifice, but that
eternal Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross. And though it may be urged, That
the Primitive Church used the name of Altar for the holy Table, yet that makes
it neither necessary nor warrantable for us to do the like; unless together
with the language we could call back the purity, the simplicity of the
Primitive times. Now things are ill interpreted, it concerns us to be more
cautelous; lest if not now, yet in after ages our language may be urged for the
confimation of Heresy, when it cannot be answered for us; as we may answer for
the Primitive times, That the Heresies were not then broacht, and therefore the
speech more loose. It is a dangerous thing to give an Heresy the advantage of
a Metaphor, which the Devil wants not skill in time to reduce back unto the
killing letter. Besides, the language of the Scripture and the Apostles is the
most pare and the most ancient language of the Primitive Church; and we read of
no Altar there after Christ, but the Altar of the Cross, or of Christ
crucified. I desire there may be nothing scandalous: I wish the true Image of
God in Righteousness and true Holiness may be restored in the spiritual
Temples of our souls But I desire, at least an abatement in the number, and
limitation, for the manner and situation of Images in the material Churches
because I doubt they are seandalous to all sorts.

To our Selves; to the strongest in one sense, it lays a scandal upon many of
them, brings them into suspicion of inclination to Popery. And this suspicion
i^ the poison of the Church, and ought by all means to be avoided. To the
weak; who are drawn hereby into a jealory of our Church, and moved toward a
separation. And surely it is no policy; nor can be a thing acceptable to
Almighty God, to fill the Church with congregations of dead Images and Saints,
and to empty it of the living Images of God. The dead praise not thee, O Lord,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.17. He is the God of the living, and not of the
dead, says our Savior.

Scandalous to the Papist. Alas, it will never win them: can you think them
such children as to be allured with a Baby? it may confirm and strengthen them;
and I doubt not but the Devil has skill enough to persuade them from hence,
that they need not come over to us; for we are drawing, as fast as we can, to
them. And we know not what use our Posterity may make of those Statues and
Images, which we have set up. I am sure they are paratura Idololatriae: and you
had best take heed how you lay rats-bane in your childrens way, and how you
strengthen the hands of the wicked.

Scandalous to the Jew. The material Crosses in our Churches may be, I doubt,
a block in their way, as well as the Cross of Christ: they have wretchedly
taken this, let us not give them that. This God, I hope, will remove by
illumination, and it may be hoped, the time draws near: O let not us be
hinderers of so great, so glorious, so desirable a work, by laying a company
of Images in their way. Cypriane de valera, a learned Spaniard, in his Preface
unto those two Treatises which he has written against the Supremacy of the
Pope, and against the Mass, tells us of one Paulus Pricius a learned Hebrew,
that turned Christian in Pavia, who complained of this, and desired a redress
of it, saying, That it was very requisite, that Images should be rid out of our
Churches; for that they were the cause that kept many Jews from embracing
Christian Religion.

Scandalous to the Turk, and to the Heathen also. It may be a means to make
the Heathen like his superstition the better, with which we do so dangerously
comply, at least in outward appearance; and to confirm and promote the Turk in
his abhorring of the profession of Christianity. It is the judgment of that
learned Spaniard I before named: Muchos Moros, Turcos, y Indios se converti jan
a Christo, si non fuere Por la offensa, y escandalo de las Imagines, many
Moors, Turks, and Indians might be converted to Christianity, were it not for
the scandal of Imagery. Ye see then they do much mischief; though they have
eyes and see not, mouths and speak not, hands and handle not, feet and walk
not; yet they are not idle in our Churches, they have their dangerous and
pernicious effects; and there is a strong, though silent, dissuasivenesse in
them to make many stand afarie off from Christ, and to abominate the service of
the Lord. But perhaps you will say, this is countervailed by some good that
they bring with them. I must confess it is just, that we should consider both,
and lay as well the conveniences as the inconveniences in the balance, that we
may discover the true weight and value of things, and not censure them by the
one, without the other: the want of which moderation in our judgments has
caused great commotions and tumults in the Church. Let us then see wherein they
profit Gods people.

If they do any good in the service of God, they are profitable, aut
discentibus, aut docentibus, aut or antibus, aut communicantibus, says
Hemmingius: or (let me add) eleemosynam dantibus; for unto these, I conceive,
may be reduced all the holy and religious offices which God requires of us in
his service.

Not to the Learners, it furthers them nothing. O yes, they are Idiotarum
libri. Truly I doubt we have much to answer for it, that there are Idiotae in
Christianismo. Let us preach the word as we ought, and by Gods grace there will
be no need, that there should be either Images for Idiots, or Idiots for
Images. This means of instruction is more safe, and more effectual; this
ordained by God, warranted by his Command, graced by his Promise. That invented
by men, without either Precept or Promise from God; but rather against both:
and it can be no way acceptable to God, to exclude this to bring in that; to
preach down preaching to make way for Images. It is a notable observation,
and, I doubt, may rub upon our times, that Hemmingius, and Peter Martyr have in
this point: That when the Ministers of the Church began to give themselves to
idleness, and silence in the Church, then began the frequent use of Images in
Gods house. They were built up, it seems, upon the ruin of Gods Ordinance; as
if the Churchmen, to excuse and countenance their own floth and negligence,
had set up stocks and stones to be their Curats, and to take their turns in
the instruction of the people. And so the Priests became, as it were, dumb
Idols; and the Idols were made dumb Priests to do their office in Gods
service. And surely it falls out unhappily in our time; to this purpose, wherein
preaching of the word is discountenanced, and left off; and in stead thereof,
as it were, Pictures brought in. And I pray you consider whether the Authors of
the one were not those that are guilty of the other. But alas, how unsafe is it
for us to commit our charges to such Instructors! since the Prophets tell us,
they are teachers of lies, of vanity, and falsshood, Habak. 2.18. Ierem. 10.8,
14. Besides, if any be so stupid as, as that they cannot be instructed without
an Image, it may be feared, they will be so stupid too, ^s to mistake the true
use of an Image, if there be any such in the Church.

And as little helpful are they to Preachers. They can neither inspire, nor
enlighten, nor inflame their hearts with holy zeal in the preaching of the
word, nor open unto them a door of utterance; for how should they open his
mouth, since they cannot their own? And they have rem angustam demi, that must
seek unto them for matter to furnish out their Sermons; neither are they able
to furnish them with any excellent stuff, unless they would make use of them
for the art of memory, which I doubt would prove but of little avail to them.
And if I mistake not, windows and pillars may serve as well.

But what? are they behovefull to men in their Prayers, and divine worship?
They may be robbers of God indeed herein, and so make the house of Prayer a den
of thieves, but for any furtherance of these Duties unto him there is none at
all, but rather much hinderance. There are but two parts of our worship and
service in this kind, (...), the internal worship of the soul, which
consists in inward devotion; and (...), or (...), the external of the body,
consisting for the most part in outward Reverence. Now for the first, they
further us not in our devotion; for that is usually the more intended, by how
much the mind is more fixed unto God, and has a more free passage unto him:
whereas these serve rather to distract the mind, and are as blocks and
hindrances in the thoughts passage unto God; especially being set up in the
very faces of Oratories, as if they were placed there to intercept our Prayers,
and to way-lay our devotions between the soul and heaven. And for outward
Reverence, I speak it confidently, I believe they have been a great means to
make men abhor it in the house of God, lest they should be entrapped thereby
unto Idolatry; or at least be thought to give it to Altars, or Images, which
are set up (as is doubted) of purpose before them. Julian the Apostate, to
ensnare the Christians to Idolatry, or at least to draw them into the
imputation of it, set up his Idols upon his own Picture; that if they bowed,
and gave civil respect (as was accustomed it seems) to the representation of
the Emperor, they might then be taken to be worshippers of the Heathen Idols:
if they refused, they were executed, not as Christians, but as despisers of the
Emperor in his resemblance. And truly the case is very like with Christians
now in respect of these Images, As those wicked Persecutors of which Ruffinus
lib. 1. cap. 7. who set up the Image of Venus in the place where our Savior
was crucified; that if any should come thither to worship our Savior, they
might be thought to worship that Idol, etc. Et ob hoc infrequens and pene
oblivioni datus fuerat locus, says Ruffin.
being set up in place of Gods worship; if they do outward reverence unto God,
they are in danger to be misinterpreted to do it to the Altars, and Images; if
they refuse to do it unto them, they are accused, and punished, as denying it
to God; and so they are in a manner necessitated to appear either profane, or
superstitious, and idolatrous.

Neither do they any way further men in the use of the Sacrament. We know the
eyes of the body and soul have both their full work there; and therefore
should be sequestered as much as may be from other objects, (...), at that most
dreadful time, as Epiphanius calls it. The eye of the body is there to be
fixed upon the representation of Christ and his sufferings, and benefits, which
himself has set before us in the holy Sacraments, and is not to bedistracted
by any other Images, whether Crucifixes, or other, set up, as it were, to
outface them, which seem to lay a secret imputation of imperfection and
insufficiency upon that blessed Ordinance of Christ, as if that were not enough
without a Crucifix, or as if the painter or carver had set forth the passion in
the Picture, better than Christ in the holy Supper. And for the eye of the
soul, that is to be fixed on Christ himself, his bitter sufferings, and those
glorious blessings thereby imparted unto us, and not to be taken up with any
humane artifices; the splendour whereof may steal away the soul from its
attention to this holy business, and so deprive it of the comforts of the
Sacrament.

And for Almsdeeds, Though the Priests of Rome find (I doubt not) good
commings in by this means, and receive good Rent for their Tenant-Images, for
the house-roome they allow them in their Churches; yet they are not like to be
beneficial to the poor: Yea, the fruitless charge and cost which is bestowed
upon them in their framing, adorning, and offerings, is a great means both to
disable and discourage Gods people, for enlarging their hearts, or at least
their hands to the poor. Indeed these Images, though they have no mouths to
speak, yet they have, as it were, mouths to devour the bread of the hungry:
and the costly attire of these dead Images is paid for dearly, it may be
feared, by many poor living Images of Christ, that by this means are feign to
go naked to the shame of Christian Religion.

And if we add unto this the dangerous opposition that is in the use of them
in Gods worship, unto the rules and laws of God himself; whereby they are not
only scandalous but impious, thwarting the rule not only of charity, but of
faith too; as may appear by the second Commandment, and also by many other
places in holy Writ, wherein this practice is vehemently opposed and condemned.
Council. Elibert. can. 36. Placuit Picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere, ne qnod
colitur, aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur. Vide Athanas. contra Idol.
August. in Psalm. 113. Chrysostom. in Genes. Hom. and ad Philippens. 1.3. Hom. 11.
Theodor. in Psalm. 113. Justin. Mart. in dialog. cum Tryphon. Clem. Alex. Strom.
6. and in Paraen. Tertul. de idolat. c. 3.4.5. Cyprian de Valera, in the
Preface of his Dos Tratados del Papay de la missa. Lamprid. in Alex. Sever.
vide drelincourt Triomphe de l'eglise part. 2.1.26. art. 4.
And the contrariety that it has both to the judgment and practice of the
Primitive Church (which in other matters we talk much of) judgment, being
absolutely and clearly forbidden by that ancient Eliberian Council celebrated
in Spain in the year 305. as Binius computes; and extremely disliked by the
ancient Fathers of the Church, as Origin, Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Athanasius, Epiphanius, etc. insomuch that they proceeded so far some of
them, it seems, as to condemn the very art of painting and carving, as
deceitful and mischievous, and as brought into the world by the Devil
himself: And Practice also, suitable to their judgment, in that they were not
in use among them in Gods service, as learned Drelincourt observes to be
acknowledged by diverse of the Popish authors themselves, as Libius, Gregorius,
Gyraldus de Dits Gentium, Syntagm. 1. Georg. Cassander Consult. art. 21. and as
may be seen, if we look but upon the descriptions of the Temples of Adrian,
hereby noted to have been distinguished from the Heathenish Temples, and of the
Temples of Constantine, the magnificence and ornaments whereof are described in
Ecclesiastical history (as is observed by a learned French writer) without the
least mention of Pictures, or Images: yea it was the reproach (as one notes)
that the Heathens laid upon the Christians in the ancient times, That they had
neither Temples, nor Altars, nor Images. Vide Orig. contra Cells. lib. 6.7.
Minut. in Octav. Lactant. div. Instit. lib. 2. Clem. Alex. Strom. 5.6. Iren.
advers. Haereses lib. 1. cap. 23.24. Epiphan. lib. 1. Haeres. 27. August de
Haeres. cap. 7. Pet. Crinit. lib. 9. de honesta disciplina.
And if we note (as one notes) that they were not used in those times but by
infamous Heretics; and that there have been Laws made against them by
public authority in those times; as that Law of Valens and Theodosius, etc.
if, I say, we add these things, That they are contrary to the Word of God, to
the judgment and practice of the Primitive Church, have not been anciently
used but by wicked Heretics, and lastly have been openly cried down by
authority, we shall find, I believe, little ground to make so much of them in
the Church, as some have done.

But what then? must we demolish these Churches, that are decked and adorned
with Images? There is no need of that I hope. There are many things now to be
reformed, that I hope will not be pulled down: And yet if there were such
need, I dare say, better forty Churches demolisht than one Soul ruined, since
a Soul is the purchase of Christ's blood; material Churches not so. These
Scandalls I desire may be removed.

And as I desire there may be nothing scandalous in the Church, so that there
may be nothing frivolous, or irrational, that our service may be a reasonable
service. I know not why we should have candles in the day time. Council. Eliber.
cap. 34. and Lactant. div. instit. lib. 6. cap. 2. Accendunt lumina velut in
tenebris agenti. -- Si coeleste lumen quod dicimus solemn, contemplari velint,
jam sentiant quod non indigeat lucernis eorum Deus. -- Number igitur mentis suae
compos putandus est, qui autori and datori luminis candelarum and cerarum lumen
offert pro munere? Aliud vero ille a nobis exigit lumen, and quidem non
fumidum, sed (ut ait Poeta) liquidum, atque clarum, mentis scilicet, quod
exhibere non potest, nisi qui Deum agnoverit. -- Haec est religio coelestis,
non quae constat ex rebus corruptis, sed virtutibus animi, qui oritur e coelo.
Hic verus cultus est in quo men's colentis seipsam Deo immaculatam victimam
sistit.
I wish there may not be so much as an Emblem of a fruitless Prelacy, or
Clergy in the Church, that only fill the candlestick, but give no light. I love
ornaments in the Church, so that they be not toyish or theatricall. I hold it
very fit that God as he is the author of our riches, so he should be served
with them. But I wish that may not befall our times that Aegidius Viterbiensis
notes to have befallen the times of Constantine; Constantini tempora (says
he) ut sacris rebus multum adjecere decoris, and ornamenti, ita morum vitaeque
severitatem non parum enervarunt. Verus ornatus Templorum utilis and Deo gratus
(says Hemmingius) est concio, cantio, oration, and communio, and non quae haec
impediunt and vitiant. Yea an holy congregation is the best furniture of the
Church. I wish our special care may be for this, and then let the outward
adornation, as far as grave and decent, not be neglected. The truth is, I can
bear much in the Church, rather than disturb the peace, or resist the
Government: which gives me occasion to speak of the last thing mentioned in the
Oath, The Government of the Church.

And for this I do acknowledge my self bound by the law of God to bear great
respect to this Ordinance of God, wheresoever I find it, I am to esteem it as
a precious stone, though I find it in a dunghill of vices. But where it is set
in gold, found associated with virtue and holiness, there indeed it is
exceeding glorious, and may challenge a double respect: but howsoever it is due
to Gods Substitute, whatsoever the man may be in his own person, and that in
point of conscience: and this duty does consist chiefly in three things;
Honor, Obedience, and Subjection. I am to honor them in my thoughts, in my
words, in my actions, yea with my estate too, if there be ability in me and
exigence in them. To obey them in all just commands whatsoever, wheresoever,
either in the commands themselves, or in the acts which they en^oyne me, so
they are not contrary to Gods law; for I know the Governor may transgress his
duty in commanding, and yet my duty may tie me unto obedience. He offends, if
he lay any tyrannous or frivolous bonds upon me, God will not have his people
abridged of their liberty, without some reason or ground. And therefore all the
commands of Governors, whether in Church or Commonwealth, ought to have their
ground either in Scripture, or Reason, and to be streams from those
fountains: they must depend upon the law of God either natural or revealed;
either as a confirmation thereof, or a declaration, or as a conclusion from
these principles, or as a determination where his law has appointed diverse
things to the same purpose and end, either absolutely or dis-junctively, either
in the things themselves, or in the end unto which they tend; they must find
an original there, from whence they must be extracted, and coppied out, as it
were. The law of God in Scripture and reason, is the maine and general root
and trunk, and all good laws are branches that grow from thence; and
whatsoever humane constitutions cannot either in a direct or collateral line
derive themselves from them, are bastard issues, and shameful to their
Parents; and the lawmaker sins in framing of them. Yet the difficulty of
Government is to be considered, and many things to be borne with, for though
he have no ground in Gods law for his injunction, but it is merely frivolous,
and perhaps burdensome; yet if his authority disables him to make it, and it
enjoyne me to no act contrary, to mine allegiance unto God, it is his sin,
but my affliction, and must be borne as other calamities; for though his law
bath no good end, yet my obedience has; obedience it self is a good and
laudable thing; and I may have the end of maintaining order, or preserving
peace, and avoiding disturbance in the Church or Commonwealth, of preventing
scandal unto others and the like, which are ends prescribed by Gods law to
regulate and frame our actions by. All things are not to be turned upside down
upon every inconvenience that may be apprehended in a law, whether it be
Ecclesiastical or Civil, For besides that there are few that are fit Judges
of a Law; That may be unlawful for the Governor to command, which yet is not
unlawful but expedient for me to obey, being commanded. As it was unlawful
for Pharaoh to command the children of Israel to make brick without straw, as
being tyrannous, and so sinful in him; but it was not unlawful, but rather
commendable in them to obey it, as far as they could. And S. Paul will have
servants to be obedient unto their Masters, though they befroward and perverse.
Indeed if they do enjoyne me to do any thing wherein I should offend against
Gods laws in the least degree, no pretense of any, though never so many or so
great good ends, must make me withdraw my allegiance from him, and pay it to
humane powers. The authority of all men is limited, and so must our obedience
to them be also. The supreme power of God is the foundation of all authority;
and therefore our duty unto that must be preferred in the first place, and
without all leave or exception whatsoever. Peace must not be maintained with
the ruins of Piety and Trust. And any Scandal to my brother must rather be
admitted, than I should prevent it without Gods leave. The rule of Master
Calvin is good here: Sicut libertas charitati, ita charitas fidei subjicienda
est. Yet in this case I am to disobey as modestly and offenselesly, and with as
much show of reverence to the Governor, as may stand with our duty unto God:
yet resolutely too, not faintly, or fearfully but as the three Children unto
Nebuchadonezar, Dan. 9.15.17. etc.

And where we cannot yield obedience, we must yield the third Duty of
Subjection, especially where the Authority is absolute and supreme under God,
which may be variously stated according to the Laws and Customs of several
Countries and Dominions. Then in case we cannot obey, we ought not to resist
but suffer; and yield a passive obedience where we may not yield an active one,
according to the rule of Gods word: They that resist shall receive unto
themselves damnation; and answerably to the practice of the Primitive
Christians, as we may see in that notable example of the Theban Legion,
mentioned by Grotius de Iure Belli, out of Eusebius; who when they were
commanded by Maximianus to worship his Idols, being Christians, they constant'y
denied to obey his command: but when he required their lives, they submitted
without resistance, though they were a strong Legion of valiant soldiers.

But I am yet in generals, and generals are clouds: more clearly and
particularly therefore. I willingly submit to the present Government of the
Church in all parts specified in the Oath by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
and Deanes; and wish them so well, that I desire they may never moulder away in
corruptions, that may make them justly odious to the people, or bring any
disrepute upon them, that may be destructive to their Eminency. I envy not
their Honors, but praise the bounty of Christian Princes therein; yet I wish
they may be more glorious in holiness and piety than in outward state and
dignity, That their honors may be more adorned by them, than they by their
honors; that the rays of their excelling virtues may even dim and overcome
the splend or of their outward additions, and that they be above others more in
goodness, than in greatness; and not so much affect the one, as to neglect
the other; nor feed the one so much, as to starve the other: ne filia devoret
matrem, and devorata matre, devoret etiam seipsam: you may easily perceive
there is some danger of it. I willingly submit to their Authority, and wish it
may be so moderated by Piety and Charity, that it may be fatherly, not
despoticall, much less tytannicall; not as Lords over Gods heritage, but as
Stewards of the manifold graces of God, that they may manage all things with
Christian compassion, and punish others, when they must needs do it, with such
hearts as are ready even to suffer with them in their corrections, like a
tender mother that will weep when she is driven to chastise her child; like S.
Paul, in whose language, (as a learned man observes) to bewail, and to
correct, seems to have been all one, 2 Cor. 12.21. I fear, says he, that
when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall bewail
many that have sinned already, and have not repented of their uncleanness, and
fornication, and lasciviousness, which they have committed. Surely, the
censures of the Church, and Churchmen, should be pronounced rather with
tears, than fury, rather with sighs, than supercilious frowns, that their
love and pity to men's persons may shine in the midst of their greatest
severitie, that they may see that they are armed, not against them, but against
their offenses; and so, as much as may be, make their punishments lovely even
to the sufferers of them. I wish that they may weigh out the justice of
Discipline, and correction too with an equal hand, bending themselves most
against those offenses which are most against God, and not punish the weak and
scrupulous (which has more need of binding up than lancing, more need of
Cordials, than Corrosives) as the stubborn and perverse: nor the omission of
an indifferent Ceremony, as the trampling upon the Law of God it self. Never
let it be heard in our Israel, that the laws and inventions of men, though
harmless, though convenient, and wholesome, are more valued than the
immediate laws of God himself. There is greater Scandal many times (it is
doubt) in such method and manner of punishing, than that is which they pretend
to remove. I desire that their Authority may be supported by those pillars of
Learning, Zeal, Holiness, Industry, Meekness, Courage, and Humility: which
may be like the seven pillars of the house of Wisdom: which they should be.

Of Learning, that they may be shining Lights, to illustrate the dark places
of the earth.

Of Zeal, that they may be burning and shining Lights like John the Baptist,
to prepare the way of the Lord in men's Souls.

Of Piety and Holiness, that they may shine in their lives as well as in their
doctrines; and their whole conversation may be a continual visible Sermon unto
Gods people.

Of Industry, that their light be not hid sub modio desidiae, but that they may
be like stars in the firmament, as well of the bigger as of the lesser
magnitude, orderly and constantly fulfilling their courses, and imparting their
benign aspects unto one another, and their wholesome influences unto the
people in the Church; not forgetting those maine and apostolical works of
prayer, and preaching the word, offering incense, and dressing the lamps, the
most glorious part of their functions. Surely, howsoever some may mistake it, a
Bishop is more splendid, and more like an Apostle in a Pulpit, than upon the
Throne, as some style it.

Of Meekness, that it may never be said of them, as S. Paul speaks of
himself when he was Saul, concerning zeal persecuting the Church, That the
fervor that is in them may be a gentle, not a scorching flame: not like the
heat of a fever, to distemper and destroy; but like the natural heat of the
body to preserve and nourish; that it may be a fire of charity, not any
immoderate fervor in them; and that it may be with them, as with God, that
mercy may still be more eminent than judgment, especially in their own cause.
I wish they may remember that of Livia to Augustus, nihil gloriosius Principe
impune loeso. It is a glory that ever deserves to be conspicuous amongst us,
that is said to have been observable in Reverend Cranmer, noted to have been so
meek in his own injuries, that it grew almost into a Proverb of him, If any
man will have the Archbishop to be his friend, let him do him an injury.

Of Courage, that they be not so gentle as to desert the cause of God in his
Church.

And of Humility the best basis for greatness to stand firm upon: that their
eminency make them not supercilious, which is a sign indeed that men esteem
themselves, but usually abates their esteem with others. Qui fastum in
sublimitate castigat, docet se meruisse quod adeptus est,

You see, I hope, that I am very well contented with the Doctrine, and
Discipline, and Government of the Church. And yet notwithstanding, as I have
done, so I do still disapprove of the late Oath. For though I approve of the
Doctrine; yet it may be doubtful, whether it be fitly averred of any humane
act absolutely, That it contains all things necessary to salvation; since it
is the judgment of one of no small note and esteem with many here (I believe,
L. of Canterb. against A. C. S. 18. p. 121.
) That before the question may so much as be admitted, whether a thing
contains all things necessary to salvation, it must be granted to be of
divine institution, or to be the word of God. Though I dislike not the
Discipline, yet I hold it not unalterable; That were to fall into the error of
the Disciplinarians, whom we have hitherto opposed upon this very ground, That
the Discipline of the Church may be varied according to the variety of times,
persons, and occasions. Though I approve of the Government, yet I cannot hold
it in all parts to be necessary; since I doubt not there were times, when the
Church was well governed without some of them, which are clearly mentioned in
the Oath. The truth is, I conceive the Oath unfit either to be taken or
imposed: I say either, because I conceive they are two questions; Whether the
Oath be fit to be imposed; Or being imposed, whether it be fit to be taken.

I hold it unfit to be taken, chiefly in four respects.

1. As ambiguous in some things. 2. As hardly consisting with truth in others.
3. As contradictory and destructive in the parts thereof unto one another. 4.
As tying us to that which may be inconvenient to the Church; if not now, yet in
after times.
1. As Ambiguous: whereas an Oath ought to be clear, being a bond of so strict
a nature, and so great a for feiture, That every man ought to be sure of the
tenor of the obligation ere he enter into it; since a man's whole estate of
happiness both in present possession, and in future hopes and expectation, yea
the soul it self, and that eternal inheritance we look for in another
world, is as it were tied over for the performance. Now this seems to be full
of ambiguity.

Ambiguous in the meaning and extent of the word Doctrine: since I take it, it
is not so clear, but it may be doubted, whether that only is here meant, which
is contained in the 39 Articles, or that also in the Homilies, the public
Catechism, and the Apology of the Church of England: and there has been some
controversy of the Articles themselves, some, or one of them; and others have
been diversely interpreted to serve the turns of Arminians, and those that have
been disaffected to the true sense of them.

Ambiguous in the meaning and extent of the word Discipline; whether it be to
be understood only of that which is contained in the ordinary book of Canons in
our Church, and the Rubric in the Common prayer book; or whether of some other
Rules before given in the time of King Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth,
or Queen Elizabeth; or whether also of the Provincialls of Lindwood, and of the
whole Canon laws of the Popes, where they are not clearly revoked by Statute.
From which dangerous uncertainties I wish the Church were delivered by a settled
establishment of some certain Rules for the government thereof, agreeable to
the word of God, and sound reason: that we might not be feign to borrow from
the Church of Rome, and to be governed by laws borrowed from Antichrist;
though not Antichristian perhaps, as they are selected, and restrained here.
Befides, there is doubt whether the Discipline be to be taken in the full
extent of the word, or to be restrained only to the Government, as it seems
abusively to be restrained in the Oath; whereas in it self it is much larger
than Government: and therefore to make that the exegesis of Discipline may
favor, I doubt, of Collusion. And yet so it is not altogether so clear, what
is here meant by Government; whether we swear to it only in respect of the
Governors, or in respect of all the Rules and exercise of Authority; which may
be doubted; yea, was actually questioned and doubted of in the last Synod in
the point of Excommunication by Laymen. And if the Governors only are here
meant, then there is doubt which and how many they are that are here meant.
Especially this Ambiguity is much increased by the etc. which I never remember
to have been in the Oath, when it was read to us in the last Synod: neither am
I alone in this forgetfulness; but the like has been affirmed by others also.
How it crept in I know not, but I do not believe, that ever before this, such
an obscure addition found a room in an Oath: neither does it consist with that
clearness which is required in that which is acknowledged to be strictissimi
Iuris. And though perhaps some of the larger sized consciences hold it
unreasonable, that we should querelam offerre apicibus verborum; yet a good
Christian will be nice in the smallest point, where his salvation may any way
be endangered. And besides, I learn from my Savior, that one jot or tittle of
his Word shall never pass away: obedientia in apicibus servanda est.

Ambiguous also, it seems, in the word [established] whether that only is to
be accounted established, which is settled by known and public Laws,
generally received in the whole Church; or that also which by the pretended
authority of some particular Governors, has of late been brought into the
Church; since it runs not [as it stanas by Law established] (as for my part, I
thought it had done; and therefore my memory fails me thereto) but [as it
stands established] and no more; which in a large signification might perhaps
tie us to diverse Innovations, which have been brought in not without some show
of Authority.

Ambiguous it is likewise in the word Consent etc. whether it tie only from
yielding a consent to those alterations which shall be made by others in
Authority; or whether he may be said to consent which obeyes only, or he only
that approves or admits of an alteration, having power to dissent from it. If
the former, then it would clearly contradict the Oath of Supremacy, yea of
Allegiance too: which though I do not so firmly believe (I confess) because I
conceive a man may obey the alteration being made, and yet not be said to
consent to alter; notwithstanding this is not free from obscurity, and is too
apt to be mis-understood.

Secondly, as it is thus full of Ambiguities, so I know not how in all points
it will stand with Truth it self, where it is said of the Government in the
particulars named, viz. Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes and Archdeacons, with the
unmeasurable enlargement of an etc. that of right it ought so to stand: the
words are these; as it stands now est ablished, and as by right it ought to
stand; which word [right] if it be equivocall, and to be understood either of
Divine right, or Ecclesiastical, (as was answered in the last Synod) then we
should admit of Equivocations in an Oath. But it seems (if well considered) to
imply a Divine right; for that clause [as it stands now established,] if it be
meant well, it must be understood I conceive of that which is established by
Law, and that Law is the Ecclesiastical right whereby they stand. And
therefore in That, after this it is further added, [and as byright it ought to
stand] it seems to aver that there is a further right than the
Ecclesiastical Law it self, even a right which does establish the Law it
self, whereby such and such Governors are appointed; and makes that, as it
were, necessary in the Church; which I know not what right can do, but a
divine right: and this I am sure some parts of the Government mentioned are
altogether incapable of. Besides, what the etc. may include; nam quid non intus
habet? for ought a mau certainly knows, it may be Equus Trojanus, and many may
lie hid there, that can pretend no more divine right to stand established in
the Church, than the etc. it self to stand in the Oath.

Thirdly, as it is taxable of Ambiguity and Falsehood, so the Parts thereof seem
to be contradictory and destructive to one another. Not to insist long upon the
dissonancie and jarre that is between the Title and Preface with the Oath it
self: In the Title it is. An Oath against all Innovations in Doctrine or
Government. In the Preface it is, An Oath against all Innovations of Doctrine
or Discipline. In the Oath it self it is neither against all Innovations, but
only against some there intimated and expressed, nor against Innovations in
Doctrine or Discipline, but with a limitation, or restraining Exegesis,
Discipline or Government. But let that pass. There seem to be parts
destructive to one another, even in the very Oath it self: the multitude of
Ambiguities, and especially the etc. being not only equivocall, but also
necessitating the Swearer (as may seem) to reserve something in his mind which
is not expressed in the Oath. And yet in the later part of the Oath, he is to
swear against all Equivocation or secret reservation, whatsoever; which, how
they can stand together, let any judge.

Lastly, it seems to tie unto that which may be Inconvenient for the Church,
every Clergy man may possibly be a member of a Convocation or Synod; if so,
then he is engaged to vote that which may be Convenient for the Church. Now in
that the Government is not denied to be alterable, it may so fall out that it
may be requisite to bring in some Alteration; and if so, then I ought not to
tie my self from ever consenting to an Alteration; lest I thereby subject the
Church unto such bondage that may leave her remediless to much mischief
hereafter. I ought not to lay any such bond upon my conscience as may be
against the performance of my duty, or the prevention, or redress of mischief
among Gods people.

Now in that it is unlawful to be taken, as may appear by the reasons before
spoken of; then a majori it must needs be, it is unlawful to be imposed; so
that if we have proved the former, we have proved both; for it is most clearly
unlawful to enjoin that Oath which is not lawful to be taken. Besides all
this, it might be added that there appears not any need or necessity of this
Oath; and Qui jurat sine necessitate, peccat; an Oath being like to sleeping or
opiating Medicines, not to be administered but upon urgent exigencies. Yea it
proves to be opposite even to those ends which it seems to aim at; it was
never very likely to establish, it has, I doubt, shaken the present
Government. Abundans cautela saepereddit suspectos; unnecessary caution leads
to suspicion; and to tie with more bonds than needs to any thing, is many times
to loose the strongest of all bonds, which is affection, and to increase the
hatred to it. Odimus quodcunque necesse est, is a Proverb often made good: The
old man in Ariosto may inform us of that, who having voluntarily contained
himself within the walls of Paris for some scores of years, being restrained
at length by command, fell into such unquiet desires to see what was without
the walls, that he went even out of the world for grief.

I might insist upon the great and immoderate severity in the Penalty proposed
to the refusal of the Oath, being no less than suspension and deprivation: it
may seem a strange kind of Simonie to make a Benefice the price of perjury;
at least, I am sure, it cannot be denied, but that a man might be unsatisfied
in the sense, and legality both of diverse things in this Oath; though it were
free from many things objected, and do the office of a Minister faithfully as
others, and bear a good Christian heart toward God. And it is very hard to
deprive such of their offices and livings; which if it had taken effect, what
mischief might have come unto the Church by the loss of conscionable Divines;
and how many Clergy beggars nught have been turned abroad with their wives and
children to the great scandal of the Church, I am glad we are feign to guess
and imagine, and that it never came to be known by a lamentable experience.
For these reasons as I have heretofore, so now again, I declare my dissent
from the Oath.

If my Subscription be urged, I was persuaded that it was the practice of
Counsels and Synods, That the whole body should subscribe to those Acts that
are past by the mayor part, as to Synodicall Acts, not withstanding their
private dissent. If my Subscription implied any more, I do so far recant and
condemn it in my self, and desire pardon both of God and the Church,
resolving by Gods grace to be more cautelous hereafter.

But is there no Balm in Gilead? are there no Physicians there? shall it be
said of us all as of Jobs friends, That wear all Physicians of no value? That
it may not be said of us, give me leave to conclude with two requests unto you,
which I desire to offer unto your grave Judgments.

First, that we may prefer a Petition to his Majesty for power to review the
late Canons and the Oath; that the wound of the Church may be cured by the
Church.

The second, that as we have freedom of votes in the agitation, so we may know
our freedom in subscription in the conclusion of our Synodicall Acts.

So we may have that happy style to be Repairers of the breaches in the walls
of Jerusalem, and Re-edifiers of the house of God.

And thus you have the thoughts of my heart, which I entreat you to judge of
favorably; and if I have erred in any thing, to reduce me meekly. And I could
wish you had as clear a dissection of every man's mind here, as you have of
mine.

FINIS.

