THE DEVILISH CONSPIRACY, HELLISH TREASON, HEATHENISH CONDEMNATION, AND
DAMNABLE MURDER, Committed, and Executed by the JEWS, against the Anointed of
the LORD, CHRIST their KING. And the just Judgment of God severely executed
upon those TTAYTORS and MURDERERS. As it was delivered in a SERMON on the 4
Feb. 1648. being the Quinquages. Sunday, Out of some part of the Gospel
appointed by the Church of England to be read on that Day.

LAM. 1.12. Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? behold and see, if there
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

LAM. 5.16. The Crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us that we have sinned.

LAM. 3.64. Render unto them a recompense O Lord, according to the work of
their hands.

Verse. 65. Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.

HORAT. -- virtutem
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi.
London, Printed in the Year, M.DC.XL.VIII.

LUKE 18. v. 31, The Son of man, v. 32. shall be delivered unto the Gentiles,
and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spit on: v. 33. And they
shall put him to death.


THe Words contain a Prophetical History of that most lawless, cruel and
hellish murder of Gods Anointed, Christ the King of the Jews; and are as
Prophetically appointed by our Church to be read on the Quinquagesima Sunday,
which in this year, 1648. fell out to be the 4 of February.

Now although in these words, there are but 3 tragical Acts: 1. Traditio, the
Treason or Conspiracy; 2. Illusio, the mocking, or spiteful using; 3. Occisio,
the execution or murder of their King:


Yet (to make it a complete Tragedy) two other Acts may be justly added out of
other Gospels, viz:

First, a precedent Act, expressing the double cause of this execrable fact,
which was partly pretended, partly real.

And the last subsequent Act, as the fruit and effect of all the foregoing
treason, conspiracy, trial, condemnation, and murder. The Son of man, etc.

To execute so much vilany and outrage, as this and other Texts speak of, had
it been only against the bare Son of man, had been an act to be detested and
abominated by all the Sons of Men, even Heathens, to whom he was betrayed;
but this Son of Man is more to these Jews then the bare Son of Man; for he
was their King, not only prophesied so to be, Isa. 62.11. and Zach. 9.9. but
the Wisemen ( Matthew. 2.) coming to worship him, they enquire after him by this
Title, Where is he that is King of the Jews? yea, and he is so proclaimed,
Luke 19.38. Blessed be the King that comes: and Pilat not only knew and
confessed him so to be (by his question, John 19.15. Shall I crucify your King?)
but confirmed and wrote it (to be commended to all posterity) by that
superscription on the Cross, in three Languages, JESUS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE
JEWS, adding, What I have written, I have written; and therefore not to be
repealed: Yea, hear truth it self speak, though of himself, John 18.37.
when Pilat asked him, Art thou a King? he plainly and affirmatively answers, To
this end was I born, and for this cause came I into this world; to be a King:
and though not de hinc, not from hence, (as Saint August: on the words) yet
hic, here on earth, to be a King.

And this Son of Man the King, [their King] is the man, whom ye shall find so
betrayed, despitefully used, and murdered by his own Subjects, the bloody,
barbarous, and inhumane Jews.

The original in the Text, (...), is generally rendered in Latin; tradetur,
and Traditor, both in Ecclesiastical and Civil acts and writings, signifies in
our English a Traitor; and this word here used by the Evangelist and Penman of
the holy Ghost, none (except ignorant, or Jews) will deny to be the most
proper significant word to express the illegal demeanor of Subjects against
their King.

And so only proper to them that I appeal to all the learned, or to the
Searchers of the Scriptures, whether this or any other the like word was ever
affixed or applied to any King for any act whatever of his against his
Subjects. This Text, besides that, Luke 6.16. and Acts 7.52. proves the Actors
against their King to be Traitors, wherein Judas, the other Conspirators and
the whole People of the Jews are expressly so called Traitors; but not one
Text in all the Holy Bible ever called the Prince or King a Traitor for any
act (were it never so false, so foul, so bloody) that was committed by the
Prince against his Subjects; and in this the Laws of our Land follow and accord
with that of Gods, and for that they may be justly called, as they are, holy
Laws.

Now although this Text barely says, He shall be betrayed; but says not, by
whom: and although the Traitors would not willingly be discovered and made
known to the world for fear of an after-reckoning, they knowing that the
People loved him: yet, because other Gospels have both pointed them out and
named them by their several qualifications, offices, and sects. I shall
therefore here range and set them down in some order; beginning with the
Arch-traytour, who by the Psalm. 41.9. prophetically is thus deciphered, Mine
own familiar friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread: and Psalm.
55.12. it was not a (professed) Enemy, then I could have borne it, neither he
that hated me, then I would have hid my self, and not have imparted my secrets
unto him; but v. 13. it was thou my guide and mine acquaintance, yea more v.
14. (thou were of my secret counsels) we took counsel together: it were lost
labor to tell you whom the Prophet means in all this, since in one Chap. (
Mat. 26.) Judas is no less then twelve times proclaimed to everlasting memory
and infamy the Traitor.

Yet though he were the Ringleader, and the (...), Traitor, for that he being
a Servant, a meniall Servant, a Counselor of the secret Counsel, under
color of friendship betrayed him; yet because in Scripture sense, not only
they are accounted Traitors, who are primarily immediate Actors in the
condemnation or the execution, (such as were this ever to be branded Judas) nor
they who Soldier-like went out with Swords to take hold of and lay him fast,
nor the Court of Justice (or Council, as it is called) but who ever joined in
the first, second, or any other conspiracy, plotting, counselling, assisting,
consenting against this King, were no less then Traitors, (for so Mark 15.1.
The Elders, Priests, Scribes, and the whole Council are involved and named to
have delivered him up) therefore I shall take the leave and liberty to discover
some of these close Traitors, who having washed their hands (as they think)
from the last execution, would therefore persuade the world that they are
innocent and free from this loud-crying Treason.

And of these, we shall find in the Gospels specified and named, Scribes,
Pharisees, Elders, Rulers of the People, Sadduces, Lawyers, the People, and the
whole Council: Lord! what a bach of Treason is this? and was there ever the
like Conspiracy of all sorts, sects, and places professing one Religion and
Allegiance, yet to work the murder of their King?

But (that the world may know and hate them in their wickedness, and may
learn to beware of such, and the like) know that the Pharisees among the Jews
were a Sect, not an Office, and most dangerous infestious and infectious to the
people, because they were become most numerous and powerful: and that you may
know them the better when you meet with them, 1. Consider them in their
Origination. 2. Their Devotion. 3. Their Tenets. 4. And their Practices.


And for the first, you shall never find a Pharisee mentioned in all the Old
Testament, he being not a thing known or heard of in the ancient Jewish
Church; but such as sprang up and crept out not long before the time of
Reformation, and so soon as he peeps he professes himself a Seperatist from
the rest of the Church, and from thence he has his name or title Pharisee: and
he is a thing outwardly (though hypocritically) holy even to superstition; not
only in the matter of Tithes and holy Fasts (to which he was so great a
Pretender, Luke 18.12. that he will have two Fasts in a Week, and Tithes of
all) but in the observation of the Sabbath, he is so zealous (if not
superstitious) and so hearty for the public treasury, that neither must the
Disciples of Christ pick the ears of corn as they pass to put them in their
mouths, Matthew. 12.2. no nor may Christ cure a blind, or a lame man, though but
by speaking a word on that day, without danger of a Council, v. 14.

And though Gods express Commandment be, Honor thy Father, thy natural,
civil, spiritual Father; yet if by Corban, that is, a Gift, (or Contribution)
Gods Cause (as they call it) may be benefited, then Caleato patrem, the
commandment of God in this case (says the Pharisee) is of none effect, but is
null and void.

And by these, and the like Tenets and Separations from others, they did too
soon overspread the whole Land, and bewitched the People to their Faction,
Luke 5.17. Insomuch that they became in a short time the only Oracles (as it
were) among the People; witness that Interrogatory of the Jews, Ioh. 7.48.
Do any of the Pharisees believe or follow Christ the King? which is as much as
if they had said, You are not to believe and follow any, but where the
Pharisees teach or lead the way: and the opinion of their knowledge and zeal
grew so great, that their Persons, but especially their Faction, governed
(says Josephus) not Jerusalem alone (the Metropolis) but upon the matter, all
Judea too; insomuch that Herod himself (as the same Author has it) was
afraid to displease them.

Would you know some other ways how they raised themselves into such
Authority, and how thereby you may learn them out? then know that they were
very much above other Jews for praying, praying often, long prayers, and
openly, as Mat. 6. v. 23. and for preaching accordingly; insomuch that rather
then they would be without the Word preached, they would go to hear John the
Baptist, Matthew. 3. but take this note by the way, that if John preach to them
to do good works, rather than to hear and talk, they will never care to heat
him more: for after that Sermon I find not (though they loved preaching) that
they over loved or heard Io: Baptist again.

And to the advantage of their number and power some of these Pharisees could
use their tongues very well; Christ gave them so much their due, when he said,
Matthew. 12.24. They being evil, yet speak good things: for so, when they came
to entrap and ensnare Christ, Matthew. 22.15. they begin (as Judas the Traitor
did, Matthew. 26.16.) with Master: yea they would seem so tender of the
preservation of Christ's person, that Luke 13.31. they will forewarne him of the
Herodians, as such as were set to kill him; while themselves are yet still in
all other things laboring to ensnare and undermine him.

Some have put the Question, Whether these Pharisees may be saved? in Answer
whereof I shall need to add no more then Christ's determination pronounced,
Matthew. 5.20. Unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of Heaven:
so that although Paul a Pharisee (as Matthew a Publican) repenting and
converted may; yet so long as they wilfully maintain, and obstinately
practice, as such Pharisees did, they could not ordinarily be saved.

And so with one observation more I shall leave them and all such as they are to
Gods justice and mercy; and the observation is, That at the first rising and
commotion these Pharisees were most busy in tempting Christ, and setting the
people on against him: yet in the later part tending to his Condemnation and
Execution, they appeared not so much as the Scribes, who were over-active in
all even to the last, not only in betraying, but killing Christ the King.

Now these Scribes pretended especially to two things, whereby they raised
themselves in the opinion of the seduced people:

1. That they (as Luther on Mich. 4.2. spoke of the Anabaptists, so these)
held, and made the world believe, that themselves and such as they, were the
only Saints to be saved; and all the rest were but cast-awaies to be damned.

The 2d thing was, their pretense to perfect understanding and frequent use of
the Scriptures: And touching the latter of these two, Calv: against the
Anabaptists, observes, that they, as these; and these, as they; stuffed out all
their impertinent and wicked discourses with more impertinent Texts of
Scripture, and continual mention of and Revelation of the Spirit.

And from these two pretenses they took upon them to be the only Interpreters
and Expounders of the Scriptures, although (as Buxtorf. in Synag: Iudaic: of
these Sects, praeter falsitatem and hypocrisin nihil habent) there was nothing
in either, more then falsehood and hypocrisy: and Calv: adds of them, as of the
Anabapt: that they were as proper Interpreters of Scriptures, as Hogs are
Dressers of Vines: for (says he) they expound not, but (as Saint Peter speaks
of such, 2 Pet. 3.16. (...)) they pervert Scriptures: the word in the Original
implies the practice of Glovers, and Shoomakers, who when the Leather will not
reach home, they stretch and tear it by their teeth. And to examine the truth
of this Assertion of Buxtorf: and Calvin, concerning these Scribes and
Anabaptists, be pleased to take a taste of some of their Interpretations, as
Buxtorf: and others have set them down; and by this little resolve, whether
the whole race of them be extinct or not, or not rather living and yet
triumphantly flourishing among us.

Therefore when the Prophet Hosea 2.9. says, I will espouse thee to my self
in righteousness: and when the Prophet Joel 2.28. has it, Your Sons and
your Daughters shall prophecy; your Old men shall dream, and your Young men
shall see visions: and when the Prophet, Mal. 4.2, 3. To you shall arise the
Sun of righteousness, and ye shall tread down the wicked as ashes under your
feet: All these, and many more the like, they expound and apply as Prophecies
spoken of, and to themselves alone.

And that they shall be Independent and free from all Government but their
own, they have (if you will believe their interpretation) a plain undeniable
Text, Hos. 3.4. where it is said, The Children of Israel (that is) the
Faithful (which they say they are) shall remain without King, and without
Prince, many days: and, I fear, the lying Spirit which put this Exposition in
their heads, set them the more earnestly on work to betray and kill Christ
their King, that they might remain independent without King or Prince many
days; though I am not ignorant that by days, sometime they will understand
(according to some other Prophesies) years.

And they have another Text, that gives them the reason from that Prophecy of
Hosea, Isa. 39.14. where it is said, Judgment, justice, and truth, and equity,
are departed: that is (say they) from all but our selves; who are all for
judgment, and justice, against all, but our selves.

And if you ask them, what then shall become of all their Adversaries and
Malignants? why? for that, they have a clear light from the Prophet, Obadiah
3.9. where it is expressly said, They shall be cut off by slaughter, (and this
is their usual justice.)

But if any ask them, does God approve such severity? yes, say they; and they
give the reason for it, Isa. 60.12. who will not serve you shall perish, and be
utterly wasted.

But then I pray, when all your Enemies are thus wasted and destroyed, who
shall reap and divide the spoil? why? that say they, the Spirit has
revealed, Isaiah 61.6. Ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their
glory ye shall boast your selves: (that is) all the honor and wealth shall be
taken from all others, and shall by you be conferred wholly on your selves.

And such Saints, such Scripturists, and such Expounders of Scriptures, were
these Scribes; who are sent by the Council, Mat. 15.1. and these with some
Herodians ( Courtiers, so called) entangle, and draw Christ the King into their
net, Mat. 22.16.

This Sermon would swell to an unnecessary bulk if I should present the
several Traitors, Actors in this damnable design; I shall therefore contract
my self, and but point at them: as first:

The People, upon whose score all must be laid; for, as the pretense in all
was, salus populi, (that is, as the Jews said, ne gens pereat, that the
Nation, the People perish not, be not destroyed) so these People must be ever
ready at hand, out of all parts of the Countries, as well as of the City
Jerusalem to serve turns; but their employments or services were especially
seen in three things:

1. That when Christ the King is to be forcibly taken and seized on, they must
be pressed and sent out with Swords and Weapons to apprehend him, and bring him
to the Great Council, Mark 14.

2. Another service they were usually employed in, and that was, to petition
for some base, unjust, or wicked thing; as that Barabbas a Thief and a
Murderer might be released, Mat. 27.

3. They are (as occasion serves, and the scene is laid) they are to come to
the Judgment Hall, or place of Judicature, and there with foul mouths and
loud voices, they must cry and bawle for justice and execution, Mat. 27.23, 25.

And these People, as commending the times past which they never knew, and
disallowing the present though it be far the better; are easily up upon any
the least Venite, or Alarm; they love to be doing, though it be not good: and
when they are up, they ask not so much, quid fecit? what he has done? against
whom they rise? as quid facimus? why stand we still? let us act and be doing
somewhat, it is no matter what: and yet all this they were to do, and did
only as they were taught and hired, not by their own wills and motions; but
as Cur-dogs set on by their Masters, Elders, and Rulers of the People.

But enough of these People, unless they were better, and yet there were worse
then these Actors; and they were (as before I touched) the Authors; their
Rulers, which were either the Heads, or Chief of the several Tribes, or
Families: or such as in their several Countries, Cities, or Buroughs, by
their wealth, policy, or Authority, had gained the power in swaying them to
choose, and refuse, to commend, or condemn, what they liked, or disliked: these
you may find in the Jews first notorious Rebellion against the Prince, and the
Church, Numb. 16. where the famous men in the Congregation were as those Heads
or Rulers of the People: and although the Scribes, Pharisees, Elders bring some
fuel and combustible matter, yet these Rulers set it all on fire.

Now if any in favor or praise of their Nobility should tell me, that in this
Treason there is no mention at all of any Lords: to this, I must desire such to
know, that if the Jews had any other Nobility then such as before I mentioned,
yet at this time the Jews were (as in our days) under the power of a
conquering Army, and so were overawed by Pilat the Governor who ruled and
judged all.

2. If those Rulers or Princes of the People were as our Lords; then they must
know that these men were deep in the first plotting and carrying on this
Treason; and were as chief isntrumental means in bringing Ch: the King to his
end; though toward the end, or last act of the Tragedy (his condemnation and
execution) for fear or policy they appeared not, or drew their necks (as we
say) out of the collar; or for that they were in this case, and at this time,
declared useless and dangerous.

But besides these Actors, and Authors, Followers, and Leaders, (all
Principalls in Treason) there were Elders; and if they were Lay-ones, then they
who would please themselves in the antiquity of their descent, may derive
themselves from this stock: for, these in the Gospel are called, (...), which
rightly and properly sounds, Presbyters; though in our English, called, Elders.

There is frequent mention of Priests in this Treason, and we know, of late,
who are called Priests; even the Clergy, or preaching Elders: Jewish Elders,
and Romish Priests, (like Sampson's Foxes) though their faces are averse, yet
they are tied by the tails, and agree: 1. That Kings are subject to them, at
least in Scriptures. 2. That Councels may be called without them. 3. They have
potestatem Juris, the King facti. 4. They may Excommunicate him.


And then 5. who kills him merits.

These both are Anti-Kings, and Counter-tenors to Monarchy: and if you will not
believe or understand, that in this Treason those Priests were like our Romish
Jesuits, yet you may well understand and believe them to be Mars his Priests,
called, (...), who in their Temples and Sacrifices scattered the fire of
sedition and rebellion; and being appointed in the Church as Trumpets, yet upon
the least grievance, or discontent of the People, they used their Trumpets as
Sheba did, 2 Samuel 20.1. to stir up the People to their Tents, and to take up
Arms though it be against Ch: their King: and indeed without these, or the
like, never did Commotion or Rebellion take life or live long; so that to
choke or strangle these, is the way to cut the throat of all Rebellion.

I cannot omit, in a word, to put you in mind that the Gospels have minded us
of some, who though comprised under those before mentioned, yet notified by an
especial title, as called (...), or as in our English Bible, Luke 7.30.
Lawyers, and these as chief pieces culled out of the rest, were (as I may call
them) Chaire-men, for so Christ spoke of them, they sit in Moses Chair; and
what they say (says Christ) that is, when they speak and say the Law, do as
they say and teach; but do not follow or imitate them in their ways and
practices: for as Christ there said of them, they have rejected or frustrated
the counsels of God (written in the Law) against themselves, and therefore,
Luke 11.52. Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the key of knowledge,
(the Law) and instead thereof you teach, (...), the traditions of men, Mat.
15.3, 6. which traditions Saint Paul ( Ephesians. 2.15.) calls (...), and in our
English not Laws or Canons, but Ordinances.

In the 15. of Mark 1. we read of their Council, in which, or to which, most
of the fore-specified Parties were assembled and gathered together; I cannot (I
think no good Christian can) call it, as some of our Councels have termed,
Benedictum: but either Indoctum, Insanum, Sacrilegum, or as indeed this was,
and so to be styled of all others from the beginning of the world to this day,
Diaholicum. The Council of Trent in comparison of this was Divinum: and of it
we may truly and properly apply that, Psalm. 1.1. it is the Council of the
Ungodly, the way of Sinners, and the seat of the Scornful: and therefore all
good men may say as Jacob, Genesis 49.5. Instruments of cruelty are in their
hands, or their Swords are Weapons of violence; and may pray as he did, v. 6. O
my soul, come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly be not thou
united, for in their anger they slew a Man, v. 7. Cursed be their anger, for it
was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel; I will divide them in Jacob,
and scatter them in Israel: and why may not all the People say, Amen? for,
though in this Council and Treason there were of several Sects and Factions,
as Pharisees and Sadduces (who were as opposite as Lutheran and Calvinist) and
Scribes and Herodians who differed in many things, and hated each other; yet
they all in this conspire, and thence it is called in the worst sense, a
Conspiracy; or as here a Council, to betray to death Ch: their King.

And yet that all may not appear alike guilty, let me add, that though there
be no Accessaries in Treason, or none more Traitors than others, in respect of
its ordinary punishments: yet some are and may justly be said to be greater and
more guilty in the Treason than others. And to this I desire it may be noted,
that there being at this time but three apparent professed Sects among the Jews,
into which, or some of which, all Jews of what Authority, Place, or Office
soever had cut and divided themselves, viz. Pharisees, Sadduces, and Essenes,
(of which latter sort happily Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea might be.) Now
as these I find not mentioned in the New Testament, so nor to be Actors in this
grand Rebellion, or Treason; for, they were peaceable men: but as the Pharisees
of the two ruling Sects were the most numerous and potent, so were they the
most forward and active in the leading part, to tempt and betray Christ; yet
the Sadduces, who denied all Scripture that made against them. 2. The
immortality of the Soul. 3. All punishment for evil after death: these (and
upon these grounds and causes I may suppose) were the most active and cruel in
hurrying the Lord of life to death, and killing Ch: their King.

Besides Officers and Sects there is a Faction mentioned in this Treason, as
distinct from all the former; and they are in the Gospel, called, Herodians;
and these were flattering Courtiers, who varied and changed their Opinions with
the overruling and swaying part; and concerning these, and such like, Christ
gave that saving cautionary counsel, Mark 8.15. Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Herodians, that is, of the contagious doctrines of the former,
and the Fox-like subtilties of the latter. 2. Of their leaven of doctrine, for
it is, 1. sower, 2. spreading, 3. tainting, and from their persons, Matthew. 23.
a Generation of Vipers: 1. multiplying, 2. infectious, 3. killing.

There is further mention of Samaritans, who were to the Jews as Papists to
Protestants, and branded by the Jews as inhumane and bloody men: and though
Ch: the King did all he possible could for the Jews, and nothing at all for
the Samaritans more than to pity them, and not fuffer them to be destroyed,
when some of his Disciples (like fiery Zealots) desired it: yet these would not
join in the bloody act with the more seeming-holy Professors, but shall at
last rise up and condemn them.

But in stead of those, you shall find, Luke 22.66. (...), word for word, the
Presbytery (for they led the way) and Mark 15.1. (...), the whole Council of
the professing Jews, they first or last have their hands in it. But I hear
these Jews, John 8.3. boasting themselves to be Abraham's seed, the Faithful,
and verse. 41. the Children of God: but here truth it self tells them what
indeed they are, notwithstanding their vain hypocrisy, and he says, v. 44.
ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye do, who was
a Murderer from the beginning.

As the persons of the Traitors are not in this, or any other Text, laid
together; so nor in this, or any other, is the manner expressed how they
enterprized, plotted, or proceeded in this devilish Tragedy: of any one, that
Text which Christ parabolically uttered, Mat. 21. comes the nearest to the
point; where Christ says, they seeing him (there called) the Heir, (but now
their King) upon sight of such a sacred Majesty which would have begot an
awful reverence in all, but such as they were; upon this sight, their eyes
became bloud-shot, and therefore forth with, from seeing, they proceed to
saying, saying ((...)) within themselves; cogitaverunt, they said in themselves
by meditation, so Mat. 2.38. 2. They said Mar. 12. (...), which is as Mat.
26.4. (...), consultaverunt, they said among themselves by consultation. 3.
They said (apud se) among themselves, (i.) publicaverunt, by communication or
publication to such as themselves. They said 4. let us join by an Association,
League, and Covenant. 5. And then (venite) by a Combination let us rise our
selves, and raise all our Confederates. 6. (Vt occidamus) that we may kill him
the Heir, Ch: the King: in all which, we see the Devil wrought, as with
Judas, he first entered into his heart, and poisoned his thought; and therefore
against this, Solomon a wise King principally labored, when he said, Eccles.
10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; for if this once infected,
head, eyes, tongue, hands, all, will be presently working: for, it speaks as
the Centurion in the Gospel, I say unto one, Go, and he goes; and to another,
Do this, and he does it.

I shall end this point with an Observation of that, Psalm. 2.1. where the
People are said to imagine a vain thing: and then, v. 3. The Rulers finding
this, they took counsel against the Lords anointed: and those words Saint
Peter, Acts the 4.25. expounds and applies to the seditious plot of the Jews,
of which it is said, the Son of man shall be betrayed, as it follows.

To the Gentiles, now, as (...) in the Greek, and trado in the Latin, signify
both to deliver up, and to betray; so Christ the King in the Gospels is said,
in respect of the persons to whom, to be twice betrayed, and delivered up.
Saint Mark has them both in the 33. verse of the 12. chapt. where it is said,
the Son of man shall be delivered to the Priests, and Scribes, (their Great
Council) who shall condemn him; and then to the Gentiles, the Soldiers and
Conquerours who shall mock and kill him.

And when Christ and the Evangelists call these Conquerors, Gentiles, or
Heathen, they speak in the Jews Dialect, who as the Greeks called all but
themselves, Barbarians; so these styled all those that were Aliens or Strangers
from the Covenant, Heathen, or Gentiles.

And further, all such Alien Heathen were in their account, and the language of
the Gospel, Sinners: so Mat. 18.17. and more nearly, and by application, Mark
14.41. the Son of man shall be delivered up to Sinners: and so Mat. 26.45. in
both which places are understood these Roman Heathen.

Now if those Romans were so called Sinners, and Heathen, because Strangers to
the Covenant: why may not Covenant-takers and Covenant-breakers be much more
held as Heathens and Sinners? so that if a native Jew and Subject had
protested, vowed, sworn and covenanted, to protect and defend the honor and
person of Ch: his King, I conceive for failer and breach hereof, he might as
well if not more truly be called and so held an Heathen and a Sinner, an
Infidel, an Atheist; then the Roman who never entered such a Protestation and
Covenant. Literally then I confess by Gentiles are here in this place meant
the Romans Strangers to Christ the King; but allegorically and tropologically
the Jews themselves (being guilty of more than the Romans were) may very well
be held as Gentiles, and therefore I will hereafter say without more
differencing them, he was betrayed, mocked, and killed by Heathen-Jewes.

And yet before I pass upon the confounding their Titles, who were so closely
joined in the Treason; I cannot but in one thing prefer the justice and
ingenuity of these traiterous Jews, before the impudence and injustice of some
other Traitors; who stick not to act all the parts of Treason and cruelty
themselves, and in their own persons; as to be Conspiratours, Counselors,
Accusers, and after all to appoint themselves to be the Judges, and
Executioners, of him whom they have betrayed: whereas these Jews, though they
durst act the former parts, yet they had so much wit or grace, as to decline
the latter; and therefore when they had betrayed and made him their King; fast,
they delivered him, Mat. 20.19. Acts 21.11. to the Gentiles, the Romans; and
that is to Pilat the Roman Governor, that he might act that lawless part,
which themselves confessed, it was not lawful for them to do.

And here now enters the second act of this direful sad Tragedy, wherein
Christ the King is mocked; and that by the Jewish-Heathen, and Heathen-Jewes by
several ways; the Jewish-Heathen they put a Crown of Thorns upon his Head,
and a Reed in his Hand for a Scepter; they take off his own, and clothe him in
Players robes, and thus they mocked Ch: their King: but the Heathen-Jewes more
scurrilously one while vote and declare him to be their King, John 6.15. and
soon after vote and declare, nolumus hunc regnare, Luke 19.14. we will have no
more Addresses to Him; and yet not long after this, they cry, Hosanna, blessed
be the King, Luke 19.38. they declare to make Him a glorious King: and yet
within few days after it, they vote and declare His death; for, so they
fiercely cried out, Crucify, crucify Him! Luke 23.21.

I might add a precedent, subtle, malicious piece of mockery invented and
practiced upon Ch: their King; for, they made him believe, Luke 13.31. Herod
was purposely set to kill him, and therefore they in a seeming love and tender
to his safety, persuade him secretly to escape this danger by a close conveying
himself to some retired place; when all this while, these trusty Counselors
are those Herodians who hunted him into their net, thereby to take away his
life: the former were scurrilous and malicious, but this last a treacherous
bloody mock.

We read, Mat. 27.27. that in stead of a Royal train and Guard fitting such a
King, the common Soldiers, the rudest and the most barbarous of the People, and
of them a whole Band, they must seize upon and take him; and to lead him,
whither? not to his Chamber of presence, but to the Common Hall there to be
tried for his life.

And in stead of a Scepter of Gold, the Ensign of Power and Rule; he shall
have forced upon him a Scepter of a Reed, to be bowed, and bent by their wind,
and to be broken in pieces when they will.

Instead of a Crown set with Jewels, jewels of prerogative beseeming such a
King, they will plat a Crown of Thorns, malice, disgrace, and robbing him of
all which of right belonged unto him.

But he was not only mocked, but as it follows he was despitefully used by
them: and was not this a spightfull usage to send out armed men to take their
King by force? the King says it is no less, Mat. 26.55. Ye are come out as
against a Thief with Swords, to take me.

2. Was not this a spightfull usage of a King when they hunted him, as King
David complained, like a Partridge, and flew him from dale to mountain, and
from mountain to dale, not suffering him to rest, and not leaving him a safe
hold wherein to lay his head? for so Ch: the King complains that they had cast
him into a condition worse then that of Birds or four footed Beasts; when he
says, Matthew. 8.20. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests,
but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.

3. And was it not a spightfull usage of a King, to be led into the common
judgment Hall by a Band of rude Soldiers (who not long before had been attended
by the Best crying as he went, Hosanna, blessed be, or, God save the King?)

4. And was it not a spightfull usage of a King, (when he was in this common
Hall) to countenance, set on, and to hire the scumme of the People, or
rascallity of the Soldiers, to call out for Justice and Execution? when they
cried, Crucify, crucify him, Luke 23.31.

5. Was it not a spightfull usage of a King, when as he the King speaks to them
in mild and civil language; as to Judas, Mat. 26.50. Friend, or Sir; but they
to him, as Mat. 26.61. this Fellow (the Prisoner?)

6. Was it not a spightfull usage of a King, to carry him out to Golgotha,
there to suffer in an open place, which was more fit for the baiting of Beasts,
than the decolling of a King?

7. and Lastly, was it not a spightfull usage of a King, not to afford him a
Sepulcher or place of Burial, but he must be beholding even for this to
another man? and yet thus spightfully was Ch: the King used.

My heart bleeds to think of their mockings, and spightfull usage of their
most blessed King; and will leave them to be enlarged by our own Meditations;
and for a brief close of this scene, shall only say that as a King may, so
this King was killed by these Jews, before he was slain or put to death, and
K. David shows how, when be says, Psalm. 55.21. and Psalm. 59.7. their tongues
are swords: and Psalm. 140.3. they are poison of Serpents, Killers all these: so
that calumny and slander, if it be not the first degree, it is a step I am sure
to kill a King: and here with these weapons they first set upon Ch: the King,
calling him Samaritan, John 4. Perverter of the Laws, Deceiver, etc.

And spit on. A man may be said figuratively to be spit on, when by
Declarations, Remonstrances, Pamphlets, or scurrilous terms he is reproachfully
and uncivilly entertained: and so Ch: the King was shamefully and most unjustly
spit upon when they proclaimed him a Deceiver (of a trust) John 19.29. a
Traitor by perverting the People and drawing them to destruction: and in this
sense they might truly be said to spit upon Ch: the King.

But, not only this they did, which was too much; and more dangerous then what
was after done by the Soldiers, who did vomit out their excrementitious froth
upon him: of whom I may repeat a passionate expostulation or holy indignation
once used by a Preacher on this occasion. What rheumatick Raskals (said he)
were these Soldiers for, had they, or could they find no place to disgorge the
scumme of their ulcerous lungs, but on the Anointed of the Lord? All that I can
say for these, is, they were not only Soldiers, but barbarous Heathens that
did this: and yet if report be true, there has not wanted even among such as
profess themselves Christians, such a Soldier who has done the like to his
King; and if any such were, let him repent in time, lest God in justice spew
him out of his mouth, as it is said Apoc. 3.16. or that he spit not and pour
out (to the dregs) the full vialls of his wrath and indignation upon him, and
all such as have mocked, spightfully entreated, and spit on Ch: the King.

In the 20 of S. John, v. 5. we read that when Pilat, a Stranger, an Heathen
and an Idolater, had seen and presented the King thus spightfully entreated, he
said, to the bloud-thirsty-miscreant Jews, Behold the Man: as if he had said,
See how disgracefully and wickedly you have used him already; and therefore if
you have any spark of manhood left in you, for humanity sake, proceed no
further, but behold him as an object of all pity, a deserted, afflicted,
scorned, spitefully-used man: but the sight of this man which would have melted
the eyes of a savage Tiger into water, hardens them as rocks, and prompts them
on to the increase of his misery, and their own vilany; for seeing him even
then, and so miserable, then they say, as Mat. 21. Come let us without delay
(not granting time, or reprieve) let us kill him: for so it follows in the
story in the Text, for, they shall kill him.

But before we enter upon this bloody act, it will be proper and pertinent to
the whole, to set down the several grounds and causes, moving these Traitors
thereunto; which we shall clearly collect and express as we find them storied
in the Gospels.

And these were either pretended, such as themselves fained, and held forth as
causes: or such as were really and truly the motives and causes of this their
killing Ch: the King. Now the causes pretended we find to be: First, that which
is generally used in raising the People into a Rebellion, the Innovation,
Alteration, or Destruction of Religion: and with this, the Jews closely
charged him, Mat. 5.17. where Christ himself by way of Answer, says, Think
(or say) not, that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets; I am not come
to destroy, but to fulfill: and in that Chap. he instanceth and proves, that
they by their own Expositions and Traditions, were the Innovators: and himself
the keeper of the Law of Moses and of the Prophets.

And after this, when they thought him too strict in the point of reverence in
the Temple, in that he drove out the Prophaners thereof, Mat. 21.12. (which
they conceived was lawful for them to do) No, says he, for God himself
says of this material Temple or Church, My house shall be called an house of
prayer, but [You] you have made it a den of Thieves, or a Stable, and place for
theft and profanation.

2. They charge him often and with loud outcries, that in the matter of
Sabbath-keeping, he is too loose, and a Prophaner thereof: to which he Answers,
that themselves are (in this) Jewishly superititious, and not he the Prophaner;
for, says he, Mark 2.27. The Sabbath is made for man, that is, for the
preservation of man: by necessary actions and recreations conducing to his life
and health on that day.

3. They closely charge him with abridging them the liberty of Divorces upon
any cause, which they said was granted them by Moses, Mat. 5. and Mat. 19. No,
(says he) it is not I, but you that alter the Law in this: for Mat. 5.32.
Whosoever shall put away his Wife saving for the cause of Fornication, causes
her to commit Adultery; but to this whole charge he gives one general answer,
wherein he shows that they were Innovators; for, says he, Mat. 19.8. What ye
now teach and profess, was not from the beginning: but ye by forsaking the old
good way prescribed, and by following the traditions and expositions taken up
from your latter Rabbis, you ( Mat. 15.3, 6.) have made the commandment of
God of none effect; and thereby, v. 9. you teach for doctrines the
commandments of men: and John 7.19. Moses did give you the (ancient good)
Law, (which you would wrest and force against me) yet none of you keeps the
Law.

A second general pretended charge upon which they proceed to his
condemnation, is expressed, John 11.48. If we let him alone, all men will believe
on him, (and adhere to him against us) and so we may lose our place and Nation;
where we see plainly, that salus Populi, the safety and liberty of the People
is their maine pretended cause: which cause has no other ground or bottom,
but that which themselves created for their own wicked ends, to wit, some
fears and jealousies, that if we let Him alone the Nation will be destroyed:
and hereupon from this charge grounded upon their own disguised and counterfeit
fears, the whole Council gives sentence, it is expedient that he (the one Man)
die for the People. v. 50. To which I may reply as M. W. Sedgwicke one of the
Armies Prophets, in his Justice upon the Army, p. 5. O ye Jews, ye miserably
abuse this Maxim, and the People too, like a company of Deceivers and
Mountebanks, who talk of curing, saving, delivering, while that they do but
waste, spoil, and destroy the People, and therefore all your swelling words
are but as the attire of an Harlot, whereby as you make your selves more
vendible, so you make your selves more abominable.

A third general pretended charge against him, we find, Mark 15.2. He calls
himself King, and he that is so, can be no friend to Caesar, that is, to the
Conqueror: and we ( John 19.) are resolved and profess, that we will have no
other King (hereafter) but the Conqueror Caesar.

Will you now that I sum up the whole charge of these Jews against Ch: the
King?

Why the first part is, That he is a Tyrant, in that he has endeavored to
change and destroy our Laws, thereby robbing us of our liberty; which he
traversed and denied, Mat. 5.19.

The second charge is, He is a Traitor and an Enemy to the State: for, Luke
the 23.2. he perverteth the Nation, and that two ways, 1. By forbidding
tribute and power of Governing to the Conqueror. 2. By calling himself their
King.

The third charge is, that his course tends to the destruction and murder of
the People which is implied in those words, Joh. 11. We must not let him live,
but kill him lest the Nation perish.

Pardon, I pray, this one short digression, while I become a Rehearser of what
the Armies Remembrancer has borrowed from Master Sedgwicke, (whom he calls the
Armies justice) These men are (...), Devils, exquisite Accusers; and such
wicked Spirits are now abroad, like those, Ezekiel. 21.32. brutish men, skillful
to destroy: Brutish, not sparing the holiest nor honourablest things, Kings,
Lords, Ministers, Scripture, Ordinances, Oaths, they lay all wast; and yet in
the greatest bruitishnesse. And yet though there be the most sensual and
beastly confusion, yet they will do it artificially, skilfully, saying, all is
for God, justice, Religion; and that they do it by the power of Christ, and
the power of God, in Religion: And see (says he) how old studied Professors
of Religion, when once their consciences are defiled, and they begin to trade
in the world with a pretense that it is for God, they are so cunning that no
bonds of honesty or faith can hold them; and there can be no such complete and
very Knaves as a Jesuit and a Pharisee: and how close these words come home to
these Layers of this charge, judge ye; for, they who are the only Breakers of
the Law accuse Him for destroying the Law, and thereupon his charge is to be a
Tyrant; they have perverted the Nation, and slaughtered the People, whereby
they incur the name and guilt of Traitors and Murderers, Matthew. 22. and Luke
7.52. and yet they charge him to be the Traitor, Enemy to the State, and
Murderer: but let this be remembered what there falls from them, John 11.50. He
must die for the People, that is, for our Laws and Liberties; and so is become
by his death your Martyr, your Sacrifice, and your Savior.

Hitherto you have heard the Jews feigned, false, unjust charge against Ch:
the King, with a short vindication of him, and a recrimination to them; which
that it may more plainly appear, be content (I pray) with a little more
pleasing patience to be rightly informed what the real true causes were, which
moved these accursed Jews to so horrid an act as to kill Ch: the King: And the
general leading cause is in one word, that they are Hypocrites, a Generation
of Vipers, Sons of Belial, Children (indeed) of the Devil: for, so Ch: told
them, John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil; he was a Murderer from the
beginning, and the lusts and the works of your Father ye will do: and
therefore from such a viperous generation and Devilish brood, what can be
expected less then murder?

And from this source, see another cause bubling, as it were; for, when they
perceived and found that he spoke as never man did, John 7.46. 2ly, That he did
all things well, Mark 7.37. yea, wonderfully well, John 11.45. and that by
these means the People loved, believed, and adhered to him, John 11.48. which
they by no means would have had the People perceived or done: these rare
endowments and virtues, like the glorious rays of the Sun upon putrified
matter, work and beget the poisonous Brats of envy, hatred, and malice; and
thereupon and therefore, as it is, Mat. 27.18. Mark 15.10. for envy they
delivered (or betrayed) him to death.

A third real cause, that although they knew by experience that Ch: the King
in his life was so tender and meek, that he studied the saving of all that
would not wilfully perish; and so patient and merciful at his death, that he
forgave and prayed even for his Murderers: yet the guilt of their hate, malice,
and murder, against him was of so deep a stain, that they could not, that they
would not believe either; and therefore as their elder Brother Cain, they
crying out, Our sins are greater than he can forgive us: can find no other way
to save or secure themselves but by his death: and this is a real maine cause
why these bloody Jews did kill Ch: the King.

A fourth real cause may be conceived, that he was their King not by their
election and free will, but by the Title of an Heir: for, so Mat. 21. before
they resolved to kill him, they premised, this is the Heir; so that though his
other graces and virtues might have preserved him as a Man, yet this alone
shall destroy him for being their natural, rightful born King; for, such
Jews will never serve and obey any but either a Conqueror who holds them to
it by dint of Sword, or some tame Creature who will serve their turns, and
obey their wills.

But the fifth cause comes nearer home to the root of all, and that is expressed,
John 11.48. If we let him alone, suffer him to live, and not kill him; some
Foreigners, (Romans) will come and take away our place: we have now a
toleration for our Religion, any Sect is free in Gods service and worship, to
choose and profess what he will; be he Pharisee, Sadducee, or other: and we
have yet an Anarchy, no Government but that of the Conqueror, who so long as
we honor, humor, and feed him and his, leaves us to wallow in all sins as
we lust: whereas if this Ch: the Anointed live, and get the power; be we
Scribe, Pharisee, Presbyter, yea the whole Council, he will not suffer or
endure this, but will take away our places, our usurpt power and authorities:
and therefore in the next verse. 49. Ye know nothing at all: and ver. 50. nor
do ye consider that it is expedient he (the one man) idie: their fear of
loss is the first immediate real cause of their killing Ch: the King.

The second and last immediate fundamental cause of his death, is, their desire
and hope to get and hold all the Power and Authority which is the Kings: and so
we find it, Mat. 21.8. This is the Heir, let us kill him, and let us seize on
his inheritance. Saint Luke has it, that the inheritance (fiat) may become
ours: which S. Mark expresses by erit, and then certainly it shall and will
be ours; none when he is dead can keep us from it, so long as we hold in (which
we will always do) with Caesar the Conqueror: and now believe this to be as
true as Gospel it self is, that pretend the Jews change of Religion,
destruction of Laws, loss of Liberty, or what else to be the cause of killing
the King; all are but forged, feigned, and held out to deceive the people, and
blind the world: for this (habebimus) is the cause, when all is done; We will
kill Ch: the King, and so seize on his inheritance.

For, this [habebimus] we will have, is the largest Commander, and the greatest
Sinner in the world; the intention, plot, and action of every man's ends in
having his pleasure, his profit, and his will is the Devils first seed-plot;
and is the commotion or confusion of all: for what is the Rulers study? but to
have his power enlarged: what the Inferiors plea? but to hold or increase his
liberty: whereas could any General Council determine and make it durable what
every man should have, all would soon be at peace; whereas so long as this one
Verb (we will have) reigns in the Superior, and rages in the Inferior, say
what we will, we can expect no better then, Kill, kill, that we may have.

And as by inheritance in this Gospel, Mat. 21. was primarily and principally
meant the inheritance of the Vineyard: which Vineyard, Isa. 5. and Cant. 2. is
expounded to be the Church: so having the Church inheritance first brought the
doctrine of killing into the Church, quid vultis dare? is the Jews question in
this case; and omnia haec, is the Devils answer: and such a dialogue betwixt
the Devil, and a Jew, for the Church inheritance, is enough to bring Ch: the
King to his death, that the Jew by the Devils help may have the inheritance of
the Church: which rather then Ch: the King would surrender up unto them, it
being his rightful inheritance, and committed to his trust by God himself, he
would rather suffer this ignominious death; and for this he deserves to be
everlastingly Chronicled as the Churches nursing Father, Patron, Protector, and
Martyr, in that he was killed in defense of the Church.

But these Jews and Conquerours betwixt them (even while they speak this, let
us kill that we may have) have that inheritance in their power and possession
already: what need they then kill the King that they may have, what they have?
but having oftentimes (as here now) begets more then a bare having: and
therefore the Greek word in S. Matthew. c. 21. is (...), which is, that we may
hold it, as we have got it by force, the Sword and blood: for sin, and this
sin especially of forcible entrance will not easily be led out of its old
track; the Whore in the Apoc. c. 17. having tasted and delighted her self with
blood, will not cease from swilling more till she be drunk with the blood, and
that blood not of the coursest or most common, but the purest, the holiest, the
blood the Saints in the Church: unjust Purchasers (be it of Christ's
inheritance) never think of restitution, but retention: how to hold it as they
got it, by the sword, by blood, yea by the blood of the rightful Heir Ch: the
King.

So much the word in the original will easily bear, without much force, and
(I conceive) somewhat more; that is, Let us kill him, that we may have and hold
more then what we yet have, or more then ever he had; let us never leave
killing till we have all: as much as our eyes can see, or our hearts desire;
for, ambition and usurpation are violent and greedy, which, like the Daughters
of the Horse-leech, are still gaping and crying, Give, give, and more, more,
yea of blood; and never think themselves full till they break with fullness of
blood.

I shall end this point with this one short observation, Ch: the King (like a
Monarch) whose institution was from Heaven, heavenly, held his inheritance,
Church and all, in one single Person; but these Husbandmen (the Jews) liked
not this, though they thrived best under it; but they will have it among
themselves: no more Monarchy by a King, and Princes of the People; but a pure
Democracy, though that the worst, and the basest of all Governments; it is like
the Acephali, which have faces of men in their breasts, but without an head;
such a Monster it is; and yet this for the present pleases us, and therefore
we will kill him the only true Heir and rightful King, that we (the people)
may have the inheritance; but I must and cannot but tell these men, that (...),
is more ancient then these Jews; and the Scepter in the hand of one is more
steady and upright, then in the hands of many; and as we find one soul to
govern one body, and when it leaves to be one, the body is dissolved: so we
may observe that the greatest Empires that ever were, grew great by Monarchy;
which soon crumbled away when shared among the many: in Gods name let all that
love peace and unity, cry, (...), let us have one King; and away with
(habebimus) we the many will have the inheritance and govern: for, as killing
got you this, so the keeping of it must continue and hold in killing.

And this is the last bloody act presented by the Jews in this Tragedy, that
they kill him, him Ch: the King: what? but a word and a blow? no not so, S.
Luke 20.14. says, before they did this, (...), they took it into serious
consideration and reasoned or argued the case, and upon the debate their first
Resolve is, as Luke 19.14. nolumus hunc regnare, we will have no more addresses
to him as to King; or we will have no more King. And upon this a second Resolve
follows, as is expressed, John 11.50. Expedit, it is expedient that one (that
one, the King) should die: and yet though from the first they plotted this, if
he yielded not up his inheritance (as is evident through the whole context of
the story) yet John 7.20. they deny it, that they have any such intention; for
then the people would not have joined with them: and therefore they give out,
as Luke 20.19. that he must be brought to the Great Council: but we know, ab
Inferis nulla redemptio, from that lower House, or their hellish Council,
there is no redemption.

Object. But Caiphas our Chieftaine has a Revelation from heaven to do this.

To this the Armies Prophet M. Will: Sedgwicke shall Answer, saying, p. 4. When
we tell them of the Laws of God and Man; they fly to an extraordinary call,
as Phinehas; and thus they halt betwixt two opinions, being neither true to God
or Man, but are like the Beasts in the Revelation, whose heads are crowned with
the most glorious Titles, of the presence of God, the people of God, the cause
of God; while their hearts are absurd, cruel, beastly, monstrous. I have
before spoken of the several Actors, and therefore shall add but little, more
then one Question; and a short Answer thereunto: For, it being so, that the
Nation is said, John 18.35. to deliver or betray him; and in this Nation of
every place, Sect, or condition of men; the most had some way or other acted
first or last to the taking the King. The Question will be, Whether all these
were Traitors, as guilty of his death, though in this last act they had no
hand in killing him? For resolution whereof I must remember you with a general
received Maxim in our Law, Quicquid movet ad mortem, what ever though un
inanimate thing, as a Cart, much more the Beast, but undeniably the man, that
moves or acts that which led to, or drew on the death of any man; is guilty of
his death. 2. But if you shall add to this, that in the act of Treason not
only they who directly kill the King, or who were privy or assenting
thereunto; but all who any way did assent, assist, or contribute to the unjust
taking him, whereby and whereupon his life was taken away; are all guilty of
Treason, and of his death, then the Question is resolved affirmatively.

Which, and much more you will find proved by Gods censure and judgment to be
just in this very act; for Mat. 21.41. Christ says, the Lord will miserably
destroy those Husbandmen, and for what? was it for killing the Heir the King?
for that was yet but in consultation; but say that it was for that conspiracy
and as acted, yet it was not only for that, but for that they consulted and
acted how to take away his inheritance: which unjust end or design of theirs,
drew on this unlawful act to kill him; and therefore not only they who killed
him, but who plotted the taking away of his inheritance (whereupon his death
followed) were punished as Traitors and Murderers; for, so it is, verse. 41.
(...), the Lord will (as it after came to pass) destroy ((...)) them, that is,
those who not only killed him, but who consulted to rob him of his just rights
and inheritance; yea more, those who beat and wounded his Servants sent to
require and defend his right, those also the Lord in justice will miserably
destroy; for in that they were, as they are called, Acts 7.52. Traitors and
Murderers.

I could, and I think I should add one note more, that not only these who
any way from first to last contributed in any kind, were guilty of this
barbarous murder; but they who had power and means and used them not, in the
defense of the Heir, and resistance to this bloody act, were no less (though
not in so high a degree) Traitors and Murderers. Our general axiom, Qui non
vetat quum potest, will bear out that position, And I pray consider, whether
Christ's own words, John 18.36. will not (without any great straining) imply
thus much, where he said, If my Kingdom were of this world, my Servants (and
Subjects) would (that is) they would as of right bound, and should, they would
fight for, and defend me from death; which if they do not, in suffering me to
be killed when they might and should have resisted and defended, they have
killed me.

And I desire all those who so often and with such vehemence have squeezed that
Text to blood, Jud. 5.23. to consider, whether Gods word there may not have its
due weight, to the maintenance of this position, where it is said, Curse ye
Meroz, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the
help of the Lord against the mighty.

It has been a long and a great dispute, whether Antichrist be come? and who
it is? and if I be not much mistaken, this and some other Texts in the Gospel
will easily and plainly resolve this Question; for where it is said they,
Apostates, Pharisees, Sadduces, etc. they the man of sin, the Nation of the
Jews, they oppose themselves against Christ, they sit in the Temple, and set
themselves above all, deposing and murdering Kings, are not these the first
great Antichrist, who make themselves, what Christ alone is, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords? Apoc. 19.16. Qui Christi sunt crucifixerunt carnem, the Tyrant
flesh, Gal. 5.24. qui Antichristi Regem, the Anointed of the Lord: so that by
this Text you have one step to the discovery of Antichrist. But enough of these
and too much, unless they were better; and yet from such wicked persons,
Actors. I must now (according to the Text) sead you on to that most damnable
act of theirs the murdering their King.

But in aftertimes the Devil (grown wiser) has furnished his Scholars
Regicides, with Arguments to prove the killing of Kings; which neither the
Jews, nor any Religions, ever found out, save only some corrupted Christians:

1. And the ground of their first Argument is taken from 1 Pet. 2.13. (for the
Devil is as good a Scripturist as these Saints, and as good an Interpreter, and
both alike) where the Apostle says, that the Kingly Office, is, (...), and
therefore though the King be singulis major, and though par in parem non habet
potestatem; yet the people, the creator and maker of the King (as it appears he
is, by the Text) has power to destroy his own creature if he fail in the end
of his creation.

Answ. Saint Peter writing here to the Jews, who held their Royal Government,
(...), to be divine and immediate from God and to stand in force without the
election or ordination of man might call, the Heathen dominion, (...), an
humane ordinance or creature, for so creature sometimes notes what is
heathenish, or not heavenly: and if so, then the Argument of the Apostle holds
the more strong for Ch: and all Christian Kings; being the Apostle commands the
subjection, not resistance; the obedience, not murdering of such humane
creatures, as Heathenish Kings.

2. In some part, and in some degrees the jurisdiction of the best Kings for
extent may be humane, of man; but that concludes not that the power of managing
the Sword is simply humane and not divine; for as Saint Paul and Saint Peter
spoke, by and from the Spirit, (infallible truth) so Saint Paul expressly
professes, Romans 13. that this power of the Sword is in the King; the Supreme,
as Saint Peter here styles him, and that to be not from man, humane; but from
God, divine.

3. Were the Kingly Office an humane creature, yet the person or manhood of the
King is not such, his person or manhood is Gods creature; so that from this
Text taken in their own sense, the most that can be enforced were, that they
might in some cases dethrone whom they had exalted; but kill him, the person,
the man they cannot, they may not; for this God made, and not they.

Object. But nature and reason teach us to defend our selves, and to kill what
would destroy us, rather then to be killed.

Resp. 2 Cor. 20. the wisdom and reason of worldly men is foolishness with
God: and the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Secondly, although nature and reason, in the general, dictates so much unto
us, yet nature and reason have laid some restraints upon this Maxim, in
respect of Persons; for, suppose the head of a man intoxicated or distracted,
should endeavor the hanging or drowning the body; might the body (to preserve
it self) destroy this head? and the King, in respect of his Subjects, has the
like relation; and therefore is so called both in Gods and our Laws, the Head
of the People.

Thirdly, but can there be a better Expounder of the Law of nature or reason
then God himself in this case? which if you grant, then (I pray) go through
the whole Book of God both in the Old and New Testament, and tell me, if God
has not every where enjoined subjection, and forbad even resistance against
the worst Kings?

2. Whether throughout the Bible those that were led by Gods Spirit did not
follow this rule strictly, as David to Saul, etc?

3. Tell me whether you find the least print of any precept or counsel given
to any Subject to put their King to death?

4. Whether ever any Subjects mentioned in all Gods Book, ever pleaded any Text
or good example in warranty or excuse of such an act?

5. Whether (for the most part) all Offenders in this kind have not, throughout
Gods Book and Law, received condign punishment from heaven, or earth, or
both? and if all this holds true and good, I cannot but wonder, that men that
Scriptures, should forsake Scriptures, and betake themselves to reason and
nature; when as still it cannot be denied that the Scripture of God is the best
Expositor of nature and reason.

Object. But vox Populi, vox Dei, what all the People say, may be interpreted
to be as the voice of God.

2. Hear Pilat as well as diverse Texts in the Gospels, thy Nation, John 18.35.
which may be expounded the people of the Jews in general, they have delivered
thee unto me.

Resp. Had this been really and absolutely true, that all the Jews had
delivered Christ to death, yet it could not have justified the act any more
then the number of Sinners can make a sin just and lawful.

2. Though in this case of Ch: it be said, the People or Nation; yet no more
could rightly and strictly be thereby understood, than that those who were then
present, or who conspired and delivered him to be slain; and this was not all
the people of the Jews; it is therefore too unjustly and too figuratively
charged upon all, when it is done but by a few of them all.

Object. But you will say, it was done by the Council, the Representative of all.

Resp. This Council by money, corruption, and usurpation had a great deal
enlarged their power.

2. But had their power or privilege been greater, it could neither make good,
evil; nor evil, good.

3. But to the point, if you consider what Ch: the King had done for the
people, and how the people loved him; you will easily collect from several
passages in the Gospels, that the voice of the people was not for killing him.

And if you will yet press, that the voice of the People of God was for it,
and that is as the voice of God.

I must answer, that if all be such as call themselves so, then the
Conspirators, Numb. 16. and then these Jews that acted against the Lords
Anointed, were the people of God: for these so styled themselves the holy; yea
Numb. 16.3. the word [Holy] may be rendered [Saints.] And these are they who
shall put him to death.

They shall put him to death: which Translation (by the leave of the learned
and judicious) I would gladly change, and for this [they shall] I would read
[they will] in stead of [put to death] I would render it, they will kill and
murder him: for although, for the most part, future tenses are rendered
indifferently by shall, or will; yet here to take away all shadow or plea from
the malice of the act, by laying it on the determinate counsel of God, as Acts
4.28. I would read not [they shall] but [they will.]

2. Not [put to death] but kill, or slay; for a lawful Judge may put to death
a Malefactor, without stain or guilt of sin; but if the Party executed were
innocent, and the Judge not vested with just authority, the man is truly and
rightly said to be murdered.

And indeed, I know not upon what cause or slip the same word, (...), here, is
Englished by (put to death) and in other Texts, as Mat. 21.39. by slay, John
5.16. and John 8.44. by Murder. And all other Scriptures that speak of Christ's
death, in relation to the Actors, render it by kill, slay, or murder.

But if any ask the Question why not imprison or secure his Person, as to Jo:
Baptist: or banish him, as to John the Apostle?

I must answer, 1. that generally when Tyrants and Usurpers of rule begin, they
scarce ever end but (as here) in killing: for, usurpation and unjust possession
never think their title well sealed, but in blood: so it was in the case of
Naboth.

2. The desire of having, begets as great a fear to lose, as it wrought care
to get, and both put together, make having and holding bloody Purchasers and
Possessors: and therefore being there may be a rescue, an escape, or reprisall
from prison, and a recall or return from exile; but none from death;
therefore, Usurpers and unjust Possessors for the most part (I mean, in cases
of Supreme power) confirm this title by killing.

But this (some may object) cannot be so truly spoken of this sentence here,
for he had, as we say, a fair Trial.

1. His Charge. 2. Witnesses. And 3. a lawful Judge.
To answer all which, I pray consider that (whatever they pretended) truly and
really his Charge and Accusation was, that he was King of the Jews; and so it
is expressed, Matthew. 26.60. and Mark 14.57. And when the Jews desired Pilat
to alter the Inscription; and to add not that he is, but that he said, he was
King of the Jews: No, says Pilat, What I have written, I have written: and
that is true, and so his accusation was, which (sure) can be no sufficient
charge to kill him for being their King.

2. Then for the Witnesses, it is recorded, Mark 14.46. that such as they were
did not agree, but it is more probable that they did not need, or did not make
much use of Witnesses; for when he was first condemned by the Jewish Council,
the Judge and Commissioners being resolved to condemn him without Witnesses,
said among themselves, Mat. 29.65. What need have we of Witnesses? and they
never ask, what says our Law in this case? but, verse. 66. What think ye? and
then presently, without more ado in the same ver. and as Mark 14.64. they all
of them, nemine contradicente, did as they had from the first conspired; they
all did vote him guilty of death. And in one word to prove the illegality of
the Jews proceedings in all, two Evangelists, Mat. 26.4. Mark 14.1.
faithfully record, that by subtilty, so S. Matthew. by craft; so S. Mark, they
sought to kill him; and it could not be otherwise done by them: for, although
to deceive the world, they gave it out, that they had a Law by which he might
be tried, yea put to death, John 19.7. yet never did they, or could they cite
or produce any such Law; but contrarily to the witnessing a known truth, and
their own greater condemnation, they themselves confessed, John 18.31. (...),
it is not lawful, or we have no law, or lawful authority to put any to death:
Authority they had left unto them in some cases according to Moses his Law to
put some Malefactors to death, but in this case they confessed they had none; and
yet they will by craft and subtilty condemn and kill him; and this was all the
Trial that the Jews did, or could pretend unto, or did use on their parts in
the condemnation of Ch: their King.

The Jews themselves then having neither Law, nor lawful Authority, for their
condemning and killing Ch: their King; there remains only to examine how
lawfully it was done by Pilat? where first it cannot be denied but that the
Romans being the Conquerours of the Jews, and that Pilat being their
Governor, he had power to judge in capital cases according to law. Christ
himself confessed thus much to Pilat, who asking Christ, John 19.10. Know
thou not that I have power to crucify, or put thee to death? to this Christ,
v. 11. by a tacit confession, answered, thou could have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above; and yet this power is to be
understood, given from above by permission, and not by commission; the Jews
themselves had primitively authority from above by commission granted to them
from God himself by Moses; whereas all the power that Pilat now had over the
Jews, came in only by the Sword; and so far and no farther was he, or could
he be a lawful Judge over them.

But as he came to be a Judge by the Sword, so (I am sure, and all the world
must confess) to his just condemnation, that be was a most unjust Judge in
giving sentence against Ch: the King: for, whereas by the Laws of the Romans
(the Conquerours) none were to die except according to their Laws he were
proved guilty of the thing charged against him; yet he sentenceth him at the
same time when he could not but openly profess that he could find no fault in
him worthy of death, as John 18.38. And yet if it be demanded, why then he
would sentence him against law, his conscience, and all common justice? the
Gospels give the reason, where Saint Mark says, chapter 15. v. 15. he did it to
content the people, and Luke 22.24. he did it as it was required by them that
set him on the work: you may remember that Pilat counseled the Jews, John
18.31. to judge Ch: the King according to their law. this was honest and just
counsel; would he had followed it himself: but I perceive now he is made the
Judge, he forgets his own counsel and law, most unjustly and damnably
condemns the just One, Acts 3.1. and all to content them, who made him Judge
in this case, and to do for them as they before had required.

But some happily will tell me, in all this there was nothing but a lowly
submission to Providence; nay further, to the determinate counsel of God; for
so it was in this special case, as it is expressed by Saint Peter, Act. 4.27,
28. Pilat and the people of Israel did whatsoever the hand and counsel of God
had determined before to be done: But I must desire such to consider, (1) that
it was done by Gods counsel, and therefore that was secret, and not known to
them: and therefore could not be pleaded for, or by them, (2) though the Text
says, God had determined it to be done, yet it says not (at least not
explicitly) that it was determined to be done by them; and therefore if the
counsel had been revealed to them, yet this could not plead their indemnity,
unless it had been made known, that they should have been the Actors; (3)
though Gods counsel and determination were most just, yet they most unjust in
doing all without lawful and sufficient Authority: (4) had they known Gods
mind, and that his mind had been, that they should have been the Actors, yet
Gods end being in all this, salus Populi, the salvation of all People; and
their end, ambition, malice, rapine; Gods providence and counsel cannot at all
justify them, but their own deeds and consciences (if they have any) must,
and will condemn them.

And the speedy execution after the sentence, cannot but aggravate the
heinousness of the fact; for, it is said, Psalm. 14.6. (and some think
prophetically of this) Their feet were swift to shed blood; for, all was ended
in few days, and as mostly all bloody acts are speedy (for, who thirsts for
blood, as others for drink, are never at rest till they have it) so by the
speediness of so bloody an execution, you may judge of the unnatural thirst
and unsatiable desire they had to his blood.

But they having this in design before, and having for some years been
working to this end, it may be mervailed, why before this, they had not
executed their intention: or why they deferred it so long, seeing delay might
have frustrated all their plots and endeavors: and to this you must know, that
in their putting the execution off to this time, there was neither wit wanting,
nor will on their parts to have done it sooner: for, the People loved him, and
Luke 22.2. they feared the People: but more especially you must consider, that
it could not be so safely and cunningly done, until upon such occasion as then
they took, when all of them were drawn up to Jerusalem the great City.
Lastly, till then there were some Factions and oppositions betwixt Pilat the
Governor or chief Commander for the Roman Conqueror, and betwixt Herod the
chief Ruler of the Jews; and till this were either composed, or deaded, it
had not been safe to have put this design in execution; whereas now this being
done, this becomes their time for doing that, which long before they had
designed, studied, and labored to bring it to pass.

And this general time being come, it also seemed good to the Holy Ghost to
specify the more especial time, when this execution was, namely, on the Eve
to the Feast, (or Holy Day) and on that day for two reasons: The one expressed,
John 18.28. lest they should be defiled. O hellish Saints! they fear not the
shedding innocent blood, and that of the Lords Anointed; but they fear to do
it on their Holy Day: 2. Not on the Feast, for this being a day put apart for
an holy meeting, and all at liberty to go abroad, under color (at least) of
going to the Temple; there might on that have happened some resistance; and so St
Matthew has expressed it, Mat. 26.5. Not on the Feast Day, lest there be an
uproare among the People; whom they feared, and that because they now loved Ch:
the King.

And the Evangelists have not omitted to record to Posterity the most special
time of the day, as well as of the day it self; and that time says one, Mark
15.25. was the third hour; which Saint Luke, and Saint John say, was about the
sixth hour; and yet Saint Mark 15.34. says, that at the ninth hour he gave
up the Ghost: which some thus reconcile, that the time appointed, or the time
when they began to prepare for the execution was the third hour (at our ninth
in the morning) but the execution it self began about the sixth (which is about
the time of our high noone) and that all was finished, and that Chr: expired
about the ninth hour (that is our three in the afternoon.)

I had almost forgot to tell you an especial piece of observation which to the
Holy Ghost seemed good to be recorded, that Ch: being basely, falsely, and
illegally accused, and charged; yet he answered not to their charge: for so
Mark 14.60, 61.

And if I be asked the reason why he answered not, it standing him upon in
defense of his innocence, and life? 1. I must confess I cannot answer, where
the Scripture is silent and answers not. 2. There was in this that secret will,
counsel, and providence of God, which (being not revealed to me) I may not
with reverence or modesty pry into. 3. His answering might have administered
occasion to their further lying, and subordination of false Witnesses. 4.
Though true it were that at that time the Sword had got a power, yet that he
held not that power sufficiently lawful in his case and person to examine,
try, and condemn him, and therefore he answered not.

But being S. Mat. 26.63. says, he held his peace; and S. Luke, from the
Prophet, Isaiah 53. and Acts 8.32. say, that as a Lamb before the Shearer
dumb, so opened he not his mouth; may we thence conclude that he said nothing
at all?

Resp. No, for 1. speak he did and answer, the Gospels are express in the
affirmative: but, 2. in that he was said to hold his peace and to be silent, it
was in relation to the false charge and illegal authority, and to these he
opened not his mouth, but was silent: 3. He spoke nothing, in Saint Hieron:
exposition, that is, nihil durum, nihil asperum, nothing which might justly
provoke the Jews, or offend the Hearers; so he spoke nothing, 4. in that they
would not hear him what he would have said for himself, it may be said, and
not improperly, that he did not, or would not answer.

And that they would not hear him was utterly contrary to all laws of heaven
and earth. Chr: himself, at the last general judgment, will admit it to
known, notorious self-condemning Sinners: and among the Jews, Nicodemus, John
7.51. and for the Romans, Festus, Acts 25.16, professed, that neither People, nor
Law condemned any before they suffered and heard him to speak for himself;
yet such, as this, was the justice showed here to Ch: the King.

And, what then? died he as he was at the Bar, silent, not speaking for
himself, or others? quite contrary; and therefore now, I beseech you, lift up
your hearts, and open your ears, and hear O earth what the Anointed of the
Lord says before his departure from the earth, and his ascent to heaven; and,
a little before his death and departure, he spoke to God his Father for
himself, as Luke 23.46. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit; and yet a
little before that, he pardoned and prayed for his Enemies and Murderers, when
he said, Luke 23.24. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do:
some know not what they do, being simply ignorant, and seduced; others are
wilfully blind: so that the one knows not what he does for the present, he is
ignorant of the wickedness of the act, the other knows not what he does for
the consequent, he knows not what will be the punishment of the fact: yet
Father, says this Lamb, even while they are about to slaughter him, Father,
forgive them: and whatever he spoke after this was no worse then what Saint
John has recorded, John 20.19, 21. Peace be unto you: and would any but Devils
take this Ch: this King, thus dying, to be a Wolf? or will not any upright
Christian say, he was a Lamb, and deserved to live as a Shepherd and a Ruler of
the flock?

After the prayer and blessing of Ch: the King, there is little more to be
noted from the Gospels, then what the Attendants were at his death, and what
his burial was: And to the first, know, that some were present who betrayed
him; such hearts, such foreheads these monsters of men had. 2. A Guard of
Soldiers, and this but necessary to keep Ch: the King from rescue, and the
Traitors from the rage of the People. 3. There were Women, and these, as by
Sex (and as Mothers of Children) the most tenderhearted: so of these (among
his Wel-wishers) were the most. 4. Of all his Apostles and Disciples I find but
one, who John 19.26. was the Disciple whom he loved. 5. This most glorious King
had no Funeral Sermon at his Burial; that would not be permitted by his
malicious Persecutors, who held any Enlogie of him, an Obloquie to them; and
yet one of his Apostles, Acts 4. preached one to the Jews; which was after
enlarged by the Evangelists; and since commended to all Ages, as an everlasting
stain to their bloody murder, and an everlasting Trophee to his never-dying
name. 6. I cannot omit, what I may justly conceive is recorded as an
extraordinary mercy of God, that among all the Soldiers who in the last acts of
the condemnation and execution of Ch: were the chief Rulers and Commanders,
yet one even among them was Ch: his Convert; for, one was so enlightened by the
true Spirit of God, that Mat. 27.54. he, with others, said, truly this was the
Son of God.

Which certainly was sent by inspiration, and revealed from heaven, to be
engraven as an everlasting Epitaph, which God did sooner, in his providence,
furnish him with then with a Tomb; which now, when all things else were
finished, was only wanting; and so still might have been, for these wretched,
covetous, accursed Jews, had he not been beholden to an honorable
Counselor, Mat. 27.57. who found him out one; of which Sepulcher, though S.
Mat. chapter 27.60. names the owner, yet S. Mark 15.46. and S. Luke 23.53. say, he
was laid in a Sepulcher, without naming whose it was.

But methinks these Jews, who pretended so much to Scripture, and themselves
to be such holy Saints, should (in such a case) have set before their eyes the
demeanor of that Saint indeed, David, and his demeanor toward Saul the King;
which King, though he were rejected by God, and that David by Gods appointment
was Anointed King in his stead; yet when Saul was put into David's hands, and
that David's Servants persuaded him to do justice upon him, 1 Samuel 24. David
stayed his Servants, and would not let them rise against Saul. Nay, further,
though Saul did daily pursue David to take away his life, 1 Samuel 26. and
Abishai told David, that God had delivered [SAUL] his Enemy into his hands, and
therefore desired that he might smite him: No, says David, for who can stretch
forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? verse. 10. Nay,
David goes further, verse. 11. the Lord shall smite him; but, God forbid, that I
should stretch forth my hand against the Lords Anointed.

But may we not wonder that these Jews given much to read the Scriptures would
never consider what holy Job had said, in chapter 34.18. Is it fit to say to a
King, thou art wicked? or that Ps. 105 Touch not mine Anointed; or that Eccles.
8.4. Who may say unto the King, what do thou? or that they should not
consider what severe judgments God showed upon those who rose up against Moses
their Ruler, Numb. 16. or against Jehu (in his posterity) Hos. 1.4. for
destroying King Ahab and his Family; and against the men, 2 Kings 21. who slew
Amon their King: I say it may be wondered that they had not remembered or cast
their eyes, at some time or other, upon these or the like Scriptures.

No, God has so blinded them that they either could not, or would not see any
Old light; but, instead of all such, they are now altogether for New lights:
and therefore welfare that, which never failed such Jews. Revelation forsooth,
and this shall do the feate for all; for, Caiaphas their chief Ruler, by the
Spirit in an abominable measure poured out upon him, sees that with a pair of
Spectacles set upon his fiery shining Nose, that none else could discern, viz:
John 18.14 Expedit, it is expedient (says he) that one (and therefore this one
Ch: the King must be he, who) must die for the People: and this expedient thus
delivered to the Guild, or Fraternity of Spirited Men, makes them as
extatically mad, cry out, as it were with one voice, Crucify, kill, and
murder him.

And yet, after this expedient thus declared. I would they had listened to
Pilat, who, though an Heathen and a corrupt Judge; yet hearing them so fiercely
crying out to crucify their King, astonished (as it were) at such an
unheard of execrable voice, asks, what? is it possible that you would I should
crucify your King? as if he had said, O ye Jews! do ye believe or
acknowledge a God? or nature? or reason? or have you any Law? or Religion? and
will ye contrary to all these put your King to death? why your God, your
Religion, your Law, your own reason; yea, and all People, be they never so
heathenish, will condemn you for this, but in despite, as it were, of all
reason, Law, Religion, nature, or God himself they will kill him their King.

And yet Pilat will not leave them so; therefore, as hoping to bring them to
hear some reason, and to be moved to some compassion, he brings Ch: forth unto
them, and bespeaks them thus, Ecce homo, John 19.5. behold, he is a man
destitute of help, shamefully and unjustly used, man has bowels; O ye Jews,
therefore for humanity sake, pity him as a man: Again, when he asks, Shall I
crucify your King? John 19.15. he sets him now before them as a King, and from
hence seems to reason thus, You hold, in your Religion, that your God ordaines
Kings; for Gods sake therefore behold and pity him as a King. Nay, yet more, he
is your King: yours diverse ways; by descent of the line of K. David; yours
for you, and your good; for, he lived, and dies in defense of your Laws; for
your own sake therefore, if not for Gods, or humanity, pity him as your King:
but that, which might have moved Devils, for they rage not against their own
Prince be he never so great a Devil, yet prevails not with these who are worse
then Devils; and therefore by how much the more his virtue and goodness plead
for him, by so much the more they are incensed against Him; so that nothing
will satisfy these ravenous Beasts but his blood, and therefore they will kill
him.

Once more, give me leave to plead for him the King from his own words and
passes: they cry out to the Judge fiercely against him, Crucify, crucify
him, Mat. 27. and he cries more heartily to God his Father for them, Pater
ignosce, Father forgive them, Luke 23.24. they cursed themselves with his
blood, saying. Sanguis ejus super nos, His blood be upon us and our posterity,
Mat. 27.25. he blessed them with the same blood, saying sanguis meus propter
vos, behold my blood that is shed for you, and all my people, Luke 22.20. never
King showed more tender love and regard to Subjects, yet never did Subjects
return worse respect or requital to their King: the Ancestors of these Jews
said to their King, 2 Samuel 5.1. we are caro tua, thy own flesh; and no man,
faith Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5.30. I say none but a mad man, or a Jew has this
hated his own flesh.

But when this King perceived and saw that all their drift was to get his
inhoritance 3. had it not been better for him, and his people, to have parted
with that than thus to lose his life? no, this King inspered from above knew
well what he did, when he thus suffered; for, in it he has proved and declared
him self to be a King, a just King, a magnanithous King, a religious King, and
a right good Shepherd, who lays down his life for his Flock. and will not
destroy them by saving his own life; and therefore he resolves, rather then I
will betray the rights of the Crown, the Laws, and Liberties of the People,
let them kill me.

And so being cometo this, a cannot but remember a sweet meditation that Saint
Bernard used upon the words of Saint Peter, when Chr: would wash his feet; the
Apostle in an awful reverence breaks out, O Master, Tu mihi pedes! thou to
wash my feet! on which the Father descants thus, Quid est Tu? quid est mihi?
quid est pedes? and concludes, cogitanda sunt, non dicenda: give me leave in
imitation to ask, quid est illi? quid est occident? quid est Illum? they the
worst, to kill him the best of men; they the feet; to murder him the head; they
the scumme of the People, to slaughter him the Anointed of the Lord; they the
lowest of Subjects; to butcher him their King: o infandum scelus! cogitanda,
non dicenda, we cannot express the heinousness of the fact, but they are to
be laid up in the closets of our breasts, and we are to remember, and in after
better times to think on all that has been done in order to this killing him
the King.

An Speed.
English Chronicler (in the Life of Henry the 3.) says, They that kill a
Christian King commit a fourfold murder: 1. Homicide, killing a man. 2.
Parricide, killing their publich civil Father. 3. Christicide, killing the
Anointed of the Lo: Ch: 4. Deicide, killing as much as in them is God himself,
being the King is Gods Vicegerent; and of Kings, God himself says, you are
Gods: livor post fata quiescit, was anciently true, that men let dead men rest
in peace; but Devils, Beasts, and such Jews as these degenerate in this from
all mankind, and therefore are not alone content to murder Ch: their King, but
that they will crucify him again when he is dead; and that not only in his
Disciples and Servants, but in his never-dying name, which (like Flies) they
endeavor to corrupt, and to blast; suppress, or destroy all the heavenly
fruits of his divine soul, witness Saint Luke throughout the Acts of the
Apostles, where we find that these miscreant Jews forbade all to preach or
speak, and punished all who durst be so justly holy as to publish any thing
which might redound to his glory, or the good of any who loved or adhered unto
him; yea, if Nicodemus dare but say, as he did, John 8.51. that by their Law
none should be judged before he be heard; which was Ch: the Kings very case:
even for this, Nicodemus is checked as a Malignant, and near to be made a
Delinquent; for, ver. 52. curstly the Jews reply unto Nicodemus, art thou of
Galile? art thou one of the pack? if we find it so look to your self, for all
that adhere to him, [the King] or to the Gospel of peace, first or last, shall
suffer for, or with him. Oh more then devilish Jews! Ye see, and observe the
wonderful wisdom and justice of God, who in this, as in other wicked plots,
turns the point upon the Sinners, and wounds them with their own weapons;
for, nothing did or could advantage the propagation and growth of Ch: the Kings
most glorious name, more then their forcible suppression of it. S. Luke having
finished the Gospel or Chronicle of Ch: the King, says, c. 24. 46. so it
behoved Christ to suffer: and if you ask, why so? 1. Because it was foretold,
Mat. 21. 2. As S. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 11.19. it behoved that the heresies,
rebellions and wickednesses might be made manifest. 3. That for this wicked act
God may let the Jews, as the whole world see, that he had just cause to
destroy them, as it is threatened, Mat. 21.39. And 4. that Ch: the King may rise
again and reign in everlasting glory with his Father in Heaven, as it
follows in the words after my Text.

And now they have made an end of him, I would gladly end here; but these Jews
not ending all in killing him, they make me to follow them, and to observe that
in killing him their purpose is to kill more then him, and herein to imitate
the savage Tartars, who, when their great Cham dies, they cast many of his
nearest friends into the grave after him: and so this issue here of his [the
Kings] blood is not stinched in the blood of him alone. I pray remember his
words, though in a parable, Mat. 21. when he speaking of this act of the Jews,
he says, these Jews will have the inheritance, and their means to have and
hold it, is, by killing the Heir; so that, as long as there is an Heir, the
Jews voice is, as there, Hic Here Is est, This is the Heir, Come, let us him,
that the inheritance may be ours.

And this very thing Ch: the King foresaw and foretold not long before his
death, when he said, Mat. 23.34. Behold! I send unto you Prophets and Wisemen,
and some of them you shall kill, and some ye shall persecute from City to City:
and this Ch: the King spoke not only by a prophetic Spirit, but out of the
consideration of their former actions, for Lazarus the Nobleman, John 12. who
adhered to Ch: him they sought to put to death, even even in Christ's life time;
and therefore now let all his Friends and Followers look to themselves; for,
when they have dug up the root, they will not leave a branch, nor a bough,
not any prop that supported either. Peter being but suspected by a Wench to
have been a Follower of Ch: nay, but to have been in his company, had he not
denied it, he had paid dearly for it, had he escaped his life: and none can
expect better, now they have killed him Ch: the King. S. Basil said of Herod,
(...), His meat was the flesh, and his drink was the blood of men; and as it
is said of the Whore Rev. 17.6. so of such, they are, 1. Unsatiable, therefore
drunk. 2. Unmercifull, for, drunk with blood. 3. Unjust, for with the blood of
Saints, men holy in life, and Martyrs, Witnesses of Gods truth.

It is recorded, Mark 12.8. that these Traitors killed him, and cast him forth
of the Vineyard; whereas had they first ejected and cast him forth by their
Law, their sin had been the less: but first to kill him, and that upon his
own ground, (his own Vineyard) and then after that to cast him out and declare
against him, and his title for ever, thereby to take and hold the inheritance
to themselves; is but to lay the foundation of their Babel in the blood of Gods
Anointed, their lawful, rightful King, and so to strengthen one sin by
another worse; which Gods justice will not suffer long to prosper, lest the
wicked should think God altogether such an one as themselves, Psalm. 50.21. and
therefore the Prophet in the same Psalm subjoynes, but I will reprove thee;
and, in the forementioned Gospel, after that they had killed and cast him
forth, it presently follows in the next words, v. 9. God the Lord of the
Vineyard will come and destroy the unjust bloody Actors, and will give the
Vineyard to others.

And should not this move a Jew to tremble and repent? it had this operation,
by the mercy of God on many of them, as it appears, Acts 2.37. for they
hearing Saint Peter to open their sin, they were pricked in their hearts, and
said, what shall we do? that is, to be saved? to which the Apostle applies a
double counsel: the first, v. 38. repent: and the second, v. 40. save your
selves from (and no longer be seduced, and deluded by) this untoward
Generation, which Christ, Mat. 23.33. calls a Generation of Vipers, which will
eat out the bowels of those who give them their life.

And the execution ended, let me put you in mind how the people were affected
therewith, which is expressed, Luke 23.48. where it is said, and all the people
beholding the things that were done smote their breasts: and now, oh ye people,
having in this sad discourse, or short history beheld what has been done to
the Anointed of the Lord Ch: the King; the least that ye can do, and to this I
must exhort you is, to smite your breasts: and yet as Ch: himself taught, Luke
23.28. Weep not for me, but weep for your selves: so beat not your breasts for
me, but beat them, and repent you of your sins committed against Heaven and
me, which were the cause of my death, and will be your destruction, if in time
you repent not.

And weep not, beat not your breasts for me; for, it is come to pass, as in the
words following the Text it was prophesied, He shall rise again. 2. He shall
ascend, and for an earthly ignominious Crown, he shall receive an Heavenly
glorions one. 3. And throughout the world where the Gospel is preached, and
further this shall be spread, which has been done by the Jews to Ch: the King.

And thus the Tragical Acts being ended on the Sufferers side; the Actors
there are now to be made Sufferers in another Tragedy; for, the Tragedy ends
not in the blood of Him in the Text, Ch: the King; but calls for blood, more
blood, the blood of these Jews: for, if the blood of Abel, which living and
animated could not speak, yet being wickedly shed receives a voice to be heard
as high as Heaven: then much more this blood of Ch: the King, the Text speaks
it, Mat. 21.41. God will miserably destroy them, and will let out his Vineyard
to others.

In this Tragedy there are but two Acts: 1. (...). 2. (...) which is set down,
Mat. 21.40. but in them a destruction threatened, he will destroy: 1.
Personally, them. 2. Nationally, their Vineyard or Church. 3. Both, totally,
not by letting the Vineyard or People out for a time, but by alienating or
giving utterly away them, and it, (...), to others, (that is) Aliens, or
Strangers.

Neither was this long in acting, for Judas the Arch-Traytor, either before, or
soon after the death of his Master, whom he had betrayed, hanged himself; and
so paid himself his own wages; and that without all pity or regard of those
Jews for whose sake he betrayed his Lord; for, they said, what is that to us?
Mat. 7.4. or what care we, Go and be hanged. 2. Pilat the Judge, not long after
the execution of Christ, whom he sentenced, was put out of his place, was
exiled his Country, and killed himself. 3. Caiphas and Herod died through
misery or violence. 4. Many of the Jews, who were alive at that time of
Christ's suffering, lived to see the great City Jerusalem destroyed, 1100000. at
least, of their Country men slaughtered, and all the rest of them either to be
captivated by their Enemies, or to be scattered over the face of the earth, and
to this day to live as Vagabonds, odious to all, and pitied of none. And
lastly, so it came to pass, that as several Factions conspired together to
kill Ch: the King; so it pleased God to blind these Jews at the time of the
Roman Siege, that the one part of them were zealous for the Temple, the Church:
another part, who cared not much for the Church, yet were willing to have a
good peace on reasonable terms: but the third part, who were all for robbing,
spoiling, killing, and therefore regarding neither Church nor State, put all in
such a confusion and combustion, that the Romans became Conquerours more by the
Jews divisions than by their own Arms.

And lastly, whereas these Jews pretended three special causes why they would
put Ch: the King to death: 1. Lest by his life the Romans should invade and
change their Laws. 2. Lest their Nation should perish. 3. Lest the People
should believe and follow him: All these pretended fears, as leading causes to
his death, are by Gods righteous judgment, soon after, brought upon them; for
the conquering Romans did invade and change their Laws. 2. Did destroy City
and Country. 3. And the People far and near both of Jews and Gentiles have
believed on, and followed this Christ the crucified King. And thus oft-times
God crosses man's policy, turning the edge and point of his own weapons upon
himself; we have found it so done to the Brethren of Joseph, to Pharoh, to
Achitophel, to Jeroboam, and thousands more: and here says the Jew, It is
expedient that our King die lest the Nation perish; and God says, the Nation
shall perish because ye have wickedly murdered your King.

And thus we see God to be an upright Judge in the execution of his own
ancient Law-given, Genesis 9.6. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed. 2. A strict Defender of his inherent prerogative, as it is written,
vengeance is mine. 3. A faithful Performer of his covenanted promise, I will
revenge says the Lord, Romans 12.19. we read, Acts 5.11. that, upon the
judgment executed on Ananias and Saphira, the Text says, and great fear came
upon all the Church, and upon as many as heard these things; and I pray God the
like fear may touch our hearts, and work in them a timely and hearty
repentance, that God in his mercy may avert all judgments which deservedly are
threatened to fall upon us, and this Land; and this let us humbly beseech God to
grant, for the passion and mediation of his only Son, and our alone Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus.

FINIS.

