A PREDICTION OF Mr. EDWARDS HIS CONVERSION, and Recantation.

By WILLIAM WALVVIN.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. for G. Whittington and N. Brooks, at the sign of
the Angel in Cornhill, bel^w the Exchange. 1646.

A PREDICTION OF MASTER EDWARDS HIS CONVERSION and Recantation.
THere has of late so much labor, and so many good discourses been bestowed
upon Mr. Edwards, and with so pious and good intentions, that it is not to be
supposed, so many precious endeavors can be vain or fruiclesse, in reference
to his conversion.

In cases so desperate as h^^, the worst signs are the best; as we use to
say, when things are at the worst, they are nearest to an amendment.

To an impartial judgment, that seriously considers the violence of his
spirit, manifested against harmless, well-meaning people, that differ with
him in judgment: He cannot but seem, at best, in that wretched condition,
that Paul was in, when he breathed out threatenings and slaughter, against the
disciples of the Lord; and went unto the High Priest, and desired of him
letters to Damascus, to the Synagogues, that if hefound any of this way,
whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem.

For certainly, had not Authority, in these our times, being endowed with much
more true Christian wisdom then such teachers, and through the power thereof,
had not restrained the bitterness of his (and the like) spirits; we had had
(before this time) multitudes of both men and women, brought from all parts of
this Nation, bound, unto London, if not burned in Smithfield.

But many there are, that fear, his condition is much more sad, and desperate,
then this of Paul's, (which yet the blessed Apostle was much troubled to think
on, long after his conversion, accompting himself as one borne out of due
time, and not worthy the name of an Apostle, because he persecuted the Church
of God.) It being exceedingly feared that in all his unchristian writings,
preachings, and endeavors, to provoke Authority against consciontious people,
that therein he goes against the light of his own conscience, that he is
properly an Heretic, one that is subverted and sins, being condemned of
himself.

And indeed, who ever shall consider, the exceeding Light that has been darted
from so many Seraphick Quills, shining round about him; amidst his persecuting
intentions, (all which he has hitherto resisted) will find and confess; there
is cause to fear: So great a shining and a burning light, that it cannot be
doubted, but that he discerns, how unreasonable a thing it is, that one
erring man should compel or comptroule another man's practice, in things
supernatur all: or that any laws should be made for punishing of
mis-apprehentions therein, wherein thousands are as liable to be mistaken; as
one single person.

He must needs know, that, only things natural and rational are properly
subject unto government: And that things supernatural, such as in Religion are
distinguished by the title of things divine; such, as the benefit and use
thereof, could never have been perceived by the light of nature and reason:
that such things are not liable to any compulsive governmen, but that therein
every one ought to be fully persuaded in their own minds; because whatsoever
is not i^ faith is sin.

He cannot be ignorant, how disputable all the parts of Divinity are amongst
the most learned, how then can he judge it so horrible a thing as he seems to
do, for men to differ, though upon the highest points: he knows every one is
bound to try all things, the unlearned as well as the learned: now if there be
different understandings, some weaker and some stronger, (as there are) how is
it possible but then will (upon every trial) be difference in degrees of
apprehensions: and surely he will not say that weakness of understanding is
sinful where there is due endeavor after knowledge: and though it should be
sinful in the sight of a pure God, yet will he not say it is punishable, by
impure and erroneous man: But,

To rail revile, reproach, backbite, slander, or to despise men and women, for
their weaknesses: their means of trades and callings, or poverty, is so
evidently against the rule of Christ and his Apostles, that he cannot but
condemn himself herein: his understanding is so great, and he is so well read
in Scripture, that he must needs acknowledge, these cannot stand with Love:
that known and undisputable Rule.

Insomuch, as if bad signs in so desperate a case as his is, are the best,
surely he is not far from his recovery and conversion.

With God there is mercy; his mercyes are above all his works, his delight is
in showing mercy: and the Apostle tells us where sin has abounded grace (or
love) has super-abounded: O that he would stand still a while, and consider
the love of Christ, that he would throw by his imbittered pen, lock himself
close in his study, draw his curteines, and sit down but two hours, and
seriously, sadly, and searchingly lay to heart, the things he has said and
done, against a people whom he knows, desire to honor God: and withal to
bear in mind the infinite mercy of God, that where sin has abounded, grace
has over abounded: certainly it could not but work him into the greatest and
most burning extremity that ever poor perplexed man was in, such an extremity
as generally proves Gods opportunity, to cast his abundant grace so
plentifully into the distressed soul, as in an instant burns and consumes all
earthly passions, and corrupt affections, and in stead thereof fills the soul
with love, which instantly refineth and Changes the worst of men, into the
best of men.

May this be the happy end of his unhappy labors: it is the hearty desire of
those whom he has hitherto hated, and most dispitefully used; (nothing is to
hard for God) it will occasion joy in Heaven, and both joy and peace in earth,
you shall then see him a man composed of all those opinions he has so much
reviled: an Independent: so far as to. allow every man to be fully persuaded in
his own mind, and to molest no man for worshipping God according to his
conscience.

A Brownist: so far, as to separate from all those that preach for filthy
lucre: An Anabaptist: so far, at least, as to be rebaptised in a flood of his
own true repentant tears: A seeker: in seeking occasion, how to do good unto
all men, without respect of persons or opinions: he ^ill be wholly incorporate
into the Family of love, of true Christian love, that covers a multitude of
evils: that suffers long, and is kind, envieth not, vanteth not it self, is
not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not
easily provoked etc. And then: you may expect him to break forth and publish
to the world, this or the like recantation.

Where have I been! Into what strange and uncouth paths have I run my self! I
have long time walked in the counsel of the ungodly, stood in the way of
finners, and too too long sat in the feat of the scornful.

O vile man, what have I done? Abominable it is!

O wietched man, how have I finned against God! It shameth me: It repents me:
My spirit is confounded within me.

I have committed evils, of a new and unparalelled nature, such as the
Protestant Religion in all after-ages will be shamed of. For I have published in
print to the view of all men the names of diverse godly well affected persons,
and reproached them as grand Impostors, Blasphemers, Heretics and
Schismatiques, with out ever speaking with them my self.

And though I am conscious to my self, of many weaknesses, and much error, and
cannot deny, but I may be mistaken in those things, wherein, at present I am
very confident, yet have I most presumptuously and a^rogantly, assumed to my
self, a power of ^udging, and censuring all judgments, opinions. and ways of
worship (except my own) to be either damnable, heretical, chismaticall, or
dangerous: And though I have seen and condemned the evil of it in the Bishops
and Prelates, yet (as they) have I reviled and reproached them, under the
common nicknames of Brownists, Independents, Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Seekert, and the like:) of purpose to make them odious to Authority, and all
sort of men: whereby I have wrought very much trouble to many of them, in all
parts throughout this Nation; and have caused great disasse. ction in Families,
Cities and Countries, for difference in judgment, (which I ought not to have
done) Irritating and provoking on against an other, to the dissolving of all
civil and natural relations, and as much as in me lay, inciting and animating
to the extirpation and utter ruin one of another, in so much as the whole Land
(by my unhappy means, more then any others) is become a Nation of quarrels,
distractions, and divifions, our Cities, Cities of strife, slander, and
backbiting; by occasion whereof, both our counsel and strength fails, and
all the godly party in the Land, are now more liable to abuse and danger,
whether they are Presbyterians, Independents, or others, then they have been
since the beginning of this Parliament; though many of them are so blinded by
my writings and discourses and so perverted in their understandings, that they
cannot discern it: And wherefore I have done all this, O Lord God thou
know, and I tremble to remember, for I have done it out of the pride and
vanity of my own mind, out of disdain, that plain unlearned men should seek
for knowledge any other way then as they are directed by us that are learned;
out of base fear, if they should fall to teach one another, that we should
lose our honor, and be no longer esteemed as Gods Clergy, or Ministers Jure
divino; or that we should lose our domination in being sole judges of doctrine
and discipline, whereby our predecessors have over ruled State and Kingdoms.

Or lastly, that we should lose our profits and plentious maintenance by
Tithes, offerings, etc. which our predecessors (the Clergle) for many ages
have enjoyed as their proper right, and not at the good will of the owners, or
the donation of humane authority: All this I saw coming in with that liberty,
which plain men took, to try and examine all things; and therefore being
overcome with selfe-respect, and not being able to withstand so strong
temptations, being also then filled with a kind of knowledge that puffs up: I
be took my self to that unhappy work, to make all men odious, that, either
directly, or by consequence did any thing toward the subversion of our glory,
power, or profit.

In doing whereof, what ways and means I have taken for intelligence: What
treachery, inhumanity, and breach of hospitality, I have countenanced and
encouraged; my conscience too sadly tells me, and my unhappy books (if duly
weighed) will to my shame discover.

The most knowing, judicious, understanding men that opposed me, or my
interest, I knew were those, that did and could most prejudice our cause; and
therefore I set my self against them in a more special manner, laboring by
any means to make them odious to all societies, that so they might not be
credited in any thing they spoke.

The truth is: In this my perverse and sad condition, whilst I stood for
maintenance of my corrupt interest, it was impossible for me, truly to love a
judicious or an enquiring man: I loved none, but superstitious or ignorant
people, for with such I could persuade, and over such I could bear rule: such
would pay whatsoever I demanded, and do ^hatever I required: they spoke as I
spoke, commended what I approved, and reproach^d, as I reproached: I could make
them run point-blanck against Authority, or fly in the face of any man, for
these took me really for one of Gods Clergy, admired my parts and learning, as
gifts of the Holy Ghost, and believed my erring Sermons to be the very word of
God; willingly submitted their consciences and religion to my guidance.

Whilst (as indeed it is) an understanding ^nquiring man, studious in the
Scriptures, in^^antly discerns me to be but as other laymen, and finds our
learning to be but like other things that are the effects of study and
industry, and that our preachings are like any other men's discourses, liable to
errors and mistakings, and are not the very Word of God, but our apprehensions
drawn from the Word.

I confess now most willingly to my own shame, that there was nothing which I
conceived effectual, to work upon the super^^itious or ignorant, but I made
use thereof ^s the Prelates had don before me, yea I strictly observed order in
such things as few men consider, and yet are very powerful in the minds of
many; as the wearing of my Cloa^ of at least a Clergy-mans length, my Hat of a
due breadth and bigness, both for brim and crown, somewhat different from lay
men, my band also of a peculiar strain, and and my clothes all black, I would
not have worn a colored suit at any rate, that I thought enough to betray
all, nor any triming on my black, as being unsuitable to a Divines habit.

I had a care to be sadder in countenance and more sollemne in discourse
because it was the custom of a Clergyman, ^his I did though I knew very well
the Apostles of Christ, used no such vain distinctons, but being not indeed
unlike other men, through any endowments from on high, or power of miracles,
and yet resolving to maintayn a distinction, (being unable to do it by any
thing substantial, I) concluded it must be done (as it long time had been,
both in the Romish and Prelatique Church) even by vain and Fantastic
distinctions, such as clothes and other formalities; and though I knew full
well, that God was no respecter of persons, and that he made not choice of the
great, or learned men of the world, to be his Prophets and publishers of the
Gospel: but Heards-men, Fishermen Tent-makers Toll-gatherers, etc. and that
our Blessed Savior thought it no disparagement to be reputed the Son of a
Carpenter: yet have I most unworthily reviled and reproached, diverse sorts of
honest Tradesmen, and other useful laborious people, for endeavoring to preach
and to instruct those that willingly would be instructed by them, tearming them
illiterate Mechanics, Heriticks, and Scismaticks, merely because I would not
have my superstitious friends, to give any ear or regard unto them.

And for these respects, have I magnified our public Churches or meeting
places, and reproached and cried out upon all preachings in private houses,
calling them conventicles and using all endeavors, to make all such private
meetings liable to that Statute that was enacted, and provided to restrain and
avoid all secret plot^^ngs against the civil government, when in the mean
time I knew the scriptures plainly showed, both by the precepts and practices
of our Savior and his Apostles, that all places are indifferent, whether in
the mountain or in the fields, on the water, in the ship, or on the shore, in
the Synagogues or private houses, in an upper or lowroome; all is one, they went
preaching the Gospel from house to house. Not in Jerusalem* nor in this
mountain, but in every place he that lifts up pure hands is accepted.
Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, there (says our
Savior) I will be in the midest of them, all this I knew: yet, because the
superstitious were (through long custom) zealous of the public places, I
applied my self therein, to their humors and my own ends, and did what I
could to make all other places odious and ridiculous: though now I seriously
acknowledge, that a plain discreet man in a private house, or field, in his
ordinary apparel, speaking to plain people (like himself) such things as he
conceives requisite for their knowledge* out of the word of God, does as much
(if not more) resemble the way of Christ and the manner of the Apostles, as a
learned man in a carved pulpet, in his neat and black formalities, in a
stately, high, and stone-built Church, speaking to an audience, much more
glorious and richly clad, then mos^ Christians mentioned in the Scriptures: and
may be as acceptable* I have most miserably deluded the world therein, and
those most with whom I have been most familiar, and have thereby drawn off
their thoughts from a consideration of such things as tended to love, peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost* to such things as tended neither to their own good nor
the good, of others. I have been wise in my own eyes, and despised others, but
I must abandon all, I must become a fool that I may be wise, hitherto I have
promoted a mere Cl^rgy Religion, but true Christian religion; pure religion
and undefiled I have-utterly neglected: I have wrested the covenant from its
natural and proper meaning, to make use thereof for the establishment of such
a Church government, as would maintain the power of the Clergy distinct from
and above the power of Parliaments, and such as would have given full power to
suppress and crush all our opposers, but I now bless God, the wisdom of
Parliament discerned and prevented it.

I have been too too cruel and hard hearted against men for erors in religion,
or knowledge supernatural, though I my self have no infallible spirit to
discern between truth and erors, yea though I have seen them so zealous and
conscientious in their judgment^ (as to be ready to give up their lives for the
truth thereof, yet have I (as the Bishops were wont) argued them of obstinacy,
and in steed of taking a christian-like way to convert them, have without mercy
censured, some of them worthy of imprisonment, and some of death, but I would
not be so used, nor have I done therein as I would be done unto my self.

I have been a great respecter of persons, for outward respects, the man in
Fine raiment, and with the gold ring, I have ever prefered whilst the poor and
needy have been low in my esteem.

I have too much loved greetings in the market place, and the uppermost places
a^ feasts, and to be called Rabby.

And to fill up the measure of my iniquity: I have had no compassion on tender
consciences, but have wrought them all the trouble cruelty and misery I could,
and had done much more but that through the goodness of God, the present
authority was too just and pious to second my unchristian endeavors: My
merciful Savior would not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smokeing
flax, but my hard heart has done it, O that I had not quenched, that I had not
resisted the Spirit, what fruit have I of those things whereof I am now
ashamed; O how foul I am, and filthy, yea how naked and all uncovered, my
hidden sin lies open, I see it, and the shame of it, and how foul it is; and
the sight of it grieveth and exceedingly troubles me. I would feign hide my
self from mine own sin, but cannot; it pursues me, it cleaves unto me, it
stands ever before me and I am made to possess my sin, though it be grievous
and loathsome and abominable and filthy above all that I can speak, what shall
I do? whither shall I fly? who can deliver me from this body of death? my
spirit is so wounded I am not able to bear: Can there be mercy for me? can
there be balm for my wounded spirit, that never had compassion on a tender
conscience? my case is sad and misserable, but there is balm in Gilead: with
God there is mercy: with him is plenteous redemption, I will therefore go to
my Father and say unto him. Father I have sinned against Heaven and against
thee, I am not worthy to be called thy child, make me as one of thine hired
servants, I will faithfully apply my self to thy will, and to the study of thy
Commandments, yea I will both study and put in practice thy new commandment,
which is love, I will redeem the time I have misspent: love will help me, for
God is love, the love of Christ will constrain me, through love I shall be
enabled to do all things, should I not love him that has loved me, and showed
mercy unto me, for so many thousand sins, shall not his kindness beget
kindness in me, yes love has filled me with love, so let me cate, and so let
me drink, for ever, love is good and seeks the good of all men, it helps
and hurts not, it blesses, it teaches, it feeds, it clotheth, it
delivers the captive, and sets the oppressed free; it breaks not the
bruised reed, nor quenches the smokeing flax, farewell for ever all old
things, as pride envy coveteousnesse reviling, and the like, and welcome love,
that makes all things new, even so let love possess me, let love dwell in me,
and me In love, and when I have finished my days in peace, and my years in
rest, I shall rest in peace, and I shall dwell with love, that have dwelt in
love. May his meditations hence-forward, and his latter end, be like unto this,
or more exellent and Heavenly, which is all the harm I wish unto him, as
having through Gods mercy, in some measure, learned that worthy and Heavenly
lesson of my Savior, But I say unto you, love your enemies etc. and may all
that love the Lord Jesus, increase therein.

FINIS.
July 22. 1646.
Imprimatur,

JOHN BACHILER


