A PUBLIC CONFERENCE Betwixt the Six Presbyterian Ministers, And Some
Independent Commanders: Held at OXFORD, On Thursday November. 12. 1646.

Printed in the Year, 1646.

A public CONFERENCE Held at OXFORD November. 12. 1646. Betwixt the Six
Presbyterian Ministers, and the Independent Commanders.
SIR,
THough you be never so serious, I must break in upon you, I am in pain till
I have propagated our laughter to you, which has held us ever since last
Scruple-Thursday. You know the Scruple-Office, where the doubting Sisters are
carried with zeal to join in a Reformation with the Resolving Brethren, and
burdened consciences come to lay down their loads, and go away with others;
where the Resolvers take away the doubts, and gain the Doubters to themselves:
whither seeing all flock that know nothing but to doubt, amongst these I
presumed to make one in the Crowd. Here I found the doubting Brethren turned
the Resolvers, and those that held the Chair, uncertain in their Resolutions,
and as doubtful as the Oracles of Old; as those that believe not themselves,
what they would have others believe. They have proceeded thus far in the
Reformation, and the Resolutions of Doubts, that they have brought all to that
petty Scruple, Whether Christ has any Church, any Ministry, since the
Apostles. Or, granting a Church to Christ, but none to them ( Dato, sed non
Concesso; Yerbery will allow no more.) They disputed this with them, Whether
they did not more usurp on the Title of Ministers in the Church of Christ,
then themselves on the Office, in Preaching? or (in their own phrase) in
hinting truths, holding forth lights, making out Gospell-Revelations,
exercising their Gifts and Lungs, and in Love edifying the Church (or if
Yerbery will better admit the Term) Propagating the faithful? Sir, Will you
receive the Conference, as I had it in a throng and crowded up, or are you at
leisure to hear at large all Ob's and Sol's? I Will venture on the Task, upon
the condition, you will take the Dialogue not for one of my penning, or one
translated out of Lucians Jupiter Tragaed: but (what you put upon me) my
relating. And from the impertinent circumstances, (if you can bear them) you
will most please your self, to see the whole Manage, the Logic, the
Determination and Result of all the Disputes proceed from those who wore their
Arguments by their sides, and yet used the others weapons, ^he chief Per^^^s
of the Con^^rence.
to beat them withal.

'Twas after three of the clock when first there appeared looks frighted with
Visions and Revelations, as if they had fasted and prayed for Mediums, and yet
they seemed rather possessed then inspird; they call themselves Spiritual, but
the Crowd begins to complain of the Big-bon'd Spirits, after them drop in
dejected visages, sentenced foreheads, that by their posture appeared to be
Seekers, and in the Van of the Lifted and Guifted men, one presses foremost
toward the Tripodes; the crowd divides, and gives way, as Jordan to the Arc,
or rather a cloud to a flash of Lightning, his name asked, whispered aloud,
Yerbery. What is he? The Doubting Brethren or Scruplers. Yerbery.


Yerbery, The Champion of the Seekers, the Chaplain Errant, that makes not
only Sermons at all hours, but his Divinity too, like the first Artists, that
found out the trade they professed. This, was he ready to oppose, and to hold
any thing.

Make way there:

Grimes, a Carpenter, the Deputy Governor, who held (...) the Rule, and did
not amiss govern (amongst such doughty Schoolmen) the Divinity Disputation.

Hewson, a Shoemaker, and Colonel, Prior Opponent, a most Categoricall
Disputant, yet so rude, that he seemed to understand others better then
himself, that he neither admitted Impertinencies, nor committed any; an
admirably Guifted, or Jesuited Brother: He proposed the Questions, enforced
their own objections and Answers, recollected the Arguments on both sides,
exposed the others Reasons, if it were possible to more absurdity, and
weakness, then the Author. We wondered so much true Logic, and false English.

Under the Colonel many other Guifted Officers.

A Major, that had not the spirit of Syllogismes, but of contradiction: who,
when he saw that Logic failed him, defied humane Arts.

A Captain, and a Captain, that offered fair, to second them, but could not
go far in Mediums, (they were not bred at the fencing School) which the
others were not ashamed to ask liberally, though they afforded sparingly.

To these still press forward the crowd of Seekers, and put in ever and anon,
The Resolvers or Scruple-Masters.
as, the Interlocutor.

Room, Room. Enter at last the grave Scruple-Masters.

Wilkinson, The Chaireman pro Tempore.

On the one hand,

Reynolds, the Oracle, with the hoarse and obscure voice.

On the other hand,

Harris, like Aaron and Hur on both sides Moses, to support his hands; Harris,
that maintained his gravity by silence, and appeared guifted better for Prayer,
then Disputation.

At their side sat

Dr. Temple, the very Timocles in Lucian, that brought more Lungs and
volubility, not much more Logic then the other.

To back these, the other stood behind.

Cornish, that helped to disturb the Disputation once or twice, and speaking
without Mediums, was descried, and sat down again.

Langley, the Mute, 'twas thought he reserved his Resolutions for the other
Sex.

Cheynel. Cheynel is now called for; he is much missed, no confidence of victory
without him, the only man that could oppose frenzy to frenzy, and outvie their
zeal with greater heat, fling about Texts, cast wildly, but in Mood and
figure.

But will your patience hold out with this style? Now the heat is somewhat
over, in a colder reflection, I begin to discover my self, like one of those,
who being transported with mirth, would force others to be as merry as
themselves, while indeed they appear rather mad. I will then give you the
Discourse, without the Scene, which you will easily supply by your imagination.
The Question first proposed, and beat out into 8. or 9. more questions or
Propositions; Whether the Ministry were committed to the hands of selected
Persons? the Theses asserted; 1. That Christ had a Church. 2. That Christ had
all power and judgment given from God. 3. That he was a Prophet, a Priest, and
a King. 4. That as a King he Gathered, Governed a Church. 5. That in this
Church he appointed some Ministers, etc. That was not the Question. And what
meant the paper he read in, they knew not, though they knew, and would not
dispute then all the Propositions. They came to show their Gifts, not the
hands they wrote. They came to have their doubts resolved, These were truths
they stood not on. Yerbery then rose up, cried down again. After an hours
debate, what was the question, crying up, decrying, this, that, hinting,
holding out, and making forth their minds, they framed the Question in terms
which they imposed to their own advantage: Whether the esteemed Ministers of
the Church of England had more Authority from Jesus Christ to preach in
public, then ordinary Guifted Christians. Here a double weakness on the
other part, still to insist, and urge their own Paper, as if they were not
they, who have brought in Extempore Effusions throughout the whole service of
God, and allow unpremeditated Preaching and praying (such as the Lay might
imitate and now here challenge) but here allow only set, and premeditated
Disputes. I was again ashamed to see terms imposed to their adversaries
advantage, and not so pertinent to their doubt, which, while the
Scruple-Masters urge their own Propositions, is still hinted to be; Whether it
were lawful for them, who were no Ministers to lay out Scripture in public,
and to undo Chapters? Whether it were lawful for the Guifted Christians, or
whether it were more lawful for the esteemed Ministers? The Chaireman rises
up, undertakes the Cause, but Mediums coming not readily, again the Papers
called in (...); Why we come hither to have our Doubts resolved, it is strange
you should tell better then our selves, what our doubts are. The Question was
hinted on this occasion, viz. your biting and unbrotherly railing against this
way of God, in building up one another. The Chairman rises up again, and
finding it reducible to one of his Propositions, offers again at the Question,
and reads his 5. Proposition with the Proofs; they admitted no reading
Divines, nor indirect proofs. Sol. Prove this; First the Negative, That it is
not lawful for the Guifted Christians: Secondly, the Affirmacive, That the
esteemed Ministers of the Church of England are lawfully called by Jesus Christ
to Preach.

The Negative first endeavored by the Chaire-man, with a most indirect and
confused proof, as he managed it, from the names and Titles, of Pastor,
Steward, Ambassador, etc. and that confirmed by Ephesians. 4.11. Christ gave some
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Teachers, therefore not all. This was urged
somewhat more volubly by Timocles, but with no stricter inference. To this the
only proof for the Negative was answered severally; Th^^ the Text was not
exclusive: There were othe^s mentioned in other places of Scripture given
likewise, as Helps, and Governments, (said the Deputy Governor) That the
Inference could not extend to the Negative, Christ gave some Pastors, therefore
none other might feed the Flock. That their Preaching did not infer that
there were not some Ministers beside them, that they did not preach with the
Titles, Officially, but Edifyingly. They did not Preach, but Teach, and that
Christ gave some Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, etc. ex abundanti, to perfect the
Saints, that the syllogism might be returned on them, Christ gave some
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, etc. but they were not that some Evangelists,
or Prophets, therefore they were not to Preach: Now ex abundanti they urge on
the contrary, that it is not only not unlawful (as yet it appeared by all
they could say against it) but our duty to improve our Gifts, to exhort,
admonish, edify one another, by all the Texts sounding that way: First from the
Context alleged against them, Ephesians. 4.16. That the Members mutually grow up,
and make ncrease of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love. That the
manifestation of the spirit is given to every one to profit withal, that they
are to administer the Grace they have received, as good Stewards, that 1. Cor.
14. every one was to prophecy, that is, to speak to edification, exhortation,
consolation, that there were many preached, Act. 8. that were no Evangelists,
Apostles, Prophets, etc. and particularly Apollo, Act. 18.28. taught in the
Synagogues that Jesus was the Messiah, and yet no called Minister of the
Gospel, it being not probable that he should be chosen by the Apostles to the
Ministry, who yet knew nothing but the Baptism of John, and was to be
instructed by Priscilla and Aquilla his Wife. You already guess the Answer:
'twas extraordinary. They prove it ordinary, since that is ordinary, which was
common to all in the Church, as to prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. Belonged to every one.
This being all then alleged against the unlawfulness, and overborne with a
greater number of Texts that seemed not only to prove, but enjoin it as a
duty. They Recollect all the Ob's and Sol's, and submit the Result to the
judgment of the Spiritual.

For the Affirmative, now they urge them to prove their own Calling lawful,
and according to the appointment of Christ, and to justify their own
Ministers of the Church of England, since they could not so easily disprove, as
they did reprove the Lay Divines: Timocles stands up.

They which are qualified, which are approved, which are called according to
the mind of Christ, and set apart to the Gospel, are Ministers lawfully called
according to the mind of Christ: But some Ministers of the Church of England
are qualified, etc.

They urged against All, and we expected he should not at first have quitted
our Church. But his proof he stretched but to some: What need all this? Provo
but one, they are called by Christ, we require no more. No: he claims the
privilege of Logic to take his own choice and Order, (a new Privilege, as
any the Subject now assumes.)

First, Qualified according to the mind of Christ, here the 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1.
are read for one Proposition, but some are thus qualified, All, All, it is
enough if some. This denied None, yes some thus Qualified, Reynolds, Harris,
Wilkinson. Upriseth Yerbery.

Not qualified to the Text, because strikers, because they destroy the
Communion of Saints, and because they inflict Temporal punishments for
Spiritual Weaknesses.

They destroy the Communion of Saints because they set up Parish Churches.
Since Christ bid his Apostles go, and Teach, no standing Ministers of Christ's
ord^ining.

To this, provoked with zeal, R. Argues in stead of Answering.

They who have justifying faith and charity according to the Gospel, destroy
not the Communion of Saints.

But some Ministers of the Church of England, meaning himself and those mith
him.

The Seeker grants not that neither, For they who have not the Spirit equal to
the Apostles even before they had the Gifts of the Spirit (who then could not
bear the saying of Christ, and therefore far from Faith,) They that have not
at all the gifts of the Spirit (there he reads them, Prophesying Tongues,
Miracles, asks which they challenge) could not pretend to Faith or Charity
according to the Gospel.

It Is again answered, Gifts extraordinary and Gifts of the Spirit, either
donum (...), or (...), This caused an outcry, they came to be edifi'd, and yet
they found the Gift of Tongues, they denied.

To the Question again.

Not strikers, Because Inflicters of Temporal punishment for Spiritual
Weaknesses, because the Assembly approves of the Act of Parliament.

Here they call him back to the question, it is safer th^n Answering.

Not qualified, Because covetous, because they take Tithes, they that take
others goods, and return nothing of value for it are Covetous.

Make the syllogism out. They that take others goods, etc. Where Is your Minor?
Timocles, They that take others Goods: You make the Minor.

What Is this to the lawful Calling, to the Question? prove your Calling.

Timocles, The next is, they that are approved, pray ye let it be they that are
call d. No, in order, They are approved that are qualified to the mind of
Christ; This we heard before, prove your Calling* Calling? Why thus: They that
are approved according to the mind of Christ, are called according to the mind
of Christ, but some Ministers of our Church, ^^ey are ap^^^ved who are
^^^lified (as be^^^^.)
etc. Col. Idem per Idem. Sir, pardon me, I know not your name. Your Argument
is this; We say you are not lawful Ministers in the Church of England called
by the mind of Christ, you reply, We are, and we are, and therefore we are. Is
not this a Circle? I confess it is, but you put me to it.

How then do you prove your Calling lawful. W. Why is there not a Presbytery
now to ordain Ministers? Timocles, your Calling is lawful that is by the
appointment of the Magistrate. But who called that Presbytery, who called you?
so fearful were they here to defend their own Calling, lest they should seem
to defend their own Church, or name Bishops, that to wave the Answer R. stands
up, and informs them what was a lawful Calling. To a lawful calling is
required in the persons call d the qualifications mentioned, Piety and Parts;
in the calling the Inward and Outward Call: the Outward calling double: in a
settled Church to be by the Ministers, the Presbytery, in an unsettled Church, as
in times of Reformation, the extraordinary or (more properly) the universal
way is by the whole Church, for to speak my sense and judgment, the ultimate
and last Authority is resolved into the body of the whole Church. Col. What do
you mean by Church? All the faithful, all the Christian People. What by the
Church of England? All the Christian People of this Nation, or Kingdom, call
it what you will.

Col. this then (if I mistake not) is the substance of your Speech, that the
persons called are to be qualified with sanctity and knowledge. We contend for
none, but who are qualifi d and guifted, that the power of Calling those
persons resides in the whole Church. None could plead better the Independents
part. They require no more, but the power of making their Officers.

Thus have they at last dealt ingenuously, and being not able to maintain by
their new fundamentals, they yielded up the Question. Either R. is very
subtle, and by this state of the Question seeks to compound with the
Independents, or else very simple, and has unawares betrayed himself with the
Presbyterians. [It is either Reynolds the Fox, or Reynolds the Goose.] They
need no Opponents in this Question, every one differing and opposing the other.
W. stating the power of calling Ministers in the Presbytery, winnes the Title
of Presbyterian from them all. Timocles concluding the same power that makes
Churchwardens, and Constables, to appoint and call Ministers, comes of an
Erastian. R. To be received into the Congregation of the Independents. 'Twas
now almost 9. of the clock, some complained of their heads, some of their Age,
another of the Crowd; But a more zealous Brother cries out, Paul teach'd till
midnight, and it was the time for their new lights to be held out; Mr. Harris
is desir d to close all, and what he could not by dispute, to determine and end
the difference by prayer, and their Requests, are now his best Call; see the
power of Natural Logic that has proved, Those that have no Calling, to be
lawful Preachers, and those that have a Calling to be no Preachers at all.

Postscript.
THe six Presbyterian Divines have been much worsted by the Independent
Commanders, in a late public Disputation, who asserted, That they had no
Commission from God to be Ministers; in the presence of two or three hundred
Scholars, and others, which much blanked those Worthies, who were sent thither
to reform that University, and to resolve all Quaeries, Doubts, and Scruples
of Conscience.

Whereupon the Presbyterians not meeting, as was expected, upon the Thursday
following, Nov. 19. they were conceived utterly to wave any more
Conscience-resolving Disputes, and were hereby concluded (from their silence
and tergiversation) to be no better then Thieves and Robbers, so that now these
Commander wanting an enemy from these foiled Presbyterians, have adventured to
challenge that late most famous University, to prove their Calling from Christ.

FINIS.

