PAX VOBIS OR A CHARM FOR tumultuous Spirits.

Being an earnest and Christian advice unto the people of London, to forbear
their disorderly meetings at Westminster, least they prove to the disturbance
of the great business in hand, pressed by diverse weighty and considerable
reasons offered to their serious thoughts.

Together with a motion for the speedy relief of the poor distressed
Protestants in Ireland: and for a public fast that we may all join in hearty
supplications to God for them.

By THOMAS WARMSTRY Minister of Gods Word.

Study to be quiet, and to do your own business. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. LONDON,
Printed for George Thompson, 1641.

PAX VOBIS, OR A Charm for tumultuous Spirits.
Being an earnest and Christian advice unto the people of London, to forbear
their disorderly meetings at Westminster.
GReat works if they end happily, are great Blessings for the most part, if
unhappily they disolve into great Curses or mischiefs. If they go up orderly,
and stand firmly, they may yield shelter and supportance unto many. If they
fail or miscarry, they do not only break themselves to pieces with their
weight, but do also crush and grind those, that are under the ruin, who
expecting a sh^lter, meet with a confusion.

The work which is now in hand in the Parliament I may truly say it is a
great work, and that in various and diverse respects: great it is, if we
consider the body that sways it, the very poize whereof must needs be active,
and can hardly leave any light impressions. The very name and sound of a
Parliament gives gravity and weight unto the air, me thinks that carries it,
and has a kind of rest and sollid stay upon the ear more then other voices
that are usually of a fluid and wasting condition, and whose very constitution
is a consumption: And if the name be so ponderous, what is the body it self
think you? The least grains in the composition whereof, outwaigh whole pounds
in other Corporations. Great it is in respect of the subject they have to work
upon, being the vast and large Fabric of more then one state and Church.
Great it is in regard of their scope and aim, which extends it self through
the whole Horizon, both of policy and religion, and has in its view and
prospect, all that concerns either the Temporal or spiritual good of many
Millions and Myriads of people, who must either stand or fall by the success
or miscariage of their actions. And great it is too in Consideration of those
many and great difficulties they are to encounter in the procuring of that good
issue they aim at.

So that there is indeed a great accumulation of greatness in that business
which is now in hand, and is likely to give over and conclude either in
exceeding happiness, or excessive misery, especially as the case now stands
with us, we can hardly find room for any mean expectation.

And therefore it must needs very highly concern us all to desire, and
endavour in what we may, that it may proceed orderly and succeed
prosperously, and to remove all shelfes and rocks of impediments which this
royal vessel or navy may split upon unto our general shipwreck.

This desire I hope is settled in all that are not of a a mere Diabolical
spirit, but the effects thereof are various, and unlike, and not always
answerable unto the united intentions, but to the variety of men's judgments,
and Fancies, in the designation of those means which they diversely conceive to
be mostapt, and proper for the compassing of those general aims wherein all
perhaps agree: The errors whereof are always diffusive of themselves into
those designs or motions which proceed from them; and indeed amongst so many
and various apprehensions, and advices, that have showed themselves busy in
the carriage of the work, I cannot but conclude some to be mistaken, since I
find them lying so far assnnder from one another, that they cannot move in
any direct lines unto the same center or purpose.

There are (if I misjudge not) but four general mistakes which do always
(though not always equally (share and divide betwixt them the misconduct of
all enterprises.

The first and most malignant is the error in the end, when the work is
guided to a wrong purpose, when the very goal or mark it self is mistaken:
which wheresoever it is found, does usually pervert the whole course of the
action, so that it becomes entirely wild and savage: Such kind of wanderings
being like unto the errors, and failings of the first concoction in the body,
which are observed (I take it) by Physicians to be incorrigble by any after
work that nature can perform. Since the proposal of the right end is the
great Scale, or standard where by all the parts and couducts of the business
must be measured and waighed, add he that measures with a crooked rule, is not
like to make straight work, if the scales be not even, how shall a man know
the weight of that, which is put into them.

The second general Error is the mischoice of the due way or means: when men
set up the right mark before themselves, but for want of a good aim do not
guide the shaft in the right line. They mean to set up at a good Town, but
they do not take the right way over to get thither. And this though it be not
in all respects so cursed as the former, that having the allay of a good
intention, yet if we may judge of things by the Event, as it may seem more
miserable since there is some good lost in a sort therein, which is not in the
other, as is miscarriage of a pious intent, so it proves many times within few
degrees, if not altogether as pernicious.

The third sort of Errors or failings whereby great and good designs are
baned, is the want of due force or strength in the motion, when the enterprise
languisheth and dies in the way for want of spirit to carry it through unto
the Butt, and though the Arrow be well guided, yet it falls sh^rt of the mark,
and so falls short of the victory and prize.

The fourth and last is the want of a right gage, or moderation, when there is
too much force or impetuousnesse in the setting forward of the business, so
that like a Charret that is driven too furiously, it is overturned with its
own speed. Or as a Bowl that is well weighed, and biast, but is at home
before its time, and so over-runnes the Mistress: And the prevention of these
four errors is the work of the four Cardinal virtues, Justice, Prudence,
Fortitude, and Temporance. Justice gives us a true meaning, sets us upon the
right end, Prudence directs us to the choice of the right means, Fortitude
keeps us from languishing in the motion, Temperance from exceeding or
overturning it.

For the two former of these errors as concerns the great work in hand, I
hope there need be no agues or shiverings in the States for them, or at least
if there be any ground for our fears therein, I hope God will be the
Physician: we have had I hope many good experiences both of the integrity and
wisdom of the Parliament, that may keep us from being overcarefull for
preventing mistakes either in the end, or the means: Their uprightness I hope
will fix them steady upon the one, and their prudence guide them in the other:
yet I wish they may remember too that they are men, and there are clouds of
corruption which may produce evil, or hinder good, even in the greatest
concurrence of the the best and wisest mortalles, if God be not moderatour of
their works, and therefore even in this, our joint dependence must be upon
him. Since it is the general valuation that our praved natures have set upon
us, and which the spirit of God has truly taken of us, and recorded in the
holy writ, that the children of men are deceitful upon the waights.

For the third, there is only one thing, in which I could willingly press for
speed, if I might be heard, because every moments delay, may be paid for too
dearly, with the loss of Christian blood, and that is in the design for the
releife of Ireland. It was the saying of the Poet, that nulla unquam de morte
hominis, cunstatio longa est.

But I may say as truly herewith a lettle alteration nulla unquam de morte
hominis cunctatio parva est; where the slownes of the proceedings leaves men's
lines unto the spoil, There every little deferring is too much. Me thinks
when that poor Church and Kingdom lyesa bleeding to death, and every minute
may give advantage unto the fury of the adversary, consultaion had not need too
take up to much of the time, least the opportunity of action, and application
may be lost in it. Too much caution is no part of wisdom, where necessity is
urgent for a speedy redress, and in this case we had all need to be speedy
and earnest in this matter, every one of us in our prayers and supplications
unto God; when the fire of Gods wrath was broken out upon the Israelites, It
was no time for Aaron to dally, he must go in all have: See how Moses posts
him forward Numb. 16.46. Take the censer, and put fire therein of the Altar and
put therein Incense, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an
Atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from the Lord. One fire must
quench another, the fire of the Altar, even of new devotion the fire of Gods
wrath is judgment, and affliction, and truly a speedy devotion should set us
all upon an Active, and earnest intercession to God for the deliverance of
thole distressed people, from the rage and duty of their adversaries. To the
furtherance whereof if the King and Parliament, would be pleased to enjoyne a
public Fast amongst us for that purpose, it might have a good savor in it of
Christian compassion, and might by Gods grace be a praevalent means to draw
down the showers of his heavenly mercy, to quench the flames of that Tyranny,
and inhumane cruelty in which our poor Brethren there, are schorched, and
consumed. But yet the have must not be only in this, while Moses prays,
Joshua must fight too, there is great need of a timely relief, even in
outward succors and supplies, least our idle devotion render our Prayers like
unto that fruitless Charity of which Saint James speaks, that dwelt only in
the tongue and had nothing of the hand, could say, depart in peace, be ye
warmed and filled, but afforded nothing. I wish therefore God may put it into
our hearts to second our prayers with a voluntary contribution, which would be
an exceptable sacrifice to God.

And that the Parliament would think of a speedy course to send them supplies.
and truly I am glad you made this a part of your late Petition to the
Parliament, and I heartily wish it may take with them so, that they may consider
of it in time, least their blood cry against us for our slownesse in relieving,
as well as against them for their fury in destroying. Our patience may perhaps
be as offensive to God, as the rage of the Adversary. It is no time to stand
discussing of niceties: to stand upon ceremonies and formalities, when a whole
Church and Kingdom is under a desperate disease; especially when every delay
makes the evil the more remediless: In such a case we should deal as a
Physician advises, (if my memory fail not) In morbis Astralibus, in
Appoplexies and such like importunate and sudden distempers, not stand too much
upon Election, and Composition, but apply that which is next at hand, so it be
proper for the disease. Oh take heed I beseech you of the curse of Meroz, and
remember that saying of the wise man, Prove. 24.11.12. If thou forbear to
deliver them, that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be
slain, if thou say, Behold we know it not, does not he, that pondreth the
heart consider it, and he that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? and
shall not he render to every man according to his work? I confess I would
beg on my knees for speed here: a holy rashness in this case would be more
tolerable then to be overwse in deliberation. But for other matters, I hope
their softness is for safety. Since for ought I know, they may not only
admit of a considerate proceeding, but receive it. And though the current of
the business may be something slower, then perhaps the too speedy
expectations of some that do not so well consider the greatness of the body,
which commonly moves more slowly, if not less securely, the weight of the
burden and the business that they have upon them, which may well forbid them
to make use of their wings: or the great intricacy and perplexity, together
with the many difficulties unto which it is exposed. Yet I hope in the end,
they may bear that Motto, Sat cito, Si sat been, And that it will appear to
have been not delay, but deliberation: And to have proceeded not from any
dullness in the body, or from any coldness or indefferency in the prosecution
of those happy ends, which the present necessity of Church and State presents
unto their wisdoms, but rather from a serious and watchful care to bring
accounts and opportunities together, and to avoid precipitancy, and prevent the
half virtue of repentance, which divides it self between Glory and Ignominy
in the work: yet it is my prayer, and therefore my hope, that this
Procastination of theirs, if we be not too impatient, may prove like the
contagion of Fabius Maximus, the delay of whose proceedings was the speed of
his enterprise, and that it may Restituere rem, for so it is said of him by the
Roman Orator, unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem.

Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem,
Ergo postque magisque viri nunc Gloria claret,
Give me leave to translate it thus:
One good man did to us restore
The Commonwealth, near lest before
By wise delay, not taking care
Of every Rumor, he did hear
But in his heart preferring still
The peoples safty, not their will,
His name then glorious well may be
With us, and with posterity.
And as it was with him, so I trust we shall all have good cause to translate
this Elegy unto this great body If God please to compact the^ so that they may
be Vnus homo, as he was united, in their Judgments and affections, and
prefer not tumultuous rumors and motions before that which is good and
healthful to Church and State. I trust then the delay will be fully
recompensed in the happy success, and crowned conclusion, that it will
appear not to have been a putting off of the business, but a prevention of
Temerity, which some men often times more work to undo, then they had to do in
the beginning, and Casts them back by their speed more then the greatest
softness of their motion could have done.

They that ride too far in a day, having a great Journey to go, come many
times short of their Iournies end.

An aftergame is but the second part of wisdom, and proves many times full of
difficulty and hazard, and therefore the safest way is, to take time and
deliberation, when we may have it, to play the fore game well, least our
negligent speed leave us to remediless errors, or at least not corrigible
without some discredit.

And truly the Stake is here so great, and every one of us so much a sharer in
it, as comprehending Religion, Peace, Honor and prosperity of the whole Church
and State, that we have all great reason to give them leave, whom we have
trusted to play it for us, to think well upon their casts, least some
oversight might end it too soon to all our undoing, and we should have
occasion to wish it were rather not yet begun then ended. The perils are so
many and great, that they had need look round about them every step, least
if the feet should outrun the eyes, the have should leave the speed behind it,
and like Mephibosheths nurse let the whole business fall and lame it. The
danger I conceive lies not in this then, but rather in our impatience, least
when we think them too slow, we should enforce them to too much have in their
progress; and through a desire that they should go on, hinder them from going
right, and whilst we require satis faction for our importunity, we loose the
expected enjoyment of our felicity; which is the last error, for prevention
whereof. I am bold (my brethren) especially to address my self unto you at
this time, and to beseech you in the name of God, and for the mercies of Christ
Jesus, that you would not by any unseasonable pressures, or Tumultuous
solicitations of the business in hand, attempt the disturbance of this happy
conjuncture, but that it may be permitted to glide on smoothly and calmely and
peaceably, as is most correspondent unto those peaceable ends, which they drive
at, not inturrupting that great assembly, either by any uncivil or distempered
concourses, or by any rude or immodest clamours; and that for these reasons,
which I shall here present unto you, drawn first from the consideration of the
nature of the business; secondly, from the different constitution of your
selves and that great body, and of the different intent, that is betwixt you in
the matter; Thirdly, from the great and general concernement, not only of
your selves, but of the whole Church and Kingdom, That I say not of
Christendom and the whole world therein; Fourthly, from the great imputations,
and intolerable prejudices that such proceedings of yours may seem to lay upon
the Parliament. Fifthly, from the great impediments and distractions that you
may create unto the carriage of their designs.

And lastly, from the great derogation that this may cause both in our own and
after times, from the validity of those good Laws, which they shall now make,
and the too too semblable excuses, that you may furnish ill minded people
withal, to a colorable underprising thereof, and a substraction of obedience
from them.

1 The nature of the work, which is a work of of peace and righteousness,
requires a peaceable and calm proceeding, for though we have found it true
through Gods miraculous mercy sometime, that union has been raised out of the
ashes that Tumult and division have left; Yet such peace is a rare Phaenix and
such extraordinary revolution are noe proper scales for us to measure our
proceedings by. Rules and actions must be collected from those experiments,
which are daily and frequent, not from wonders, and miracles, which are seldom
seen. Surgeons think it not safe to stabb their patients, because one
perhaps was so delivered of an impostume. The providence of God, that
overswayeth all actions, can turn the design of an enemy into the work of a
physician. And he that made all things of nothing, can make what he pleases
of any thing, and bring his own most wise conclusions, out of the most
contradictory premises. But yet those rare and stupendous works of his, are
noe warrant for us to prescribe to him still to bring to pass such strange
conversions.

Secondly; as it is a work of righteousness, directed to the abollishing of
those errors and vices, which through the malice of the Devil and his
iustruments are of late crept into the Church; so it abhors tumults, and
uiolence.

The fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them, that make peace; says
the Spirit of righteousness and peace. And if we survay the proceedings of
those Ministers and happy Instruments both of peace and righteousness, the
Apostles and Desciples of Christ Jesus, which are good patterns for us to
walk by, we shall find that though they had at least as many difficulties to
meet with, as the sum of all those we can observe or imagine can make up to
lie against the business in hand, yet they made use of noe tumultuous, or
uiolent practices for the compassing of their ends, no-distempered or uncivil
clamours, no threatening demeanours, noe contemptuous carriage against
Governors. Though they found them too untractable, and far from admittance
of that enterptize they intended. They encountered indeed with much violence,
and sedition, many confluences, and erruptions of the people, they had to do
with, breaking out upon them like violent storms, or the unrully surges of the
enraged Ocean. All you may see in the Acts of the holy Apostles, but for
themselves they raised none, but leading on the work with a Calm stream, and
with a peaceable and unpassionate zeal prevailed so far as to beat down
before them the unrully oppositions they found in their way. And make it
appear unto the wonder of the world, that God saves not by sword or spear,
but by a secret and almost unperceived operation, and that the soft and still
voice wherein God was, was more powerful then the most violent winds, Then the
most teareing thunder, yea then the most enraged flames, that any humane fury
could kindle or raise against them. Neither did they abstain as some may
perhaps object either for want of opposition, or through any defect of
Christian zeal, or of a party to countenance a Tumult: Opposition they had
enough to provoke them as is well known, and we have already declared their
zeal! Alas yours at the hottest, if we speak of pious zeal, is but a spark
unto their flame; you may and do (I doubt) exceed in intemperate hearts: But
divine zeal, it is a benign flame, ever accompanied with humility, and
charity, that a Fever, a disease, this a healthful vigor of the Soul, and
in this I dare be bold to say, they were as far beyond the best of you, as
the Sun at noone beyond an Ignis fatuus, neither wanted they a party to have
showed themselves in the matter, with as much noise and violence if they had
pleased, as you have done, If you consider either number or unity, as you may
see if you look upon those great and miraculous increments, and numerous
collonies, that transplanted themselves at once into the Church, even by about
three thousands at a time, as you may read in the acts of the Apostles, for
their number, and if you look upon that one mind, and one heart which was in
them, which could not but add much sttength unto their multitude, so that
their forbearance was not out of any such respects, but out of a careful
watchfulness, not to exceed the Decorum of a Christian moderation, and to do
Christ's work according to his own rule and pattern, in whom the strength of
the Lion of the tribe of Judah, was joined with the meekness, and patience of
a Lamb, and the wisdom of the serpent, with the simplicity of the Dove. And
surely beloved if we would walk in their stepps, it might be a good
presumption of our attaining to the like ends, Since we (if our sins have not
altered the case) have the same God, and patron, of the same power and mercy,
to protect the same cause that they had. And if our offenses have deprived us
of him, it is not all the violence we can use, nor the most impatient
solicitation we can set upon, that can purchase any blessing to the matter in
hand. Therefore in this respect, my advice is unto you, and I hope I shall
join with you, to turn your violence in that kind you wot of, to an holy
violence upon God in your prayers, and instant solicitations of the Throne of
grace, that with united forces, and sanctified importunities you would assault
the Allmighty, for his mercy and compassion, quasi (...) facta, as Tertullian
speaks as an united party, and army of Christians in your holy assemblies;
and this as he speaks would be vis Deo grata, a force very acceptable in
deed unto the Lord, but for your Tumultuous assemblies, I know no such warrant
to judge them pleasant unto him, since I see not any Commission you have from
God unto that purpose; nor any good proportion that they bear unto that issue,
which we earnestly hope to be happy in.

Add unto this, that it is a work of Medicine, or healing, not of
destruction, or dissolution, but so far only as our present tumors and
Corruptions make necessary unto that, the whole state is that great body to be
Phisickt, and cured. The civil State or the Commonwealth in the outward, and
pollitique consideration, is the outward part or Fabrique, the Church in the
spiritual consideration, may well be taken for the inwards, or bowels, or if
you will, the Soul of that body. For these two make up but one and the same,
and differ no futher then the extemall parts or members from the inward or
spiritual part of one, and the same man. And as the outward parts are for the
inwards, and the body for the soul, so the outward state of the Commonwealth,
is for the Church or spiritual part; and as the cure and managing of the body,
is to be directed principally to the good of the soul, so the affairs and
carriages of the Civil state, to be directed principally to the preservation
of the State spiritual, in a Christian Common wealth, which is the only living
body of this kind; Heathen states being at the best but dead Carcases, void of
all inward life as it were. And therefore these two must not be separated too
far, but jointly cared for, with a principal regard ever had unto the
spiritual ends, since the greatness or flourishing of the Commonwealth is
only so far truly comfortable, and healthful, as it tends to the promotion
of Religion, and service the of God, which is the healthful constitution of
the Church. And therefore those Politicians, or Statesmen that make Religion,
and the Church but a means unto outward ends, they set the Cart before the
Horse, and are preposterous in their designs.

The union betwixt these two is like the union between the body and the soul,
which is the uery definition of life, the separation, if to tall, is death, and
what ever tends thereto, leads unto a dissolution. And therefore whosoever
divides these two too far and makes them of too different a consideration,
goes about to divide the form from the matter.

For as Anima is tota in toto, so I dare be bold to say, the Church is
extended, or at least should be through all the members of a Christian
Commonwealth: so that even the state is an Eclesiasticall body. Some
conclusions will follow upon this, that might perhaps discover some Paralogismes
in the ordinary discourse of these times, but I pursue the business I have in
hand.

The distempers of the Church are like those extremities and disorders, which
are in the faculties or passions of the soul. The sores of the Commonwealth
as the wounds of the body. And as in the humane or natural, these two have a
mutual, coaction or reaction; the distemper of the soul causing diseases in
the body and on the Contrary the diseases of the body procuring inordinate
affections in the soul. So here, the miscarriages in the Church are the causes
of the miscarriage in the Commonwealth, and the distempers of the
Commonwealth bring forth diseases of the Church, And to speak truly I do
more then doubt, that for the present we are under a shrewd Complication of
these two kinds of diseases: therefore it is time to look after the Physician,
and who is that? it will be worth the knowing.

The Archiatros or principal Physician, in whose power and skill only the
cure lies, it is none but God alone, under him in the Ministerial work; both
Magistrates and Ministers. Some of these are more for outward applications, and
some for inward; of the former sort there are the Magistrates, especially the
King, or as Galen (if my memory does not fail me) says of a Physician, that
Medicus debet esse, tanquam Imperator, so I may say on the contrary, that
Imperator debet esse tanquam medicus, a King ought to be like a Physician
(under him) the subordinate Governors for ordinary and particular cures, of
known and Common diseases, the Ministers they are for inward applications; The
Parliament is that great Council, or College of state Physicians, assembled
under his Majesty to consider of public and extraordinary evils, which are
not so safely to be committed to the skill or faith of particular Men, and they
are to consider of all sorts of distempers, whether inward or outward, in
Church, or State, whether they be against our Temporal, or Spiritual good,
and since both these works are in their hands, and agents are to be fitted to
their ends, I desire it may be seriously waighed, whether they should not
Consist of both Spiritual, and Civil members, that may be fitted both for the
discovery and remedy of both sorts of diseases.

And these are the great and extraordinary doctors of the Commonwealth and
Church, of whom under God we hope for the cure, that the body may again
receive vital action, freely and without interception from the Soul, and the
soul yield it franckly unto the body. The Medicines, that they are to apply,
are wholesome and good Laws, for quod Medieamenta morbis id praestant jura
negotiis, says the Civil Law.

So you see it is a work of medicine or healing, and in this respect as it
requires in them skill, faithfulness, courage, freedom from passion. So it
concerns you to demean your selves quietly, whether you reckon your selves
to be patients, as I confess I do, or whether as assistants, or standers by.
If patients the very title teaches you not to be impatient.

If assistants, or standers by, you must not trouble or interpose in the work,
if you can say any thing, that may give light unto the Physician, for the more
clear discovery of the disease, do it in the name of God modestly, and
peaceably; but do not prescribe to the Physicians for the Medicine, least if
you will needs be pleased, we that I say not you, be not perfectly cured; that
Physician, that will yield to administer every thing, that either the patient
longs for, or the standers by can talk of, shall try many experiments, but
heal few diseases.

And give me leave here to advise you, that you be not too earnest for
Empiricall receipts, that have had some success in other Bodies, the various
customs, or age, or temper of this, and the necessities of those may much
alter the case, and perhaps though the bodies be like, the diseases are not the
same, perhaps the same ingredientes here in this Climate may have another kind
of virtue, either in nature or degree then they have in other; as it is
observed of Physical simples. I pray you leave the Physicians to their own
work, and do not disturb them with clamorous exactions.

They are not met as Cooks in a Kitchen, to please your pallats, but as
Physicians in Conclavi medicinali, to displease your diseases, and to heal
your body.

Let them alone then, and trouble them no longer (with I pray you administer
this, or that) but leave it to their skill and care: and to the blessing of
God, and take heed especially you prescribe not to him.

Lastly, it is a work of reparation of the house or Spiritual Temple of God:
and therefore as in the building of the Temple, there was no noise of axe or
hammer to be heard, but all things were to be done without noise or tumult, so
here in this repair of the Spiritual Temple all things are to be done
without tumult, or passion. God would not have his holy Arc carried upon
Beasts, but by men, which me thinks; may intimate thus much unto us, that he
will have matters of the Church managed not by passions and unruly affections
which is the beastly part in us, but by calm and quiet reason, which is the
part which styles us men.

At least it is not fit for you to trouble your selves and them in this kind,
because of your different constitution, and various interest you have in the
business. That your Constitution is different from theirs. If you confess
not, the distance is so much the greater, you will not deny, I am con^ident,
but there are many degrees of wisdom betwixt you. I will not say very near,
as much as is between the sensitive and the rational. It is well if you have
enough to steer you right in your private and mechanical affairs, which is
your proper station, or calling, and you may do well to consider, whether you
do well to neglect that business God has set you about, to meddle with that
you have no calling unto. But they are Stars of a greater magnitude, and
therefore may move in a higher Sphere, and you may be content to receive their
influences I hope, it is not in you all to challenge so much light unto your
selves, as to judge of laws being made, much less to determine and set down
magisterially unto them, what constitutions they are to frame.

And as your constitution is very diverse, so your interest is not the same with
theirs. Their calling and commission, unto which you amongst others have
subscribed, engages them to the well-doing of the work so far, that they are
answereable to the great God for all errors and misprisions therein, and must
go away either with the glory, or the shame of it. Your interest is to receive
the benefit together with them of their happy designs, to reap the harvest of
that good seed, which they shall sow, to gather the fruit of those wholesome
plants, which they shall plant in the garden of the Commonwealth, which I wish
may prove unto every one of us, as the Garden, or paradise of God, yiedling
forth unto you, that mortal fruit of the tree of life, and of knowledge, free
both from the curse of the one, or the flaming sword of the other, to the
eternal comfort of all your souls. If this move you not to give over your
unquiet motions, give me leave to mind you of the general concernement, I
might say of all Christendom, and the world, for I hope this may prove in the
event, and diffusive good of their determinations to have been an Oecumenicall
Parliament, that may open fountains of truth, and peace together with
holiness, unto the whole universe, to water, and make fruitful all the Barren
and thirsty places of the world, that like the Sun or Stars in the Firmament,
they may disperse the glorious beams of their light into the darkest corners
of the Earth. But I need not fetch my rise so-farre, the general concernment
of the whole state, and Church of England, if you consider it, as you may and
ought to do, will yield you reasonable motives enough to sit down, and not to
take upon you to be moderatours, and bear the sway according to your humors
in those affairs, which concern them all, unless you could show any warrant
from the whole, whereby they have designed you to become their sollicitours.

I confess you are a great and a principal part; but yet you are not the
whole body. There are many millions more, that must either be happy, or
unhappy in the success of this Parliament, then are within the walls, or
subburbes of this City, whereof you are thought to be no greater a part,
then you make show off, and you cannot assure me nor yourselues, that those
things that you so earnestly look for; will be satisfactory to all the rest.
They have not committed their cause to your uote, but to the Parliament, whom
they have made their Vicars and proxies for the managing of this great work.
And as they gave them this power freely, so they may justly look that it may
be freely exercised by them, unto whom they have so committed it, and may well
take any force in the least appearance that is offered upon them to be a
limitation of their own freedom. will not this brotherly regard prevail with
you? I trust at least you are tender of the Parliament, your professions aver
it, let your performances confirm it. Consider therefore in the fourth place,
the great imputations that these proceedings of yours may seem to lay upon
them. The Galls of the spurrs are usually abated for, in the price and uallue
of the horse The use of the whip or the voice of the rider is in a sort the
reproach of the Palfrey. Frequent Admonions have their secret Accusations in
them, and therefore men take it for a difgrace to be invited too often to their
duties: Especially if there be the least show of violence or force in it, it
does not only tax either the wisdom or the will or the power of the Agents,
which are attended with Ignominy, but it does also rob virtue of the praise by
taking away the glory that is in the (...) freedom of her Performances, and
discorrageth the work by making it seem slavish.

You are wise enough to make the application, and I have business enough to do
to forbear it, or if you will have it, make it your selves, by giving your
selves the answer unto these few Questions.

Do you think the Parliament wise enough to discern and discover what is fit
to be done, and to Lay hold upon the fit opportunities, which belong unto
every motion to be set forward?

Do you conceive they are honest enough in their wills, to make a fit and a
seasonable pursuit of those good ends which they have before them.

Do you think them furnished with abilities answerable to the work in hand,
and to bring the means and the issue together?

Do you know where to mend them in all or any of these? I am sure I do not,
and I think not you; why then may they not be trusted with the work, why
cannot they be let alone? why do not you Conceive it better for you to
follow your trads and callings which is the business which God has set you
about, then to trouble your selves and others in your unnecessary meetings at
westminster? I say noe more in this point, But I pray you be tender of the
Credit of the Parliament

Or if not: yet in the fifth place, Let me advise you be tender of the
success it self; the Proverb is I confess, that many hands make light work,
but it is not all ways verified in the better sense, sometimes the excess of
agents takes not so much from the burden and toil, as from the weight and
the substance of it.

A business may be half lost if we take not heed in a confused Crowd,
especilly where the skill is not multiplied with the numbers: Too much handling
does use to soil the Artifice, and over much meddling may as well disturb the
order and frame, as put for ward the Course of the motion, and if it move not
in order and frame, the swifter it goes on, the sooner it may be shaken to
pieces, and bury our hopes together in its ruin.

Take heed I beseech you, the Fabrique in hand is a piece of great Curiosity,
and depends much upon the right disposure of the parts; And therefore not fit
for the touch of every rash and unskilful hand, until it be wholly made up
and perfected, and then I hope it will be so compacted together, that you may
safely both weigh it, and enjoy it, and will have no need of any mending by
your hands. Till then your wisest course will be to stand a loose of, and take
what comfort you can in the view of it at distance, but give not your judgment
till you see it finished; He that should stand by a Painter, and should see
him drawing the first and second Lineaments of that piece which he means to
perfect hereafter, and judge of the work before it be half done, would
detract much from the Painters skill, and not add much unto his own
judgment. Snspend your censure then, till the workmen give over, and be not
too busy in tonching, and handling it before the coullours be quit dry, least
you moyle your selves and deface the piece, and so lay your own errors upon
the Artificers.

Sixthly, if all this cannot turn the scales, give me leave in the sixth and
last place to present unto you one weighty and serious consideration, and to
desire you to be seriously cautelous, that you do not enervate, what you
entend to promote. I know it is your desire that the healthful and glorious
design in hand, may not only be perfected and finished, but that it may be
fixed, and settled upon so strong a Basis and foundation that it may not be
shaken down again by any storms or tempests whatsoever, that the Devil or
any instruments of his can raise against it: That those good laws which shall
be now enacted, may be as a chain of gold for glory, and excellency, so that
they may be strong and dureable as iron, able to bind, and keep in their due
order and limits all the most extravagant members of this state.

Now the great Buttresse or Foundation upon which the Laws of England stand
(If I be not mistaken) is upon the free consent of the King and subject, in the
composing and farming of them. And that is indeed the strongest metal to make
a chain of, to bind men withal, that any humane Lawgiver can make choice of,
since it is that suits best with the nature of man, which is commonly amourous
of Liberty, and is apt to take all things with the left hand that savor of
abridgement or imposition: And does also prevent them most of all excuses or
quarrels against the laws, for since it does in a sort make them all (for the
considerable part in policy) as well parties and agents in the making of the
yoke, as passive in the bearing of it, we are so much the more deprived of all
plea and exception against it, until it be taken off, or abrogated by the
like power and upon the same terms.

It is our general inclination, that we had rather be taken to yield, than to
be overcome, for though they both take up at one Inn many times, yet the
former is thought to be the fairer way: whatsoever our own wills have not a
hand in the passing, we usually account our selves either robbed or cheated of;
But that which is given away, is thought as good very near as a possession,
and a voluntary bondage better then a forced freedom, (if I may so speak) yea
we take our selves to be all a kind of Kings, as long as we under a
voluntary subjection. And indeed such kind of Laws are of a larger
jurisdiction than others that put themselves on with force and violence, and
are received with reluctance of the people, since they lay hold upon the whole
man in a sort, and engage the will it self, which is most in tollerant of
captivity-and the most unsatisfiable objectour against such kind of
obligations; And as their extent is more Large, so their force more strong too,
since to the reason of the law and power of the Lawgiver, they carry also the
consent of the subject, which three makes up that three fold cord which is not
easily broken, whereby Laws are bound up into a solid body, and secured from
the shocke of refractorines or opposition.

The reason or wisdom of the Law is I confess, the most reasonable
engagement, and the necessity of any other I conceive to be the fruit of
corruption, but we must be considered and provided for as we are, and that
is (I doubt) for the most part consisting, more of will then Judgment: So few
there are amongst us I fearc, that have understanding enough to be convinced,
and therefore as the case stands for the general, he does too little for the
inforcement of a rule, that makes it bright and clear, For the eye of the
soul, unless he add some spring or motion to sway the moving part, which is
the will which proves of two sullen a temper many times to embrace that light
which is offered though it be never so clear, and good. There is a medea in us
whch bewitcheth us to a video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor. So that there
must be strength in a Law, as well as light and reason, to sway the will, as
well as to convince the judgment.

And the will or motive part of man shows it self in two things, in
inclinetion, and action. The power of the Lawgiver may do something upon the
Latter to restrain or agritate our performances, but it has little to do with
the former, the inclination, and if that be not subdued in some reasonable
sort the obedience in acction will be neither constant not sincere, but
accompanied with murmurrs and complaints, with Evasions and imputations both
upon the Law and Lawgivers, as tyrannical and oppressive; But where the
consent of those that are to be subject goes along with the rest, and has a
competent share in the making of Laws, there the Judgment and outward actions
are bound up together with the in lination, and the yoke is made in a sort
lonely and easy, being lined as it were with the consent of the subjects,
which keeps it from galling, and them from weariness and complaining. And
there fore that government where this consent is wanting, must either have a
weak or slavish people to deal with, or it may prove but wavering and of no
long continuance, which makes me believe that the government of England both
in this and other respects, if it be kept within its moderate limits, is the
best government in the world.

A maine thing therefore for the consolidating and establishing of Laws is the
free and general consent of the people, in making of them: And this consent is
of two sorts, either personal or numerall, whetein all have their particular
and express votes, or by substitution and proxey, where the consents of the
whole are made over unto some that are representative of all the rest who
submit both their Judgments and their wills unto them, which is most
necessary in great and polous bodies, both for the avoiding of Tumult and
muteny, which is too ordinarily incident unto great meetings, and for the
supply of that want of judgment which is in the many, which would hardly
either direct them to the best, or admit of agreement in that which were
tolerable.

And also for aprevention of a dissolution of trading which must necessarily
follow, if every particular member should leave his ordinary function, and
calling. and betake himself to the making of Laws: which would be also the
dissolution of the Commonwealth, and were to destroy the body, for the cure of
the diseases of it. And indeed it is but to yelld unto mere necessities, and
impossiblities, (Tyrants that we must all live under) which forbid any faisible
orderly concurrence of so many into one Council or conclaue. since no place
would be either big enough to receive them, neither would their immensity
suffer them to draw near enough together, to Communicate their Councels, and
advices, but one part must needs be a stranger unto the other, Nor would their
number or multitude admit of any fit course or time, for the computation or
comparing of their votes: for these, and perhaps some other reasons, which for
the present I think not of, it is most necessary, and unavoidable, that the
innumerable multitude of the Subjects of a Kingdom, should by ellection of
their Proxies, and respective attorneys be reduced into a competent and
assemlable all company of those, which are of the wiser, and more excellent
constitution, who are to act for all the rest, and in their name, and power to
give their voices either with, or against those constitutions, which are to be
binding to the whole body. And here I conceive is the very reasonable, and even
natural foundation of a Parliament, which is that excellent Quintessentiall
Body, as I may so speak, in whom the whole State or Commonwealth does both
judge, and consent either to approve or disapprove of those things which shall
be proposed, The members whereof I conceive to be of two sorts, some settled
and appointed in their particular condirions, by the fundamentals laws of this
kingdom, which may seem to be a kind of original stateclection, others
occasionally chosen by the uotes of the people whose elective uoyces fortified
by the Kings writ or commission, designs them for their legis-latiue, and
Parlamentary power. In this body there are uertually contained all the
considerable members of the Commonwealth either in person, or by their joint
and seuerali procuratours and atrurnyes: And as their acts are in account the
Acts of the whole State, so their freedom is in a manner the freedom of the
whole, and any uiolence which may be derogatiue unto their free proceedings is
equally operative as may seem for the dissen forceing of their laws, or at
least to give a hint unto those that have a desire to exept against them, as if
it had been offered unto the great body of the Commonwealth it self, neither
skills it much, (I conceave) whether this uiolence (be it in truth, or in
appearance) proceed from an external or foreign power, or from an
unauthenticall part of the same body, for the general consent or freedom
seems abated, not only when they are surprised and awed by foreign forces
or terror, but when any part does give a semblance of swaying and overpowering
the rest, or to draw and exact from them that which is done by clamor or
tumult, especially when that part have divested themselves of their power and
uotes, by translating them upon that representative body. And such is the case
with you and the Parliament. Therefore if you should but by the show of terror
and uiolence (which your irregular concourse, and tumults may savor off)
detract any thing but in appearance from their freedom in their agitation and
conclusion of those businesses they have in hand: Take heed you do not
endanger an abatement of the estimate or ualue of those laws which they shall
make, and that you prepare not too much room for those that shall dislike them
hereafter, to pretend that they were made in terror and tumult, and rather by
the clamor af a multitude, than by the uotes and deliberate judgments of
those to whom the King and kingdom had committed the work, and so by your too
much keenesse in urging and pressing upon the business, you take not off the
edge and efficacy of their constitutions. Since those decrees that have too
much of force in the making, prove many times to have too little in the binding.

Let me entreat you therefore my brethren as you love the peace of the Church,
and desire the happy end may be attained, unto which the great Counsel of the
Kingdom is now directed, and that it may prove a solid and established work,
that you will weigh these reasons, with an impartial mind, putting of all
self-love and prejudice and that you will now at length desist and sit down,
and expect with patience the desired success, let it be yoar studdy to live
uprightly and honestly in your trades and callings, and to keep your selves
within your limits, and to the conscionable exercise of your proper
employments, and not to intrude into that you understand not: If you will needs
be active in reformation, let it be in the reformation of your selves. Call a
Parliament in your own hearts and assemble all the faculties of your souls in
the court of your own consciences, to discover and redress those grievances
that are there, which lie toward the ruin of that commonwealth, which will be
the best way, that I know for you to take, to set forward the public
reformation, en^ct laws in your own hearts against your own coveteousnes;
your oppressions, your deceitful and unjust dealings in your trades, against
your unquiet and distempered affections, against your spiritual pride and
factions, inclinations, execute judgment, upon those firebrands there, which
are ever contriving a devision and separation between your God and you, and
between you and one another, and adorn your felves with a meek and quiet
spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price, so shall you be a great
means to cause God to divert his judgments from us, and to restore his
favorable countenance toward us again, and to send his blessing upon the
Parliament and the whole State to the redress of those evils under which we
labor and to the procurement and establishment of that good which may be to
the resetling of this tottering Church and State in that condition which shall
be best pleasing unto him, and most comfortable unto his people, delivering us
both from superstition and profaneness, garding us both from Tyranny and
Anarchy protecting us both from oppression and rebellion, freeing us both from
herisie and Schisms that we may be a glorious Church unto himself, and an
imitable example both of peace, truth and holiness to the whole world: That a
foundation may be laid here of a great conversation of the whole world unto
Christ of the calling home of the Jews, of the convertion of all turks and
heathens, and all Antichristian and wicked heretics, to the abolishment of the
Tyranny and usupation of that man of sin, the Romish wolf, and to the wished
reconcilement of the Protestant Churches and all others in one and the same
saving and substantial truth, however any of them may differ in outward forms
or ceremonies. God of his mercy grant this unto us, and make you to desire
nothing but what is conducing hereunto, and give you grace to pursue it
peaceably and christianly, yielding to the necessity of a graduall and orderly
proceeding, and not running out of one extreme into another, least the evils
be rather changed then remedred. In such defines the Lord grant you a gracious
hearing, and answer you with a desired blessing, to the confusion of his
enemies, and the promotion and establishment of the Gospel and Kingdom of
Christ Jesus, and the same God bless, guide, and protect the Kings Majesty,
and the high and honorable assembly of Parliament, a proceeding free from all
devision and passion with comptiame and correspondancy, they may conclude in
that, not which you not I, or any other may fancy or desire, but in that which
is agreeable to the will, and conducing to the glory or God, thoug never so
contrary to your desires and to the reformation of all evils in the Church and
state, and the settling of peacle and truth amongst us, Amen.

But alas I doubt the prime fountain of their distemper, is notiin you
altogether, I remember I have read a saying to this purpose. That popluus est
tanquam mare, quod exsequietam et tanquillum semper manet nullis fluctitie
agitatur nisi cum ab Aeolis concitatur surit. That the people are like unto the
sea, which of it self is quiet and calm, not tossed with waves and surges
when it is troubled, and agitated with winds. There are therefore it may be
doubted some Aeoli amongst you, some vu ruly; and swelling spirits that are the
boutefeux, and shirrers up of those tempestuous motions which are among you, I
dare not accuse any; but who ever they be, let me tell them that I doubt it
will be found a work that will receive but an uncomfortable recompense from
the God of peace, to kindle the fire of tumult and sedition in the Church, if
Vriah met with a breath from the Lord, for laying a rash hand upon the Arc, to
keep it from falling, when it was shaken, what a breach think you may they
expect, that by their timorous attempts upon it, do as much as in them lies,
shiver into pieces that holy arc of the Lords house, look but upon the
Guerdon of murmurers, and factionists in this world; in the fixteenth of the
Book of Numb. And it may light you to a shrewd guest what reward they are like
to have in the world to come; I am loath to suppect any, but give me leave to
admonish all, Et capuit qui capere potest, and to put you in mind how
disproportioned such wisdom is unto that wisdom which comes from above,
which the Apostle tells you, not I, (and I hope he may yet pass for
anthenticall) that it is first pure then peaceable, Gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits without judging and without
hypocrisy; and before at the thirteen verse of the same Chapter, who is a wise
man, and endued with knowledge among you, let him show by a good converfation,
his works in meekeuesse and wisdom; And on the contrary. But if ye have
bitter envying, and strise in your hearts, rejoice not, neither be liers
against the truth, this wifed once desendeth not from above, but is earrhly;
sensual, divelish; For where envy, and strine is; there is sedition and all
manner of evil works, surely if Saint James be canonical Scripture (as I
hope that will be none of our new doubts) then this is a orthodox Doctrine, and
if this be orthodox doctrine, the praetife of some of you is but an hetrodox
practice, the I ordes are so clear, they need no great comintary, you see
here the plain characters, of heavenly and divelish wifedome set down by
their true and opposite properties in the: name of God, unmaske your selves,
and look upon your selves in this glass, and I am persuaded you will not all
be enamoured on your own features, you will I hope be out of love than with
the deformity of tumultuous proseedings.

But especially my Brethren of the ministry, I beseech you by all those great
bonds of obligation that you owe unto Christ Jesus the prince of peace, That as
you (...) be Ministers of peace, and as you (...) the Gospel of (peace so your
would by all means pofible both by doctrine and example (...) the (...) of the
(...) of the Church, (...) I beseech you all Vainglory and (...) with the
desire of populatity; and put on the spirit of m^^k^^s and sincerity let your
tongues be lick the Tongue of the wise which is health, to like whole again
(as I may so speak) the sores and breaches of Israel, and not like the tongue
of the wicked which is as words and spears: to pierce and vulnerate the
mystical body of Christ, and to make breaches in that building which he has
Cemented to gether with his own most precious blood: oh stifle I beseech you,
that bitter proverb, that it may be anathematized fio^ amongst us that omne
malum a sacerdotique. But alas why do I speak thus unto you, I beseech you
pardon me; I do willingly acknowledge, the ministry of London to be the Glory
of the Church of Eugland, but yet I fear there may be some meteors, amongst
those glorious stares, if there be, than this is theyrs. And I entreat them to
consider of it with a meek and a christian heart, and to weigh it well,
whether that truth lasts not longest and speedeth not best, that is brought
in and fomented by a peaceable mind, and so I committ you al unto God, and to
the power of his grace, beseeching his gloriours Majesty that he will give us
al hearts to endeavor the making up of those miserable distractions that are
amongst us, that mercy and truth may meet to together, and righteousness and
peace may kiss each other: that he will be pleased to take pity upon our
poor distressed Churches, that they be not consumed in the flames of their
own discords to the glory and rejoicing of the adversaries of the Lord, that
once more we may serve him with united hearts, and that peace may be within our
walls, and plentiousnesse within our palaces: none but thou only can do it
O Lord, help us O Lord our God, for vain is the help of man; And so the God
of peac ewhich brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, the great shepehard
of the sheep make you perfect, strengthen and stablish you and us all, for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

