THE TAKING OF WINCHESTER BY THE Parliaments Forces.

As also The surrendering up of the Castle.

Wherein they took two Regiments of the Cavalleres that were under the command
of the Lord Grandison.

By I. VV. an eye witness.

Rev. 16. 16. And they gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew
tongue Armageddon.

Rev. 18. 2. And he cried mightily, with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the
great to fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils: and the hold of every
foul Spirit and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

London, Printed for the Author. 1642.

To the Right Worshipful Master Thomas Clarke, and Master Thomas Cart,
Bailiffes of TEUKSBURIE: And To Master William Wilson, Master William Croste,
Master Thomas Hale, Mr. Theoph: Ally Mr. John Millington, Mr. Henry Lane, Mr.
Thomas Clarke junior, Mr. Edward Phelps; and to all the rest of the well
affected to King and Parliament there: John Ward wishes true peace and
freedom here, and ete^^^l felicity hereafter.
RIght Worshipful, and the rest of my friends and acquaintance, I here present
you with a short Relation of the taking of Winchester; which is (though easily
accomplished, yet) worth the hearing. I confess these are not times for men to
spend in writing or reading Histories: But this being matter of discouragement
to the foe, and of great encouragement to us, I thought good to divulge: and so
much the rather, because I know it has been published already by a false
Copy, which mentions the enemies issuing out of the City to meet us; which is
no such matter, and deserves a check rather then approbation. Worthy
Gentlemen, the respect and duty that I owe to you all, does enforce me to make
this Dedication to you, knowing you all to be Patrons to all virtuous actions,
in the Town where I was borne, and well-wishers to me: and therefore I
presume, that though it be but slenderly composed, (the Subject being a known
truth, and I your native Countriman as well in affection as by birth) you will
with the more tenderness pass by any blurre committed in the penning thereof,
and censure more favorably of my blunt and weak expressions. And no question
but that you (setting Winchester before you for an example) will with the more
courage and unwearied resolution defend your (yet unplunder'd) Corporation from
the barbarous cruelty, and from the ambitious pride and insolency of so
destructive an enemy; who if he once enters will leave you nothing to take
pleasure in, but the ruins of an once flourishing Corporation. Thus barring
complements, I remain your must affectionate and faithful friend,

John Ward.

The Argument.
MArleborough plundered: the enemy
To Andever, and Wantwich hye.
The reasons why, at Wantwich they
Suffered the foe to runaway.
Their sudden march to Andever:
The foes remove to Winchester.
Our forces follow, without stay:
What accidents fell out by the way.
The Townsmen keep them out, but yet
They run for it, when they come to fight.
Our Army enters: but the foe
For safety, does to the Castle go.
But being destitute of aid,
To end the quarrel they assayed.
Quarter is given, the chiefest guests
They prisoners keep; let go the rest.
The Town is pillaged, but all
The worst do on the Clergy fall.
The fair Cathedral pill'd they then;
Undid the Priests and Singing-men.
Some things amiss he wishes mended.
And so the Comedy is ended.
The taking of Winchester.
WHen Redding could no longer entertain
Our enemies, and they were forced again
To march away; lest meagre Famine should
Their haughty spirits (pined with want) new mould:
Into three parts they did themselves divide;
One part in Redding stayed, another hy'd
To Oxford, and to Marleborough the third:
At whose feared presence all the Country stirred.
Yet they with much ado entered the Town,
Having first burnt some of their houses down.
That trusty Town they plundered in a rage,
'Cause they opposed them; that ('it is thought) an age
Of years can hardly ever it repair,
To make it half so flourishing, and fair.
This heavy news soon to the Generals ear
Was brought, by some that did inhabit there;
Who being moved at the relation, sent
Well near four thousand horse incontinent,
T'encounter with the thieves; and ere that we
Had marched two days, the spoiling enemy
We had espied, one part of them; for they
Divided were after they took the prey.
To Wantwich this part went, when we had taken
(Had we made better have) both horse and man.
But being dark, and wet, and late in the night,
We could not close them in, nor could we fight.
Besides, we wanted good instructions too,
And for the present knew not what to do.
These lets gave the enemy a large occasion
To get without the reach of our invasion,
Ere we could reach the Town; yet some we took,
Poor ragged rogues, as ere eye on did look.
A great deal of their plunder there they lost,
And left behind, being in their journey crossed.
Our men got horses there; there store of cloth,
Some fine, some coorse, linen and woollen both.
Thence sheets, and shirts, and pewter, and such gear,
Our Soldiers did upon their horse-backes bear.
Thence we removed, and marched to Andevere,
A base malignant Corporation; where
The other part of Rebels did reside,
Who having notice durst no longer bide
In that poor naked Town, but marched away,
Hearing of our approach that Sabbath day.
There quartered we two nights: the morrow after
Were our Dragoones sent three miles off to quarter,
'Twixt that and Winchester: (for thither all
The Cavalleres were gone, both great and small,)
That so they with less difficulty might
Be drawn out, if occasion served to fight.
That night our foes gave counsel some should arm,
With winged speed, to give us an alarm.
Two hundred of their men that were best horst,
For speed and surenesse, presently rode post,
To strike th'Allarum up, at Andever,
To force us to our Arms, and to strike fear
Into our Army: but before they come
To Andever, they understood that some
Of our men quartered by the way; and stayed
And to improve the least advantage 'say'd.
Our careless men all being fast asleep,
No Spies sent out, no Court of Guard did keep;
Not one of them stood Centry; the enemy
Did well approve of their security;
Rushed in upon them, snorting in their nest,
As swift as thought, slew some, and took the rest:
Some two or three they slew; an hundred more
They prisoners took, and drove them on before.
As fast as they could scour it, back again
To Winchester they hy'd with might and maine.
By this time we, though ignorant of all
The hardship that our fellows did befall,
Rousde up betimes that morning, were prepared
To follow our design Winchester ward:
Both heaven and earth favored our enterprise,
Both did assist us'gainst our enemies.
Aurora bravely did her beams display,
And friendly Sol presaged a glorious day.
Me thoughts the Sun stood still, or else our steeds
Posted that time with more then common speeds.
No cowards then, none staid behind for fear,
But all strove which of them should first come there.
And hearing what the enemy had done,
That stirred new fire, and drew new fury on.
Over the pleasant downs they scoured a pace,
As every steed had been of Phoebus race.
Ground of our foes we got, which made them mad
To lose the prizners which before they had.
As many then, as haste would suffer them
To kill, they slew, turned up the rest again.
By means whereof, they (marching on so fast)
Regained the Town, and all their business cast.
Er'e we approached the walls, the Cavaliers
Made haste, and got the Castle over their ears,
And carried as much luggage thither too,
As so much time permitted them to do.
Most of the chief malignants in the Town,
And Gentry of the Country up and down,
(Whereof that Countries almost all composed,
Or else of such as with their actions closed,)
Took sanctuary there, and took upon them
To guard it, so that none should take it from them.
The Citizens took on them to defend
The City walls; the Castilians did depend
Upon the Townesmens promise, and to speak
The truth, they did their best, but were too weak.
No sooner had the enemy possessed
Himself o'th Town, but straight our forces pressed
Near to the walls, where the base City band
Of trained men their entrance did withstand.
There is a ditch much like a more, but dry
Without the walls, which helps to fortify
The traitorous Town, there our dragoons did stand,
And like themselves, defide the City band.
A breach was in the wall, through which our men
With near two hundred bullets greeted them;
Who being seldom used to such hot cheer
For breakefast, as our soldiers showed them there,
Pledged them with half a score, and near upon
Such a small parcel from the Castle come.
Mean while our men the second time gave fire,
Which made the cowardly enemy retire:
Whereat our youths impatient of delay,
Through the ditch up to the wall made way;
On hoys'de another up, the breach to scale,
Where they their conquering swords did flourish all.
The Townsmen being so poorly overcome,
Ran all away each to his proper home,
Threw off their arms, their weapons laid aside
In some by-place, where they might not be spide.
Stood jetting in their doors in peaceful tire,
As if that they to war had no desire.
This while our men within took pains to let
The horsemen in, that they might scour the street,
Which done, some feared lest that the Cavalliers
Might send some private bullets'bout their ears.
And slyly cut them off as they should enter,
Amongst whom some ch^ef^ Commanders feared to venture;
But yet the army stood in general
To enter, whatsoer'e did them befall,
Which made the rest more forwardly appear,
Fearing lest they should lose their credit there.
First noble Bedfords regiment began
To lead the way, resolving every man
Either to take the Town, or in pursuit
Thereof, to dye, lawfully called too're:
The rest in order marched by degrees
Till all were got within the liberties.
Unto the silent Forum, marched we than
In triumph not opposed by any man.
There we our conquering Ensigns did advance
A dismal sight to the inhabitants.
Then those that did oppose us-most before,
Did as our vassals stand: as if none more
Desired our presence; None so diligent
As they, to give the Soldiers content.
With bread, cheese, beef, one waits; another stands
With beer; glad they will accept on it at their hands:
And happy's he that first has spent his store,
To run the sooner to procure them more.
As soon then as the streets were all made clear,
Strong Courts of guard, and centries every where
Were placed to keep all passages, that non
Might pass without good information.
That day, and all that night, next morning we
The Castle thought t'assault, when presently
The enemy to our commanders sent
T'intreat a parley, whereto they gave consent.
Upon which parley it was concluded on
To yield up their commanders every one
To us for prisoners, and the soldiers they
Must only with their lives escape away:
Their horses, arms, and money was to be
Disposed of to be our soldiers see.
But crafty Machivilians, they had gone
Knowing themselves vanquished and over come,
And set their colors all of them on fire
Belonging to both regiments entire:
Rich fringe of gold, that lately compast round
Romes gorgeous ensigns lay upon the ground;
Envying that our men should triumph over
Them with those flags they flourisht with before.
'Twas death to them poor envious men to see
Their ruin made for our posterity.
There their chiefest honor in the ashes lies,
The rest our soldiers challenged for a prise.
That morning all, till after noone were we
Emploi'd in plundering of the enemy.
There our dragoons, whose horses were so bad
Got better steeds then many troopers had:
Rich scarlet coats, and suites, and rockets, they
That got in first, seized on and took away:
Fine Holland shirts, sheets, aprons, and such gear
(Which they had robbed from Marleborough I fear)
Their curious beavers, felts, bands, silver, gold,
And more then my small knowledge can unfold:
Brave slashing swords, and belts, and skarfes they got,
Rings, Arms, Carbines, Boots, Pistols, (and what not?)
This heat being past, our men went up and down
To plunder base malignants in the Town.
Then Meteers, Drapers shops, went all to wrack.
That at our entrance sought to keep us back;
Or that conceived the smallest discontent,
Against the vote for King and Parliament.
(I wish the Soldiers in their blundering zeal,
Wronged not our own poor suffering Common weal.)
Th'houses of Deanes, and Prebends suffered much,
Who ever escaped, they surely got a touch:
There many black coats got a desperate f^ll,
But chiefly those, men styled Canonical:
They made such work with them, and with their wive^,
That some were almost weary of their lives.
Borrowed so many mourning cloakes, suits, gowns,
And petticoats, that half a dozen towns
Do hardly so much cloth and silks afford,
To furnish them, as they before were stored.
Whilst yet Revenge was reeking hot, before
Their hands were cold, and heat of blood was over,
They sound the Minster our, (with much ado,
Such strange Meanders do belong thereto.)
A stately thing it is, and beautified
With many curious S^atues too besi^e.
The Pope himself before this time had never
So many superstitious Rites as there.
But now they are so demolisht in that Town,
That now, if ever; Popery go^s down.
Into the great Sanctorum entered they
Where hallowed things, unseene this many a day*
They to the public view discovered,
And made as common as th'In-keepers bed.
Th'Organs uncas'd, that every one might see
Whence they derived so sweet an harmony.
So well they liked them, that they did presume
Each man to take a Pipe, and play his tune.
This was liked best: before they would not go
Without a man to tune, and one to blow.
But now each man may play his part at large,
Well forecasted, and save the Town the charge.
Then to the Vestry orderly they go,
Where they presented were with such a show
Of brave laced Surplices, Hoods, Tippets, Plate,
And prick-song books, that 'twould a man amate
To see the sight: Cushions embroydered rich,
With many a costly ceremonious stitch.
They seize on all they light on, and divide
This Microcosme of rich Cathedral pride.
Nor are they so content: but vexed to see
Their superstitious Shrines, run presently,
Cut, slash, and hew them, face, legs, feet, and hands,
There Westons (now deformed) Statue stands.
The Churchmen by this means are all undone,
In their old course they cannot now go on.
The Singing man is broke: he mournes and grieves:
What, Surplice too? ah sacrilegious thieves.
They must perform their office peece-meale now,
Not with their music, as they used to do.
O sad distressed times! their tone is lost,
Their vestments stolen; never were men so crossed.
Their Temple is perpetually disgraced,
And all the Relics of their Saints defaced.
The oldest man alive did never see
A piece of Church work done so suddenly.
Had but old Paul's been edifi'd so soon,
'T had never cost so much as now't has done.
And that which many have, and will bestow
So ill on that, would pay poor Soldiers now.
Thus Winchester was taken, and those Frogs
And poisonous vermin, haunting in those bogs,
Left shelterlesse; their fortunes worn so slender,
Small hopes they have there any more to gender.
Thus two proud Regiments, then which the King
None better had accouter'd, did we bring
Into subjection: thirteen Companies
Accommodated well: a kingly prize,
If well disposed of. Yea great Grandison
Himself we took, though he were quickly gone.
Thank some discreet Commanders, that h^ve wit
Enough, but use it when themselves think fit,
For their own private gain: though they undo
Whole Cities, Armies, Countries, Kingdoms too.
Where e're the treason lies, I hope it will be
Known, to their cost in the discovery.
Had he been guarded as a prisoner should,
And horsed accordingly, though then he would
Have given a kingdom for his liberty,
He had not escaped our watchful Soldiery.
How quickly would our Wars come to an end,
Would all our Army their affections bend
To truth and valor? But so many lewd,
Perfidious spirits commonly entrude
On such designs; so many, that no care
Which way they take, nor on whose side they are.
So that they get their pay, or come in favor,
Or plunder Countrymen of what they labor,
And toil extremely for: and underneath
That visard of Malignants, can bereave
Poor men of all their goods: and if they are
Questioned, make answer, it is Malignants ware.
Which custom causes many to neglect,
The public good, for their own selfe-respect,
And some Commanders, (or they are belied)
Have done some things not to be justified.
They slight the service: and when they should be
Employed in routing of the enemy,
They Are at their Wine, or Dice, or any where,
So they can shift it off, and not be there:
Only to spin out time, because they would
Feign have the War prolonged, if they could.
That so the public stock might fill their purse.
They Will have enough on it one day with a curse.
And some of them I Am sure, have showed such tricks
That they have been in pay full twenty Weeks,
Yet never were in a skirmish: how can they
(I wonder) have the conscience to take pay,
And do no good, but hurt, burden the State,
Live on the spoil, swear, domineere and prate?
And look what mischief e're the Soldiers do,
They wink at, and them countenance thereto.
Were this well looked to, and Commanders checked
For their too much remissness, and neglect,
And forced to ply their business, or give over
Their places, and befoole the State no more.
Were every Master well examined too,
That Captains might not shuffle as they do,
Nor use such close and base Legerdumaine,
Cheating the State for their own private gain,
The public charge would be the less, and we.
Might sooner vanquish the proud enemy.
Then might our hopes be greater; we might then
So much the sooner expect peace again.
Heaven then would bless our actions, yea and crown
Our goings forth, with glory and renown.
And when these wars are finished, and (...) cease,
Deck us with Laurel, and confirm our peace.
FINIS.

