A WARNING PIECE

Shot off from Freland to England, charged home with good counsel, by a
truhearted Englishman, a mourner in SION.

WHEREIN These evil days, and dangerous Times (without reflecting upon any
particular persons) are plainly set forth.

-- pecces quocunque sub axe
Sub Jove semper eris.
LONDON, Printed 1641.

THe manifold schisms and rents in the Church, the manifest divisions and
dissentions in the Commonwealth, as they cannot but afflict us with grief, so
they may justly affright us with fear, that the Gospel of the Son of God may
shortly come to suffer as great an Eclipse in these Kingdoms, as the Sun did
in the firmament, when the Son of God Christ Jesus suffered upon the Cross,
which was universal, miraculous. For if we do but weigh and consider with
our selves, the fearful, crying, crimson sins of the times, how few Shunamites
return, how the zeal of God is dried up in the hearts of men, how God is
served for custom, and not upon conscience sake, for fashion, rather then in
sincerity of affection, what can we, nay, what may we expect else, but that the
Almighty instead of his arms full of mercy, peace, and plenty, thus long held
out amongst us, has now gathered his lap full of plagues, and is pouring them
down upon us? Yet forty days said Jona, and Nineveh, shall be destroyed, true,
if Nineveh, repent not, and may not we as truly say, yet not five months, and
England shall be destroyed, if England amend not? fear we, and it stands us
every one upon to pray and fear, lest we are they of whom our Savior speaks
in his Gospel, Matthew 21.43. The Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from you,
or as he speaks by his Prophet, Amos 3.2. You only of all the Nations of the
World have I loved, therefore, I will visit you for your sins. Your sins have no
less incited, and provoked the Lord, then the sins of your near, dear
Countrymen and Friends in Ireland, your sins are not less then theirs, that
your sufferings should be lighter, and do you not hear how the Lord has
visited them? Them that so lately lived at ease, abounding in plenty, seated
(as they conceited) in the Eden of the World, and had built their Nests so
high, the Lord has humbled them, brought them low, and lower yet they are like
to be brought.

Ob. But they were grievous sinners, transcendent sinners, their sins were the
sins of Sodom, that sink of sin, pride, idleness, fullness of bread, and
unmercifulness to the poor, add we, they were great oppressors, fearful
swearers, blasphemers, common Sabbath Breakers, and these last evils have layn
long in the deck, and now draw Gods heavy judgments upon them, say all this is
granted. -- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.


Sol. But stay your censure, and hear the Apostle speaking, Thou that say,
another should not steal, do thou steal? etc. The rule is not more ancient,
then true, Where there is no Reformation in Action, there is no alteration in
the Affection, then lay your hand on the mouth with Job, and say. Once have I
spoken, but I abhor my self, etc. or reflect as Judah did upon his Act, with
Tamar, Genesis 38.26. Thou art more holy than I; and does not holiness become
Gods House? but behold hollownesse, hollonesse in your thoughts, hollownes in
your words, hollownes in your actions: Hollownesse in your thoughts, it being
the common belief and opinion (specially of several Sectarists) that there
are none or very few sincere Christians in Ireland, but men of debaucht life,
vile conversation, such as England had spewed out, whence they inserre (by
words) that it is the just Judgment of God, toweed them out, that in posterum,
that Kingdom may be planted with such as will bring forth the fruits of the
Spirit. And do not their Actions show as much in affording them no timely
Aid, Vt nemo in sese tentat descendere, nemo?

Say they are superfluous branches, yet preserve them for your Orchard of
Englands shade they may keep a storm from you. Say they are (...) (value them
at the lowest.)

Such members as the World might well want, yet such (as being most loyal to
our gracious Sovereigne) might stand you in steed, and being preserved might
stand to you in time of need. Did you never see a barren prop uphold a
fruitful Vine? but this is ex non concessis, and we must tell you, that vestra
res agitur, and the Catholics (for so they will be now called) are but pricking
you through our sides, and will shortly, very shortly (without timely
prevention) wound you, propriis spinis. Look to your Edomites with their no
God, your Babylonians with their new God, your dissolute Atheists, your
resolute bloudy-hearted and bloudy-handed Papists (to say nothing of the
Brownists, Anabaptists, fanatical Familists, and many other Sects swarming
amongst you and say, if a City or Kingdom so divided can long stand.

Division is most pernicious to those parts, whose life and safety is in Unity.
Divide and impera, is the Devils grand masterpiece; our Enemies could never
conquer us were we unanimous, but plowing with our Heifer they prevail, making
some men Decoyes to betray others. But, me thinks, I hear the Times Politician
replying, O Coridon, Coridon, quaete dementia coepit?

To whom I answer as I have read, That whiles the Crocodile sleeps gaping with
open mouth, the Indian Rat shoots himself into his belly, and gnaws his guts
in sunder: Whilst the men of Laish lived quiet and secure, Judges 18.7. the
Danites come upon them and smite them with the sword, and burn up their Cities,
Verse 27. So enters mischief at the open gates of security; and this is most
dangerous, facilius opprimitur qui nihiltimet, he is most easily surprised that
forecasts no perils, dangerlesse fear is better then fearlesse danger. Danger
is like the Basiliske if foreseen it dies, if not, it destroys. My Lords of
Athens, said Demosthenes (once seriously jesting) how vigilant ought we to be,
seeing we have thieves of brass, and walls of clay. And will you never fear
more then you seele, never dread danger till it knock at your doors? Are
wicked men in a State, as ill humors in the body, if they be not corrected,
suppressed, all must perish, and are you not in danger? Are your Enemies of
unwearied vigilance for mischief, and your Religion, and their superstition
unconsistent, and are you not in danger? is that State most miserable, where
every man makes his own Religion and Law, and are you not in danger? These
things wisely wayed, must teach you to debate: Men and brethren, what shall we
do? the Echo answers do, debate no longer, do, or else undone. The Gospel,
Religion lies at stake, and if you bid not fair for it, and that by Arms, and
that very speedily, Actum est, and your judgment sleeps not. It is good
policy with men to restrain that nature by force which will not be won by
fair means. If fair means would ever have prevailed, how has our gracious
Sovereign and his predecessors (of most blessed memory) endeavored that way? but
we find and feel (and you may fear no less) that there is nothing more
dangerous then superstition, or the false worship of the true God. After the
bloody quinqennium of Q. Mary, and pious Elizabeth placed in the Throne, many
that were addicted to the Roman superstition, Apolog. of Ecclesiastical
Hierarch cap 1. An Dom. 1569.15. Rig Eliz.
communicated with us in Divine Service, free from all punishment or
molestation, and enjoyed common favors and benefits with other of her
Majesty's loyal Subjects, but the Pope perceiving that by this consociation
with our Church all hope would soon be lost (by any help from a home party) of
reducing this Kingdom to his subjection, sends Morton an English Priest to
declare by his Papal Authoritic unto the then Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland, that Queen Elizabeth was an Heretic, Slow in Annal. 12. Eliz.
and therefore they were not subject to her Laws. Whereupon they raised an Army
which was soon defeated. But Pius Quintus was still the same, and forthwith a
Bull is published, wherein out of the fullness of his power, An Dom. 1570.12.
Eliz.
Queen Elizabeth is denounced an Heretic, and that such as did cleave unto
her should incur his Curse, and that she was deprived of all Dominion, and
Dignity; that her Nobles and people, or any other that had sworn obedience
unto her, were freed from that Oath, and from all Allegiance and fidelity;
commanding them not to obey her Laws upon pain of his Curse. And that this Bull
might be seen, heard, and feared; it is fastened by one Felton (a Fugitive,
deeply plunged in the Roman superstiton) upon the Gates of the Bishop of
Londons Palace. But this Bull did not yet roar loud enough, therefore Gregory
the thirteenth who succeeded Pius Quintus, confirms, Anno 1578.14. Eliz.
and ratifies this Bull, endeavoring to give him more breath and life. Bristow
and Allen were herein very busy; but Campian and Parsons, by their plausible
persuasions prevailed with many; and Saunders by violence and force of Arms
(with an Army from the Pope, succouring the Rebel Desmond) enthralled men's
persons in Ireland, and now they are worse enthralled, the Lord comfort them.
What should I say of their bloody Enterprises of Arden, Parry, An. 1582.25.
Eliz
and many others of the same rank against her sacred Majesty.) All these
notorious seditions and sanguinary attempts against Queen Elizabeth of blessed
Memory, did our last gracious Sovereigne King James, right well resent, and
could not but in his Princely wisdom more then conjecture that the like
disloyal attempts might be practiced against his sacred Dignity and person by
these Romanists, yet hoping by the light of the Gospel, to extinguish the
Egyptian darkness of Popery, and out of his gracious inclination to pity and
mercy, desiring to conquer evil with goodness in the beginning of his Reign
(his Majesty's clemency was rare and admirable) he sets at liberty all
Jesuits, Anno 1603.
and Priests, that were imprisoned, and unto such as lurked in secret corners
of the Land, he gave them leave openly to profess themselves to be such, so
that both by a certain day would depart the Realm. And as he began, so he
ended his Reign, with all manner of clemency and mercy toward them. And our
gracious Sovereigne, treading the steps of his wife and peaceable
Predecessors, has still been most gentle and indulgent toward them. Them
whose Trust is Treason, whose Faith is Faction, whose Religion is Rebellion.
Do we not see and feel the woeful effects of his Majesty's clemency and others
connivencie at Popery? There is no more to be said. Something must be done, or
else shortly all will be undone: Their Idolatry must be restrained, or our
Religion cannot long be retained. Set on, or look shortly for an onset. Up be
going or doing, fly or fight for your lives. The last is most honorable,
warrantable; Then gather your selves together, and let every man say, with good
Nehemiah, Sh^^l such a man as I am Fly? The Lord of hosts be with you, the God
of Jacob be our refuge. Amen.


