THE COPY OF A LETTER, Sent from the Commander in Chief, of the Town and Port
of PLYMOVTH, To the Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire Speaker of the House of
Commons: Concerning the late great fight at Mount Stanford.

Together, With a true Relation of the Persons there killed; and what condition
the said Town and Port now are in.

Also Copy of the Vovv and Covenant, which all the Deputy Lieutenants,
Commanders, Townsmen, and Soldiers took, to live and dye in defense of the
said Town.

Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Letter and
Protestation, be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
middle Temple. November. 91 19th 1643.

Sir,
SInce my last unto you of the 28 of October, 1643. The Enemy has pressed hard
upon us, against Mount Stanford Work, with their great Ordnance, and began to
play against the same on Sabbath last, being the fifth of November; hoping, by
that means to perform what the hellish Plot of the Gunpowder Treason should
have done: they played so hard against it all that day with Batteries, and it
being not any way made to endure the same, that some of our Gunnes they
dismounted, and some clogged with earth, falling down upon them, that we could
not make use of any of them; so that on the morrow they surrounded the Work;
fell on with all their strength of Horse and Foot upon all quarters: yet the
chief Commander of the Fort behaved himself so bravely, that three times he
forced them to retreat; and could we have got any indifferent relief over the
Water in any reasonable time, we had kept the Fort. Yet nevertheless the
Enemy sent a Parley three times before the Captain would except of it. Then
Conditions were made, That all Soldiers should march away with their Arms,
flying Colors, and Bullet in their mouths; and that the Captain should have
any one piece of Ordnance away, that he would make choice of. The Enemy lost
four or five Captains before the Fort; besides diverse other Officers, and
many Soldiers, We lost at that time no Officer of note, only one Lieutenant
killed with a great shot, and diverse Soldiers taken prisoners, which were all
exchanged the next day, for some of their own men that we had formerly taken.
I believe they will not brag much of their victory by getting that Work, for we
are now better and in more safety in the Town then before. For we were forced
to keep a Leager there, and continually to relieve them; so that our men were
forced to very hard duty, to keep all the other Works and Fortifications
belonging to the Town. The Enemy having the Work yielded to them, those of the
Enemies party in the Town (as it must be expected in all places are some) began
to get courage, our own friends doubtful; and I believe, the Nutralists do
desire that the Town might be delivered up: Whereupon, for fear that either
through treachery of the Townsmen, or for want of experienced men, I seized
the Fort and Island, the Castle and Magazine, that in case the Town should be
forced and over-powred with strength by the Enemy, and knowing this place of
such great concernement, that through Gods assistance I would keep them till
supplies and relief come. Whereupon I have put them into the hands of such as
will keep them for the King and Parliament, with the last drop of blood in
their bodies. Our friends began then to be encouraged, our enemies both within
and without us to be dismayed, thinking that there was no hope of surrendering
the Town: so ever since, the Townsmen and all Inhabitants have been more
forward to contribute their best assistance then formerly many have done. And
upon Thursday last after Prayer and our mornings best preparation for the same,
my self and Mr. Major, took a Vow and Protestation, which I have here sent
enclosed, and caused it to be presented to all Gentlemen, the Committee of
Parliament, the Deputy Lieutenants, all Townsmen, all Officers and Soldiers,
and all Inhabitants whatsoever; which I find was generally taken with great
joy and cheerfulness. I hope the honorable Houses of Parliament are not
unmindefull of us; yet I never received any instructions from them since the
fifth of September, being the time that I departed from London, although I have
sent four several Packets concerning diverse and special affairs. I humbly
crave that with all speed I may have Powder, Lead, and Match sent, that I may
with honor perform the trust imposed upon me. Thus humbly kissing your hand,
I take leave and rest,

Plymouth 11 November. 1643. Your most humble Servant to be commanded, James
Wardlace.

The Vow and Protestation.
I A. B. In the presence of Almighty God, do vow and protest, that I will to
the utmost of my power, by Gods assistance, faithfully maintain and defend the
Towns of Plymouth and Stone-howse, the Fort and Island, with all the outward
Works and Fortifications to the same belonging, against all Forces now raised
against the said Towns of Plymouth and Stone-howse, the Fort and Island or any
Part thereof, or shall be raised by any Power or Authority whatsoever, without
the Consent and Authority of both houses of Parliament. Neither will I by way
or means whatsoever, contrive or consent to the giving up of the Towns and
Fortifications aforesaid, or any parcel of them, into the hands of any person,
or persons whatsoever, without the consent of both Houses of Parliament, or
of such as are Authorized thereunto by them. Neither will I by Gods grace
raise nor consent to the raising of any Force or Tumult, nor will I by any
way or means give or yield to the giving of any advice, counsel, or
intelligence, to the prejudice of the said Towns and Fortifications either in
whole or in part: But will with all posible speed faithfully discover to the
Major of Plymouth, and to the Comander in chief there, whatsoever design I
shall know or here of hurtful thereunto. Neither have I accepted any pardon
or protection, nor will I accept any protection from the Enemy. And this Vovv
and Protestation I make, without any equivocation and Mental reservation
whatsoever: Believing that I cannot be absolved from this my Vovv and
Protestation; and vvishing no blessing from God on my self or my posterity, If
I do not truly and sincerely perform the same. So help me GOD.

FINIS.

