THE ANATOMY OF WAR, OR, War with the woeful, fruits, and effects thereof,
laid out to the life: Wherein from Scripture, and experience, these things are
clearly handled; to wit, 1. What War is. 2. The grounds, and causes of
War. 3. The things requisite in War. 4. The nature, and miseries of War, both
Civil, and Foreign. 5. What things are justly taxed in War. 6. When War is
lawful. 7. Whether it be lawful for Christians to make War. 8. Whether
Subjects may take up arms against their Sovereigns. 9. The remedies against
War. 10. The Means to be freed from War. 11. The Remedies, and Means both
Military, and Moral for the obtaining of Victory in War.


By R. W. Minister of the Word at Stansteed Mount Fitchet in Essex.

Hoc and Ratio doctis, and Necessitas Barbaris, and Mos gentibus, and seris
Natura ipsa praescripsit, ut omnem semper vim quacunque open possent, a corpore,
a capite, a vita sua propulsarent. Cicero pro Milone. LONDON, Printed for John.
Dalham, and Rich, Lownds.

AS Children through ignorance of the nature, and peril of Fire often times
fall thereinto, and are burnt: so Men not acquainted with the nature, and
danger of War, too often desire it, Dulce bellum inexpertis.
and too soon rush into it, to their own ruin. And therefore that we may see
clearly, as in gl^sse, the true nature of this heavy plague of War, which now
threatens our desolation, and the downfall of our Church and State, I have once
again stepped upon the Stage, and for the good of my Country, exposed my self
to the sight, and censure of all eyes and tongues. Omitting wholly what I have
handled concerning War, both in my Pious m^^^ ^r^ctise in Parliament time;
and in The Principal duty of Parliament men; and in The Vindication of the
Parliament, and their proceedings; I will here for the information of the
judgment, the cleaning of the understanding, and the satisfaction of the
conscience of all those, who will peruse this Treatise, lay down many things,
concerning both War in general, and Civil War in particular; although for
brevities sake I shall omit many things concerning both, which might be said,
and treat but briefly of those things which I do handle.

War in general, is a lawful defense, whereby the ordinary, What War is.
and lawful Magsitrate, for just causes taking up Arms, does publickely
repel force with force, revengeth public, and general injuries, or recovers
general, or generally sustained losses. In this Definition these things are
observable. viz.

I. That War is not to be undertaken, but for just causes. II. That it
belongs only unto the Magistrate to make War, and not to private persons
III. That it is not to be moved, but repelled: not kindled, but quenched: that
is, rather for defense then offense: for the punishing of injuries, than the
doing of wrong. All which shows evidently the lawfulness of the Parliaments
Wars, their Cause being Religion, and the Republiques good; Themselves the
greatest Magistrates, and of greatest power; and this design of theirs
declined as long as possibly they could, with the safety of the State.
Q. 1. It may here be demanded, What the grounds, and causes of War are? The
Causes of War.


A. 1. First, in general, the great Alexander being once demanded, why he
endeavored by War, to be Lord of the whole world, made answer; All the
Wars that are raised in this world, are for one of these three Causes; viz,
either to have many Gods, many Laws, or many Kings: therefore I desire by War
to possess the world, and to command it, that all the inhabitants thereof may
honor but one God, serve but one King, and observe but one Law. Guevara
familiar. epist page 240


A. 2. Secondly, and more particularly, Wars come sometimes from a good
ground, or cause, sometimes from a bad bottom, or foundation.

First, sometimes War comes from good grounds, it being only ordained to make
men live in peace; whence Augustine Quae non crudelitate, aut cupiditate, sed
pacis studio geruntur, Aug in libr ele Verb. Dom
says, That even amongst, yea by the true Worshipers of God, Wars are often
raised, and undertaken, not out of coveteousnesse, or cruelty, but out of a
true, and sincere desire of settling peace. Yea hence the Emblematists devised
this Hieroglyphicke to express this truth, viz, Andr. Akiat. emblem. Page 445
a Helmet which had been used in War, being in time of peace neglected, and
laid by, a swarm of Bees (emblemes of sweet peace) come and hire, build, and
breed therein: the Motto or word was, ex bello pax. Peace is the offspring of
War, or War the Parent of Peace: much like unto the soldiers sword, which in
Martial was turned in the time of peace unto a Reapers sicle.

Pax me certa ducis placidos curvavit in usus:
Agricolae nunc sum, militis ante fui.
Secondly, sometimes War comes from a bad bottom, or foundation, yea for the
most part springs from one, or other of these evil roots; to wit, either,

I. From some unbridled pleasures, and immoderate, and inordinate lusts. Iam.
4, 1
Or

II. From diversity of Religion. For,

I. Sometimes Satan the father, and Prince of Heresy, stirs up Ware against the
woman. And,

II. Antichrist, always having an intestine hatred, and bitterness of spirit,
and mind against Christ, and his truth, instigates, and sets on work still some
instruments or other, for the opposing, distracting, and dividing of those
places, and persons who profess the Gospel. Or

III. From some coveteous desires, and affections. The fountain, and original
of all Wars, and seditions (says Plutarch. ^ello (...) ac (...) fon^, and
or^go, etc, Plutar. consol. ad Apol
) are the corrupt coveteous desires of man, whereby, by hook, and crook, right
or wrong; he pursues after vehemently whatsoever he conceives, to be for his
profit, and advantage. Whence Seneca (...) Prove
faith:

Si duo de nostris toll as pronomina rebus.
Pralia cessarent, pax sine lite fores.
That is,

Take from the world these Pronounes, Mine, and Thine,
The Wars will cease, and peace through the world will shine.
IV. From ambition, or, a desire to rule: Genes. 14, 3
It is observed by Eutropius, and others, that the Romans were 500, years in
conquering of Jtaly, and that for the most part; they were ever in their Wars
Assailants, and but seldom times Defendants: and why so? but only from their
ambition to rule others, and to bring all into their subjection. Yea what but
ambition, and a desire of supreme Soveraigrty was the cause of all Alexanders,
and the great Turks Wars?

V. Wars always, at least on one part, or in regard of one side comes from
some sin or other: according to that of Plutarch. Nullum omnins bellum, cujus
vitium aliquod non sit causa, etc plut. de repugn. Stoic.
There is no War whereof some sin, or vice is not the cause; viz, either
pleasure, coveteousnesse, ambition, desire to rule, or the like.

VI As Wars come from some sin or other of those who raise them, so they
come from or for the sins of those against whom they are raised: for the
sword is sent by God unto a people for their sins, and is therefore the
punishment of sin. Yea sin is Causa sine qua non, such a cause of all Wars,
that no Nation should be annoied with any, if it were not for their sins.
Levit. 26, 24, 25: Deuteronomy 28, 36, 49 Iud: 2, 13 and 3, 1, 8, and 4 1, and 6, 1,
and 10, 6, and 13, 1 and 1, King 8, 33, Jsa. 5, 25, Ier. 5 15


Qu. 2. Having thus cursorily run over the grounds or causes of War, in the
next place we will consider Requisita, what, or how many things are requisite
in War?

A. 1. I may answer hereunto, either as a Soldier, or as a Scholar. The
things required in Ware.


First, if I should answer this as a Soldier, or as a Scholar in Mars his
School, then I might say, as Brasidas was wont to say, Thu yd. l, 5, S^^ sermon
52
That these three things are requisite, and necessary in Ware: to wit,

I. To be willing to fight: for if a man hunt with unwilling hounds, he will
scarrely ever catch the hare, and if a man fight against his will, he will
hardly endeavor as he ought to overcome him, or them, with, or against whom he
fights. And,

II. To fear disgrace, and shame: for if he be shameless, and fearelesse of
disgrace, he will quickly flee, and forsake his colors. And,

III. To be obedient to Commanders; for if the soldier do not obey his
Captain, and Commanders, he will quickly be disranked; he may quickly be
slain, or taken by the enemy: and cannot perform any good service for him,
under whom he fights.

A. 2 Secondly, if I should answer this as a Divine, or as a Scholar in
Christ's School, then I must say, that these three things are required in every
lawful Ware, viz.

I. A lawful Authority commanding it; for War must not be attempted without
the Authority of the Magistrate.

II. A just, and lawful end, or cause, occasioning, and moving it. Now what
the lawful Causes of War are and when War is lawfully undertaken follows
by and by.

III. A good affection in following it, or a due consideration of the manner of
the enterprising, and prosecuting of it: for although the cause of War be
just, yet it must not be rashly set upon, but all other means must first be
tried. Judge. 10.13. 2 King. 18.14.


Qu. 3. The nature and miseries of War.
It may now be enquired, What the Nature of War is?

A. 1. First, War is sometimes the whet-stone of fortitude, and the
encourager, and stirrer up of youth unto Martial discipline. When the King of
the Lacedaemonians did threaten, that he would utterly destroy and raze a
certain City, which had often annoyed the Laccdaemoniant, and found them
work, the Ephori would not permit it, saying Nequaquam abolobis, neque
sub^er^es juvenum cotem, Plutar. in Lacon. Bruso lib. 3. c. 15
Thou shall not destroy, nor abolish the Whet-stone of youth: calling thus that
City which so often troubled them, the Whet-stone of youth: because their
young men thereby were whetted, and their affections jet on edge to be skillful
in the art of War, seeing there were those so near them, who would try both
their skill, and strength upon every occasion, and advantage.

A. 2. Secondly, most commonly War is evil; whence the Scripture sometimes
calls it, a grievous evil. Isa. 21.15. sometimes an oppressing evil. Jerem.
46.16. sometimes a bitter evil. 2. Sam. 2.26. sometimes a devouring evil. 2.
Sam. 2.26. Ier. 50.22. sometimes an evil which pierces unto the heart, and
soul. Ierem. 4.10.

A. 3. Thirdly, War is of that nature that few are enriched thereby, as
appears thus; If any grow rich by War, then it is those who gather the
spoils thereof; but seldom these; therefore few or none. We say, Male parta,
male dilabuntur; goods ill got wast like snow before the sun: as money won at
play, or got by theft. Yea lawful prey, for pillage is seldom long enjoyed,
according to our English Proverb, Gightly come, Cightly go; or, to the Greek
Adage (...), I got this booty in the wars from an enemy, and therefore I may
spend it the more freely.

A. 4 Fourthly, War is the cause of all innovations, alterations, and
mutations in a State, they being still brought in by the sword, or an overawing
power. Whence Lucian says, (...), War is the father of all things, or the
Author of all changes in States, and Kingdoms, from which all things seem to
proceed. Historians observe, that there is a vicissitude, and intercourse of
all things, and that once in a 100 or at least in 400. years there is some
great change, and alteration in all governments, and States, either in
Religion, or manner of government, or Governors, which change whatsoever it
is, seldom comes but by War. As for example, if curs or any Protestant
Prince should desire to introduce, or set up Popery, it would very hardly be
don but by the sword; and a strong power; War producing all innovations, and
mutations in States.

A 5 Fifthly, War is a miserable plague; whence this word War in the Hebrew
tongue, has its name from cutting, biting, and devouring, because wars
devour, and consume many. Hence the sword is said to have a mouth, that is, an
edge. Job 1, 15, Hebr. 11, 34
and to eat Job 2, Sam. 11, 25
that is, to kill. War is one of Gods 4 fierce, and devouring plagues: Ezeth.
14.21
yea one of his 3. sorest judgments Ezeth. 2, Sam. 24, 13, 14
and seems to be the greatest of all the 3. or 4. Levit. 26, 16 17, 25, 33
Deuteronomy. 28, 48, etc


Qu. 4. Some may here say, If War be of this nature, then what may we think
thereof?

A. 1. First, we may safely think, that some War is lawful; for (as
Augustine says,) Si Christiana disciplina omnia bella culparot, etc Aug. in
strm de Centur
If Christianity should blame, or tax all wars, then when the soldiers asked
Christ what they should do for the salvation of their souls, he would
undoubtedly have bidden them to cast away their weapons, and to give over
War, which he does not but only forbids them to wrong any, and bids them be
content with their wages: which shows plainly, that some Wars are lawful,
and therefore not all to be condemned.

A. 2. Secondly, we may think that the event of Warris most uncertain; and
therefore they are much mistaken who expect from the Wars nothing but good
news, and prosperous success in all designs, and enterprises, Errant qui in
bello omnes seou^dos rerum eventus expectant, Iul. Caes. Comm. lib. 7
for he who puts on his armor must not brag, as he that puts it off. Philip
of Macedon warring upon the Grecians, Diogenes: came into his tent, and being
conducted to the Emperor, and asked if he were a South-sayer, or
Fortune Tellers? answered S^^^^itiae vanitatisque tuae sum verus speculator, etc
yes I am a true Fore-teller, and Fortune Tellers of thy folly, and vanity, who
(when none compells thee) comes to hazard thy life, and Kingdom, and to cast
the dice of war, whether thou shall live or not, and whether thou shall have a
Kingdom at command, or to possess or not. When 2. Armies are in the fields,
we see both of them to have warlike weapons, and both to have humane bodies
Virinque ferrum, and cerporae humana erunt: nus quam minus quam in bello
eventus respondent, Live. lib. 3
; and not the one of them to be armed, and the other naked, and the one
mortal, but the other immortal; and therefore success, event, and
expectation, never deceive us, or frustrats our hope so much, in any thing as
in War.

A. 3. Thirdly, we may think of War, that it is a thing not to be desired;
and that none delights in the sound of the warlike Drums, or in the the Alarmes
of War; but only they who never tasted the bitterness thereof Dulce bellum
non expertis, at quigustavit, co^trem: scit animo quoties adventans illud
videt. pindar. apud S. ob.
for he who has once felt the smart of it, will tremble as often as he thinks of
its approach, or summous thereunto. And therefore we must use all our best skill,
and cunning always to avoid war as much as possibly we can, Adversarioru^
pug^a prudenter declinanda, Greg in mor
it being a thing of that nature, that no wise man will desire it, nor
willingly (when he can, and may avoid it) cast himself into Mars his arms,
or expose himself to the mercy of his enemies sword, and his body, and life to
peril, seeing it is not in our power to overcome or conquer, the issue of all
war being doubtful, and hazardous. Sapientis non est velle certare, and
periculo se velle committere etc Lactant. l 6


A. 4. Fourthly, we may well think, that War is not so easily ended as begun;
and that all should take notice of this who undertake Ware, that it is easily
begun, but hardly ended, easy to enter into, but hard to get out of, (like a
curious drawn Garden maze) the beginning and ending not being in the same man's
power: Scito omne bellum sum facile, caeterum aegerrime desinere, etc Salust.
in Iugurth
for every coward, or fresh water soldier may begin Ware, but it is laid
aside, when the Conqueror will. Bellum incipere cuivis ctiam ignavo licet.
deponitur cum victores velint, Tull. in quaest


A. 5. Fifthly, we may think, that War is such a thing, that to be free from
it, is a great blessing, and happiness, and so pronounced to be by God. Isa.
2.4. Mich. 4 3. And therefore is never to be attempted, but upon immergent
necessity.

A. 6. Sixthly, we may think this of Ware to wit, That if peace may be
procured, War is not to be waged; as Marcian the Emperor was wont to say
Imperatoriar, ma non esse capienda, dum pace^ habere liceret, Zo. naras to. 3,
Ann
Kings must not take up Arms against their subjects or any, so long as they
may live quietly, and in peace.

A. 7. Seventhly, we may think of War, that it ought not to be undertaken
rashly, or unadvisedly, but with most mature deliberation; and that before we
begin Ware, we should well consider what may happen in Ware Quiequid evenire in
bedo potest, priusquam ingrediare considera, Thucyd. l. 1
and not only think with our selves, what power, and strength we have: but
what the power of chance, or common fate of Ware is, or may be. cum tuas vires,
tumvim fortunae, Martomque belli communem propone animo, Live. lib. 30


A. 8. Eighthly, we may safely think of Ware, that it is evil, or a great
judgment, or an evil, always in some regard. The Aeolians intending to aid
the Argives in their Wars, Archidamus writ a letter unto them, wherein were
only these words, Quietness is good; and therefore if that be (as indeed it
is) most true, then by the rule of contraries it will follow, that War is
evil. Yea War simply considered, and in it self, may be reckoned in the
number of evils; that is, either I. Of evil of sin, for it cannot be just
on both sides. Or II. Of evil of punishment; for it was ever held a scourge of
God; and is only therefore esteemed good, because we are bad.


Ninthly, we may think from the word of God that the war whereby whole Kingdoms
are infested, wastest, and destroyed, comes not by chance, but by the purpose,
permission, and providence of God, for the punishment of men's sins Leu.
26.17.2^.31. etc. 2 Samuel 17.24.12 13. Psalm. 46.9.10
. And thus by these particulars we may guess at the nature of war, and see a
little what we may think thereof: We will now briefly lay down

Quest. 5. What things are justly taxed in war?

Ans. 1. An implacable desire of revenge, or to mischeeve those with, or
against whom we fight: For although we may punish offenses, yet we must not
revenge our selves; and I conceive that in war we should be more ready and
inclinable to spare when we can take, and with safety keep alive, than to
kill; especially when the war is undertaken for the punishment of
Delinquents, because then if we keep them alive, they may fall by the sword of
justice in the Magistrates hands as well as by us in battle; and therefore
they who have no mercy upon any in war are justly taxed.

2. Cruelty in revenging, and punishing in war is justly taxed, for although
a man may kill his enemy in battle, yet he should not delight in using cruelty
toward him, by devising new or strangetorments to make him die.

3. Covetousness of prey and pillage is taxed in war; for although it is not
a sin to fight in war, yet to fight or war only for prey or pillage, is a crime
Militare non est delictum, sed propter praedam militare, peccatum est. Ambros.
.

4. Ambitious desires to rule, or possess the Thrones and Crowns of others,
are justly taxed in war. A Philosopher presenting Antigonus with a book, de
justititia, concerning just and upright dealing between man and man, he said
Desipis, qui cum me videas alienas ubes armis vexantem, tamen apud me de
justitia diceris. Erasm. lib. 4. Apoph. ex Pl^.
, Thou art a fool in grain oh Philosopher, who when thou see me oppressing
with war strange Cities, telst me of justice and upright dealing: Implying thus
much, That they who for the enriching of themselves, or for the enlarging of
their Territories, or for the glory of their Name, seek other men's Cities and
Crowns, cannot observe the Laws of righteousness. And therefore this
ambitious desire is in war justly worthy of blame.

Quest. 6. I will now lance this plague soar of War, and touch it to the
quick, in and by this quere; What the miseries of war are?

The miseries and miserable fruits and effects of war are many and great; as
for example.

Answ. 1. In war the most wicked are held the most warlike, yea, except a man
be exorbitantly wretched, he is scarce esteemed a resolute and right bred
soldier; for as a plough-man except he be crooked and bending to his labor,
does never make clear work, nor furrow his land handsomely, as the Jews were
wont to say; so except a soldier can swear, swagger, ravish Maids, deflower
Matrons, and play the villain in grain, he is scarcely counted a man at arms
in these corrupt times.

2. War continued, or long wars make men inhumane, for consuetudo peccandi
tollit sensum peccati, that is,

At first sin seems to us loathing, but often sinning makes sin seem
nothing; read and compare together, 2 King 8 12.13. with 10.32.33. where
before Hazael ever truly entered into the wars, he thought he could never be so
cruel, as to dash the childrens brains against the stones, as the Prophet
foretold; but afterward when he was inured with war, he did it. And thus the
continual wars which the Sicilians had, made them like savage beasts, as
Plutarch says.

3. War brings populous Cities to utter destruction, and desolation Ierem.
18.2. Hose. 5.8.9.
; as we see by Fridericus Oenobarbus, who when he had overthrown Millain, sowed
salt there, and harrowed it, to show that that City was brought to utter
destruction.

4. War brings misery, and desperate distractions upon, and unto that Kingdom
were it is: For, as the Sea (though vast and great) is tossed and troubled when
the winds strive and rage; so when Kings contend, and make war one upon
another, their whole Kingdoms are disquieted, perplexed and vexed Quemadmo them
certantibus veatis mare concuritur, sic Reg bus sibi adversantibus, populus
regni vexatur. Chrysostom in Matthew.
.

5. War wastes that in an instant, which was long a finishing, and ruins in a
trice what was long a re-edifying; for as Herostratus, an obscure and base man,
could easily burn the Temple of Diana of the Ephesians, which was 220 years
abuilding of all Asia, at the cost of many Kings, and beautified with the
cunning labors of many excellent workmen; so it is most casie in war, by fire
and sword quickly to subvert famous and admired Cities, as we see by Niniveh,
Jerusalem and others, and shall see (we hope) by Rome. Woeful experience in
poor Ireland shows that war wastes and consumes all wheresoever it comes,
whether Towns, Cities, Villages, Corne-fields, Vine-yards, Forts, Orchards,
and whatsoever is necessary for the sustentation of man.

6. War spares none, neither man, woman, nor child, neither young nor old:
Virgins and Wives in war are ravished and vitiated: Infants are trampled
without pity or mercy under the horse feet, or tossed upon spears points:
Women with child are often cut up and disfected.

7. War exposes all things to prey, plundering and pillage. And

8. Casts, or carries those who are left unflaine into exile, captity,
banishment, and bendage.

And thus I have briefly showed the nature and misery of War in general: I
will now proceed to the confideration of Civill-war, wherein first we will take
a view of the nature, then of the misery thereof.

Quest. 7. What is the nature of Civil war?

Answ. 1. It is a misery of miseries, for when wars arife in a Commonwealth,
great calamities do invade that place, both publicly and privately Cum oriuntur
bella, et public and privatim magnae urbem calamitates invadunt Plato lib. 1.
de lege.
: war being like a swelling and overflowing stream and tide, which scatters,
wastes, overturnes and beats down all things before it; much more Civil wars,
wherein one part of the Land wars upon, or against another, as it is now in
Ireland, and begun in England Bellum torrentis instar omnia slernit, and
vastat. Plut. de educat. puer.
. In Civil wars nothing but misery can be expected, for if the worst part
prevail, their mercies are cruel, and if the better side get the better, yet
it cannot be without much loss and bloodshed of the Inhabitants of the Land
Omnia in bellis civilibus misera, etc. Tul. ad Ma. Mare.
: And therefore Civil (or uncivil) wars is a misery of miseries.

Quest. 8. But may some say, What are the miseries of Civil war?

Many and great, as namely,

Answ. 1. Civil war is not easily appeased, nor quickly quieted, but once
begun continues long; For as the wings of birds though clipped, do speedily grow
out again, so the fire of Civil war once kindled, is not easily quenched, but
although it be raked up for some time in the enibers of seeming reconciliation,
yet upon every occasion it breaks forth again.

2. Civil war is the wasting of the subject, and brings the Inhabitants of the
land into a consumption: For as Dragons sucking the blood of Elephants, kill
them, and they in like manner being drunk with their blood are squeesed in
pieces by the fall of the Elephant, and so die; so oftentimes, yea for the most
part in Civil war, both parts do destroy and are destroyed, and both sides do
endammage and are endammaged Plin. lib. 8. Chap. 12.
.

3. Civil war exhausts the exchequer, or brings the Treasure or riches of the
Land into an Hectique Fever, being like a vessel tapt at both ends, which
quickly runs out. This we see to our grief both in Ireland and at home.

4. Civil war is the overthrow of all Estates and Monarchies, as appears by
the Roman Empire, and the Macedonian Monarchy of Alexander the Great.

5. Civil wars beget corruption of manners, and makes wicked men and deceivers
grow daily, by much, worse and worse. And

6. It begets a change of Laws, for as ex malis moribus bonae leges, good
Laws come from evil customs and corrupt conversation, if the good side or
party prevail, but the enslaving and envassalling of the subject by a Law, if
the worse win the Field.

7. Civil war exposes or lays a Land open unto the rage and fury of others, or
invites foreign Forces, and power to endeavor the conquering and subduing of
them: For as the Eagle and Crane do so vehemently contend and strive, that
oftentimes clasping together in the air they fall down unto the earth and are
taken up alive of Shepherds; so now and then it comes to pass, that whilst
Princes perversely exercise mortal and deadly wars against their subjects,
another invader when he finds him sufficiently weakened, puts in for a hand or
lot, and carries all away; The Emblematists have observed this, and discribed
it by a Lion and wild Bore, who fight so long for victory or mastery, that at
length they both become a prey unto the Vulture, who awaits them until they
have so weakened one another that they are unable to defend themselves; the word
is, Ex damno alterius, alterius utilitas, The loss of the Inhabitants in
Civil and uncivil wars is the gain of forragn Invaders.

8. Civil war beget want of reverence toward God, for the madness and
outrage thereof is such and so great, that it profanes and polutes every holy
thing and place Bellorum civilium insania omne sanctum and sacrum profanatur.
Sen. lib. 1. de benef cap. 1^.
; neither times, places, nor persons, that is, neither the Lords day, nor his
House, nor his Deputies the Magistrates, nor his Messengers the Ministers,
being regarded by rude uncivil soldiers in Civil wars.

9. Civil war makes that King who undertakes unjust wars against his subjects
to repent him of his victory, when he truly sees what he has done; and he
overcomes in Civil wars woefully who repents him of his victory: and had
therefore much better pardon his subjects if they do offend him, then repent
after Conquest the slaughter and destruction of them Male vicit quipaenitet
victoriae. Melius est enim ignoscere quam post victoriam paenitere, Senec.
epist. 15.
.

10. Civil war makes many poor, according to that of Antisthenes, to whom
one saying, That in wars the poor perish, answered Imo tum ^lures fiunt ^tob.
sermon. 48.
; Nay, in war the poor are multiplied, many being impoverished thereby, as we
find it true both in this Land and in Ireland.

11. Civil war brings good and bad into misery, or the sword of civil war
wounds, yea murders both the innocent and guilty: for when the fire or flame
thereof breaks forth in a Land, both guilty and guiltless, both wicked and
righteous, feel equally the smart, and misery thereof; Vbi belium civil
ing^uir, innocents; and novi juxta cadunt Tac. ^hi.
neither love nor hatred being known by any external thing. Ecles. 9.1.
And thus by these particulars we may easily guess at the Nature and Misery of
civil wars.

Quest. 9. It may in the next place be demanded, when war is lawful? or,
seeing that sometimes it is lawful to fight, and sometimes not, how may we
know when, with the peace of a good conscience, we may wage war, or aid and
assist those who fight?

Answ. 1. War is lawful when it is for Religion, and the Republics good. When
Pope Eugenius offered to bestow some Cities upon Alphonsus, because he had
recovered Picenum, and subjected it to the Sea of Rome, he answered, That he
neither fought for profit nor prey, but only for Religion and the Churches
cause. Se nequaqua^ quaestus aut praedae, sed ecclesiae gratia liane
expediticnem suscepisce. Panorn lib. 3 de reb. gest. Alphon.
And

2. When it is to procure the continuance and settling of peace and quietness.
Men prepare war, when they desire peace, because (as we say in a proverb)
weapons bode peace, qui desiderat pacem, praep^rat bellum. Vigetius.
yea wars are undertaken that men may live in peace without injury and
oppression. suscipienda bella sunt ut in Pace sine injuria vivetur. Tul. 1.
offic.
And as men sustain and endure hard labor upon hope of rest and ease, so wise
men make war in hope, and for the effecting of tranquillity and peace.
Sapientis pacis causa bellum gerunt ut laborem spe otir sustentant. Salust. ad
Caes.
Indeed men do not desire peace, that war may follow, but make war that peace
may be obtained: Let those therefore who wage war with or against any, be
peacemakers in their warring; that is, by laboring to overcome those against
whom they fight and contend, that so they may bring them to embrace the sweet
and profitable conditions of peace Non quaeritur pax ut bellu^ exerceatur, sed
bellum geritur, ut pax acquiratur. esto ergo be lando pacificus, ut eos quos ex
pugnas, ad pacis utilitatem vincendo perdu cas. Aug. in ^ de verb. dom.
. In war, we say, the end must be good, which end in general is Gods glory, in
special the conservation of justice, and confirmation of peace: Pugna pacis
matter, war is the mother of peace.

3. War is lawful when it is for the defense of a man's own right, or for the
safety, safeguard, and preservation of our Cities, and habitations 2 Samuel 10.12.
: For reason teaches the learned, necessity the rude, custom the Gentiles,
and nature the wild beasts, to repay war with war, and force by force, when
they are robbed and deprived of their right by injustice and oppresion Hoc and
ratio doctis, and necessitas barbaris, and mos gentibus etc Cic. pro Milone
.

4. War is lawful when it is to repulse our enemies: Moses Exo. d 17.^^
said to Joshua, choose us out men, and go fight: upon which words Piscator
observes, that it is lawful for the people of God to defend themselves with
weapons against their enemies; for Moses does here nothing of himself, but by
Gods direction. And

5. When it is deliberately begun, and speedily ended: undertaken with good
advice, and given over with all willingness, when it may with safety,
convenience, and the good of Church and State. And

6. When it is in defense of the innocent: for that war whereby either our
Country is defended from invaders, or the weak and innocent from oppression,
or our friends from thieves and wicked persons, is a most just war Forti udo
quae per bella tuetur a barbris pat^^^m, v^l defend^ infirmos, vela latronibus
locios, plena just tia est. Amoros de effic.
. Or when war is attempted and enterprized to deliver the oppressed, and to
bridle the insolency and cruelty of the wicked Genesis 14.14.
.

7. War is lawful when it is for the punishment of public injuries and
wrongs; for just wars were wont to be thus defined, contentions whereby we
endeavor to punish public injuries and wrongs ^usta bella s^lent (...), quae
^^^scuntar injuris. (...)
; and therefore that war was not only of old held just, but also necessary,
which defended sorce by force. Be^lum ^lud est non mdo iustum, see iam
necessarium, quum wis illata defenditur, Cicer. pro Mione.
And

8. When it is for Gods people, it is lawful, 2 Samuel 10.12. And

9. When the cause is just, and weighty, not light and frivolous; (...), vel de
lana caprina, as about the shadow of an Ass, or, the fleece of a Goat, as the
Proverbs are: that is, for trifles, and things of no value: but as Suetonius
said to, and of Augustus, Quod nulli genti sine justis and necessariis causis
bellum intulit, that he never made war with any Nation without just and
necessary causes. Sueton. in Aug Chap. 21.
And

10. When it is undertaken by lawful authority, to wit, of the Magistrate as
was showed before. And

11. When it is only against those who injure us, or raise unjust war against
us, or our Country. Note here, that our Country, or Kingdom may be injured by
an enemy two manner of ways, to wit:

First, When he invades, by unjust forces, our temporal possessions and good
things, laboring by a strong hand to deprive us of them, whether it be our
liberties, laws, lives, riches, inheritances, wives, children, etc. Now
against such as these we have just cause to defend our selves. Judge. 19.25. and
10.1.5. 2 Samuel 10.12. Nehem. 1.14.
And

Secondly, When he labors to rob and spoil us of our spiritual and eternal
treasure and riches, viz. the true worship of God, the true, pure, and holy
Religion; and consequently the salvation of our souls. Deuteronomy. 13.14. 2 Samuel
10.12.


12. War is lawful when it is carried in a good manner: for although God
himself has taught Stratagems in war, and consequently allows them; yet
lawful Covenants and Faith given must be kept inviolable.

13. When Malefactors, Malignants, and Delinquents are maintained, and
protected, as Judge. 20.

14. When Rebellion is moved, or raised in a Land, and defensive arms are
prepared for the preservation of the State, as David waged war against Sheba, 2 Samuel 20.

15. When it is against Apostates, and back-sliders in Religion, Deuteronomy. 13.12.
etc. Lyran in Numb. 31.

16. When it is better than peace; for Belium honestum turpi pace preferendum
est. Demosthon.
an honest war is to be preferred before a base and shameful peace.

17. When it is enterprized by the special commandment of God, as Saul was
sent against Amaleck.

18. When it is for the rescuing and recovering of such things as are
unlawfully taken away, 1 Samuel 30.

19. When it is incruentum bellum, an unbloody war; or as Laertius says,
(...), a war without weeping; that is, when the victory is got without
bloodshed, and murder.

20. When it is for the preservation of liberty, and prevention of slavery and
bondage. When time and necessity requires (says Tully) we must fight, because
death is to be preferred before base slavery and servitude, and a man had
better die in the wars, than live in disgrace and bondage. Quum tempus
necessitasque postulat, decertandu^ est manu and mors servituti turpitudinique
anteponenda; nam occidi pulchrum est, si ignominiose servis, Cicer. in Tusc, qu.


Lastly, War is lawful, when there is no other means left; for that war is
lawful which is necessary, and those arms are just and warrantable, which are
not taken up until there is no hope at all of peace or safety, but by war.
Bellum est justum quod necessariu^ est, andarma sunt pia quibus nulla nisi in
armis relinquitur spes, Livi. l. 9. dec. 1.
And hence the Jews in all their voluntary wars, first offered peace unto
their enemies, and then denounced war; but did not execute it until first
they had made this threefold Proclamation, viz. Dedat se qui vult, fugiat qui
vult, pugnet qui vult.


1. He that will have peace, let him have peace. 2. He that will flee, let him
flee. 3. He that will make war, let him make war.
This we must always remember in war, that though both the cause be just,
and the authority sufficient; yet must it not be rashly or hastily undertaken,
Extrema primo nemo tentavit loco.
for no man tries extremities at the first. War is one of the sharpest
remedies to cure the maladies of a Commonwealth, and the event thereof is both
doubtful and dangerous; and therefore it should be the last refuge, and only
then used when necessity enforces.

Quest. 10. Although it be not much doubted or questioned, whether the Jews or
Gentiles of old did lawfully, as occasion served them, make war, yet it is
ordinarily enquired, whether it be lawful for Christians, now under the
Gospel, to make war or not?

Answ. It is, as is proved by these grounds, viz.

1. God, by Moses prescribes a form of making war, Deuteronomy 20 1. and therefore
certainly he did allow his people sometimes, and upon some occasions to make
war. Number. 10.9. and 31.2, 17. Judge. 1. and 31 chapters.


2. We read that many of Gods faithful servants have made war, as Abraham
Gen 14.28. Moses, Exodus 17.8. Joshua, Exodus 17.9. Josh. 1.14. and 12.7. the
Judges, 1.3.4.5.7.8.11. chapters, the Kings, David, Asa, Iosaphat, Hezekiah.

3. John Baptist forbids not soldiers to fight, neither commands them to give
over war, if they would be saved; but to wrong none, and be content with
their wages, Luke 3.14.

4. The Magistrate is said, Romans 13.4. not to bear the sword in vain, but to
be the Minister of God for our good, and a revenger to execute wrath upon him
who does evil. Which plainly shows, that the right of the sword is allowed
both against private faults and offenders, and also against public, who by
arms are to be resisted and opposed.

5. Cornelius the Centurion, Acts 10.1. is commended for his faith, and did not
give over warfare (that we read of) when he was baptized: which undoubtedly the
Apostles would not have suffered if war bad been prohibited unto Christians.
And so Math 8.10. the faith of another Centurion is highly commended.

6. It is most certain, that a great part of the Magistrates duty is, to
protect and defend innocents, orphans, widows, and those that are oppressed,
which sometimes without Arms cannot be done. And therefore if the case require
it, Rom 13.4.
the godly Magistrate may flee unto this last remedy of war. It is the office
of the Magistrate, to take vengeance on him that does evil: Now it may fall
out that not one or two, or a few, but a multitude may do evil, and commit
some outrage, who cannot be resisted but by force of arms; and then the
Magistrate is to use this means of the sword for the suppression of evil, and
the vengeance of evil doers.

7. That which God persuades unto, and which is done by the inspiration and
assistance of his holy Spirit, is lawful; but God often persuades and exhorts
the Saints to make war, and is said to be present with them by his spirit,
and to give victory unto them; and therefore war is lawful, Josh. 1. Judge.
6.11 and 13. chapters, 1 Samuel 15. and 30. chapters, Psalm. 44.

8. That which the Saints do by faith is lawful unto them, but by faith they
make war, Heb. 11.34. therefore war is lawful unto them.

9. The Scripture says, There is a time to war, and a time to make peace,
Ecclesiast. 3.8. And therefore war is lawful.

10. God is styled, The Lord of Hoasts, a man of war; One who teaches our
hands to war, and who gives victory in battle: and therefore war is
lawful.

Quest. 11. But whether is it lawful for Subjects to take up arms against
their Sovereign?

Answ. Dr. Sharp (Symphon. Proph. and Apost. page 244.) answers hereunto, that
there are two sorts of Subjects, to wit.

1. Some who are merely private, and these ought not of themselves to take up
arms against their King.

2. Some who are so private, that the superior power in some sort does depend
upon them, as the Tribunes amongst the Romans; the Ephori amongst the
Lacedaemonians; and our Parliaments amongst us: And if Princes observed not
their Covenants and promises, these might reduce them, and if they sought the
overthrow of the State, these might withstand them.

Quest. 12. What are the Remedies against war, that is, both for the
preventing and removal of it?

Answ. 1. The Remedies are either Moral, Martial, or Theological.

First, the Moral means are these two, to wit:

1. Humble suits and supplications for peace, unto them from whom a war is
feared.

2. Expressions of the Loyalty of our actions, and sincerity of our intentions
and desires, however they may be wrested or misconstrued.

Secondly, The Military means are many, as namely,

1. To follow close a victory: this was Hambals fault, who could tell better
how to win the field, than how to use his victory: and this Casar blamed in
Pompey, that having once the better of him, he did not follow his fortune.

2. To give way to a stormer Plus audet audax quam fortis, a foolehardy man
dare do more than one truly magnanimous; for the property of a good soldier
is not to run himself into such desperate hazards, that there is no
probability for him to come off with safety; but courageously to adventure upon
any feazible design, and to give it over, when it may be given over, but
cannot be effected or brought to pass. It is better (as all know and will
confess) for soldiers sometimes to retreat, that they may return again to
their greater advantage, than to keep their stations and die. Whence Antigonus
once forced to give way to the violent onset of his enemies, said, S^ non
f^gere, sed utilitatem retro sitam perle qui.
That he did not fly, but pursue his profit and advantage, which was placed
backwards, or behind him; intimating, that in such a case it was more
commodious for him to go backwards than forwards, to retire than to advance.

3. Another Military means for the removal of wars is Prudence,
Magnanimity, and skill in Martial discipline, in the Captains, Commanders,
and Officers.

4. Another is, for Captains and Commanders to observe, and mark diligently
all conveniences and advantages of time, place, etc. both for pitching their
tents, and fighting their battles.

5. Another is, in the soldiers strength, courage, resolution, and obedience
to their Commanders.

6. Another is, for Captains and soldiers in necessity, when they can, to
help one another.

7. Another is, for Captains and Common Soldiers to be well armed, for and
against all assayes, and assaults: But more amply of these by and by in the way
unto Victory.

Thirdly, the Theological or Religious Remedies or Means for the preventing
and removing of War, are these which follow, and the like, viz.

1. To war upon our selves; The Oracle of Apollo answered those of Cyrrha,
That if they would live in peace at home, they should make war with their
neighbors abroad; but if we desire peace with others, we must wage continual
war with our selves, and our own sins, wickedness within, being the true cause
of war without.

2. To humble our selves before and unto God, by fasting, Joel 2. and 3. Jonah
3.

3. To enter into a covenant and holy league with God, Hose 2.18.

4. Seriously to repent and to turn truly unto God, Levit. 26.40 etc. Devt.
30.1. and 32.36. and 1 Samuel 7.3. Jer. 4.8. and 6.26.

5. A promise of thankfulness or thanksgiving unto the Lord, if he will be
pleased to give victory unto us or preserve and deliver us from war, and the
performance of this promise when he has answered our desires.

6. Prayer unto God, and that both in general and particular.

First, in general we must pray that the Lord would be our Captain in the time
of War, and take our part and fight for us, there being nothing without him
which will or can help us, that is, neither 1. Strong, and well instructed
Armies, Psalm. 33.16. Nor 2. Fenced Cities, Amos 5.9. Nor 3. Great or mighty
colleagues or confederates, Psalm. 60.13. and 62.10. And therefore let us not
trust in any of these or the like, but only in the Lord, as these his Saints
have done, to wit, Asa 2 Cro. ^4.11
, Iosaphet 2 Cro. 20.12
, David Psalm. 44.6. and 108.13.
, Isa Isa. 3^.2.
Hezekiah Isa. 37.20.
.


Secondly, Because the Lord works ordinarily by means, therefore we must in
special and more particularly pray when we are anoid and infested with war.

1. That the Lord would bestow upon our Captains, Commanders, and Officers,
such wisdom, and prudence, yea such fortitude and courage, that they may
consult of, manage, and order all things wisely and discreetly, and prosecute,
yea execute all things prosperously, magnanimously, and with good success,
Psalm. 20.1.5.

2. That the Lord would incline the hearts of the soldiers unto obedience, and
subjection to their Captains; and preserve them from all sedition and rising
up against their Commanders

3. That the Lord would preserve both Commanders and Common Soldiers from all
wickedness and impiety, especially from those heinous offenses which too
frequently follow the Camp and accompany wars; as namely, blasphemy,
fornication, rapes, drunkenness, gaming, jarres, contentions, theft,
pilfering, etc.

4 That the Lord would strengthen the hands of all in battle, giving them
courageous hearts, resolute minds, and firm resolutions, that their battles
and endeavors may be crowned with victory.

Now that these our prayers may become effectual, two things are required, viz.

First, They must proceed from a pure mind, or an heart purged from sin Pro.
1.26. and 28.9. Isa 1.15. and 59.2. Mic. 3.1.
.

Secondly, They must proceed from faith unfeigned, or from a firm confidence
and assurance, that the Lord will hear our prayers in as much as may stand
with his glory and our good Iam. 1.6.
.

And thus much for the Remedies against, or Means for removal of this plague
of war from us.

Quest. 13. It may now in the last place be demanded, How victory may be
obtained in War? Or by what means we may not only be preserved from the power
of our enemies in battle, but also bring them by conquest and victory into
subjection?

First, The Martial means for the obtaining of victory in war, are either
Negative, or Affirmative.

1. Negative, if soldiers desire conquest in fight, Then

1. They must not fall to pillaging too soon, lest their enemies take occasion
thereby to fall upon them, and to take them unprovided.

2. They must not pursue their enemies in flight so eagerly, that they mingle
themselves with them or run themselves so far in amongst them, that they are
not able to bring themselves off again with safety.

3. They must not at all trust to their multitude, for not always that Army
which is the greatest prevails, but oftentimes the least. Darius against
Alexander, Pompey against Caesar, Haniball against Scipi, Antonius against
Augustus, and Mithridates against Sylla, had greater Forces without comparison
then their enemies, and yet were overcome.

4. They must not at all trust in their own strength: Thou have therefore oh
man (says Augustine Oh homo ideo non vicisti quia de tuo praesumpsisti. Qui
praesumit de viribus suis antequam pugnet, proster^iter. Aug. de verb. Apost
not overcome in battle, because thou presumedst of thy self; for he who
before fight, trusts in his own str^ngth, shall be overthrown Eccles. 9.11.
.

Secondly, There are Affirmative martial means for the obtaining of Victory
in War; as namely.

1. For Captains highly to prize their soldiers, Fabius Maximus sent to Rome
to the Senate for money, to redeem his soldiers which Haniball had taken
Prisoners, and being denied thereof, commanded his son to sell all his lands,
and bring money for their ransom; so highly did he value and esteem the
freedom of his men. And thus every Captain should do if he would win the
love and affection of his soldiers, without which a Commander should hardly
obtain victory.

2. Courage and resolution in battle: 300 Noblemen of the house of the Fabii,
took upon them alone to wage battle against the Vi^^tines Livius.
. To show that a true and magnanimous soldier will not fear to undertake any
noble feazible enterprise for the obtaining of Victory in the day of battle.

3. Long preparation for the undertaking thereof: He must long prepare for
war who would speedily overcome, because a long preparation of war makes a
speedy victory Diu apparandum est bellum ut vincas celerius, quia lo^ga bellis
praepa^atio celere^ facit victoriam Senec. epist. 1^.
.

4. To prosecute the wars with good counsel and advice; for there must be
counsel at home when there is war abroad Parva sunt arma foris, si non est
consilium domi. Sen. Epist. 15.
.

5. A diligent observation of all conveniences and inconveniences which may
happen, whether of Sun, wind, mists, etc. for the Sun and dust hinders our
sight, and the wind being contrary, or in our face, is noxious both to horse,
rider, and all kinds of darts, arrows, and shot. Ordinaturus aciem, tria debet
ante prospicere, solemn, pulverem, ventum, etc. Veget. l. 13. cap. 14.


6. The use and assistance of expert and experienced soldiers, who know their
terms of art, postures, conveniences, inconveniences, when to advance, when to
fall off; and how to use their weapons, or handle their arms etc. One saying
on a time to Epaminondas, that the Athenians were all armed with new arms and
weapons, answered, What then? shall Antigenidas (who was a most curious
Musitiam) weep, because Tellia (who was a most poor player of instruments)
has got a new Pipe? signifying, that the Athenians were to small purpose armed
with new weapons, seeing they knew not how to use them. Plutarch. in apoph.
If an Army consist of raw, young, and fresh water soldiers, who seldom or
never saw men wounded or slain; when they come to see such sights, they will
tremble and be confounded with fear, and begin to think rather of flying than
fighting. quiraro aut nunquam viderent homines vulnerari, vel occidi quu^
primum aspexerint etc.
Experience shows, that knowledge and skill in Military and Martial
discipline does exceedingly embolden a soldier in battle; and that in warlike
enterprises, a few ancient and expert Warriors has overcome, got the day, put
to flight, yea to a sore slaughter, a great multitude of rude ignorant,
untaught and untutered soldiers Vigetius. de re militari. lib. 1. cap. 6.
.

7. Subtilty, Policy, and secret stratagems: Note here, That Policy in war, is
threefold, to wit,

1. For the immediate endangering of the enemy: It is observed That Haniball
never fought any battle without laying some ambush for the ensnaring of his
enemies: And when just war is taken in hand, it matters not whether a man
endeavor to conquer, subdue, and master his Adversaries by open force or
secret politic devices: for the Lord commanded Joshua by deceit, or a secret
stratagem, to overcome the Inhabitants of Ai Quum justu^ bellum suscipitur
utrum aperte pugnet (...) quis, an ex insibits, nihil ad justitiam interest.
Aug. ad. Bonif.
. Good Captain; do not always Vi and armis, by open force labor the
overthrow of their foes, but chiefly endeavor it by secret stratagems, because
in open war there is a common danger, but in warlike devices those who lie in
wait are not in such peril, as these are for whom they lie in wait Boni ^^ce^
non aperte praelio, in qu^ est common periculum, sed ex occulto sempe
attentant. etc. Viget. l 3. ca 9
. Antigonus being asked, How a man should give the onset upon his enemy?
answered, either by force or fraud, either openly or by deceit Aut^ do^^ aut
vi, au^ a perte aut pe^^ insidias. Sto^
.

2. Policy in war is sometimes for the immediate preservation of themselves,
and mediate or consequent disadvantage of their foes: P. Aemilius to avoid the
Sun that shined in the face of his Host, was so long in ranging his Army,
that by the time the battles should join, the Sun was upon his back. The
like policy used Marius against the Cymbrians, and Augustus against the
Flemings.

3. Policy in war is sometimes for the encouraging of the soldiers against
their enemies: Polemon to make his soldiers fiercer in assailing the
Lacedaemonians, cast his colors into the midst of his enemies, whereupon they
pressed upon them with great violence, esteeming it a great shame to abandon
their Ancient, or to have their enemies possess their Ensign.

8. Another martial means for the obtaining of Victory, is the Captains
encouraging of his soldiers and convincing them of the lawfulness of the war
in hand. Themistocles leading out the Army of the Athenians against their
enemies, saw two Cocks sighting most fiercely; whereupon, he turned him to his
Soldiers, with these words Hi neque propatria, neq pro aris and focis, neque
pro monumentis avorum, neque pro gloria, neque pro liberis neque pro liberate,
periculum subeunt, sed tantum, ne alter ab altero superetur, eique cedere
cogatur Aelian. lib. 2. cap. 28.
: These neither fight for their Country, nor for their Religion, nor for their
Possessions, nor for their fathers Sepulchers, nor for honor, nor for their
wives and children, nor for their Laws, or Liberties, but only, Lest the one
should be overcome of the other, and forced to yield unto him: How much more
then should we hazard and adventure our lives when we fight for all these?
with which words his soldiers were so encouraged, that they went most
courageously and resolutely against their Adversaries.

9. Another means is, experienced Commanders and stout Captains; Cabrias the
Athenian was wont to say Ter^ibilio^em esse exercitum cervo^um duce Le^ne, quam
Le^um duce ce^o. Erasm lib. ^. cap. 32. Fa^^er.
: That an Army of Dear was more terrible if they had but a Lion to be their
Captain, than an Army of Lions having an Heart to be their Captain.

10. Another means is, to cope with the enemy, before his strength increase
too much; whence Julius Caesar was wont to say, Expectare (...) ^^piae a
gen^^ur, summa de^ent^a est. Iu^^us Cael. Com^ent lib 4.
That it was a great madness for any to stay until the Host or their enemy
was increased and multiplied; because he who desires to conquer and subdue his
foe, may in all probability sooner do it when his Army is small, than when it
is great, when he has few to aid him, than when he has many.

11. Another means is, to be resolute, and courageous in battle. There is a
people in Germany called Catti, whose strength consists in their foot men; of
whom it is said, Tacitus.
Others go to skirmish, and the Catti to war; such was their courage,
magnanimity and undaunted resolution in the day of battle: much like to that
speech of King James, That he had four and twenty Players, and six Actors.
Soldiers must not be like the Frenchmen, of whom it is said, Livius.
That if they loose the first encounter, they loose also the victory; but
rather like the Lacedaemonians, who of all people were most valiant, being both
in the beginning and end of the battle more than men.

12. Another means is, to aim principally at the principal, and to level at
the Leaders, (as Scanderbeg was always observed to do) because, smite the
sheepherd, and the sheep will be scattered. Epaminondas viewing a huge and well
harnessed Army, but without a Leader, General, or Captain, said, Quan^^
bellua, sed absque capi c. St. b.
How great and fair a beast is here, but without an head.

13. Another means is, to war only upon just causes. It is observed, That
the Emperor Trajane was never overcome, or vanquished in war, because he
never undertook war without just cause, as Hely the Spartan does say. The
Romans were never so foiled, neither ever received so much dishonor in all
their wars in Asia, or Africa, as they received at the siege of Numantia; and
this was not for default of battery or assault, or because the City was
impregnable, but because their wars against Numantia were unjust, and the
Numantines had just cause to defend themselves. Titus Livius observes, that
Marcus Marcellus would not be Captain of that war, which was not very well
justified; and that Quintus Fabius would never undertake that war in chief,
which was not very dangerous; and that these two Noble Princes were of high
esteem with the Romans: But in the end much more was the estimation of Marcus
Marcellus for being just, than of Quintus Fabius for being valiant. Whence it
has been said Si bona suerit causa pugnantis, pugnae exitus malus esse non
potest and vice versa etc. Ber^. de nova militia.
That if the cause of the Warrior be good, the end of the war cannot be
evil; and contrarily the end of a fight is not judged to be good, except a
good cause and a right intention did precede the fight.

These and the like, are the Military and Martial Means which are to be used
for the obtaining of Victory in War.

Object. Against these it may be objected, that victory in war comes only
from God; and therefore all Military means are vain, none being able to
preserve us from war.

Answ. To neglect the means wholly, is to tempt Gods Providence, and to trust
in the means, is to distrust Gods Providence; and therefore we must observe,
how means profit, and how not, viz.

1. Military means will help us, as they are means ordained by God, for the
removal of the malady of war, if we use them in the fear of the Lord, and
because ordained by God, putting our trust, confidence, and affiance for our
protection and preservation wholly in Him, notwithstanding the use of the means

2. These means will not help us, if God being despised, neglected, and not
looked at at all in the use of them; we being intent only upon them, or at
least respect them primarily, hoping that they will profit us without God: for
victory in war is neither got by multitude, nor strength, but by the aid,
assistance, and power of God Victoria in bello nec multitudine, neque
fortitudine paratur, sed divino auxilio. Xenophon. Stob. sermon. 49.
. And therefore these military means must now be used, and those Theological,
mentioned in the 12 question, and then trust solely, wholly, and only to our
good and gracious God, who is the God of victory, and makes wars to cease in
the world: and to whom all praise and glory belongs both for the enjoyment of
all good, and preservation from all evil, whether of sin, or punishment.

FINIS.

