Caro-Cari^ta.

A Treatise discovering the true Nature of CHARITY: How far consistent with our
own primary Inherency: And how nighly paralelled in vulgar Practice.

Composed by L. W.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Stephen and Thomas Lewis, and are to be sold at
their shop, at the sign of the Book-binders in Shoelane, 1658.

TO THE most Worthily Honored Lady Theodosialvie
Madam,
HAving designed this Treatise for the Instruction of a Mind yet
incommunicable; least Error or Malice should under such latitude of Time
intercept the intention; I have presumed to Implore hereto the Influence of
your Graces; That the Dignity of your Illustrious Attributes might warrant it a
secure tutelage to Posterity. The Nature of the Subject will, I hope,
successefully intercede for your Reception; since it is the perfect Character
of your own practical Piety: and the fairest Pledge to your celestial
Inherency. (Nor can the Ascertion pass for civil Ceremony) the living
Testimonies of your Glory are as frequent and universal as humane Infirmities:
and the Consequence as effectual as a continual Sacrifice, regeminated by the
numerous Affluence of grateful Votaries. Madam, both Civil and Intellectual
Endowments, have in your fruition thereof, attained the highest Perfection,
fully meeting the due Intention of their Enlargement, their uninteressed
distribution. All Arts and Sciences whatsoever have fallen from their primitive
Honor, Credit, and possibly their efficacy, since become Objects of Commerce
and Prostitutes to abject Lucre. The splendour of their glory survives yet only
in your Dispensation of their Virtues. The Influence of whose ministry therein,
extending beyond the pretense of any Relation or Reference whatever. It being
to any an irresistible Plea to a, Right in your succor, to affirm that they
want it. To avoid an impropriety in which position I must not so far trespass
against the Dignity of so communicable a Bounty, as indistrust thereof to
thrust these addresses into a singular exception. Nor will the rules of
Civility admit thereto so confident an Introduction, as to precede the access
of an agreeing Election: I will therefore humbly wait your pleasure to
distinguish under what degree of Inherency you shall vouchsafe to shelter this
abandoned Production, tendered by,

Madam, Your humbly devoted Servant, L. W.

Caro-Cari^ta
Son,
COnsidering that the most perfect Method to form exactly our own Judgment is
methodically to inform another; and that the most legitimate Authority can
admit us to the privilege of this practice, is what Nature has constituted on
us in the production of our kind; I have long since (in regard our frail
composure can scarce promise to us a rational communication betwixt gray hairs
and the Cradle) formed a purpose in my Intention, to compose for thee a Tract
of Natural, Civil, and Divine Notions, as the most proper and useful subjects
of Instruction, solely conducing to the improvement of our being; whereby thou
may facily and timely attain to that capacity, as to avoid those shelves,
thy faithful Pilot shall discover to thee, by the wrack of his own fame and
fortunes (inseparable coherents) yet in respect no time falls within the
dispensation of humanity, but the present I am forced to pervert the Order of
my Design; commencing with that principal, should crown the closure of our
enterprise: and since we cannot hope to reach a capacity to treat of All; at
least to discuss of the most Necessary.

In reference to which, the highest Principal in Practical Divinity being
Charity. The utmost Object, to which every progression in Religion tends
Scala vel ad summum attinet usque polum; from whose implicit operation is
derived her explicit denomination, Religare, to bind together; a compendious
model of the whole Law: and without which, The tongues of men and Angels, with
the highest and most powerful operations or illuminations of the spirit, or
what other celestial graces so ever are but as tinckling Cymbals, or as
sounding Brass. This being an indisputable Axiom in this high mystery; it
will be materially important truly to distinguish of her Nature, least we
reflecting on some imperfect similitude thereof, should deviate from this
glorious light, and by such empty exhalation be seduced to our ruin;
especially, finding the ravishing lusters of her graces deflow'red in the
profanation of her Attribute, under a proverbiall ascertion, Charity begins at
home. A Vulgar position, wanting neither the Approbation nor Practice of the
gravest, wisest and most Religious in repute to lend it a more warrantable
authority. But to remonstrate unto thee, how repugnant this distinction, in the
order of her objects, is to the sacred nature of her Essence; least the Devil
should deceive thee under the figure of an Angel of light, we will endeavor to
discover the error of this Tenet.

Methodically proceeding, first, perfectly to delineate the principal subject
of our discourse in a full and perspicuous Definition: To which true original
tracing any parrallel, we clearly may distinguish the similitude or
dissimilitude in the particulars. In pursuit of which Rule, we must acknowledge
Charity to be a free act of the Will to relieve another, proceeding from no
other consideration, end, or relation, whatsoever, than the compassionate sense
of another suffering.

The qualification of the act, though simple may properly extend to a triple
exposition in her nature, free in respect of the motive of the act; free in
relation to the manner of the act; free in regard of the measure thereof.

1. In respect of the Motive free, not induced by impulsion, as importunity or
Solicitation; Assent attained by the one, viseth directly but at our proper
quiet; by the other, but obliquely to pleasure the Intercessors: Nor by
Imposition, either as a legal Institution, civil Rule, or natural Order:
Munificence in conformity to the first, can be qualified but Obedience; to the
second but Gratification; to the third, but an innate Retribution. 2. Free in
respect of the manner, without protracting, grudging, reproching, or insulting.

1. Protraction incurs the hazzards of that guilt, may probably ensue, in the
doubtful miscarriage of another: while the suspended will in the affected
demur, betrayeth in it self an indifference totally inconsistent with the
nature of so zealous a Consequence.

2. Grudging implies a retraction of the will, which defaceth the nature of the
Acts ere it is fully formed.

3. Reproaching intimates a contradiction in the nature of the Motive, figuring
at once, both a prope^sion and an Aversion, twins following so close in issue,
that the younger seems to supplant the elder, whilst one pours Oil in the
wound, the other seeks to enlarge it by Incision.

4. Insulting proclaims rather a pretense of Acquisition to our selves, than of
Redemption to another; whilst one hand humbly stoops to unloose the Shekle at
the foot, the other arrogantly presumes to cast the yoke about the neck.

3. Free in regard of the Measure: this distinction extends it self first to
the Capacity of the Agent, next to the Exigence of the Patient. As he that has
to the utmost of his faculty ministered to another Necessity, though not
supplied, the deficiency has attained the merit of the undertaking. So he that
has liberally advanced the welfare of another by a timely succor, yet
restrained his hand, by the reluctance only of his will, from finishing his
restoration, abandoning the distressed to the former hazard of his Ruin,
has totally forfeited the Glory of his Inception; if not rendered himself
guilty of the future issue: The true Object of Charity, being to redeem another
from Affliction, not to prolong another misery.

The general Object of this celestial virtue, Relief, extends to as vast a
latitude as our frail Natures are exposed to casualties or defects, whereto it
is appropriated, She is a guide to the blind; a support to the Lame; food to
the Hungry; raiment to the Naked, and counsel to the simple, etc. So that if we
shall truly consider Her in her proper Nature; no one can be found so happy,
which may not, nay, which does not become the Subject of her Ministry: Nor no
one so wretched, which may not become Her Minister: so full a variety of Parts
is in our Civil composition to grace that Harmony might issue from the
Agreement of our mutual Love.

The Subject or Motive of this officious endeavor, is only the compassionate
sense of another Misery. How far such reflective participation of another
evil may be consistent with that rigid tenure of Philosophy, which struggleth
only to support the mind immov'd, placing the contentation of the Soul rather
in magnanimity than Indulgency; in Greatness more than Goodness: may possibly
require a vaster Agitation, than will agree with the Simetry of our present
Treatise. Yet thus much we may briefly infer in confirmation of our Position,
That the regular Emotions of the sense are as necessary to the production of
the souls Effects: as is a gale of Wind to the progression of a Bark upon the
surface of the Ocean: without which it can neither be Communicative to it self
or others; the noblest Qualificatio^ of every moral virtue; unless we should
improperly admit, this Speculation to pursue an Object distinct from her Nature
whereof it but pretends to be the original: a supposition inconsistent with
the very Essence of intellectual graces, which are so visibly united in
coherence of Effects, as they but form one only Nature: Nor can there be a
communicative faculty, without the sense of an impulsive motive, which is
expressed even in the Election, with more than an impartial indifferency:
Besides which interior Compunction in the Motive, there must be also an
interior Compassion in the ministry to form the Excellence of this celestial
Attribute. The debordments only of superfluity are not sufficient pledges to
merit the perfection of her dignity, though issuing from the most perfect
Sincerity. Slighter dispensations may sometime possibly figure her Nature. But
Seipsum vel ex seipso aliquid voluntary perientis saluti contribuere, est
quidem opus vere Divinum. To contribute voluntarily himself, or any thing from
himself to the safety of a perishing man: is questionless a work truly divine;
as may appear by the example and testimony of that incarnate Word, who formd
her Nature. Nor yet can every Act of Benevolence receive so high an
Illustration, to be invested with the Ornaments of Her Title; The threatenings
of a destructive exigent must meet our ministry to qualify our aid with such a
Dignity: not that every degree of distress, may not assume an equal
privilege; if weighed in the Consequence with such an apprehension and
followed with the Impotence of the sufferer: But that no degree of succor
whatsoever without reference to this distinction, can merit such an Attribute.

This Virtue yet must farther be more purely qualified to attain her perfect
luster, and manifest Her Original really celestial: She must not issue from
any material consideration, End or Relation whatever: what? not from the
reflection of our own frailty, subject to like Accidents, might move us timely
to provide for a delivery, either by a particular Retribution, or a general
Commiseration: No, such Intention waiting on Her, production were but obliquely
to trace our vulgar Notion in a civil Policy: What? not the consideration of
another Virtue, Goodness, Honor, Dignity? No, that were to prosecute a Rule
holds no conformity with the Pattern of Her perfect essence, who suffered only
for the safety of the vildest criminals. May then the glory of the Action
inflame our wills to propagate Her being? No, that were to prostitute the
highest virtue to the fruition of the lowest vice. May our Relations yet in
Nature claim this privilege. No, that were to admit the most sensual and
irrational Beast to a Capacity of the divinest excellence; since they, by
instinctive motives do equally with us endeavor to preserve their own
Productions.

Nay, we must yet extend the sense of our Distinction farther to delineate Her
Purity: concluding that She proceeds in Her Integrity against any
consideration, End, or Relation, might in humane sense retract her Influence:
which shall want no other Authority for confirmation, than His Example and
Precept enlightened our understanding in the sacred mystery of Her Institution,
who enjoins our Ministry to them that hate us, to them that despitefully
persecute us, etc.

Having thus briefly searched into the perfect Essence of this celestial
virtue: we will endeavor to disclose under what material Arguments our common
frailty can so far disguise pretended Piety, to challenge to our selves hereof
the first Inherency: and how nigh vulgar Practice has assumed Her similitude,
or yet therein attained the intention of their own improper Notion. It Is true
the order of Nature requires that we first be, before we can be useful unto
others. But while we are, the order of this sacred virtue sometime may exact,
that our present beings cease for the improvement of another; of which we have
examples even in civil Rules; Curtius, Scevola, Regulus. But when with the
Apostle she shall yet take a higher flight: and earnestly desire (if possible)
to be secluded from eternal Glory, Peace, and Comfort, for his Brethrens sake;
What Inclination so barbarous, that is not silenced with a stupendous
Adoration of Her Glory; Yet these Patterns (some may perhaps allege) to be
more proper to our speculation than our practice: nigher our admiration, than
our Imitation: (what we desire not to attain, we plead an Incapacity to effect)
but if granted so; they are not here improperly inferred, when only to confute
this specious texture, which the indulgence to our selves has wrought, and lend
the sensual soul a clear intelligence, how far our corrupt Tempers are from
the attaining of her excellence; when we so shallowly distinguish of her
Essence: To which may possibly farther be objected, that we herein extend the
sense of this Her Character to a more special and peculiar Influence of grace
than falls within the common dispensation to humanity: or the due limmits of
such precept might compose unto all a general Prescription, which reaches but
to love our neigh bour as our selves; not to fer their Interests to our own.
It Is true such is the litterall sense of this equilibrate Textures sigured to us
by that sacred Light, who formed Her proper nature as framed only to the
frail capacity of our common usage: But not that either the excellence of Her
luster, or the extent of our Devoir should be contained under the limits of so
sensual a delineation: Being herein included (as in other Precepts) a
spiritual sense to inanimate the Letter; not distinguishable to a sensual
Inspection: such was the expansion of that veiled Light, revealed to us in the
Exposition of the Law; by that celestial guide, who only could fulfill the
same; It is said, Thou shall not commit Adultery; But I say, whosoever sees a
woman and lusts after her has already committed Adultery with her in his
heart. Nor does the implicit sense of the former Injunction dissent from the
Eclareisment of the latter: When brought unto the Test; by him that would
uphold he had observed them from his Infancy, to the sequel of the Institution
being annexed this supplement; Sell All thou have, and give it to the Poor:
All, is so far from admitting of a Partner in this approved Ministry, that it
implies not so much, as a participation even to our property: Our proper
Interests here being totally ejected forth the balance of the former Rule in
competition with another Misery: some may perhaps except against the Collation
of this Parrallel, as not altogether competent to form a general Institution,
in that the Party instanced was a single Person, without any dependence on
others, or other on him: either of which might probably seem of force to alter
the Constitution of so strict an Imposition: Since improvisors of their family
are in the balance of Impiety, but counterpoised with unbelievers. A specious
evasion to shroud affected Avarice from the Capacity of so requisite a
Ministry: and in the extent of such position, yields almost every member of the
same a privilege of omission, man's Avarice or Ambition, Vanity or Lux in any
one condition whatsoever not possibly meeting such prescription might move him
willingly to turn the torrent of his Assluence from his proper Interests or
Pleasures. Most pretending the advancement of their family, induces them to
the Enlargement of their Revenues: but where the due proportion of such bounds
should terminate are indiscoverable to the proper mover: for the nigher they
seem to approach the Object, the more remote are they from the attaining it:
new acquisitions beget new desires', and new desires new acquisitions; so that
it may be admitted a civil position as well as a Math'maticall conclusion:
That the whole sublunary Orb cannot in the application, fill the extending
angles of man's still vacant heart: if it shall be required, where then may
terminate the due bounds of man's irregular desires. It may be answered, that in
Natural Rules, what is, ultra Necessitatem is superfluous, if not destructive;
what is ultra Decentiam, is impertinent; if not ridiculous: As in the most
perfect constitution of Natural compositions: so in the most regular form of
civil Textures, there will be few found so low or indigent; which may not fall
under this prescription; there being in most Temperatures and Fortunes, either
multa Superflua, or multa Aliena, many things Supersiuous, or many Strange.
From which conclusion may possibly arise a scruple, What then should be the
Encouragement or Fruits of humane Industry? If all the toil thereof should meet
no other end, than the bare support of her proper Fabrique? Why? (without
Reference to our future condition.) Is it not a higher merit, dignity,
satisfaction, to secure another being, than to lend useless divertisements
to our own? Can there be a more just acquisition of Homage, A thore plausible
Echo to our Fame, A more firm band to our Amity. Such certainly was his
Resentment, whose Advise did direct our faculties to this Object: Labor with
thy hands to be helpful unto others. Nor must it be the Refuge of our
Acquisition, that were an ungracefull loan to offer unto the Almighty; since he
for such vouchsafes to own it: Who gives to the Poor, lends to God. But ex
Primitiis, of the first, and most excellent fruits thereof, such were the
Qualifications even of the Heathen Offerings to their illusive Deities. But the
Usage of our times, (though instiled with the glorious Attribute of Christians.
(The whole structure of which Profession, but raised on the foundation of this
Practice) will in our most zealous dispensations scarce reach to the
Excrescence of our incumbring store: which may siguratively be said, but the
snipping of our hair, or the pairings of our nails; rather Illustrations to our
civil Fame, than progressions to our future felicity, badges rather of our
vanity, than production of our Piety: so far are we from sacrificing onevice in
this oblation, that we make even vice it self the Object of our offering. How
then can our vices here by meet a pacification, which sincerely preferred might
effectually cover a multitude of transgressions. But our corrupt Inclinations
are so far from adhering to the visible traces of this virtue (which flies in
her cordial Ministry, not only the seeming approaches of another discovery:
but even of her own secret Testimony, not letting one hand know what the other
does.) That we sound thereto a trumpet in the most affluent Conventions: raise
proud structures with Inscriptions thereof, to keep our Glory in the memory of
Posterity: and when all this? when our frailty has left us no longer faculties
to relish hereof the conducements, or to distinguish of those boasting
Relics. O ridiculous stupidity! Shall not the Indian Heathen (as we presume
to call them) in their clemency to impotent Foul and Beast (without pretense
of merit, providing public Receptacles for their Relief) rise up in judgment
against us. But if we think Divine Impositions too heavy a burden for our
frailty: let us examine how far the force only of Civil rules may really
herein extend themselves. Non nobis nascimur, we are not born for our selves.
According to the Inference of this Principle; we are so far from being the
first Object of our own proper Endeavor, that in the very use and end thereof,
we are not so much as admitted to a participation in the intention of our
primitive production: So necessary is the Communication of our faculties, to
the due support of the civil Fabrique. From whence we may conclude both in the
Civil and the Natural frame. Pars sibi tantum vivens jam morti proxima est;
That part which lives only to it self, is already on the consines of Death.
Such a privilege, nor the greatest, nor the meanest can assume unto
themselves, without destruction to their proper being. Et cujusque Dignitas
consistit tantum in commodo alterius; And the dignity of each part consists
only in the benefit another thereby receives: Nor is the extent hereof
limited within the circumscription of a private Family, Name, Nation, Sect or
Faction: sed to to humano generi; But to all mankind: at quo remotius
subjectum, eo Nobilius effectum, And How much more remote the subject; So much
more noble the thing effected. Alienis and inimicis Administrare, est sibi
proprium commodum negare. To administer to strangers and enemies, is truly to
deny unto our selves our proper interests. Solomon extends the sense thereof
yet farther, affirming, (A good man to be merciful to his Beast.) The happy
effects of which communicative virtue may be visibly manifest to every common
Inspection, shall consider how those Commonwealths have attained the highest
felicity of a perfect Government, that in their forms of common union have
represented but one single family, as the Spartans among the Greeks; the
Esseans among the Jews. Their provisio^s issuing equally from the common care
and Industry; the Elevation. Education, and Instruction of their youth, of all
earnestly prosecuted as one common Interest.

Having thus in reference to Charity, discussed how far our own primary
Inherence may become consistent with divine or civil Institutions: our
premised order requires, we should next present a Form hereof, produced from
the vulgar usage; that by a due collation of their Patterns, we may more
visibly distinguish of the Agreement in their Natures.

In Order to which, we will in general, first, severally reflect on the
Essential parts of our mutual community and commerce; though through the
corruption of our Nature, they seldom are divided in the Practice; the former
being frequently but a disguised Introduction to the Latter.

The simple Objects of an unimpeachable community, are, Gratulatio,
congratulatio, solatio and consolatio. Gratulation, Congratulaon; Solace, and
Consolation.

1. The Subjects most properly inherent to the first usage, is gratum aliquid
facere, agnoscere vel restituere. To tender, acknowledge, or requite a benefit.
The first two Branches of this distinction are very frequent, motives in vulgar
practice to civil Addresses: and the latter not altogether unusual: (But
according to the intention) neither the one nor the other falls under the due
limits of a simple and unimpeachable community; since they are but artificial
preludes to future and more advantageous pretenses: so that such forms of
intercourse may more properly be termed a traffic for Lucre, than a tender of
Beneficence or Gratitude, which only meets the perfect Test, when as some
pressing Exigent invites a speedy succor: But such extremes, like falling
Fabrics, affright them farthest from it have had most shelter by it. No
relation whatsoever will hazard any Interest to support where the success to
humane sense appears doubtful. In opposition to the first motive every one
can form unto himself a subtle caution. Absurdum est meipsum ingratiare nemini
grato. It seeming an absurd procedure to ingratiate our selves to him is become
acceptable to none. In such deplorable condition, the Parents unnaturally
abandon their Children, and the Children as ungratiously neglect their Parents:
Those sharply pursue these in their fall, with Rebukes. These irreverently,
those with Revilings: Brothers will rather strain their credit to supplant
each other in their Possessions, than to supply each other to preserve them.
Defaults are only reproachful in their ill success; but who excuses not, if
not applaudes the undertakers of a prosperous mischief. Be the actions and
intentions clearly free from any reference to the unhappy issue; yet misery
shall seldom meet in the officious visits of the nighest Relations; but an
insulting reproach: And where the Almighty God shall please to lay his hand,
Insolent man will presume to set his foot. In Repugnance to the latter Motive
(which in strictness of civil Rules may sometime possibly meet in one center
where the capacity not answers the Will, man thinks it an imputation to his
honor publicly to profess by a voluntary compensation to have held
Advantage from a thing so mean, could fall to a comtempt in civil commerce;
and had rather elate his vanity in some magnificent present, or entertainment,
than remunerate a benefit in a graceful Retribution. The high endearments of
the choicest amity, richest presents, most sumptuous extertainments, shall in
the adverse state scarcely produce a Recompense meet for the grooms that usherd
them; who meeting in one Point of Fortune, are measured, by the same Rules in
esteem, Corrupt humanity! we have daily proofs of gratitude twixt Fish, Foul,
and Beast of several kinds, and of them all to man in his Extreme, but of
man's timely aid to man in his adversity, no tie could ere afford, or truth
from History record; witness upright Jobs woeful visitants, and she, who in
his affluent prosperity had produced so many faithful pledges of her love in a
flourishing fertility, could not in the bitter Agony of his affliction afford
him one gentle word in a comfortable ministry. And that vigorous and divinely
illuminated spirit, who for his stable integrity, was described to be the Rock,
whereon the sacred structure of our saving Faith should be erected could not,
in his extremity unto his Savior, (who had on him conferred that dignity) so
much allow as an acknowledging Testimony.

2. The second object of community, Congratulation, holds an extraction from a
more alluring subject, most men with alacrity tendering homage to a rising
prosperity. But still with reference to their proper Interests, a procedure
most frequently in use among eminent Personages, on the successful Issues of
their enterprises, and may be judged rather an act of Ceremony, than an office
of amity: though the inherent Pretenses and exterior consequence thereof may
seem to bear a more plausible intention, being usually illustrated with
sumptuous presents, specious proffers, high Engagements; such were the
Ornaments to Jobs restoration from those degenerate Relations, that in his
dejected trial, under the formalities of friendship did but exaggerate his
misery with reproach. And truly evident it is to every common observation; that
such obsequious endearments are but secret Ambages to reserved purposes. If
otherwise these superficial Interludes, divided from such reference, more
frequently are attended with disguised emulation, envy or inemnity.

3. The next ensuing object of community is solace, the most frequent
attractive and universal of all the rest, man being naturally a sociable and
communicative Creature, seeking relaxes from the rigor of his primitive
Infliction by such intervals, as the burden necessary to his existence will
permit, if contemplative seeking agreeable issues to the digested Idea's of the
mind, for the use, benefit, or instruction of another spirit, delight,
confirmation or illustration of his own; underthe limit of prescription, may
probably be figured a plausible divertisment, proper and approvable to every
Sex, Age or Function. The which particulars, though all or most pretend to
prosecute in the Election of Society; Yet few, or none, do once so much as
figure to themselves the Use, End, or the Propriety of this Object in
community, which separated from Interest or Affair, is but followed to satisfy
the sensual appetite; to waste our precious hours in a casual, vain,
impertinent babble, to make an Ostentation of some ridiculous Pagentry, or
sport our selves with others desiciency.

4. The last Object of an uninterressed community, is consolation; the only
true legitimate and apparent issue of this celestial virtue, having no other
motive, but only the compassionate and effectual sense of another misery: of
which there are two kinds, Speculative and Material; The former without the
latter, may possibly sometime, in the agent, be invested with such Impotence,
as may not altogether derogate from the dignity of such Original, or otherwise
also, in the different quality of the Ministry, appropriated wholly to the
nature of the Passion; as in the Intellectual distempers, where the distracted
spirit requires only a rational prescription to restore it to the former
luster: yet usually such officious tenders are but a spurious, formal
compliance 'twixt eminent Personages on some disasterous Occurrent: A Ceremony
more frequently in practice in former ages, nor out of custom still in the
Eastern parts 'twixt nigh Relations. But such a superficial Ministry to an
exterior desiciency, (where otherwise endued with capacity) may rather be
termed a shameless and insulting mockery, than so much as a humane civility:
no faculty being without grudging more communicable than words, the sum of all
friendship betwixt man and man; and of all profession 'twixt man and God. The
real and Essential being but an imaginary point we figure in the sphere of
our discourse, to find the perfect elevation of this splendid Attribute, the
sensual appearance thereof being inscrutable to our sense in humane Society; as
we may truly collect from the due perpensation of our Argument; since we cannot
therein discover so much as the shadow of a debonary Indulgency to a distressed
calamity to issue from any practical Object in humane community. We should next
proceed to agitate on the more usual affluent and universal object of humane
intercourse preposited in the inception of our Texture; Commerce, the common
receptacle to yt premised occurences, as the Ocean to the Rivulets. But in the
inspection of such transaction, we have yet less hope to discover what we are
in search of (the Image of this divine Attribute; than in the preme^tioned
particulars: and in the attempt, pursue a fruitless enterprise: since it is
manifest to every common sense, without a farther circumstance, that man's
Infirmity or Necessity, the only true Objects of Charity, do but herein yield
him up to be the fitter prey to corrupt Lucre: And although a civil Commerce
might possibly meet a just prescription: yet is it so rare and difficult a
procedure, that ye wiseman affirms the Agitators herein, can hardly keep their
hands clean. In which respect, they were but as Thieves, reproachfully secluded
from the common receipt of a religious Convention: Nor are the forms of
Negotiation in the weightest or the sleighest transaction, managed with less
furbery, circumvention and deceit, even to the tender of a common visit; so
vilde and corrupt an Imposturie attends on humane coherency: that even the
most specious glosses of his courtesy are but a subtle traffic of propriety:
Yet that insulting custom may not so far corrupt the judgment, as to deprive
us of the use of Reason in civil practices, under a national prescription: no
man making scruple to act, what is in general usage licensed by the Authority
of the Law; we will proceed to instance farther, wherein such legal forms are
not only repugnant to Charity, but to Equity and Humanity; nor can such
Ordinance be a sufficient warrant to a rational man's integrity; who ought
exactly to separate the inferences of his actions from any inessentiall
circumstances and forms, under what dignity so ere authorized; to insert some
instances hereof, least it might altogether appear an empty suggestion. An
industrious acquisitor becomes plausibly possessed of a real Estate: and
although the end of his endeavor labor and care, was but to support his
numerous is2ue of either sex: (for the Law of God, Nature and Nations allow not
of any distinction between them) yet Death, by casualty surprising him, shall
by the Authority of the Law, frustrate this his intention, conferring the
succession to his possession, only on the primogenitor; who shall with as much
confidence enjoy and dispose thereof without reflection on the Calamities of
his Fathers naked members; as if his affluent Revenues were but the fruits of
his own proper Industry. Oh! barbarous inherency! But much more brutish, where
such estates are so voluntarily constituted by the voluntary vanity of the
acquisition, for what right of Relief can be pleaded for their succor from
others, who are voluntarily abandoned by their own natural Parents. Oh, the
glory of a Name! Oh, ridiculous shame! Can a man with Honor or Decency set a
Diadem on his Head, and leave the rest of his Members naked or tattered.
Extravagant passion for a dirty fame: It Is virtue only can be a perfect
Ornament to a family, not Power, not Wealth, not Dignity; since such
inessentiall shaddows of renown vanish even in their first eruptions, like an
empty noise. The right successors to the most glorious Monark of the world, in
a small process of time, became but poor enslaved Mecaniques at Rome. But to
omit farther Argument against the pretenses of this inhumane custom: admit the
splendid Title might support this gallant Pagentry should fail; even in the
first succession, the general issue of the Possessor shall totally exclude the
general issue of the Acquisitor from any Interest of Inherency. A pretty piece
of legal Sophistry. In either of which cases was never yet heard of any, that
brooked the fruition of such privilege, which so much scruple of erroneous
partiality, as might support the equal competitor from starving, though the
unequitable Advantages were never so affluent: so willing are the depraved
inclinations of brutish man to extinguish in their secret Consciences, the
lights of Nature or of Grace, in favor of their Avarice, or sensuality, when
the adulterate glosses of the Law may lend an influence to such procedure. Nay,
such is the tyranny of insulting custom, over servile spirits, that where no
visible advantages succeed the prosecution of the unequal prescription of the
Law: Yet the barbarous inhumanity of man, without a scruple of Remorse, submits
to the formalities thereof, though to the unjust extinction of another life:
as in matters of Petty Larcin. A most exquisite encouragement to common Unity,
where the light of civil commerce becomes an instigator to inhumane Practices.

Having so far as our frailty will permit, attempted to discover the glorious
Graces of that celestial and immaterial light did first give influence to our
Treatise: as also weighed how far the reflection of her luster may, in vulgar
Practice, agree with the true Nature of her Essence. It now remains only for
closure of our Texture, to examine how far, this Vulgar Position, may truly
reach the Inference therein included.

In order whereto we may infer, that such self Indulgence therein expressed
visibly tends only fovere genio, to cherish the sensual Inclination, and
can have no other Object than Ambition, Vanity, Lux or Avarice. Now how any of
these Objects, severally or jointly, may tend to the composure of man's present
felicity, (without reference to his future condition, to the Improvement
whereof they solely are inquestionable obstacles) we will proceed to figure.

1. Ambition, the highest passion of the mind, to which (when her Rights are
in question) all others still give place: can to it self propound no other
Good, but the subjection of another actions to the prescription of our will.
If such insulting Arrogance shall (through an affected sufficiency) pretend the
end of their supremacy is but assumed to reduce the stubborn temper of the
unformd multitude to civil order; we may thereto object, that a modest Reason
only should preside the motions of another spirit, to lend it a more regular
Impression, divested from the very appearance of violence or peculiar
interests, which always are the only ushers introduced and columns that
support this high Prerogative: Or were such terrible investures warrantable to
shroud the just Pretenders from those fatal issues do commonly attend the
undertakings of a naked Institutor, though supernaturally inspired, yet what
affinity, similtude or relation can there be betwixt the quality of the means,
and the nature of the intention: between the regulation of the mind, and the
destruction of the Body; or if admitted for allowable, Can rational man be so
extravagantly possessed with passion for another disagreeing benefit, as to
waide through so many dangerous, guilty, costly, penible Tracts, conduct to
this supremacy, without a reference to satisfy our own advantages; which also
truly weighed in the Inception, and pursuit, fruit and fruition are but
inessentially proposed; the Introduction still attended with violation of
Rights, civil, Natural and Divine: The consequence upheld with slaughters
devastation, oppression, the cries and tears of desolate widows, the mourning
and calamities of innocent Orphans; the fruit associated exteriourly with the
inseparable Furies, Envy and hatred interriourly with that of ye inappeasable
and secret horror of his own guilt: the fruition uncertain, the issue
tragical, which agreement of parts, in the Nature of the subjects must
questionless produce a preposterous Harmony to form the life of man agreeable.
Vanity is but the bastard Brother to the former distemper of the Mind:
possibly contended with the exterior shadow of such immensitie, glory, and
empty rumor from an empty Vaut, popular applause. A mercenary Idolatry devoted
to it self: a changing gale to every Sale.

3. Lux, pretends to a more material Object of delight, in adulation to the
sense; and contrary to the intent of her sollicitous Indulgence to satisfy,
satiates in stead of succouring, to supply clogs to destroy: whilst oppressed
Nature sinking under the burden of a preposterous Ministry, contracts more
painful and lasting Infirmities than could be threatened by her Indigence.

4. Avarice, the vildest, vainest, and preposterous affection can taint the
Reason or possess the Spirit, vild, in that it indirectly pursues the basest
Object to the prejudice or destruction of another; vain, in that the more it
advances in the improvement of the means, the farther it is distant from
attaining the End. Preposterous in that man consumes himself in pursuit of his
own support; yet attaining the materials thereto, denies himself the fruition
thereof, He makes no scruple of any crime to increase his useless store, that
another may enjoy the fruit of his Vice; who though the nighest Issue of his
loins, wishes if not procures his destruction: and be his prudence never so
cautious in the equal distribution of his accumulation, shall at his
Obsequies, be only gratified with opprobrious reproaches, slanderous murmurs,
secret execrations of his proper blood. So that we may conclude from the result
of our Discourse in reference to the Principle, if justly balanced; That such
Charity as begins at home, always ends there: and never extends farther. And
who directs his actions by this prescription: Est homini lupus, sibi ipsi
Diabolus; is to others a Woolf, to himself a Devil; from which observation,
has questionless proceeded this proverbiall Imprecation, Dieu me guarde de
moy: God defend me from my self: which may possibly, at first Inspection appear
a gross Impropriety; in that it might be thought, no rational man will
prejudice himself: yet when we shall reflect, how man's extravagant indulgence
to his sensual inclinations does deface the glorious Image, should illustrate
his Nature with pre-eminence. We may without all contradiction affirm the
contrary; That no power Humane or Diabolical can in any thing prejudice man,
but himself or by himself. It may therefore without farther extention of this
Treatise, become evident to every common sense, That the Nature of such
Charity. propounded in our Vulgar Position, is so far from any real affinity
with this Celestial Virtue, whereof it would assume the Figure, that it can no
way imply this primary Advantage Adulterately shadowed in the specious Texture.

Finis.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. l. ult. r. Act, p 18. l. 12. r Exterior copassion, p. 29. l 5. r.
Texture, p. 60. l. 13 r. which prescription, p 72. l. 6. r. Acquisitor, p. 83.
l. ult. r. an empty.


