THE GOOD-VVILL OF HIM THAT DWELT IN THE BUSH: OR, The extraordinary Happiness
of living under an extraordinary Providence. A Sermon preached before the Right
Honorable, the HOUSE of LORDS, in the Abbey Church at Westminster, on Tuesday,
July 22. 1645. At their public Thanksgiving for the good success given to the
Parliaments Forces, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax in the WEST.

By John Ward, Minister of the Gospel, in Ipswich.

EXODUS 3. 2. Behold, the Bush burned with fire, and the Bush was not consumed.
DEUTERONOMY. 33. 29. Happy art thou, oh Israel; who is like unto thee, oh people!
saved by the Lord, the shield of thine help, and who is the sword of thine
excellency. London, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Sign of
the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, 1645.

Die Mercurij, 23. July, 1645.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That Mr. Ward, one of the
Assembly of Divines, is hereby thanked for the great pains he took in his
Sermon he preached yesterday before the Lords of Parliament, in the Abbie
Church, Westminster, being appointed a Thanksgiving-day, for the good success
that God has given lately unto the Parliament Forces, under the Command of Sir
Thomas Fairfax in the West. And further that the said Mr. Ward is desired to
print and publish the said Sermon, which is to be printed by authority under
his own hand.

Io: Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.
I do appoint Christopher Meredith to print this Sermon,

JOHN WARD.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the LORDS now Assembled in PARLIAMENT at Westminster.
MY LORDS;
I Have observed, that long Epistles are as little pleasing as long Sermons;
and therefore shall not be troublesome by a tedious Dedication: Only your
Lordships may please to take notice, that this Sermon, which is now Printed in
obedience to your Order, before it goes forth to public view, comes first to
be Presented to your Honors. It is sufficient assurance of acceptance and
countenance, that your Lordships pleasure is to have it published. If now this
little spark, or rather almost dead coal; shall give the least light or heat
to any heart, that shall vouchsafe to read it; and hereby any accession may be
made, to the praise, or to the fear of This glorious and fearful Name, Deuteronomy.
28. 58.
THE LORD OUR GOD: It is that which is desired, and as much as can be expected
by,

MY LORDS, Your Honors most unworthy Servant in the work of the Ministry,
JOHN WARD.

Errate.
Page 1. lin. 14* for memorandum, read memorial, lin. vlt. del* of God p. 2.
l. 18. for state. r. start. p. 5. l.5. ^ if he will. p. 6. l. (...). for both
stakes, r. both estates p. 7. l. 21. for Jacob. ^. people l. 25. r. if we but
imagine p 8. l. 3. for proofs, r. proof. l 7. for infinite (...) infinity. r.
in the margin against l. 29. 1. Chro. 4 10 p. 9. l. 23. del. these. in the
margin by l. 23. r. B* reason and experience. p. 10. 19. for evidenci^, r.
evidence l. 25. for up, r. as p. 14. l. 19. for in the valley r c^st into. p.
15. l. 22. for bond, r. hands. l. 23. for end, r. and. p. 18. l. 19. for
priests, r. party. p. 19. l* ^3. r. but the Lord. l. 17. for watchfully* r.
wickedly. p. 22. l. 34. for read, r. reach. p. 25. l. 5. r. righthand. p. 27.
l. 7. for 36. r. 33. p. 28. l. 12. for where, r. when. p. 34. l ^^ r. or the
Covenant ^e rigidly* p. 38. l. 5. r and this present.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Right Honorable the House of LORDS, at their
public Thanksgiving, July 22. 1645. For the Routing of General Goring in the
West, etc.
DEUTERONOMY. 33. 16. And for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush.
THat song being published and left upon record in the former Chapter, which
God himself had dictated, and commanded to be written, for a Memorandum and
Item to the people, or witness against them: And now that great favorite of
God, being the second time warned of his departure, the story whereof follows
in the next Chapter, before he goes up into the Mount, to take a view of the
Land of promise, Isa. 8. ^.
the land of Immanuel, in which prospect he had also the happiness to see
afar off, and embrace the privileges and blessings to be there enjoyed by
the people of God. He does first in this Chapter take his solemn farewell of
the Tribes, leaving behind him this other memorandum also, becoming a Prophet
of the Lord, A summary of divine prophecies and promises, fore-shewing and
fore-assuring them sundry providence of God in favor of them: For this is the
blessing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before
his death.

After a lofty stately preface, commanding attention, charming affection, be
first lays his hands upon the head of every Tribe severally, dividing the
blessing amongst them, to each according to the lot of God; and then embracing
them all altogether, he blesses God, and blesses himself together with them,
rapt in admiration of God's glory and their happiness, in regard of the
goodness of God communicated with them; verse. 26. 28.
There is none like to the God of Jesurun, who rides on the Heavens for thy
help, etc. Happy art thou, oh Israel, who is like unto thee, oh Jacob, saved by
the Lord, the shield of thine help, and the sword of thine excellency.

As for the first part of the Chapter, where the Text is found among the
special blessings of the several Tribes, it were altogether impertinent, and
would be an unprofitable waste of time, either to show the consent or the
difference between this benediction of Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. and that prediction by
Jacob, Genesis 49. or to state the questions, and guess at the reasons, why one
blesses whom the other curses; or why Simeon should be left out and passed
by, rather then any of the rest of the Tribes; or wherefore Moses should cross
his hands, and prefer the younger before the elder when he comes to the
sons of Jacob, by Rachel, Joseph and Berjamin, as the Patriarch did, when he
blessed both the sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim. Neither will it be
needful to contend about the reading of this particular Text, for even therein
(though the Gammar be not very difficult,) the Translatours do not all agree,
but without any violence or wrong to the sense or the scope of the words.

It is placed in the midst of this ample portion of Joseph, as the Tabernacle
among the tents, the choice and chief of all: They are the blessings of
prosperity in ordinary; this the happiness of adversity in extraordinary.

For though Interpreters do generally no otherwise look upon it, then as the
spring and fountain whence all the rest do flow, expounding it by Genesis 49. 25.
By the God of thy father who shall bless thee, etc. and it must be granted a
truth; that the blessings of the Heaven above, blessings of the deep that lies
under, blessings of the breast and the womb (which are the other part of the
legacy of Joseph) be all by the good will of God. Yet it may well be denied to
be the truth held forth in this Text, doubtless something diverse from all
those, some singular thing in the failing of them, supplying their absence,
recompensing that want, is intended by the Holy Ghost here, viz* deliverance in
trouble, and deliverance from trouble, deliverance wonderfully and fearfully
wrought out.

1. Else there were nothing here to answer that of Genesis 49. 23, 24. support and
succor in times of danger and distress: The Archers sorely grieved him, shot
at him, hated him, but his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands
were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob.

2. The word rendered good will, (...) Exodus 40. 35. (...)
may also signify any thing whereby God will manifest his grace and good
pleasure, and so the Septuagint takes it here.

3. The other word also translated dwelling, may import such a dwelling, as
when the cloud abode on the Tent of the Congregation, and the glory of the Lord
filled the Tabernacle: a residence in grace and power, testified by some open
manifestation worthy the majesty of God, a neighborhood or neernesse for
protection and safeguard in a glorious way, and is so interpreted by the
Prophet, (...)
Isa* 4. 5, 6. And the Lord shall create upon every dwelling place of mount
Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a
flaming fire by night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense.

4. It is a plain allusion to the miracle recorded, (...)
Exodus 3. A Bramble (for such was the bush God made choice of, for the more apt
expression of the mystery and manifestation of the miracle.) A Briar, a most
contemptible and combustible shrub, all on a light flame, yet neither withering
nor perishing, but green and flourishing in the very fire.

A just emblem both of their low estate in miserable oppressions, nigh unto
ruin, utterly unworthy to be beloved, and of the wonderful work of God by
his great wisdom and power, saving them from the mischief of the Egyptians
craft and cruelty, and redeeming them from under their hand by great judgments.

Ye know the vision, Exodus 3. 2. and the interpretation thereof, verse. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10. and the story that we read in the Chapters following: what was then
showed, what was spoken, and what was afterward done in pursuance and
performance thereof.

Unto that gracious providence figured and promised in that apparition, Moses
has an eye in this Text, praying the like for Joseph's posterity in like case
of hazard and danger, and bequeathing it to them as the best part of their
portion: for to strain it to the preservation of the virginity of Mary in the
conception and birth of Christ, the triumph of our Savior crowned with
thorns, or the incorruption of his body in the grave under the dominion of
death, as the Popish Commentators do; or to restrain it to the Prophecy of
Ahijah to Jeroboam, 2 King 11. 29.
as some other expositors, because he had rule over the charge of the house of
Joseph, is altogether unwarrantable, if not absurd.

Having thus found the meaning of the Text, I believe your thoughts out-runne
me, and take up the doctrine before me.

A peculiar extraordinary providence in favor of a wretched people, Doct.
in whom is neither might nor worth, is an extraordinary peculiar blessing,
both the whole series and webb of such a providence, and every remarkable
passage of it.

Every overture of mercy and grace, in a time of trouble, every assay of
deliverance, though the salvation be not presently perfected; nay though many
cross providence intervene, that raise many difficulties, and make the
present state more grievous, more perplexed; yet if God revive his work, and
there be such things done by his hand as carry in them a testimony of his
compassion, a pledge of his faithfulness, an evidence of his neernesse to
relieve and rescue, it is to be acknowledged a very great happiness.

When a nation is not worthy to be beloved, and the rod of Gods displeasure is
put into the hands of bloudthirsty and deceitful men, and they help forward
the affliction, and there be little or no probability of better condition by
men or means; if then the Lord will make offer and tender of his good will, and
one may discern in his works, in his ways a gracious propensitie and purpose
to redeem, though in the prosecution thereof there be such various and uneven
dispensations of providence, as may give occasion to the enemy to be hardened
and insolent, and the other side to be discouraged and dejected; yet if God so
temper his judgments, as his own people shall feel the benign and
comfortable, and the Adversary the hurtful and destructive effects thereof, he
will step in, to restrain, or inhibit, or prevent the fraud or fury of the
enemy, and take the advantage of their animositie and attempts; to glorify
himself, in showing forth his wrath, and making his power known upon them; and
the meanwhile continue to protect, and repeat, and multiply wonders in favor
of his people, to the confusion of the adversary, it must be confessed a very
great mercy, transcending the good of peace and plenty.

Though that may be doubted which some have affirmed, Greg. Nissen. Lippomannus.
that the brightness of the flame of the fire in the bush, did darken the
brightness of the Sun at noonday; yet this must be believed, that the
blessing of adversity is better then the blessing of prosperity.

What ever the opinions of vain men may be concerning this thing, yet all those
who have stood on the same side, with the Spirit and word of God, have ever
been of this judgment. Let us hear two or three speak for all the rest.

1. What else can we make of that expression of Ezra, Proof by Scripture. Ezra
9. 13.
words that come from the very heart root, and speak affection to admiration;
And has given us such deliverance as this? Why what was this deliverance, that
he could not find words to express it? 'Twas but a deliverance in the shell,
barely disclosed, deliverance in the blade, not the ear, in the spring, not the
harvest, they could not then eat of the fruit of it; as the light in the
twilight, not the noon, neither light nor dark, or rather both in a mixture
and vicissitude. The books of Ezra and Nehemiah will inform you; or if it be
too much to read the story, Psalm. 126.
the Psalm will tell us, Their captivity was turned, yet so, as they needed to
pray still, turn again our captivity, O Lord: they were not restored to that
from which they were fallen, either for number of people, abundance of wealth,
or liberty, or beauty, of order in the Civil or Ecclesiastical state; more
persons had fallen in some one battle before the captivity, then were enrolled
at their return from Babylon; David alone of his own proper good, had
contributed more to the building of the first Temple, 2 Chronicles, 29. 4.
then the whole Congregation together were able to offer toward the reedifying
of the second: Possibly one man had been owner of more cattle then all of them
could number, when they were come up into their own land, they did not enjoy
the liberty of an Israelitish subject, but were under the arbitrary power of a
Tyrant, who bare rule over them at their pleasure; Nehe. 8. 36, 37.
They were servants in their own land, and it yielded much increase to the
Kings, whom God had set over them because of their sins: Only they had found
some favor with the Heathen Monarchs: Proclamations had been issued in their
behalf, some liberty granted by Cyrus, some additionall enlargement by his
successors, some special providence had been dispensed in answer of their
prayers, a door of hope was opened; but there were many adversaries, and they
daily wrestled with many difficulties and discouragements, even among
themselves were found many wicked and ill affected persons; at that very time
there was cause of solemn mourning and fasting: Yet even this deliverance,
this way of God in goodwill to them, the holy man magnifies with no little
wonderment; hereof he was glad as they that dream, in an ecstasy of joy and
admiration; he looks upon it as an over-excellent object over-powring his
heart, that he cannot find words for it, And have given us such deliverance
as this.

Secondly, Psalm. 144. 15.
The Psalmist speaks it plainly, though he cannot speak it fully; Happy is the
people that is in such a case, yea happy are the people whose God is the Lord.
He weighs both stakes, with the advantages of each one against the other, and
in his judgment this casts the scales, and more then counterpoiseth the good
of that: for if the former words, verse. 12, 13, 14. and part of the 15. That
our children, etc. Happy is that people that is in such a case, be the wish and
boast of the vain men mentioned, verse. 11th? then he opposes those last of his
own to theirs, nay happy are the people whose God is the Lord: or if he speaks
his own thoughts, looking to the promises and blessings of the Law, yet then he
corrects himself, and prefers this to the former, counting them happy who
suffer affliction, if God be amongst them in good will, as when he dwelt in the
bush; rather then those who spend their days in wealth, Job 21. 9, 13
whose houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them; whose
soever the words be, without controversy he gives the precedencieto that for
which he had first prayed, viz. an extraordinary providence toward him in
times of trouble: Psalm. 144. 12, 13, 14.
Bow the Heavens, O God, and come down, send thine hand from above, rid me and
deliver me out of great waters, from the hand of strange children, whose mouth
talks of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood. And by the
way it may be noted, how he can number and measure the blessings of plenty and
prosperity, can gaze upon the pomp and glory of them, and find language to
speak as much as heart can wish or think: but the privilege of protection and
deliverance in troublesome times (while God teaches the hands to war and the
fingers to fight, ver. 1, 1.
while God becomes the goodness, fortress, tower, deliverer and shield of his
servants, subduing and scattering their enemies before them.) He rather admires
then comprehends; he cannot graspe what he saw, nor distinctly express what he
apprehended: affections swallow up words: Happy is that people whose God is the
Lord.

But why do we look so far, when we may find proof so near in the last verse
of this very chapter: Happy art thou, oh Israel, who is like unto thee, oh
Jacob, saved by the Lord the shield of thine help, and who is the sword of
thine excellency? The Rhetorique is very high, yet very intelligible, and its
meaning easily discernable, an ordinary capacity will reach it, especially if
but imagine the man of God now upon the mount of contemplation (as we find him
in the next Chapter on the top of Nebo) looking round about him on the course
of Gods providence in Egypt, in the wilderness, and in the land in times of
distress, and giving liberty to his heart with contentment and gladness to
feed upon the good things, the manifold good folded up in that blessed state,
wherein the Lord did more immediately and openly interest himself in their
cause, in every difficulty and against all opposition, either miraculously in
the want and absence of means, supplying and saving-by himself; or
marvellously in the insufficiency and disproportion of means, commanding an
efficacy, and creating an issue beside their thought, beyond their
expectation, to their advantage and privilege, especially in the hazard of
war; else what means the mention of shield and sword?

A short paraphrase will smooth and clear the abrupt and imperfect expression,
if any thing may seem obscure in it, and lend much light to the proofs of the
doctrine in hand; for the words do manifestly bear this sense: Oh the
happiness of the people, the care of whose welfare the everlasting God does
take upon himself. The multitude, the variety, the world of mercies mingled
with judgments, the abundance, the infinite of good put into their hands,
dropped into their mouths by the gracious and glorious administrations of
providence. Oh the excellence, the luster of the prerogative of such a people
above all other nations, outshining the seeming cloudinesse and
uncomfortablenesse of their unsettled distracted condition! They perhaps may
sometimes think themselves in a worse estate then other men, because of the
diminution and obstruction of their ordinary liberties, by the want of common
accommodations and conveniences; but if they were taken off their prejudices,
and knew their own happiness, there were none to be compared with them, the
worlds wonder and envy; having God so nigh them, so seasonably, so manifestly,
so admirably preserving and providing for them: its impossible to set forth the
excellency of their privilege, words will not express it, the mind cannot
fathom it, admiration cannot reach it. Oh the happiness, etc.

But we may well set aside particular witnesses, for there are three or four
things in Scripture that we cannot lightly pass by without observation, which
corroborate the testimony produced.

First, This blessing is the blessing of the promises, mostly the matter of
Gods promises, special solemn promises, other things are the object of men's
wishes and desires; Oh that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my
coast, and that thou would keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me: but
if God saw cause at any time to fore-acquaint his people with his good will,
about the concernements of their outward temporal estates, the prophecy and
the promise are usually of these, and of this kind, we find very many, very
ample, and very remarkable discoveries and engagements in Moses and the
Prophets.

Secondly, God is more often proclaimed by Names and Titles that are relative to
such a providence, and the blessings of it, then by any other in another way.
Its very observeable; the Lord delights to be known, and godly men to
acknowledge him; He frequently glories, and they glorify him in the notion,
and under the names of Savior, deliverer, redeemer, and the like.

Thirdly, Many provisions were made by God and good men, for preserving and
publishing the knowledge and remembrance of such providence and mercies:
Anniversary festivals were instituted and solemnized, diverse monuments erected,
names given to persons and places, proverbiall speeches taken up, records kept,
Numb. 21. 14.
Journals, Annals, Chronicles written of them; the History of the Bible (and a
great part of the Bible is history) what is it but a webb of such wonders, like
a rich piece of imbroyderie, most pleasing to the eye, a light work upon a sad
ground? of other matters it may be said, as of the story of those who gave
themselves to mechanic and secular employments, 1 Chronicles. 4. 22. These are
ancient; or obsolete things, things held unworthy of memory, there were no
memorials of them; but there was a law for the recording of these, and all
means used to contribute an infinity, an eternity to their fame, and the glory
of God in them.

Lastly, If the affections of men and their expressions may speak any thing in
the praise of this blessing, we find that also in the Scripture, for they
otherways blessed the God of their mercies for these then for other blessings,
they celebrated the praise of God in these Psalms and songs of thanksgiving,
with all largeness of heart and elegancie of speech: Its strange, what
apprehensions the very Heathens seemed to have of the excellency and
preeminence of this blessedness, and by what fictions they represented their
fancies.

But when the holy men of God made recognition of the wonders and advantages of
an extraordinary providence, they spoke in such strains (not of fancy, but
affection) as never men spoke; no not themselves, but at such times, and on
such occasions.

Beside the light we have by the testimony of Scripture, we may evince and
persuade the truth of the doctrine, by evidence of reason and experience; and
truly we need all manner light and proof, for it is a Paradox, like Sampsons
riddle, meat out of the eater, and sweet out of the strong: but we may easily
find it out, if we will consider the ways of God in such a season, either in
their reference to himself, or unto his people. These two things seriously
pondered and without prejudice, will clear the truth, and persuade an
acknowledgement.

The works of God, in the way of extraordinary providence, do make most
visible, most clearly visible, the invisible things of God, even his eternal
power and God head: His works are wonders, Psalm. 145. Mognalia Dei, Mirabilia
Dei.
wondrous works, mighty acts, terrible deeds, such as declare his greatness,
as show the glorious honor of his majesty, the glorious majesty of his
Kingdom: He gives abundant evidences of his presence in dreadful
manifestations, so that all eyes are made to behold him, and every tongue to
confess to him We may read his Name in Capital flourishing letters, written
as with a Sun beam, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders. We may behold him as a man of war, in his complete bright armor, as
a King in his royal robes, glorious in his apparel; He saw, Isa. 59. 16, 17.
and there was no man, and he wondered that there was no intercessour;
therefore his own arm brought salvation to him. He put on righteousness as a
breast plate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head. He put on garments of
vengeance for a clothing, and was clad with zeal, as with a cloak. We may see
that which Moses sings, The Lord triumphing gloriously, in the greatness of his
excellency, overthrowing those that rise up against him. Psalm. 15. 28.
We may see him working all in all, a blessed sight, and which makes them
blessed that have the happiness to behold it; as holding some proportion with
that beatificall vision in Heaven, where God shall be all in all. And this
fairly leads up to the other.

Secondly, Then he communicates his goodness with his people most eminently,
then he rides upon the Heavens for the help of his beloved, and in his
excellency on the sky; he discovers himself openly, and seasonably, in a
way befitting his unsearchable greatness, for their relief and help: He walks
amongst them in paths of mercy and truth, both his hands full of blessing.

First, In such times he deals out the blessings of the right hand, the most
sure mercies, the light, the support, the supplies, and the comfort of his word
and Spirit, the trial of grace, the increase of grace, 1. Pet. 1. 7.
the fruit of grace; blessings much more precious then gold that perishes,
Isa. 48. 10.
though it be tried in the fire: then he chooses his people, Ezekiel. 20 5.
avoucheth, challenges, redeemeth, ransometh them, and avengeth himself upon
their enemies. Isa. 50. 4, 50
Then he lifts up his hand and makes himself known to them: Isa. 27. 9.
Isa. 4. 4.
He wakeneth their ear, prepares their heart, and fealeth their instruction:
Then he convinces and humbles them, purges away their dross, takes away
their sin, washes their filth, their blood, and refineth them by the spirit
of judgment, and by the spirit of burning: Then he gives a spirit of prayer
and supplication, and is nigh unto them in all things they call upon him for:
Zech. 13. 9.
They shall call on my Name, and I will hear them; I will say, It is my people,
and they shall say, The Lord is my God: Then he opens the book of his
remembrance, written before him for them that fear the Lord, and think upon
his Name, and he makes them up as his jewels or special treasure, Mal. 3. 16,
17.
and spares them as a father his own son that serves him. Never does the
Church and people of God enjoy more of God, and more eminently, then in the
times of their trouble, when he comes down to redeem them with great judgments.

Secondly, In that time also the Lord deals out the best blessings of the
left hand, the most beneficial mercies, deliverances: indeed all providence,
in such a season, is deliverance; so Ezra looks upon it; Ezra 9. 13.
And have given us such deliverance as this: So God himself interprets that to
which my text alludes; I have surely seen their affliction, Ezod. 3. 8.
and I am come down to deliver them. All the blessings received or possessed in
such a season, are but the appurtenances and additaments to deliverance; and so
the Psalmist confesses, in Psalm. 136. (a Psalm that has none like it in all
the Psalter,) while he sums up all the story of Gods extraordinary gracious
providence in this acknowledgement, And has redeemed us from our enemies, for
his mercy endures for ever.

1. Now redemption is a most manifold blessing from much evil to much good: ye
cannot look upon deliverances as single kindnesses, they are pregnant mercies
full of good, have many mercies in the womb, and bring forth abundantly.

2. They are the most acceptable, 1 Samuel 14. 27.
refreshing, reviving mercies, like a bright shining after rain, hot gleams in
uneven weather between showers, the brightest beams, and of strongest
influence; like the honey Jonathan tasted in the wood; he put his hands to his
mouth, and his eyes were enlightened; like the water Sampson drank in his
faintness, when he had drunk his spirit came again, even as life from the
dead: Grace has been showed from the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to
escape, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a reviving in our
bondage.

3 The blessings of such a providence, are mercies of the best relish; as the
fruits in Paradise, of Gods own creating, far exceeding any at any time since
produced by art or nature; as the water out of the rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 13.
pleasant as honey and oil: He made them suck honey out of the rock, and oil
out of the flinty rock: as the wine by miracle at Cana, Joh 2.
the best wine, better then the purest blood of the grape, the master of the
feast being witness, who, if any, was sober and able to discern: they are
more immediately of Gods working, and more immediately reached out of his hand,
and therefore the good that is in them is more pure and heavenly, savouring
more of his all sufficiency, and more universally answering and satisfying the
desires of the soul: Wisd. 16. 20, 21.
like the Manna which fell in the wilderness, bread from Heaven, Angels food:
The Jewish tradition says, it was able to content every man's delight, and
agreed to every man's taste, serving the appetite of the eater, and was tempered
to every man's liking, according to the desire of them that had need: And the
Canonical Scripture seems to favor it, Numb. 11. 8. The taste of it was as
the taste of oil: now they that love oil, tell us, that pure oil is to the
taste, as clear glass to the eye, it receives much of its favor from that
wherewith its mingled, as glass does its color from that by which its laid.

4. They are the most present convincing testimonies of Gods grace, such as
bring along with them the clearest and fullest revelation of divine favor: for
they are wrought out not only in great patience and longsuffering, but in
tender compassion and abundance of goodness, and therefore more sweetened then
other mercies: The Lords portion is his people, he kept them as the apple of
his eye; Deuteronomy. 31. 10, 11, 12.
as an Eagle fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes
them, bears them, so the Lord alone did lead them, in a kind of sympathy and
fellow feeling of their miseries: Isa. 63. 9.
in all their affliction he was afflicted, in his love and in his pity he
redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.

5. They are blessings given in, in return of their prayers, in answer of
their longing desires and earnest expectations, the harvest of their hepes, and
therefore reaped in with great joy and gladness.

6. They are sent as messengers and witnesses of Gods truth and faithfulness,
in remembrance of his engagements, by relations, covenant or promise, and
therefore speaks comfortably to the heart of those that hope in him; Exodus 3. 7.
I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have
heard their cry, by reason of their taskmasters, for I know their sorrows, and
am come down to deliver them

7. They are intended for pledges in earnest of others to follow them, good
Osses or Omens of more to come, as we find in the end of the Chapter; Happy
art thou O Israel saved by the Lord, thine enemies shall be found liars unto
thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places: like the signs which Moses
and Aaron wrought before the Elders of Israel, Exodus 4 30. they are dispensed,
to beget a confident expectation, and to keep life in the faith and hope of the
poor of his people that wait upon him; and therefore make them rejoice in hope,
encouraging to look forward with confidence and chearfullnesse; 2 Cor* 1. 10.
He has delivered, he does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver
us.

8. They are set off with such a foil as render them far the more amiable and
acceptable, viz. the sense of misery, the fear of ruin, the unquietnes and
perplexity of a misgiving mind, held in continual doubt and suspense, a very
manifold uncomfortable darkness, which prepares the heart (as the rubbing of
a bladder) to receive good of God with more enlarged affections, and dispose
the spirit to drink in the contentment more abundantly, and increase and
multiply the joy and thankefullnesse in the acceptance.

9. Of all blessings these come the lest looked for, and therefore the more
welcome; for though nothing is more desired, yet nothing is more despaired then
preservation or deliverance in the needful time of trouble.

10. And lastly (which makes the measure heaped and running over) in such a
season there are multitudes of these mercies of both kinds; as we say of
stormy weather when the Sun breaks out between clouds, there are many fair
days in one: there is a repetition and multiplication of mercies: Psalm. 103. 4.
the father of mercies opens his hands wide, and fills plenteously with
good; redeeming the lives of his people from destruction; He crowns them with
loving kindness and tender mercies; the God of their salvation, Psalm. 68. 1^.
daily loadeth them with benefits: he deals out his blessings as Masons lay
their tiles, Tegere beneficium beneficio.
covering and binding down one with another, for he sees all their afflictions,
and proportioneth out consolation, though not according to their fond or
froward wishes, yet according to their infirmity and necessity, which, by
reason of manifold tentations, require frequent, repeated and multiplied tokens
of his dwelling amongst them in good will.

All these things may be seen by the light of the flame in the bush, they may
be all read in the story, whereof the vision, to which the Text refers, was the
praelude: They fall with in the observation of those, who are so wise as to
consider the works and ways of the Lord, and are found in the experience of
them, who have the happiness to acquaint themselves with God, and to wait for
him in the ways of his judgments.

And by all these laid together, its very evident, that if the good things of
prosperity may be wished^, Bona rerum secunderum optabilia, bona rerum adversa
rum mirabilia. Sen.
yet the excellent things of adversity are and ought to be admited; and if
there be any thing worth the name of a blessing to be found here below in the
valley of change, it is then when we are in the valley of straits under a
cloud, and God covers us with his hand, and shows his glory, making his
goodness to pass before us, even in troublesome times, when the providence of
God works extraordinarily in favor of us.

Now what remains, but that we make improvement of this doctrine, for Gods
glory and our own edification. A doctrine most seasonable for this time and
this day; a time wherein the Lord of glory dwells amongst us, as when in good
will he dwelt in the bush; a day of public rejoicing and thanksgiving, for
another pledge of his residence amongst us in grace and power, That bright
shining in the West.

Let us first bring our peace offering, Use 1.
a sacrifice of praise, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to the Name of
the Lord.

It cannot be denied, but the blessing of the Text is our privilege, that this
promise is our story; for as the state of the Church and people of God, some
years since, was not unlike to that which was figured in the smoking furnace
which was showed to Abraham, Genesis 15.
when horror and darkness had fallen upon him at the going down of the
Sun; so the late and present providence of God are not unanswerable to that
which was shadowed in the vision which Moses saw, Exodus 3.
when God appeared to him in a flame of fire in the bramble; The good will of
him that dwelt in the bush* has come abundantly, come seasonably, come
admirably upon the head of his people in this Island. The fury of the battle
has been poured upon us, and it has set us on fire round about; and behold*
by the goodness of our God, glorious in holiness, dreadful in praises, doing
wonders, we are not destroyed, we are miraculously saved (for God works
miracles in our preservation, though men do none) though not from all harm,
yet from present, utter destruction: and though it cannot be said of us, as of
the three children when they were in the furnace, where the fire had no power
upon them, that the hair of our head is not singed* nor the color of our coats
changed, or the smell of fire has passed upon us; yet (blessed be God) it may
be said as of the Bush when it was all on a flame, Exodus* 3. 3.
we are not burnt; God is nigh unto us, and stands between us and our harms, to
rescue us from ruin: troubles are moderated, mercies are mingled with
judgments, we have more then our lives left us for a prey; and though we walk
still in the fire, and are not yet called out of the furnace, yet verily God is
amongst us, and there has been a loosing of our bond, an enlargement of our
liberties, and we have received great deliverance in our trouble; and though
the heart of the King be not effectually moved, either toward God or his
servants, to make such an observation, acknowledgement and decree, as that
heathen Monarch, yet be it known, our God is able to turn his heart as the
streams of waters; and we are encouraged to wait the return of our prayers,
and doubt not but the wrath of man shall praise the Lord, Psalm. 76. 10.
and the remainder of wrath will he restrain. God has done great things for us
already, in preventing, disappointing and disposing of counsels and force,
besides and beyond the intendment and expectation of men, and we are alive to
praise God for it, as this day.

Let us, I beseech you, turn aside to see this great sight, this burning, yet
unburnt bush: possibly while we draw near to behold it, God may speak to us out
of the bush, we may receive an interpretation of the vision, and come to
understand the good will of God in the open manifestations thereof amongst us.

I may not now give you a Map of all the providence of God of late, and the
things remarkable in them: therein I have been prevented this morning, and
blessed be God I have been prevented, because the work by that hand has been
better done; Mr Sedgewick.
only in allusion to the story pointed at in my text, give me leave not to
strain to parallel every thing, but to observe before you some few considerable
testimonies of the good will of God dwelling with us as when he dwelt in the
bush, that our hearts may thereby be the better prepared for his praises.

It is now more then manifest, that Rome and Hell had long since taken crafty
counsel, by working wisely to extirpate all protestant Religion, to strangle
all the male children of the Church at the very birth, to drown all masculine
profession, and to leave alive nothing but a loose effeminate form of
godliness without the power, that the Papal Monarchy might be absolute, that
Babylon the great, the mother of fornications and abominations of the earth,
that great mistress of superstitions and wicked arts, to besot the spirits of
people with her love, might again sit upon the waters, have dominion over the
multitudes and Nations; Rev. 17.
that the man of sin, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God, and is worshipped, might as God sit in the temple of God* 2 These. 2.
might lord it in the Church over the consciences of men, the people of God
enslaved to do his drudgery, for his advantage. This was Romes masterpiece.

For as for that other (whereof we have more sense) the dissolving of our Laws,
the introducing of an Arbitrary government, the divesting us of our liberties
and privileges, and the attempts to disable us from ever getting the yokes
from off our necks, it was but a design on the by, a device, a bribe wherewith
to caiole and hire the Court to their party.

Now while all these things were in the dark to us, Psalm. 64. 6.
and both the inward thought of every one of them, and the heart was deep, by
the piety of what mid wives were we saved alive in those times? what secret
friends had we, that either counter-wrought their designs, or failed them in
the trust or service? was it any other then the unsearchable wisdom of God,
Job 5. 12.
who disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot
perform their enterprise? Surely it was the Lords doing, and it ought to be
mavelous in our eyes.

Who remembers not the flattery of Prerogative by the Prelaticall faction, and
all to humor the Royal power into an opinion of necessity of advancing the
Miter for the support of the Crown? the artifices of the Prelates for the
adulterating of the doctrine of the Gospel, by Arminianisme and Popery; the
introducing of Innovations, for the blending and polluting of the public
worship and ordinances of God; the corrupting of the manners of the people, by
the Law of liberty on the Lords day; the discountenancing of all vigorous
profession, by branding it with the term of Puritanisme; and though they
commonly coupled a Papist and a Puritan together in all their declamations;
yet they did but as the Butchers, that drive up a lean beast among the fat
ones, to get them into the slaughterhouse, and then lets him go back again to
pasture.

We have not forgotten what snares they laid for tender consciences, by
pressing the reading the book of Sports, by urging subscriptions to their new
injunctions, by framing the Oath, etc.

How rigorously our Taske-masters exacted the burdens which they had imposed,
the service they had increased; how insolently and with scorn they drove away
those which came to complain, and how violently they pursued those which fled
from under their jurisdiction; and how nigh we were brought to Rome ere we were
aware of it.

When these things were thus, were we able to have rescued our selves from
under the hands of those who dealt cunningly with us, and evil entreated us,
and laid those sore burdens upon us? Were we worthy that the Lord should look
upon our afflictions, and send to deliver us? Did we so much as understand the
drift and depth of those designs then on foot? the methods, the arts and wiles
of those powers and spiritual wickednesses in high places, with whom we then
wrestled? Were we duly sensible of the dangers wherein we were, of the hazards
which we ran?

I beseech you let it not be forgotten, how unexpctedly, how seasonably, how
marvellously, how graciously the God of our mercies prevented us, and visited
us to redeem us. And as he, whose Name is Wonderful, did wonderfully in the
first turning of the wheel, in like manner he has wrought gloriously for his
Names sake, in the whole carriage and advancing of his great work of
preservation and deliverance: When God began to work his signs among us, did
we understand that he meant to give us such deliverance as this? did we imagine
those things possible, which our eyes have been made to see?

When the woman took up the stool to cast at the head of the Dean, when the
Service Book was read at Edenborough, did we dream that by that means (as was
hinted in the morning) all the Bishops in the three Kingdoms should be set
besides the cushion?

When our Brethren the Scots began to gather together to consult about, and
petition against the invading of their privileges; when they were necessitated
to take up arms for their just defense; did those Incendiaries, who blew that
coal, intend to gather the people of these Kingdoms to the battle of the
Lord, against Antichrist and his Popish Priests? and when there was an
appearance of war, was it probable that that little cloud in the North should
have risen against the wind, and spread so far, and the storm fallen so
heavily upon that party who first provoked them to it?

In the beginning of this Parliament, when the manifold oppressions and
grievances of the Church and Kingdom began to be represented by petitions, who
did imagine there had been such a blessing in that cluster? that that despised
day of small things, should have been prolonged, and prospered into such a
probability of reformation?

In the beginning of this summer, at the time when Kings go forth to battle,
what likelihood was there of so many days of rejoicing in so short a space;
that the days of public thanksgiving should strive in number with the days
of solemn humiliation?

Let us draw yet a little nearer to behold this great sight, and see, if names
and places, and such like circumstances being changed, the late and present
ways of our God amongst us, be not like to those which Moses looks at in this
Prophecy: Or if I may not take the liberty (because the time is short) to
compare particulars, yet give me leave to offer these remarkable things to your
observation.

In the general it must be acknowledged, that the Lord has his way in the
storm, and his fury is poured out like fire: but withal, this cannot be
denied, nay it ought to be confessed to the praise of God: that even all that
cloud has been light to usward, and darkness to our enemies: we have found
by the good hand of God upon us, a very great moderation of judgments, a
mavelous mixture of mercies, and therein wide difference put between us and
them: Isa. 27 7.
Has he smitten us as he smote those that smote us? or are we slain according
to the slaughter of them that are slain by us? They have been many times lift
up for their greater fall, but we have been always remembered in our low
estate* and redeemed from the hand of our enemies; we have been at our wits
end, by the difficulty and perplexity of affairs, the Lord has made the storm
a calm, and brought us out into unexpected enlargement; when we have stood on
the brinke and precipice of ruin, he has sundry times snatched us off, and set
us in more safe estate: what we have managed weakly, and what they have
attempted confidently and watchfully, God has overruled for great good and
advantage to us: and while they are left to themselves, to abuse the
providence of God to the exciting and inflaming of their own animosity, the
enraging of their spirits, and the hardening of their hearts, our God, whose
dwelling is amongst us in good will, offers more grace to us; because he has
compassion on his people, he has caused the trumpet to be blown to the solemn
assembly, and he sends his messengers to preach submission and conversion to
God, repentance and amendment of life; and we hope that the names are more then
a few that learn righteousness, and mourn in Sion, and wait upon God in the
way of his judgments. True it is, there is no such Prophet amongst us, to whom
God speaks face to face, as he did to Moses, that can reveal the secrets of
Gods counsel, concerning the circumstances of the manner and end of this
unnatural war; but great is the company of Preachers that interpret the
revealed will of God, concerning our duty and the ways of our salvation* which
is more necessary and more profitable for us to know; neither is there any one
singular person, that is such an eminent mediator as Moses was, that can fall
down before the Lord 40 days and 40 nights together, Deuteronomy. 9. 18.
and neither eat bread or drink water, because of all the sins we sin, in
doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord to provoke him to anger; yet doubtless
there be many that are afraid of the anger and hot displeasure of the Lord, and
the spirit of grace and supplication has been poured upon many, and there be
many that step daily into the gappe, and wrestle with God and prevail.

The power and the wisdom of God, Isa. 28* 29.
who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working* has been very
glorious in a world of providence in favor of us every where; we may behold
with open face the glory of the Lord in a world of wonders; oh Lord, how
manifold are thy works! in good will thou have done them all: we may say with
amazement, what has God wrought? and what Nation is there who has God so nigh
unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? or
at any time, since the Bible was written, has God assayed to preserve and
prepare a people for himself by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by
war, and by a mighty hand, and by an stretched-out arm, and by great terrors,
as the Lord our God has done for us in our own land before our eyes?

The compassions of God fail not, Iam. 3. 22, 23.
they are new every morning, great is his faithfulness, else we should perish
hourly in our divisions, distempers, and the provocations wherewith we tempt
the Lord.

We are filled with drunkenness, we dash one against another, and yet his eye
pitieth, and spares, and we are not perished: we are divided, divisions are
multiplied, the Kingdom divided within it self, the Church divided within it
self, and yet behold we stand: We read in the word, that a Kingdom divided
within it self cannot stand: we read also (and who trembles not at the
reading?) It is easier for Heaven and earth to pass, then one title of the Law
to fail: What shall we say? has God revoked his word? has he repealed his
sentence? surely he suspendeth it, and we hope it may pass away unfulfilled:
England may be the instance of exception from that general rule, a Kingdom
divided within it self cannot stand. Oh the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, Romans 11. 33.
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

We are a froward and perverse generation, we do not receive correction, we are
sick of our remedies, impatient of our cure, discontented with our mercies,
murmuring at our deliverance, lingering back in our hearts to our former
bondage, not believing the Lord for all the signs which he has showed amongst
us; yet the Lord bears with us in great patience, forbears to turn our enemy,
breaks not in upon us to destroy us, but gives us liberty to humble our souls
and pray before him, and suffers himself to be entreated, Exodus 3* 4.
and proclaims his Name, The Lord, the Lord gracious and merciful, slow to
wrath, abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, pardoning
iniquity, transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty. Oh
that we could make haste, and bow, and worship, and glorify God and be
thankful: Truly if we bring all our story into view, we shall find nothing on
the part of men but wickedness or weakness, madness and folly, and on Gods
part, nothing but wisdom and power, grace and patience, mercy and truth met
together, and justice shining in an infinity of goodness.

To gather the whole matter into a short sum: Confusion has, or might have
covered us; but together with the smoke of the furnace, a lamp has been seen
to walk between the divided pieces, many evident testimonies of the goodness
of our God condescending in the remembrance of his Covenant, to walk amongst
us in paths of mercy and truth.

The fire has broken out into a flame, and it has taken hold upon us round
about, and we are no better then a dry bush before it, and yet by the good will
of God abiding among us, as when he dwelt in the bush, destruction is
inhibited, intercepted and prevented daily. The presence of God in the glory of
his majesty has been so tempered, as to us, like the spirit moving upon the
waters at the creation, it is refreshing, reviving, and we hope refining and
reforming, or at least preparing for the production of order and peace with
truth; Isa. 1^. 4.
while to our adversaries, set as briars and thorns against him in the
battle, our God is a consuming fire.

Now what shall we say to these things? Psalm. 107. 8, 1^, 21. ^^.
Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, for his wonderful works
to the children of men: May I say it again and again, treble the repetition, as
the Psalmist does on like and less occasions; Psalm. 107. Oh that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children
of men. Oh that I could lift up my voice as the Angel his trumpet, at the
opening of the seals, and persuade to come and see, that we may together
magnify the work we behold, and exalt the praises of our God.

Come and see the work of the Lord (what desolation shall I say, Psalm. 46* 8.
nay rather) what prevention of desolation, what preservation he has wrought
in the Land: There is desolation, I confess, and great terriblenesse in the
desolation, but there is abundance of goodness outshining it, in the
extraordinary ways and workings of deliverance by the good will of our God.

Come and see the work of the Lord: Psalm. 111. 2.
The work of the Lord is great, done openly before us, as on a theater, a
manifold work of mercy, done in wisdom, fearfully and wonderfully done, and
is worthy to be sought out and pried into, of all them that have pleasure
therein; there is a mine of blessings folded up in it, and there may be a mint
of pleasure and profit in the contemplation. How precious should the thoughts
of God in all of it be unto us? Who so is wise will consider these things, Psalm
107* 43.
and he shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

Let us make observation of that wherein our God is glorious, and we are
advantaged; Psalm. 9 16.
of every thing whereby he makes himself known, Higgaio^ Selah. Res meditanda
summa. sunius. Oh rem perpetua meditatione dignam. Vatab.
and we are, or may be made blessed in the course of his extraordinary
providence over us for good, and pause and dwell upon the contemplation, with
meditation, with deep and serious consideration, with all intension and
elevation of the heart always.

Let the work and praises of God be celebrated with admiration, praise him
according to his excellent greatness; Psalm. 145.
indeed there is no praise comely, Optimorum non est laus, sed admiratio,
proportionable to the transcendent excellency of Gods majesty, but admiration,
praise waits upon thee, Psalm. 65. 1.
says the Psalmist; or as the Hebrew more significantly has it, (...)
praise is silent, or silence before thee; it is impossible to comprehend, much
less to express all that belongs to his praise: Tacet laus ratione operum
tuorum* sortium. Laus non potest attingere te Pagnin.
our eyes can as well read and measure the greatness and brightness of the
lights in the firmament of Heaven, as our hearts can discern and display the
glory of God; Who can utter all the mighty acts of the Lord? who can show forth
all his praise? as the bright shining of the Sun beams in a reflection by a
glass is far Psalm. 106. 2.
less then the luster of the Sun it self; and the return by an Echo is very
imperfect and short of the voice, when much is said, and many speak together:
so the glorifying of God by men, is infinitely disproportionable to the
excellent glory that shines in his mavelous works; the best praise of his
providence, is humble acknowledgement with reverence and adoration; Psalm. 150.
2.
Let us therefore praise him according to his excellent greatness.

And let us publish his praises, and not hide them in our hearts, but together
with the burning on the hearth, let there be light and heat shed abroad, that
others also may be provoked to glorify God and be thankful; Ps. 145. 5, 6, 7.
I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous works;
I will declare thy greatness. They shall speak of thy glory, and talk of thy
power, they shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness.

And as much as in us is, let us propagate the glory of God to posterity and
ages to come, one generation shall praise thy works to another, verse. 4.
and shall declare thy mighty acts.

And herein ( my Lords) ye have the advantage of all that hear me this day; Ye
may command these things to be written (even a book of the wars of the Lord)
for the generations to come, that the people which shall be created may praise
the Lord: Ye may appoint days of Thanksgiving, when remarkable passages of
providence minister occasion thereto; and if the God of our mercies should make
the wars to cease, and this miserable distration to end in an happy
reconciliation and reformation, ye may ordain an anniversary remembrance
thereof, as the Jews did their days of Purim, Esth. 9 18.
that the memorial of the good will of God in this wonderful deliverance, may
not perish from the land: and peradventure another age may find cause to make
a Secular commemoration of the multitude of mercies which are forming in the
womb of this extraordinary providence, and shall in time be brought forth for
the advantage of posterity; for we hope the foundations are now laying for many
generations, and the days come, Jer 16. 14, 15.
when it shall no more be said, the Lord lives, that brought up the children
of Israel out of the land of Egypt, no nor, the Lord lives, that brought up
the children of Israel from the land of the North, at the least as to that
which is already past, for we wait yet a further accomplishment of that
Prophecy: But the Lord lives, that separated his people, and brought them up
from under the papal bondage and servitude, Rev. 11. 8.
which spiritually is Sodom, and Egypt, Jer. 51* 45.
and Babylon; and delivered their souls from the fierce anger of the Lord: Rev.
19. 2, 4.
The Lord lives, which has judged the great whore, that corrupted the earth
with her fornications, and has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.
Amen, Hallelujah. Surely the time approaches, when the memory of those
wonderful works shall be swallowed up in the celebration of this, and this
deliverance, and the course of Gods special extraordinary providence at this
season in favor of his Church, shall be esteemed more miraculous then those of
old, and the glory of this shall dim the luster of those.

The mean while, when God appears to us by such signals of his presence, as of
late, and there is occasion, either to contemplate or to celebrate such
wonderful manifestations of his good will, as this, for which we assemble to
bless his name this day, let us not forget the admonition which God gave Moses
when he turned aside to see this great sight, Put off thy shoes from off thy
feet: a double caveat.

One to deny our selves, Caution.
not only in curiosity and vanity of mind, but in all low, earthly, sensual
reasonings and passions, such as are incident to brutish men who know not,
Psalm. 92 5, 6.
and to fools who understand not the deep thoughts and mysterious ways of God
in his judgments (so some allegorize the phrase, because the shoes go next the
earth and gather dirt,) and to elevate the mind and heart above all that's
common, and which a natural, carnal and politic wisdom, which is from
below, would suggest; and as if we were in the mount of transfiguration, to
have high, and spiritual and heavenly apprehensions and stirrings of heart, in
all humble and holy reverence adoring the majesty of God, both in that which we
behold, and that which we cannot yet comprehend, waiting till he further
interpret himself.

Verily God is with us, nigh unto us, else how is all this befallen* us? and
whence are all these miracles? Judge. 6. 13.
the miraculous victories beyond all expectation, so lately, so often given in
unto us? The mavelous works done before us, are apparently wrought out, not
by the heads or the hands of men, but by the finger of God, or rather his
mighty hand and outstretched arm, and are none other then evident pledges of
his nearness to us in good will, as when he dwelt in the Bush.

The other is to lay aside all emulation, contention, and vain jangling about
the merits of men, the praise or dispraise of the men of Gods hand, and in all
humility to resign up all pretenses of claim or interest into the hands of God;
Ruth 5. 7.
for in this way of resignation of right we sometimes find this Ceremony used:
and so some understand that expression in Exodus, Exodus 3. 5.
and it may be applied to this purpose, viz.

1. That the parties themselves, whom God honors in the service, would give
him all the praise, and let none of the fat of the peace offering cleave to
their own fingers, but cause it to be burnt on the Altar to the Lord: Levit.
4. 10.
Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name be the praise. And to speak
plainly for God; there is none other cause; for what is, or has bin praise
worthy, besides the success; and who knows not, who sees not, that the event
is of God? When Gideon and his servant heard the Midianite and his fellow tell
one another the Dream, Judge. 7. 13, 14 15.
and the interpretation thereof, how a Barley-cake tumbled into the Host of
Midian, and fell upon a Tent, and smote it, and over-turned it that the Tent
lay along, and they saw the carriage of the business the next day in the
battle to answer it: what could they do less than wonder and worship? well
might their hands be strengthened to the war: but it had been extreme madness
and impudence to have gloried in themselves, and would have been revenged, as
on Herod. The spoils of a victory may be divided amongst men, but the honor
of a victory, especially such as ours have been of late, belong to God alone.
It is his glory, he is a jealous God, and will not give it to another. It is
his Crown, he that will set it upon his own head, or will not lay it down
before the Throne of God, and the Lamb; Deuteronomy. 25. 9.
the Lord will loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face.

And secondly, That standers by, and lookers on do look off, look up above the
instruments of Providence, to God who gives victory in the day of Battle;
neither quarrelling, nor idolizing men or means; both which are equally
sacrilegious and abomination before the Lord. Do ye think the Israelites had
done well, or would it have been accepted of God, if they had made odious
comparisons between Moses and Joshua, if they had decryed (as indeed they
murmured at) Moses, because by his hand they were led about many years in the
wilderness, and met with many difficulties and disasters, and their carcases
fell, and they consumed daily, and came short of their hopes? and on the other
hand had lift up Joshua, because under his conduct the enemies were
over-thrown, and their walled Towns and strong holds were gained, and they
prospered in every undertaking. Had this been to acknowledge the hand of God,
either in judgment, or mercy? Doubtless, God is not honored where there is
strife, and variance, and emulation in such a way as this. If there be a
miscarriage at any time, and our Counsels or our Armies, either err, or
prosper not; it is our duty to fall upon our faces, and humble our souls, and
enquire of the Lord; and if any that offer themselves willingly be more
successful, our hearts may be toward them, but Bless ye the Lord, Judge* 5.
29.

3. I may add a third caution to the two former, viz. That all pomp and
triumph be laid aside in the days of our rejoicing and thanksgiving; not that
I judge it utterly unlawful, but altogether unfit and unseasonable; Ringing,
and Bonefires, and such solemnities, are for Tear-lesse and bloodlesse
Victories over a foreign enemy, rather than in civil war; where they that
get the day, Judge. 24. 2, 3.
must needs possess the victory, as the eleven Tribes did that over the
Benjamites, with cries and tears: the conquerors cannot behold the slaughter of
the enemy, but it must repent them for their brethren, because the Lord has
made a breach in their own Nation, perhaps their own families: nor look upon
the gain of the Conquest, but as David did upon the water which the Worthies
fetched from out of the Well of Bethlehem, which was by the gate; 2 Samuel 23. 17.
Is it not the blood of the men that went in the jeopardie of their lives? It
would be poured out before the Lord.

Secondly, Use 2.
When all this is done, there is yet a further use to be made of this Doctrine;
for we shall find, that where the man after Gods own heart reads upon the
Law of thankfulness, Generally to all.
He interprets it thus; He that offers me praise, glorifieth me, and he that
orders his conversation aright. Psalm. 50. 23.
So that God is not glorified, unless there be a care of composing or
disposing our way, as well as a sacrificing of Confessions: and unto this also
the Doctrine is an engagement.

For if an extraordinary peculiar providence be an extraordinary peculiar
blessing, then without controversy there is super-induced upon us at this
season a very great obligation to walk worthy the Lord, to have our
conversation according to the way of God in compassion of us, ( For whom much
is done, of them much is looked for.) Else we shall return evil for good, and
may be sure to hear of it, as Israel also did, Deuteronomy. 36. 6. Do ye thus requite
the Lord, oh foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy Father, that has bought
thee? has he not made thee, and established thee? To say nothing of what we
read to this purpose, almost every where in the Books of Moses; we may hear the
Prophet preaching it very plainly, both the Duty upon this very ground, and the
aggravation of the sin in the case of perverseness, and the recompense of the
error, upon supposition of the provocation, Isa. 63. 8. He said, Surely they
are my people, children that will not lie: So he was their Savior. q. d. He
took them into Covenant, he admitted them into the nearest relations: in this
case less could not be expected, then that in all ingenuity they should have
abhorred to degenerate into any false way, or fail to be an holy people. In all
the reason of the world (one would think) they should have reckoned themselves
bounden to answer the loving kindness and faithfulness of the Lord, in all
holiness and righteousness of conversation before him all their days. Upon
these terms he took upon him their protection, So he was their Savior: Psalm.
105. 45.
That they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws, Esa. 63. 8.
for so the Psalmist expounds it; and if ye read on to the eighth verse, ye
will find the rest; But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he
was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them. The equity is so
manifest, as nothing more needs to be said in it.

Only if you desire to know what it is that God requires, and we ought to
return, you may find it, if you look in the glass whereinto the species of
the children of Isreal's face is shed, I mean the story of their Rebellions. We
may read our duty in their perverseness, and see where to wash our selves, by
their spots. Doubtless, ye have heard of their provocations, and the issues of
them, they are gathered together into very short sum, Psalm 95. ye may find
them a little more enlarged and particularized in the 78, and the 106 Psalms.
Or if ye please that I may run over the History before you, in a few words we
shall the more readily discern what to amend.

1. They did not abide in that good disposition wherein they received the first
tidings and tokens of Gods good will to them. When Aaron had spoken all the
words which the Lord spoke unto Moses, and had done all the signs in the sight
of the people; The people believed, Exodus 4. 30, 31
and when they heard that the Lord had visited them, and looked upon their
afflictions, then they bowed their heads and worshipped. But in the next
chapter, they lightly depart from that acknowledgement upon the first
discouragement, where they found themselves in an evil case, because of their
tasks, they met Moses and Aaron, Exodus 5. 20 21.
and said, The Lord look upon you, and judge, because ye have made our savor
to stink in the eyes of Pharaoh and his servants, to put a sword in their hands
to stay us. And again, at the Red Sea, when they saw the great work which the
Lord had done upon the Egyptians; they feared the Lord, and they believed the
Lord, and his servant Moses; but they soon forgate his works, Psalm. 78. 11. 22.
and his wonders which he had showed them, and trusted no more in his salvation.

Secondly, They bare all difficulties with great impatience, and murmured upon
every trial, at the increase of their burdens, the approach of the enemy, the
bitterness of the water, the want of bread, the want of water, when they had
not meat for their lust, when the Spies brought an evil report upon the Land,
when the way was tedious, and they must go about: At every turn, and upon all
occasions they complain, and rebel, and tempt the Lord.

Thirdly, They quarrel their deliverers, while they were yet in the Land, and
charge the injuries and oppressions done them by their enemies, upon their best
friends. In the Wilderness they are envious and mutinous, even Aaron and
Miriam are drawn into the conspiracy. They misunderstand and misapply the
judgments of God: the executions done upon the factious and seditious they
impute to Moses and Aaron, as bloodshed and murder. When the earth had opened
and swallowed up Corah, and his company; the next morning all the Congregation
murmr, and tell them to their faces, Numb. 16.
Ye have killed the people of the Lord.

Fourthly, They repine at their deliverance, even when it was far advanced, and
despise the salvation of God, and made an attempt to return into their old
servitude; so base were their spirits, as they had rather have abidden under,
nay, returned into their cruel bondage, so they might have had their fish, and
their onions, then be saved by miracle, if they must be enstranged from their
lusts: We remember (say they) the fish which we did eat in Egypt freely, the
Cucumbers, and the Melons, and the Leeks, and the Onyons, and the Garlicks,
Numb. 11. 5. were it not better for us to return into Egypt? and they said one
to another, Let us make us a Captain and return into Egypt, Numb. 14. 3, 4.

Fifthly, They did not understand the works of the Lord, nor trust on their
God, nor depend upon his Word, or rely upon his Providence,nor waited for his
Counsel; but hardened their hearts through unbelief, yea, they spoke against
God, tempting and limiting the holy one of Israel, for all the signs and
wondrous works which he showed amongst them.

Sixthly, Psalm. 78. 8.
They were a faithles and stubborn generation, a generation that did not set
their heart aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with God. They had
engaged themselves by solemn Covenant to Reformation, to depart from the
customs of Egypt, and to keep themselves unspotted from the manners of the
Nations, to receive a form of worship from God, Exodus 24.
a Law of Ordinances, and to keep his Commandments and be obedient: But they
made a Calfe in Horeb, they worshipped the molten image, they committed
whoredom with the daughters of Moab, and joined themselves to Baal Peor, and
are the sacrifices of the dead; they kept not the Covenant of God, and refused
to walk in his Law.

Seventhly, They dissembled with God in their humiliations and professions of
repentance, which they were frequently put upon: Psalm. 78. 34.
When his wrath was kindled against them, and he slew them, then they sought
him, they returned and enquired after God, and they remembered that the most
High was their Redeemer; nevertheless they did but flatter him with their
mouths, they lied unto him with their tongue; for their heart was not right
with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant: Wherefore God was not
pleased with them, for their carcases fell in the Wilderness; of all them that
were numbered in the Desert of Sinai, Numb. 1. 46.
on the second month of the second year after their coming out of Egypt, all
the Males from twenty years old and upward, Six hundred thousand, three
thousand, five hundred and fifty; not a man of them was found alive upon the
Muster in the plain of Moab, a little before they entered into Canaan, save
Caleb the son of Jephunneh, Numb. 26. 65.
and Joshua the son of Nun, they were all consumed.

Now these things are our examples, 1 Cor. 10 6.
lively representations for instruction, to the intent we should not walk
unworthily, unanswerably to the good will of God, in his peculiar extraordinary
providence over us, (as they did) by levity and slightness of spirit,
frowardness, discontentednesse, malignancy, confederacy, and compliance with
naughty men; unthankfulness, backsliding, regardlesnesse of Gods works;
unbeleife, breach of Covenant, impenitency, hypocrisy, or formality in our
Fasting and Praying, and pretense of Reformation, and amendment, and such like:
but have another spirit with us, Numb. 14. 24. Josh, 14. 6.
and follow the Lord our God fully, lest we be destroyed of the Destroyer, as
they all were; for all these things happened to them for ensamples, and they
are written for our admonition, 1 Cor. 10 11.
upon whom the ends of the World are come. The sins and the punishments of
those Israelites are set before us, as in a glass, or image, that we may see
in them what to expect, if we also provoke the Lord as they did: Let us behold
our faces in this glass, but not go away, and straightway forget what manner
of persons we are; but repent, and be zealous, and amend, so God shall be
glorified, and we shall be blessed in our deed. This in general, and for all.

Now give me leave, More particularly to the Lords.
I beseech you, Right Honorable, in all humility, to offer a word or two more
specially to your Honors, who are the great part of this Assembly.

My Lords, ye are the chief of all the people of the Land, Rulers, and Nobles,
Princes of the chief Houses among the families of our Nation, it is expected
both by God and men, that ye should do more for God in the advancement of his
glory, and in a more public way, than others that are of inferior rank, and
stand at farther distance from him. Ye have the advantage by the eminency of
your place to contribute more, and ye are more obliged, ye have a larger
portion in the blessing, and ye are the first in the Covenant; Numb. 7. 2. 1
Chr. 29. 6.
We Noblemen, Barons, etc. It will be greatly to your Honor, if as God has
honored you above others, ye shall honor him more than they: If ye shall
offer first, first offer your own selves to the Lord, a living sacrifice,
holy, and acceptable; and then in your sphere, and according to your power, do
honorably for God, who has done gloriously for us all.

My Lords, The matters of God are before you, as well as the affairs of the
Commonwealth: It is humbly prayed, that they may have the precedence and pass
before, at least in a line parallel, and in even equipage with the concernments
of men.

The time was, and it was not long since, when all the heat and zeal of men
burnt out on their own hearth, and the coals thereof, were as the coals of
fire, which has a most vehement flame; their rage and their jealousy was
cruel as the grave; A man was made an offender for a word, and drawn into
judgment presently, heavy fines imposed, and executions done with cruelty. True
it it is we cried out of the oppression; and the wisdom and the justice of
this Honorable Parliament saw cause to remove those Arbitrary Judicatures of
Honor, Star Chamber, and High Commission, and we rejoiced in the breaking of
those yokes. But yet we see, there may sometimes happen occasions that may
awaken Authority, to do something exemplary for the vindicating of the names
and reputations of men, even there where something may be pleaded, if not in
excuse or extenuation of the words or actions, yet in favor of the persons.

My Lords, Ego certe vereor, ne nos quoque, cum alienas blasphemias iterum
atque iterum repetamus, nostram mentem polluamus, atque ita condemnatione
quoque participemus. Basil. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
The name of God is blasphemed daily, He has been charged to be the Author of
sin, of the anomie of the wickedness of sin; Blessed be God, ye have showed
your detestation of the blasphemy; He is denied to be that which himself says
he is, the mystery of the Holy Trinity, that other great Gospel-mystery of
godliness or God manifest in the flesh, is openly decried, derided. I tremble
at the most execrable blasphemies which have bin belched out of the mouth of
that Beast, and dare not mention them in the Pulpit, they would not be once
named amongst Christians. The authority of the holy Scriptures, given by
inspiration of God, is not only questioned and disputed, but peremptorily
denied and gainsayd. The most sacred and fixed Articles and Principles of Faith
are shaken, and lose their reverence. The Gospel is blended with errors of
vain men deceiving, and deceived; not the seamlesse Coat only of our Savior,
but his very Body is divided and torn by Schism and Factions: There spring up
daily many roots of bitterness, and many are thereby defiled. There be
scoffers, and profane persons, and Atheists, and many are daily made such, and
great occasion is given to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, and to speak
evil of the way of Truth, by those who privily bring in damnable Heresies, and
by those who follow their pernicious ways, using liberty for an occasion to
the flesh. These things, and the like, are done daily, to the great dishonor
of God, and scandal of Religion. I beseech you, my Lords, stir up your
jealousy, and take hold upon your power, for the punishing, the avenging, and
the redressing of these things. Be very jealous for God, who is jealous for his
people with a great jealousy; that there may be no color of cause given for
the renewing of the old complaint; All men seeks their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's.

Secondly, It is humbly desired, that the work of Reformation may be speeded,
and order in the Church established by Law, even now while the Lord is thus
advancing the work of our deliverance; although there be many difficulties,
and an appearance of some discouragements.

Your Lordships may please to remember, how while the fire was yet on the Bush,
two or three days before they were to pass out of Egypt, when the people must
needs be in an hurry and confusion, in no fit disposition, scarce a capacity
of receiving such a Law, and there was no time to teach them the interpretation
of it; and (one would have thought) a fitter season was nigh at hand, and might
well have been waited for the introducing of the use, and regulating of the
manner of communicating in such a mystery: yet even in that juncture of time,
and before God offered to show the whole pattern in the Mount, the Sacrament of
the Passover was instituted, and the rule thereof made public by an
Ordinance, and the people commanded to observe it; Exodus 12.
and they went, and were obedient thereunto.

It seems to me, and I believe your Honors cannot think other, but that this
was done, and written with special reference to this very season, and the
great affair now in your hands; for instruction and direction to this present
Parliament, to take into most serious consideration and affection, the humble
advice and Petitions, that have so often, and with so great desire and
expectation been presented to both Houses, in the matter of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; and to give a Law for the Administration thereof, and the
regulating of the admission of Communicants, according to the Word of God, and
the rules of discipline, in all the reformed Churches: That the Church of
Christ may have the liberty of this Ordinance in the purity of it. (Then which
nothing can make more for the unity and peace of the Church and Nation, and the
defeating of the crafty designs of those cunning men, who lie in wait to
delude and divide;) and to do this speedily* notwithstanding all objections,
and obstructions, which politicians, or profane worldlings, or any Sectaries,
may with fair pretense raise to the retarding hereof, being all cle^^ly* and
fully anticipated and answered, by the light and encouragement of this very
story.

And when this is once settled, you shall with the more ease provide; and we
shall with the more patience and consolation expect the setting up of the rest
of the frame of Government, though the times should continue unquiet and
hazardous, and we should still be put to depend upon an extraordinary
Providence for subsistence.

For your Lordships may also please to call to mind, how when the people
wandered in the Wilderness, near forty years before they possessed the Land,
The Lord caused the Tabernacle of the T^stimony to be wrought and reared, and
ordered the pitching of it, and marshalled the Tents of the Tribes about it,
and gave the Laws for his public worship; and in that unsettled time, and when
they were newly entered into Canaan, while they were yet in war, set on foot
all that belonged to the administration of it.

And afterward, how it was the care of Ezra and Nehemiah, in the most
troublesome times, when they had many enemies, and there were many conspiracies
and confederacies against them, and the distraction was great, and they were
forced to hold a sword in one hand, while a Trowell was in the other, yet made
it their great care to re-edifie the holy City and the Temple, and reform and
restore the public service of God: and when they entered into a curse and an
oath, Neh 10. 19, 30 31, etc.
Reformation in matters of Religion, was the first and principal charge. And
when they waxed cold, or forgetful, the Prophets put them in remembrance, they
received the exhortation, and the Lord blessed the labor of their love: Then
the Prophets prophesied unto the Jews which were in Jerusalem, Ezra 5. 1, 2.
Hagg^i 1. and 2.
in the name of the God of Israel; and the Elders of the Jews builded, and
they prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the Prophet, Ezra 6. 14.
and Zechariah the son of Iddo; and they builded and finished it, according
to the Commandment of the Lord. There is my warrant for this motion, and there
is your Honors pattern for the work, and there is great encouragement to us
all. I move you, my Lords, to no more than what ye your selves have obliged
your selves by solemn Covenant to do, and what you have engaged us all to
endeavor and procure, by all good and lawful means to be done; and this
brings to mind.

A third thing* The keeping of the Covenant in the whole, and in every part,
especially that which concerns the Reformation of the Church, according to the
Word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches. I suppose I may be
bold, and that without offense, to transfer hither the speech of Peter to
Ananias and Sapphira in another case, or at the least to allude to it; When the
super-inducing of such a sacred engagement was first in motion, it was free to
the high and Honorable Court of Parliament, to have forborne the framing of
such a Covenant: And while it remained under debate and deliberation, was it
not in your power to have abstained from the bringing of your selves and the
Kingdoms into such an oath and a curse? but now ye have sworn before the
Lord, how so great a part as the intended Reformation can be kept back, or be
rigidly pressed for the advantage of the civil State, and neglected, or be
proceeded in remifly, in the case of Religion and the Church, without tempting
or provoking the Lord; that I may not say without Sacrilege or a lie unto God,
judge ye? Or how safe it may be, after vows to make inquiry?

How sad a thing and destructive would it be, if the Land should after all this
be made to mourn for breach of Covenant and perjury?

I beseech you, my Lords, prevent it with all your zeal, and the Lord enable
you to do worthily for God, to do something extraordinary for him, who has
done mervailously for the Kingdom, exceeding abundantly above all that we have
asked, or thought: Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, world
without end, Amen.

There remains yet another Use to be made of this privilege and advantage of
an extraordinary Providence; Use 3.
I will briefly dispatch it in a few words of exhortation.

1. To contentedness with cheerfulness under the mighty hand of God, that ye
may possess your souls in your patience, and be able to cleave to the Lord
without distraction.

We may be happy in adversity: why should we make our selves miserable by false
fears, and false apprehensions? we cannot run from the fire if we would: why do
we disquiet our selves in vain? were it not better to walk with God, in it, and
follow the Lord fully? It is an extraordinary privilege to live under an
extraordinary Providence: there cannot be such an extraordinary Providence, if
all things move in the ordinary way, there must be change and trouble; and how
shall we hope to receive the good of it at the hands of God, if we be unwilling
to receive the evil also? The work which the Lord has begun to do, both in
Mercy and Judgment, is very great and manifold: upon what ground, or to what
end can we think or wish it may be finished in a day? He that believes,
makes not haste.

God will certainly glorify himself, and make his power known, and get him a
great Name; why should not we desire to see the glory of God, though we
therefore must be set in straits, and under a cloud, and the hand of God be
upon us?

The Lord has prepared his Throne, and has begun to pull down Babylon, and to
avenge the blood of his Saints, and of all that are slain on the earth. How
shall their sin swell up to its fullness, and they be ripe for the Judgment,
so as all the World shall confess, True and righteous are thy Judgments, oh
Lord; if the mean while the people of God, and the Kingdoms of the World
suffer nothing grievous by them; who would not be glad to live when God does
this?

The Lord is refining of his Church, as Gold is refined, it must be done in the
Furnace of affliction: He is purging them from their filth, and he will do it
by the Spirit of Judgment, and by the Spirit of burning. Esaias 4. 4.
Now we know that chronicall diseases, must have long and redious cures; where
they have long been settled upon the lees, they must be often rolled from
vessel to vessel, and when they hang upon the old haunt, they must be whipe
off: and if this may be the fruit of it to take away our sins, that we perish
not in them; wherefore should we make it our fear, and not rather count it a
mercy to suffer the trial? God is come down to redeem his Church, there must
be time and occasion for him tobring forth all his great Judgments, and
multiply his wonders, that his people may have many testimonies of his neernes
to them, many pledges of his faithfulness, for the support of their confidence
and hope, that they may be convinced of, and humbled under their weakness,
unworthiness, wretchedness, and learn to depend on God alone, and give him
all the glory, that they may have the proof of the grace of God working
effectually in them* and their patience may have its perfect work, that they
may be entire, and made fit for deliverance, their hearts prepared and
established to receive, and wear it with all thankfulness, to the praise of
the glory of the grace of God. And if this be the good of tribulation, why
should we not be willing to choose, with Moses, Heb. 11. 25.
to suffer affliction with the people of God? or to say with Peter, Matthew. 17.
4.
in admiration of the happiness, It is good being here? Micha 7. 9.
Or at the least to resolve with Micah, to bear the indignation of the Lord?
(If we will needs so look upon it) and with H^bakkuk rejoice in the God of our
salvation; Hab. 3. 17.
although we shall be brought into extreme desolation, and never so great
affliction be prepared; if happily he will plead our cause, and we may be brought
forth to the light, and shall behold his righteousness, and walk upon our
high places? rather than pray with Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 28.
Let there be no more thundering and hail.

We have made many prayers and supplications, it becomes us now to wait (as the
Husbandman) for the harvest of our hopes, James 5. 7, 8.
and have long patience for the rain, as well as the Sunshine; that all
things may be the more kindly ripened, and the more seasonably gathered in, and
threshed out and sed upon, to the more advantage of our blessedness; and in
due time we shall reap if we faint not: Be patient therefore, and stablish
your hears, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

Secondly* That we may attain to these things, suffer me to add another word
of exhortation, and then I shall have done; it is to prayer, First, that the
Lord would give us an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear,
while God dwells amongst us in good will; that we may have the happiness to
find the honey in the carcass, the wisdom not to suck the poison of
Malignity, and male-contentednesse to our ruin, but to extract the sweet, the
good, the righteousness that may be learned by judgments for our Reformation,
and edification unto salvation. This would make us count that blessedness,
that we now call misery; for not affliction, but the folly of him that suffers
it, is evil. But we cannot find out the Riddle, unless we plough with Gods
heifers: James 1. 5.
Wherefore, if any man want the Wisdom, let him ask is of God, who gives to
all men liberally, and upbraideth not.

Secondly, That while the fire takes hold upon the Kingdoms, The good will of
him that dwelt in the Bush, may come abundantly upon us, who are many ways
separated from other people. A motion for prayer is seasonable in a day of
thanksgiving; This is the day which the Lord has made, Psalm. 18. 24.
we will rejoice and be glad in it. Save now I beseech thee, oh Lord; oh Lord,
I beseech thee send now prosperity. And truly we shall not pray before we have
need.

I know no reason we have to flatter our selves with a golden dream of sudden
or settled peace; I am sure our sins do multiply and increase, and so do our
dangers too; If the sword of War were sheathed again, we are in hazard to be
ruined by that drunkenness wherewith the Lord has filled the Land, to perish
by division, schism, and faction: in this distemper, if we had no war, yet
there would be no peace; and if he dash us one against another, and not pity,
nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy us, who can plead against him? The Lord
knows how todeliver the godly out of temptation, Pet. ^.
and to reserve the (...) judgment to be punished: Numb. 14.
The Lord knows how to fulfill all his works in mercy* and truth to our
posterity, which we say shall be a prey, and they may know that salvation,
which we now despise, and the present froward generation perish by the way.

I think therefore there is need to pray, and to pray daily, to seek the
Lord, Amos 5. 6.
that we live, lest he that now dwells amongst us in good will, as when he
dwelt in the Bush, break out like fire in the Land, as he threatens the house
of Joseph, and devour^ it, and there be none to quench it. The Lord is an holy
God, he is a jealous God, Josh. 24. 19, 20
and will not forgive our tranngressions: if we abuse the goodness of God, and
seek liberty for our lusts, and forsake the Lord; He will turn, and do us
hurt, and consume us, after he has done us good: And it may come to pass,
that as all good things are come upon us, cap. 23. 25.
which the Lord our God has promised us, so he may bring upon us all evil
things, until he has destroyed us from off this good land, which the Lord our
God has given us.

Nay, if we knew the secrets of God concerning us, or could understand by books
(as Daniel did) the set time of our deliverance, yet we ought to seek by prayer
and supplication: How much more, while the fire is yet on the Bush, should we
cry continually to our God, after the example of Moses, that we may behold his
Salvation? And now while we are together, and the Lord has put it into our
hearts to pray before him; (for, blessed be God, we may now pray after the
Sermon, and are not bound up to a doxologie, no not on a day of thanksgiving;)
Let us remember it in our Prayers.

FINIS.

