THE PROPHECY OF GNATUS A BRITISH PROPHET: Introduced by a PREFACE OF ROBERT
WARE, Esquire; AND Set forth with a few NOTES By the INTRODUCTOR.

DVBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray at Colledge-Green, for Samuel Helsham
Bookseller, at the Colledge-Arms in Castle-street, 1681.

THE PREFACE.
AS Almighty God has dignified man with the similitude of his own Image, so
has he been pleased of special privilege to raise some of mankind by
extraordinary elevation of spirit above the rest, not only in Natural and
Artificial Endowments of Understanding and Perception, but also has many times
infused into them above the sagacity of ordinary gifts, a faculty of foreseeing
and declaring unto others fatal events, unperceived by any but themselves, who
have therefore been called Prophets; and such a one, Gnatus, the Author of this
Prediction seems to have been: who being a Christian, cannot be presumed to
have founded his Predictions in Drycraft Deopo^craft / or any other ealdre
healsung / or ancient Heathenish Rites or Ceremonies then used, nor with regard
to Constellations, or Dominion of Planets, or Mid heofonlicum wondrum / i. e.
Prodigies of Heaven. But as Beda terms it, mid Godcunde / or Godcundre onbry
ardnysse / that is to say, by Divine instinct. Nor did he by Iergon / or the
juggling artifice of ambiguous expressions, cast a mist about his words, or
inwrap them in darkness of sense; but in clear terms sets forth his meaning in
the following Prophecy; which being of late casually found, and drawn out of
the Archives of Sir James Ware's rich and careful preserved Antiquities, now
breaks forth like a Star newly created in the Firmament of Heaven, which draws
all the World to look upon it with admiration; and moreover, affords things new
and old, that is to say, an Historical Instruction of what is past, as well as
Predictions of very fatal events hereafter to be accomplished, depending on the
behavior of Nobles, and people practicing and maintaining the true Religion
against Idolatry, and subduing the lusts and appetites of the flesh.

R. W.

A British Prophecy in the Sixth Century after Christ: Taken out of an Old
Register Book belonging to Rochester, and translated out of the Saxon Character
into English, by John Gravener, some time Chaplain to the said Bishop; being
named Edmond Gest, Anno 1564.
IN the days of Ethelbert King of Kent, Augustine Chief Patron of Carlem, that
Palace being bestowed on him by the King, he bearing his Banner in Procession
at his first Entrance into this Isle of Britain, one Gnatus, the then British
Prophet met him, to whom he thus spoke.

You The Prophet checketh Austin at his first entrance into Britain.
nor your Master have not observed the Masters Precepts, which is this: Let him
that is the meanest of you be as Master, and the Master as the meanest. Which
Precept, had he that sent you but observed, he nor ye had not fallen. For
Jerusalem has fallen out with Antioch, and she with her. So likewise has
Constantinople with Rome, and she with her, from whence thou now come. Where
is then the Peace of Christ, with which thou must qualify the people of this
Isle, seeing ye have rented your Saviors seamless Garment? For the light has
shined with in this Isle for many days past; He gives Rome a caution not to
bring in Popish Ceremonies into the Liturgy.
Be thou therefore cautious neither to add nor diminish what has been already
Planted by thy Predecessors within the same, least you and yours become as
odious as those that sent you; He shows what has brought in Antichrist.
for Ambition, Pride, and Covetousness, has already brought in Antichrist
sprinkled amongst them, which as yet is insufficient. Antichrist against
Antichrist, is supposed the Mahumetan Sect against the Roman Sect.
For another Antichrist is arising to contend with Antichrist; who by little
and little, and in space of days shall make them Vassals, and subject to their
Power, and so inherit what they now possess. But if you and yours follow their
Paths more then Christ's, you and your Successors shall be hated as they, by the
people of this Isle: King H. 8th. his dissolving of the Monasteries, Priories,
Abbeys, etc.
then in the height of yours, and their Pomp, through Vain Glory, Covetousness,
and Idolatry; ye and they shall be mowed as the Grass, and wither within the
same. K. E. 6ths. Reformation.
Then Britain shall bring forth a Babe, from whose lips shall flow sweetness:
Romes tyranny during Qu. Mary's days.
which Antichrist within this Isle shall for five days make it bitter, Qu.
Elizabeth.
until a Judith shall rise and refresh their senses; who has heard, and will
not hear; seen, and will not see; who has tasted, and yet does not taste; who
have smelt, and yet were not sensible of its fragrancy; who have held, and yet
let it go. A warning to the Protestant Church to keep Unity against Rome and
her devices.
Thus Truth being planted, and sprung up afresh; shall never wither within this
Isle, unless her Nobles and her People wilfully follow strange Gods, through
the lusts and appetites of the flesh; and then become the Children of Wrath.

To prove that there was a Wise Man with whom the British Clergy Conversed;
and is supposed to be the said Gnatus.
1. THat Ethelbert was Contemporary with Augustine, The Authors to prove that
the Clergy in those days did not own Rome, nor her Tenants, viz. Beda, Stow,
Baker, Fullar, and Lambard.
appears by the Ecclesiastical History of Venerable Beda; and that he had
communion in a Synod with Augustine in the time of Dynoth Abbot of Bangor: There
also it appears what was done in this Synod. Beda Lib. 2. Cap. 2.

2. Carlem was at that time the chief City of Kent, and as the Author of the
British History affirms, was Built by Rudhurdibras, or as some Copies have
it, Lud Rudibras, almost nine hundred years before the Incarnation of Christ;
For Carlem to be the Kings chief Seat. See Lambard's Perambulation of Kent.
and the same is called by Henry of Huntingdon, Cacr Kent, in his recital of
ancient British Cities.

3. Banner, this Banner was the Cross and Image of Christ, which Beda calls,
Lib. 1. Cap. 25. Cristes Gade Tacen silfrene / and Cristes mael mid him.

4. Gnatus, so far as the probability of conjecture may administer credit, this
Gnatus was the holy and prudent Anchorite, with whom (as Beda in his
Ecclesiastical History says) seven Brittissh Bishops, and many most Learned
men came to advise, when they were to consult with Augustine; For these are the
words of Beda, that they came aerst to sumum Ancram se was mid him halig and
wis / i. e. they came to a certain Anchorite, whom they reputed holy and wise.
Hence it may be observed, that the British Church was a well Constituted
Church, at and before the time of Augustine's first coming; which could on the
sudden, out of the Kingdom of Kent, assemble seven Bishops, and so many most
Learned Men.

FINIS.

