ON THE DEATH Of the Late Lieutenant General TALMACH, A POEM.

Humbly Dedicated to her GRACE the Duchess of Lauderdale,

By E. Ward, Gent.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for, and Sold by James Blackwel, at Bernards-Inn-Gate,
Holbourn, 1694.

On the Death of the late Lieutenant General TALMACH.
AS sturdy Oak its Towering branches shoot,
Nourished by sap drawn from a noble Root,
May, for a time, (by its defensive Arms)
Survive the Dangers of destructive Storms;
Till some chance Thunder, from a Cloud, shall wound
The aspiring Plant, and rend it to the ground:
Thus shattered, mourned it lies, with Earth laid even,
Whose lofty Boughs once played 'twixt us and Heaven.
So fell brave Talmach, from a Stock derived,
Ancient as Laws, within whose bounds he lived:
His Ancestors in FAME's Records took place,
Crowned with high Honors among the Norman Race;
Whose Aid (in that old memorable War)
Taught their great PRINCE to be a Conqueror;
And raised him to a Pyramid of Fame,
By brave Attempts they truly Great became,
Bentley Bentley in Suffolk.
their Seat, and Talmach then their Name.
Thus did their Line in streams of Brav'ry run,
Ending in Glory, as their Race begun,
Great their Forefathers, great their Warlike Son;
Whose bold undaunted Soul was ever free
To face all Dangers, and dare Destiny:
Through clouds of Smoke, where sulfurous Fames arose
Lighting the Vanquished to their last Repose:
Through storms of flying Deaths; he boldly past,
Scorning the Balls from Wars loud Engines cast;
But still pressed on, till he had bravely shown,
What by a Gallant Hero might be done,
And in each Action (hasty to be great)
Showed Resolution to be Fortunate.
When England (careless doting on her Ease,
Wrapped up in Riches, Luxury, and Peace)
Grew negligent and wanton, void of care,
Proving an Enemy to none but War;
Which France observed, grew Insolent and Proud,
Raised up her head, (who long to us had bowed)
Casting on, Europe a devouring eye;
Whilst blinded Albion stood regardless by,
Till watchful Providence stepped in between,
Acted her part, and changed the frightful Scene:
None then (by the United Crowns) was thought
So fit as Talmach, for a brave Exploit,
To strike at France, and dare those threatening Frowns,
Eclipsed the Glories of her Neighboring Thrones.
In order to Effect the great Design,
Dangerous t'attempt, ignoble to decline,
He hoists up Sail, to the French Coast he Steers;
Urged by no Vanity, nor held by Fears;
Moved by unbias'd thoughts, he cooly weighs
The little prospect of a great Success,
Resolving (what Repulse so e're was given)
To bravely Act, with confidence in Heaven.
Big with increasing Hope he should prevail,
He Ploughs the Ocean with a prosperous Gale,
And nimbly to the wished for shore he run,
Where Life was to be lost, or Conquest won;
His soul enlivened with a generous thought,
That lasting Glories must be nobly bought,
Made him resolve, when the great Work began,
To Act like something greater than a Man.
Now the whole Fleet, with swelling Sails, were brought
Near to that Shore, for which the Hero sought,
His loud mouthed Agents roared out his Command,
And gave the Signal to prepare for Land;
Whilst every Soldier fearless of the Grave,
Took up a Resolution to be Brave:
The Active General, leaping on the Strand,
First took possession of the promised Land,
Where the sly Foe rushed from an Ambuscade,
From hidden Batt'rys roaring Engines played,
Defeating all the projects he had laid:
The restless Sea in Mountains did arise,
As if affrighted at the dreadful noise;
Ill boding Clouds in Monstrous shapes appeared, A Storm arose.

And hollow Winds, by trembling Sailors heard;
Nature, unhinged in all things, looked awry,
To show the Fate of some great Man was nigh:
Surprise and Terror now their hopes o'er-cast,
Death threatening every Landed Soldiers last;
Whilst the brave Talmach still undaunted stood,
Fearing the loss of Honor, more than Blood;
Till Providence, by some neglect, gave way
For Envy her Mischievous Pranks to play,
Pressing through Dangers, which he scorned to fear,
Met a Destructive Messenger of War,
Which nobly he received, unmoved in thought,
Smiled at the dreadful Message which he brought;
And bleeding Fought, till Nature Strength denied,
To show that Courage; he was forced to hide,
But still alive was born away with Joy,
As old Anchises through the Flames of Troy,
Down to his Bark, where full of pains he lay,
Tumbling on Surges of an angry Sea;
Where gaping Waves, impatient of their Prey,
Seemed eager to intomb so Rich a Clay.
Thus through a tossing Tempest was he brought
Back from the fatal Sands, whereon he Fought,
To Plymouth, where his Soul from Cares withdrew,
Shook off her Robes of Earth, and bid adieu;
Leaving behind a Memory so great,
Will bury Monuments, and outlive Fate.
Wisdom, in all his Actions, was his Guide,
Patience his Care, and Worthiness his Pride:
No Enterprise, in War, by him begun,
Was through neglect e're lost, or Rashness won:
No Prince, but his, had such a Friend to trust,
So Truly Valiant, Merciful, and Just,
In Conduct Wise, in Conversation Grave,
Generous in Conquest, and in Battle Brave;
In his Command Good, Affable, and Kind,
Moral in Acts, and of a Noble Mind,
Loyal to's Prince, and to his Country Just,
True to his Friend, and Faithful to his Trust:
Whose Memorable Deeds shall Deathless be,
Rise with his Dust, and face Eternity.
FINIS.

