A GREAT FIGHT AT chepstow Castle in the West of England, betwixt the Forces
under the command of Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell, and the Cavaliers commanded by
Sir William Kelmish, Governor of the said Castle, and the number slain on
both sides.

Also an exact Relation of the late Skirmish at White Hall upon Tuesday last,
May 16. between the Parliaments Forces, and the Inhabitants of Surrey, with the
manner of their beginning, and occasion thereof.

Together with a List of the number that were slain and taken prisoners on both
sides.

Likewise, a great Rout in Northumberland, and the full particulars thereof.

C R
printer's or publisher's device

MAY 18th. London, Printed for R. Williamson. MDCXLVIII.

An exact RELATION OF The late Fight at Chepstow Castle, betwixr the Force
under the command of Lieutenant General Cromwell, and the Cavaleers commanded by
Sir William Kemish.
SIR,
OUr Forces are advanced as far as Chepstow, and Orders and Instructions are
given out by the Lieut. Genesis to the Party designed for the blocking up of the
Castle, and the reducing of it to the obedience and subjection of Parliament.
Our quarters are appointed, and we have cut off several passages for the
hindering of provisions from going to the Castle. We draw nearer and nearer to
the Walls, and receive many volleyes of shot from them, and they from us. But at
our first coming hither, the Lieutenant General sent in a summons to sir
William Kemish, Governor of the said Castle, for the surrender thereof upon
fair terms, but he most insolently refused the same, and hung forth his flag
of defiance, who in stead of treating for surrendering in peace, acted a new
posture for a second Engagement firing very fast from the Castle walls, but we
soon queld their courage, and made them leave shoo^ing; for having taken a
place of advantage near the Castle, Order was given, that a considerable party
of Musketeers should be placed there, which was accordingly done, who played so
violently upon the enemy that they made them pay deer for their peeping, and it
is supposed diverse were slain and wounded, both by the execution of the shot,
and the flying of the stones: We ply them close, and keep strong Guards, and
have not lost above two or three men; but we are informed, that their losle is
far greater. It is supposed they cannot hold out long, and the rather, because
the Governor has sent out for a parley, but now it is too late, Sir, this is
all from him, who remains

Yours to serve you, R. W.
From our Quarters near Chepstow this 13. of May, 1648.
Letters from the North, declaring the manner of the routing and dispersing Sir
Marmad. Langdales Forces in the North, by the Pa^liaments Forces belonging to
Sir Arthur Hasle. ig, Governor of Newcastle.
SIR,
THe Cavalry in these parts begin to grow very high both in their langu^ge and
action, taking their progress up and down the Northern Counties, and a party
of Langdales men came and s^ized on the town of Morpeth, with an intent to
garrison the same; but by the great vigilance of our Governor hey were
prevented, and their designs f^ustrated; for sir Ar^h^r Hasl^rig having notice
thereof immediately sent forth a party of Horse and Foot, but the Enemy having
notice of their coming, left the town, and betook themselves to their heels;
but our party pusued them, and took six prisoners, the rest escaped.

We hear that the Scots intend to have a Rand^v^us upon the 23 of this instant
Man, and th^n to m^ke choice of a Lord General And from We^ it is certified
that the Enemy in those parts is very active; As for other particulars, I refer
you to the i^sed Paper.

New Propositions from the Kingdom of Scotland.
1. ALthough in the answer of April, 22. Which we received in writing from the
Honorable Court of Parli^ment we are remitted to their Lordships Declaration
now printed and published the^ein to find satisfaction to our eight desires,
presented to the Parliament March 22, and although these desires were such as
were most agreeable to the word of God, and do highly concern the safety and
security or religion, yet after diligent perusal of the said Deciaration of
Parliament, we cannot find there in any of these our eight desires satisfied.

2. We find twice in the said Declaration a passage cited out of the
Declaration of both Kingdoms, viz. That the not takers of the covenant are
declared to be public enemies to Religion and Country, and to be punished as
prosessed adversaries and malignants, etc.

As the three breaches of Treaties infisted upon in the said Declaration are
disputable, and not without controversy, so the three demands sent to the
Parl. of England are of most dangerous consequence to Religion, so far as we
are able to judge of them, or pry into them.

And although we are real well-wishers to his Maj* honor, freedom, and
safety, in such a way as may not be inconsistent with the safety and security
of Religion; yet the demand of his Maj. coming with honor freedom and safety
to some of his houses in or near London before security had from him, yea
before application to be made to him by his Parliaments, for settling Religion
according to to the Covenant, we conceive to be not only a postponing to the
Kings, but an apparent hazard of the subversion of all the Ends of the
Covenant; considering, that the Army being disbanded, and his Majesty under no
restraint, being restored with honor, freedom, and safety, may gather new
strength with the Popish, Prelaticall, and malignant party, for hindering the
settling of Religion and peace according to the Covenant, which we have the more
reason to apprehend, his Majesty still retaining his old principles and having
not long since professed and declared that he is obliged in con^cience to
improve that power which God shall put in his hands for the establishing of
Episcopacy.

4 There are in the said Deelaration diverse particulars highly concerning
Religion determined and resolved upon without the advice and consent of the
General Assembly, or their Commishoners which is a great prejudice to the just
interest and liberties of the Ki^k.

5 We do find in the said Declaration all law^ull and possible ways of peace
and namely by Tr^aties which method we conceive to be necessary as well by
common and na^urall equity, as by the Word of God and especially between two
Kingdoms united by Solemn Covenant.

6. The Declaration holds forth no resolution of Parliament for opposing and
suppresling of the Popish, Prelaticall, or Malignant party if they rise again
in Arms* but only against ass^ciating or joining forces with them, and not so
much as that except with limitations in case they be refusers to swear and
subscribe the Covenant, and in case the rise in Arms to oppose and obstruct
all, or any one of the ends of the Covenant. Whereas it may be easily foreseen,
that if the Popish Prelaticall or Malignant party rise again in Arms in
England they cannot only conceal their intentions against the end of the
Coyenant, but also be easily exempted from being reckoned refusers of the
Covenant, the Covenant not being now imposed upon them; and being once suffered
to rise in Arms (as some are already) may grow so strong, as that it will be
very hard and difficult to suppress them.

7 Whereas we have insisted for satisfaction to our consclences, concerning
the persons to be entrusted with the managing of the war, and that none may be
employed in Committees and Armies but such as have given constant proof of
their integrity and faithfulness.

Finally, as we neither were, nor are against an Engagement, if once satisfied
in the grounds of undertaking, and manner of proceeding, and the other
particulars expressed in our sormer papers; so for the reasons before mentioned
and diverse others fully exprested in our Representation upon the Declaration,
we judge the present Engagement, as it is stated unlawful: and trust that all
the well-affected in the Kingdom, will make conscience of their solemn Vows.

A. Ker.

The particular relation of the skirmishing at Westminster, upon Tuesday last
May 16. 1648.
Upon Tuesday last being the 16. of this instant May, diverse of the Inhabitants
of Surry, and Borough of Southwark, came unto the Parl. and presented a
Petition, in the name of the Knights, Gentry and Inhabitants of the County of
Surrey. The Petition was received, and thanks, with an answer that the Parl.
would take their Petition into consideration with all convenient speed, etc.
But diverse of the pretended Petitioners grew very insolent, and said they would
have an answer presently; threatening the Parl. openly in Westminst. Hall,
saying that if they had not a more satisfactory answer then the Essex men, they
would fall upon the Parl. and pull them out of the house. Whereupon the
soldiers fired at them, and forced them to retreat away; the Horse from the
Mewes charged them likewise, forcing some to fly one way, and some another;
many of them were wounded, and some slain. A List of those that were slain and
taken prisoners.
Slain of the Surrey party.
Mr. Baxter,with 7. others.
Wounded.
Mr. Hudston of Southwarke, and Mr. Lock, with about 30 others were wounded.
About 30 Prisoners taken. Some Watermen were accidentally wounded, and two of
them slain. Of the Parliament soldiers 2 were slain, none hurt except an
Officer of horse who was accidentally wounded by the shot of a pistol.



This combustion in a short time was quite appeased, and the Gentry of the
Country in all this (for the most part) behaved themselves with moderation.

Imprimatur

G. M.

FINIS.

