A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Engagement: OR, The Northern Subscribers Plea
opposed to their dissenting Neighbors importune Animosities against Engaging to
be true and faithful, etc.

Tending to beget a calm Compliance in all the Conscientious Lovers of Truth
and Peace.

Laid together by N. W. a friend to the COMMONWEALTH.

Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil; but to the Counselors of
Peace, is joy, Prove. 12.20.

Where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work, Jam.
3.16.

(...). Nazian: Orat. 12.

London, Printed for Francis Tyton, dwelling at the Three Daggers in
Fleetstreet, near the Temple. 1650.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Engagement: OR, The Northern Subscribers Plea, etc.
WHen the glorious God, Job 34.21.
whose eyes are upon the hearts and ways of the sons of men, (looking through
their purposes) strikes off the Chariot wheels of their beloved interests, as
incompatible with his grand design in the World: When he discomfits their
hopes, and casts a damp upon their expectations, it is usual for them to sit
down in morosity and peevishness of spirit, 1 Kings 19.4. Jonas 4.8.
and think they do well to be angry, even unto death. This unhappy temper has
robbed us of the agency and usefulness of many hopeful instruments, in these
days of great temptation, when a man has been more precious then fine Gold,
yea, a man then the golden wedg of Ophir. Isaiah 13.12.
But as this frame of spirit and demeanor, is always very importune, and
misbecoming those who are called out to the service of Providence, so
especially in times of sad discomposure, such as ours at present are. Now the
ribs of Jacob hang loosely, and dash one against another, and Englands children
are even straggling as Hinds that find no pasture. Now our breach is great,
like the Sea, and gapes still, widening for our enemies; those that get behind
the hedge, Ezekiel. 22.30.
are not where God looks for them. He that is so fond of his gourd, that though
destruction upon destruction be cried, and the whole Land spoiled, Lam 4 3:
yet will by no means let it go; is cruel, like the Ostrienes in the
Wilderness, and worse then the Sea Monsters, which draw out the breast, (...).
Chrysostom. Isai. 59.16. and 51.18. Micah 7.4.
and give suck to their young ones. Christians, as they are the greatest lovers
of God, so they are full of bowels, beyond all other men, and tender of their
mutual welfare. Truly, the Lord may very well wonder, seeing so few
intercessors, so few that come with balm in their hands, and ligatures for our
wounds, yea, that so many of the best (in account) amongst us, are rather as
briars, and of the most upright, sharper then a thorn hedge, raking in our
wounds like enemies, and without pity widening our breaches, although the rent
be even at the caul of the heart.

Romans 2.1.
That we may not therefore become inexcusable, doing the same things, or render
our selves altogether unserviceable in our age and places, though we can do
little for the help of the Lord, till it shall seem good unto him to lay us
aside, (although our interests be not suited more then many other men's, who
fling away in discontent, nor our spirits satisfied, but in waiting the good
pleasure of the Lord,) we judge it our duty, to stand up with those few heads
and stays of our Tribes, kept together by Gods providence in this strait of
time for our support, and to engage with them for the strengthening of their
hands, till the Lord has accomplished his great work, Isaiah 51.16. Psalm.
94.13, 15.
planting the Heavens, and laying the foundations of the Earth amongst us; till
he give us rest from the days of adversity, and still the enemy, and the
avenger; till judgment return unto righteousness, and all the upright in heart
follow it; till he thoroughly plead our cause, and roll away our reproach; till
he ordain peace in our borders, making our walls salvation, Isaiah 60.18.
and our gates praise.

And that in so doing, we may acquit our selves from the imputations, both of
time-serving, and blinde-obedience, (nothing being good, but what is rationally
good) we shall,



ex abundanti, to those serious scruples which we perceive to stick upon many
men, as obstructors of their ready conjunction with us in this business.

disoblige themselves from acknowledging, at least in some sort, those powers
in being over them (whether lawful or pretended) and not draw upon their heads
the guilt of all that dismal confusion which would (like the breaking out of
water) unavoidably follow the total (...). Chrysostom.
dissolution of Government amongst them? especially in a Nation wherein the
contest about Prerogative has been the sharpest Plea that ever it was acqainted
with, and in which the fiery spirit of absolute domination has found more
Abettors then could be imagined amongst a people that hated not the name and
thing of liberty and property. And though some men happily, whose judgments and
activity have been against us in this grand quarrel, may conceive themselves
exempt from any such charge, yet whether we who have fought against tyranny
should not be accessory to Anarchy and deeply concerned in its woeful
consequents, should we disown that Authority over us (though not so full and
formal as we might wish it were) we have ever been held in great doubt? we
never coveted to have the enemies thanks for doing his work; yea, we have been
very fearful lest the Laws should cry out against us as lawless, and every
ruined family should charge its undoing upon our scores. If men be Wolves one
to another under the straightest restrictions of Magistracy, what will they be
when left to their own laws? the best lot we our selves can look for in such a
cause, is but the Giants courtesy, to be devoured last; nay considering that
spirit in most people lusting to revenge, we may look to be devoured first.

As to those pretensions which other men make to power and rule over us, we
found them but shadows, or at best but dilute and washie supports to a sinking
Commonwealth; we can expect no operation of that which is not in being, let
the title or right to power be never so highly pretended; neither were we ever
thoroughly persuaded that Government was any man's See the Tenure of Kings, etc.
I. M. Princeps e Senatu oritu^, Senatus e vobis. O^ho. in Tac. ad praetorianos^
freehold, or that many men might not serve providence in the administration of
right to a Nation, and the promoving its welfare as well as any one, were his
blood of never so high a color, or his Grandeur never so pompous and Majestic.

Hence we fell to a debate, whether we had not already, yea, whether
interpretative owned the Powers in Being? viz. by submitting their cases to
trial in that course of law which fetches its formality and original from
them, and is dispensed by their substitutes and inferior Officers? and those of
us who are Lawyers, whether by pleading at the Bar and owning their Judges as
proprietors of the Bench, we did not own those who Commissioned them? yea,
whether all of us in paying them tribute, have not set our seal to their
Authority, and its lawfulness? if we have gone this mile with them, how should
we refuse to go the other mile too, even to give them honor and fear, as well
as tribute? Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom
tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor be
longs; if nothing had belonged to them, we should have given them-nothing;
real acknowledgments always, in the sense of wise men, overweighing verbal
disownings.

Lastly, those of us who are Ministers found our selves surprised, by our own
prayers for them, as men possessed of power, to give them homage; by our making
request to God that they might use their talents well, we found this included,
that they had their talents from God; we have owned them in their declarations,
days of thanksgiving and humiliation, and we think it but straining at a gnat,
if we should refuse to set our hands to engage with them, who have had our
tongues, yea sure, and our Peccant qui d ssidium cordis and linguae faciunt,
etc. Pic. Mirand Ep.
hearts likewise at their commands and disposal as to such duties.

Act. 24.19.
decrying its lawfulness, and in their discourses taking it as for granted,
that no conscientious man could own the Parliament as now constituted, or its
power. We thought sure their reasons are (...), very ponderous, which disoblige
them from that visible Authority over us; but all that we could gather from
them fell very much below our expectations, and being weighed in the balance,
proved far too light for what might be laid against it. Our consciences
suggesting ready, and (as we thought) full answers to their most material and
weighty alledgments, and finding our selves able to set reason against reason;
yea, had it becomed us, confidence against confidence (meeting with persuasions
to a compliance and closure with the Parliament, stronger then any persuasions
to disunion) we thought it not best to take up with vox populi, being an
insufficient warrant for any man's refusal, to co-engage or fall in with the
Authority, but diligently to search whether we ought to go forward or backward;
and the more we enquired into the mind of God concerning us, the more we found
this duty, for which we plead, cleared up to our consciences. Now the principal
Arguments offering themselves to us for this purpose, and prevailing above us,
were these.

1. The Being of these present powers over us from God, which we found

1. All constitutions have their making and marring, their standing and falling
from God: frames of Government indeed are resolved by him into the peoples *
will, Deuteronomy. 17.14.
as the next and immediate cause of their specification or formality, and what
kind of Government they will for their own good, the Lord sets his Seal upon
it, as owning and approving it; this is clear in that translation of Government
from the Judges in Israel, and the setting up of Kingly Power in the person of
Saul, 1 Samuel 8.9, 10, 12. Chapters; But that here is (...) the hand of God in
the Wills of men, in these cases, appears from his appropriating such changes
to himself, both as to persons, and things, Ezekiel, 21.27. Zachar. 11.10, 14.
Hos. 13.11. Ier. 18.4.
Act. 13.10, 21, 22. The Policies of Nations are some of Gods Works upon the
wheels, which he orders and frames as seems good to himself; man is the
instrument and subject in all changes, but the being, or not being of them must
be resolved into Gods Will, as the Supreme and Primordial cause. He does
according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the
Earth, and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou? Dan. 4.35.

But here men put in with a full cry, We desired not, or willed this change of
Government, this new Frame or Model superinduced over us, nor yet can we
content our selves with it.

To this we Answer, some men desired it, others did not; (...). Clem. Alex.
Admonit. ad Gentes.
absolute Will, without which no purposes, and by which all purposes are
brought to pass and established, Psa. 33.11, 12. This is seen in Rehoboams
rejection, 1 Kings 12.15.24. The Text tells us, that the cause and the thing
was from God. Again, when the people were divided about the choice of a King, 1
Kings 16.21, 22. the prevailing party were owned in their choice, God never
manifesting any dislike of it, nor ever reproving Omry or his Successors for
usurpation. And if this hold good in the choice of a Governor, why may it not
in the choice of a Government? and then surely that is of God, which by his
Providence is superinduced over us, though its superinduction be never so much
stomack't by the surly wills of many, of most men.

2. That place of Scripture, Romans 13.1. (amongst many others) is very full and
pregnant to prove the Being of our present Powers from God, Not only Magistracy
in common is his Ordinance, as King and Sovereign of the whole Earth, but the
specifical Powers that (...)
be, likewise are by the Ordination of God, as the first and chief cause of all
Beings. The word here rendered, Ordained, we conceive to be of great force for
the legitimating our powers, it being often used to signify events and
appointments flowing from the eternal efficacious Decree of God, as Act.
13.48.22.10, etc. in which God cannot be a Spectator only, or a permitter, but
must needs lay to his hand as a powerful Worker, yea, in an eminent and signal
manner too (this we shall evidence he has done in our Case by and by) for if
the permission of God (which extends it self to evil, sin, or privative
defects, be not without his Circa quodcunque est Dei permissio circa idem etiam
est actualis volitio. Th. de Bradward.
volition, then surely those futuritions, or positive events determined by him,
and welpleasing to him, come not to pass without his special efficiency; this
Doctrine some of us have taken in from the Schools, and in whatever Series of
events God manifests this his special concurrence or appearing, that cause he
owns; hence it may be said of our change, the thing is of God, and those Powers
in being over us ordained of him, yea, by his special appointment, special
procurement, and we hope out of special grace and favor.

But the Word, (...), say some, signify lawful powers, a power of right,
contradistinguished to (...), a power of might.

Luke 4.6. what shall we think of Pilates power to crucify the Lord of Life?
Joh. 19.10. Here the word is used again: was that a lawful power? Secondly, we
cannot easily understand how any powers should take the denomination of lawful
or unlawful, from their Form, Constitution, or Mould; for then only some one
frame of Government would be lawful (as it is in Gospel Discipline) and all
other unlawful; but rather from the efflux of peoples wills, into the Being of
such Powers over them, or from their agency in commanding things lawful or
unlawful under God. Those that command unlawful things, in such exorbitances
(swerving from the Rule of their Office) they retain no stamp of Malus
princeps, non est princeps, quemadmodum spiritus impurus qui invasit corpus
hominis, non est animus. Eras.
Authority or Power on them at all: For upon this account, we are disobliged
from conscientious obedience in such cases, because there men act as disrobed
of Magistracy, God never giving any man Commission to do evil. He is the
Minister of God to thee for good, says the Apostle, Romans 13.4. 1 Pet. 2.14.

Kingly power is by this Plea proved a lawful power, and a power ordained of
God; why then was the King resisted, rejected, and that Government laid aside?

England were so, the States of Holland are so, so are the Emperors, Princes,
and Cantons of Germany, the Senate and Capi of Venice, the great Dukes of
Muscovy, the Vaivods of Transylvania, and the Parliaments of England.

2. Why that Government is laid aside, the Parliament has given most unbyassed
men very good satisfaction, both for the equity and necessity of it, in their
Declaration of March 17. 1648. published in several Languages, unto which we
refer the Objectors.

3. The King was rejected upon the matter of his Charge; See the Kings Case.
resisted because of his illegal commands and usurpations upon Liberties, and
If a Villain work on Sunday by his Lords command, he shall be free. Sir H.
Spillman, Council.
Consciences: Neither was the King (though a lawful power) the sole power
amongst us, no, nor the Sovereign power neither, if Mr. Prynne be not mistaken
(who intitles several Volumns of his, The Sovereign Power of Parliaments and
Kingdoms,) and that learned Scotchman in his Lex, Rex, (opposed to all
Prerogative and Royal Advocates) overthrowing and exauctorating the Pleas of
Maxwel, Barclay, Grotius, Spalatensis, the Doctors of Aberdeen, Dr. Fern, E.
Simmons, etc. tending to assert the Royal Prerogative of Christian Kings.

We conceive all powers, as to their form, are lawful, yet all changeable. The
Royal Scepter was lawful, though not everlasting; the laying it aside, speaks
not its absolute illegality, but its temporal inexpediency. And we wish that
Parliaments in their present Constitution, may not be so long lived, as the
Norman Scepter, if they be less expedient; we judge them both lawful powers, but
neither irresistible, nor unchangeable.

4. The Lord by his Providence has largely commented upon those Texts, which
confirm the lawfulness of our powers in Being, yea, their very constitution as
from him. Grotius of the truth of Christian Religion, l. 1. sect. 11.
Where it pleases God to change the form of Government; those men whom he
uses as instruments for the effecting of that matter, as being determined for
him: Suppose they be like to Cyrus, Alexander, or Caesar the Dictator, to them
all things, even those which are above the reach of man's prudence, do succeed
more beyond their desires and wishes, then the diversity of humane casualties
ordinarily does permit, etc. They are the words of H. Grotius, a man not very
Orthodox touching Magistracy neither, and remarkable under this head, by all
those who have taken notice of the gracious conduct of Providence toward, and
the Lords presence with those who have been instruments in his hands, for
effecting this change of Government amongst us: And truly, he that considers
the works done in our days, pondering them well, and yet confesses not Digitum
Dei, hic and hic, the Arm of the Almighty made bare for us, we cannot but think
he is more deeply baptized into the spirit of Atheism, then the Egyptian
sorcerers which withstood Moses, were, Exodus 8.19. If the falling of a Sparrow
to the ground, though worth but half a farthing, has something of providence
in it, much more, those wonderful appearings of God antecedent, concomitant,
and subsequent to our change of Government. Psalm. 97.5.
Have not the hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord, at the
presence of the Lord of the whole Earth. See the Lord Generals Letter from
Ireland. December. 1649. Isai. 26.11.
God will surely curse that man and his house, who says it was an arm of flesh
that did what was done in England, as making way for this change, or what has
been done in Ireland since. Those who will not see when the Lords hand is
lifted up, they shall see, and be ashamed, etc. The Almighties smoothing that
roughness, and becalming those tumultuous ragings of peoples spirits, by the
greatness of his arm, Exodus 15 16.
making them as still as a stone, just upon this change. His breaking their
powerful conspiracies, and dissipating those numerous bodies (spirited with
influence from the Royal Head) before this change, and his preventing those
hideous confusions, and garments rolling in blood, which by the Catholic out
cry of the vulgar, and the ominous presages of some graver heads, threatened to
attend this change. All these jointly pondered (together with his uninterrupted
goodness toward us ever since) make up an evidence of Gods signal owning that
power in Being over us, which is the product of these wonders. If Providence
can speak any thing of his mind, or ever did in any age of the world: Psalm
19.2.
If the Lords workings be not dumb shows; if there be any language in them, it
is that of Shemaiah, to all that would lift up themselves against our present
Authority, 1 Kings 12.24.
Return every man to his house, for this thing is from the Lord; not from him
only as an overseer of things doing, and an orderer of things done for his
glory, but as an efficatious worker in producing this very change, according as
he uses to show himself in all those events, and those only which are of
special complacency to him. Isaiah 23.9.
The Lord of hosts has purposed to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring
into contempt all the honorable of the Earth: Surely, this word is come to the
birth (we believe, and therefore we speak.) The anointed of the Lord will
certainly make Monarchy and Monarchs, Psalm 2.9, etc.
the present pride and glory of many Nations, as infamous as ever they have
been famous. If Kings be not wise; if they serve him not with fear; if they set
themselves against the Lord, Apoc. 21.24.
and comply not with his interest in the world; if they bring not their glory
and honor to the New Jerusalem; he will pour shameful spuing upon their glory,
yea, though they bear themselves up in their port and pride, Isaiah 60.15.
as Behemoth in the waters of Jordan; he will dash their Scepters in pieces
like a potters vessel, and make them bow to the soles of their feet, whom he
has promised to make an eternal Excellency, even the Saints of the most high
God, Dan. 7.28. Heb. 12.28.
who shall receive a Kingdom which cannot be shaken. The zeal of the Lord of
hosts will perform this.

Having thus cleared our first Argument, as the main foundation upon which we
build our obedience, being of most powerful and direct influence upon our
consciences. From this holding Plea, we pass to a second Argument.

The mutual relation of Protection and Allegiance (every benefit requiring

This Argument is hinted in the Act for Subscription, Act. Jan. 2. 1649.
and not without special reason, considering how ready men are to forget
themselves, and to trip up the heels of such as support them. We need not labor
in specifying or aggravating the benefits of Protection, they being of so
obvious a sense to all, who prize Religion, Life, Liberty, or Property: And we
understand not what duties answer the nature, and claim of such benefits. If a
thankful owning of those persons and powers, through whose hands they are
dispensed to us, and a cheerful submission to them be denied. If we give not
that which God requires, will our offering be accepted? and wherewith shall we
make an atonement for our ingratitude?

Here again many interpose, as not willing to be thought undutiful; we

but to our sense, the objectors seem rather nice then wise. We never knew how
to divide the hair, or distinguish betwixt a conscientious subjection to any
powers over us, and an owning them, as full and lawful powers ordained of God.
Conscientious submission consignifies a conscientious owning the powers, and
presumes or implies their lawfulness; otherwise Conscience would not interpose
so far: All the tribute of duty which Conscience exacts, being paid as to God,
will be ill performed, if we pay them in to a wrong hand. The case indeed is
changed, when a man submits upon another account then Conscience, as from
Policy, Fear, etc. But Conscientious obedience has no such flaw in it, as a
mental reservation of so strange and implicatory a purport as this, I obey out
of Conscience, and yet I judge the powers so unlawful, as that their commands
have no influence upon my Conscience at all.

Others say, Their self-seeking and oppression make us we cannot own them so
heartily, as otherwise we might.

quondam Publicans exclaim heavily, Burdens! Burdens!

Dic mihi si fueris tu leo, qualis eris? Deuteronomy. 32.6.
But, Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise?

2. Those men rather sought themselves, who sought the Kings favor, and tackt
about to his interest, who would plead his cause rather then not kiss his hand;
as that man who blushed not to aver, That the Kings Concessions were the
largest, the safest, and the beneficiallest, that ever were granted by any King
to his Subjects since the Creation. Did they seek themselves, who to the
apparent jeopardy of them and their posterities, durst take such a Lion by the
beard as they did? Neither have they yet divided his inheritance by line
amongst them, nor voted an everlasting Parliament (as many ad invidiam,
suggest) to make their houses great, or themselves Princes over us. But to
proceed.

We shall mention but one Argument more, viz.

We know not how to approve our hearts before God, if we should put our selves
out of a capacity of serving his Providence, while he offers us opportunity
thereunto, as we should do by refusing this Engagement. Now every man almost
cries out, Isai. 3.6, 7.
Let me not meddle, make me not a ruler to this people, let not this breach be
under my hand. We think it most seasonable standing up in the gap (as our
callings may require) and offering our services to the God of our lives and
comforts. This we have spoken to already, in the beginning of our Plea: And
truly, we are much pressed in our spirits, and cannot but wait upon the Lord,
going forwards while he leads us. When Israel sat still, they were ever
hankering after Egypt, therefore said the Lord sometime unto Moses, Speak to
the people that they go forward. And that which many call Backsliding, we
doubt not to take for Progression. If God leads a people beyond their
non-ultra, or the limits of their own prefixed thoughts, or expectations, they
usually grutch him their company. Israel would go willingly out of Egypt, the
place of their bondage; but when they met with any staggering difficulties, or
amuzing providence in their journeys, they fell to chiding with God, and would
needs be returning to their old taskmasters service again. It is a true
saying, Multi ad perfectionem pervenirent, nisi jam se pervenisse credorent.
Fab.
Many men might have attained perfection; but for their too early dreams, that
they were already perfect. Those (and they not a few) who made it their
ultimate end, To establish the Kings Throne in Righteousness, proclaiming and
declaring this, together with their loyalty, to the world, as their prime
scope, when they were convinced that the Lord would not have it so, sit down as
sullen as the Prophet, when God would not verify his Declaration concerning
Nineveh: Jon. 4.
But because we cannot do this thing, shall we therefore do nothing? We fear
this Plea will not be accepted before God: That which we conceive good, is not
done; therefore we have laid ourselves aside, and refused to do any thing for
his service, in order to the Public Good. We never heard of any such
persuasion coming from the Lord that called you. Gal. 5.8.


To this we hear men say, They lay not themselves aside, but the Parliament
does it, by urging upon them an Engagement (as the condition of their service,
and activity for the Public Good) which they cannot salva conscientia, submit
to, and that chiefly upon this ground, because it presumes their consent to the
change of Government, and an approbation of those things which have been done
in order to it.

But, under favor, we conceive this consequence is not of necessary Connection
with the Antecedent, and therefore we may be so bold with it, as to deny it.

1. We presume that the Parliament and Army might do some things in order to
this change, which themselves hold only justifiable upon the Plea of
necessity, and not absolutely to be approved: Some of the Parliaments
Declarations, and of the Armies Papers witness this.

3. Can those who submitted to the Norman yoke, be interpreted to approve all
that the Conqueror did in order to the vassalizing them, and bringing them to
his own terms? Hist. liber. Lusitaniae. li 3. c. 4.
Can we think that the Dukes of Bragance who swear Allegiance to the Spaniard
(usurping Lordship over him against all the peoples consent) did by that act
approve what the King of Spain did in order to his subversion? Surely no. Thus
we think (mutatis mutandis) that our subscribing to the present Authority,
concludes neither our approbation of what has been done in order to the change
of Government, no nor the change it self: it ties our hands indeed from
subverting the establishment in esse, and to be subject; and powers (in our
thoughts) irregularly and disorderly changed may be lawfully and
conscientiously subscribed unto and owned as powers ordained of God. Master
Dury in his consid. of the present engag.
It is the persuasion of a good Christian, and one of no mean name, That it
does not belong to us to judge definitively of the Rights which the supreme
powers over us in the world pretend to have unto their places. And it is our
persuasion, that neither Gods commands touching subjection, nor the Parliaments
Acts for subscription, puts the submitting conscience either upon the
approbation or non-approbation of the equity or iniquity of this change of
Government wrought amongst, but only upon the conscientious acknowledging the
powers over us in their present constitution, as the only visible Authority by
the Ordinance of God. But

3. Supposing the consequence good, that subscription drew with it a consent to
the change of Government, and an approbation of what was done in order to it,
we conceive that both of these, without any injury offered to conscience, may
be approved; The Parliaments forementioned declaration renders the former
approvable to us, March 17, 1648.
and as to the main things done in order to this change, we shall speak our
thoughts in particular. They appear to be these,

Pet. 2.13.) to exclude the claim to a sacred and unalterable prerogative in
any persons or powers whatsoever; This we find no great reason to boggle at.

viz. in declaring to their Lordships, that if they refused to join with them
in settling the Militia, the Commons would proceed to do it without them; that
was then judged a safe and wholesome Resolve: and why might it not take place
now after all the experiences had of delays and Negatives (in matters of
highest moment) from the Lords, yea of their direct thwarting the common sense
of the Kingdom in Parliament? For it is unreasonable to conceive, (...) Sect.
39.
that it should be a matter of sin, or unlawful for a Kingdom to make
provision for it self and its own good, unless such or such a small party
amongst them, who prefer their own undue personal interests before the public
interests and welfare of the Nation, should consent and join with them therein.
This put the Parliament upon a necessity of abolishng the House of Lords, as
may appear in their declaration March 17. 1648. And this we conceive need stick
as little upon us.

3. Their bringing the King to a trial, sentencing him, and taking him fiat
justitia, ruat calum. That the people have no right to judge him, though he was
so, as it is our dissenting neighbors Plea, so it was the Plea of that
prerogative Secretary Lethington against Knox (a man Orthodox and
conscientious) God (says Knox) is the universal judge as well unto the King as
to the people, History of the reformation of Scotland. lib 4.
so that what his word commands to be punished in the one, is not to be
absolved in the other. We agree in that (said Lethington) but the people may
not execute Gods judgments, but must leave it unto himself, who will either
punish it by death, by war, by imprisonment, or by some other kind of his
plagues. I know (says Knox) the last part of the reason to be true; but for
the first, that the people, yea or a part of the people, may not execute Gods
judgments against their King, being an offender, I am assured ye have no other
warrant, except your own imaginations, and the opinion of such as more fear to
offend their Princes then God. This we know, that God is no accepter of
persons, and that blood, upon whomsoever it lies, cries so loud in the ears of
the Almighty, that he has strictly commanded men to take no satisfaction for
the life of any murderer. Now, Numb. 35 30, 31, 33.
what if we had no Law, rule, or president to go by for the punishing of
Princes, in any civil Record, shall not justice therefore be done? must the law
of God be enfeebled and fall to the ground for want of an humane ordinance to
back and enforce it? Judge, we pray you, may this be? but we are fearful of
swelling our paper beyond the bulk of a brief Plea; this also, we conceive, may
be approved by men honest and conscientious.

But the great matter is yet behind, the grand question or (...) is not what a
people may do of this nature, being free from all bonds and obligations, but
what they may do who lie under Covenants and Engagements to maintain such and
such a Government, or such and such governors in their power and Sovereignty?
Here, say our dissenting neighbors, the water sticks, as to our present case;
and in particular they cry out amain of the contrariety and utter inconsistency
of the Covenant and Oath of Allegiance with this present Engagement; this leads
us therefore to the second thing propounded in the beginning of our Plea, viz.
that we should make answer to, and remove those serious objections which waylay
many conscientious men, so that the cannot come up to the subscription.

We shall take leave here to lay down two or three preparatory Rules touching
the obligatory power of Covenants in general, which may be-friend us in this
our following essay, viz.

ipso facto, void, because the matter of a Covenant (being an essential part of
it) is res licita, and for want of that due matter any Covenant falls to pieces;
as that vow which ties any man to a condition that is impossible signifies
nothing, upon this this account, Mark 6.23. Acts 23 14. 1 Samuel 25 22.
because a man cannot keep it de facto; so that vow or Covenant by which one is
put upon any thing unlawful, signifies as little, because a man cannot perform
it de jure. The sin is in making such Covenants, not in breaking them, a man
overtaken with any such Oaths, needs no absolution, they fall asunder of
themselves.

Bedlam, where now she lies bound in chains, and so is like to do while her
dying day; but I must either marry or burn: am I now (notwithstanding my
engagement to her) free for another woman, or no? We conceive conscience would
give in its verdict, Yes.

King. 1.52. and 2.23, 24 37, 38, 42, 43. there the case is cleared. Suppose
any people by covenant pay unto their Prince, as their public shield or
Protector, such and such Annual Subsidies. This Prince, regardless of his duty,
is to the people as a wall broken down, he prostitutes their safety to brutish
destroyers, their liberties to encroachments, their trade and goods to Piracies
and Harrasings: They become sensible of the defalcation of their properties,
and the debauchment of the public interest, and deny him the encovenanted
tribute; the Prince sues them upon an action of debt, and (though prerogative
be the foreman of the Jury) the people are acquitted and justified.

What are Kings but vassals to the State? who if they turn tyrants, Lex, Rex.
p. 404. in Answer to an Objection of Amisaeus.
fall from their Rights, Is Master Rutherfords question in his dispute for the
just prerogative of King and people.

These Rules we find very useful for the descrupling, and disobliging our
consciences of those ties in the objection, and being of very easy and obvious
application, we shall pass to more particular Salvo's.

1. To the Covenant, and to that clause in it for preserving the Kings etc. be
not a condition, then either these two articles mentioned contradict one
another (and so the Covenant ties us to impossibilities) or else the King was
no Delinquent. If the former, then the Covenant, as to both those articles is
null. If the latter, why did the Assembly of the Church of Scotland, in a
declaration sent to the King, charge him with being guilty of shedding the
blood of many thousands of his best subjects? Yea, why did their Commissioners
(concurring with the Houses of Parliament, See the Parl. Declarat. of March. 4.
1647.
in their answer of the thirteenth of January to the Kings letter of December
1645.) amongst other things, make it their first and chief reason why they
could not consent to the Kings coming to London; and to a Personal Treaty
desired by Him, until satisfaction and security were given to both his
Kingdoms, because so much blood of his good subjects had been shed in this war
by his commands, and his Commissions. Here we see the Parliament and Scotch
Commissioners charging the King with deep Delinquency, how comes it to be
expiated in 1048? Or shall we think it was a groundless charge? Is it fit to
strike Princes for equity? Nay, sure we should prejudg their wisdom and
integrity too much, in saying so; they tell us how he became guilty, viz. The
blood being shed by his commands and Commissions, he shed it; for the Author is
more guilty then the Semper is dicitur facere cui praeministratur. Tertul.
Opera magis pertinent ad imperantem, quam ad exequ^ntem.
Actor. The Prophet Nathan tells David that he shed the blood of Vriah, 2 Samuel
12.9. though Vriah was slain by the sword of the children of Ammon, and not by
David's Commission neither, but by his indirect procurement; but the Kings
Commissions to kill, etc. at the bar of justice abundantly testified his
palpable guilt and Delinquency Therefore we conceive (to avoid a manifest
contradiction in our solemn Covenant) that clause must needs be acknowledged
conditional, which concerned the Kings person, (for as touching his power, the
dispute is not so hot, though by the Covenant the one be as sacred as the
other.) The The reasons of the present Judgment, etc. p. 27.
Oxford Convocation saw this condition clearly enough from the Parliaments
Declarations in answer to the Scottish Papers, and therefore were deterr d, as
they say, from taking the Covenant; Nay, the Royal Pourtraicture.
King himself (if men may believe it) upon the Covenant tells us, that the
clause in the Covenant referring to his person was of a Dangerous limitation;
how could that be, if the Covenant, according to the letter of it might not be
kept, and yet the Kings person endangered? And surely if by any Covenant we had
unwarily tied our selves to privilege his person, so as thereby to overthrow
the use or end of See Junius Brut. p. 84.
Magistracy amongst us, that Covenant could not be binding, because sinful; God
will have no man lift up above his (...), etc. Naz. Orat. 27.
Ordinance, but this is done by setting up an unaccountable Magistrate,
Covenanting to privilege his person absolutely, or without limitation, which
must needs give him liberty to play Quilibet impune facere, hoc scilicet regium
est. Salust.
Rex, and to make what God ordains for peoples good, to become a snare to them,
and their chief endamagement; no such discommode in the world, as a man that
may do what his list, and his life notwithstanding must be accounted the
choicest treason that can be; well then, if the Kings preservation was
conditional, we must leave it to the determination of those who are chosen to
Judge and conclude what is consistent with our liberties, and what not, whether
the things mainly Covenanted for, or the condition could have been obtained and
preserved with the preservation of this Kings person, yea, or no; if not, the
case is Enuntiatio hypothetica, si conditio sit impossibilis, aequivalet
negativae. Fr. Burgers. loq.
clear; and truly we cannot but think as the Parliament and Kirk of Scotland
thought, viz. That the Kings Concessions were unsatisfactory, yea, destructive
to Religion, and the Nations safety, and that he should be ever kept on
treating (being thereby set in balance with the whole Nation, and) with the
advantage of creating everlasting war and trouble, to the ruin of all honest
people, especially being a man guilty of most enormous crimes, and of an
implacable spirit, we thought our Covenant never bound us to.

of that grand condition in the Preservation of, etc. touching this condition
the Scots speak very well (though in the extent of the Covenant we conceive
them mistaken) in their Declaration of August last, containing the grounds why
they could not admit the late Kings Son to the exercise of Royal Power over
them. The duty of defending and preserving the Kings Majesty's Person and
Authority (say they) is joined with, and subordinate unto the duty of
preserving and defending the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms, and
therefore his Majesty standing in opposition to the just and necessary public
desires concerning Religion and Liberties, it were a manifest breach of
Covenant, and a preferring of the Kings Interest to the Interest of Jesus
Christ, to bring him to the exercise of his Royal Power, which he walking in a
contrary way, and being compassed about with Malignant Counsels, cannot but
employ to the prejudice and ruin of both.

But the Declaration of the Houses of April, 1646. and other Declarations
abundantly clear the extent of the Covenant to Kingly Government, and bear
witness to their meaning in it.



2. The same unalterable tenor of politic administrations cannot suit the
various exigency of a Nations Affairs; what the Parliament therefore declared
at one time, Declaration of March 17. 1648. p. 21. Ames: de Consc. l. 5. c. 25.
Ibidem.
they might see necessary cause for altering at another, and did, as appears by
that Declaration, where Answer is made to this present Objection; the Intention
or Obligation of a Law or a Promise, ought not to be extended beyond the reason
or foundation of it, so that the Reason or ground ceasing, the Obligation must
needs cease too, as it does likewise upon this account, viz. if the state of
things and persons be so changed, as that in the judgment of wise men, those
who promised or declared ought, cannot be thought to have willed the including
such or such an event in the promise: Now this event in the Parliaments Case
was the Kings implacability and inexorableness, after seven addresses made unto
him, and the strong inclinations of the House of Lords to his beloved Interest,
neither of which events the Parliament can be judged to have included in their
former Declarations, viz. that they should resolve thereby, and declare to
maintain the Government in that manner, let the King or Lords do what they
pleased, or carry themselves as they listed.

Parliament Privileges, (which we Covenanted to preserve) by forcing the
House, excluding the members, etc we have this to say.

1. This Engagement concludes not our approbation, nor wraps us up in the guilt
of any miscariages infringing the Covenant, if any such were committed, neither
does our Covenant bind us to any things impossible, whatsoever irregularity
have been charged upon the Army (of this kind) in our places and callings we
could neither prevent nor can remedy.

See that Declaration, Feb. 17. 1648. Page 12, 13.
2. We hear of no Covenantiers in Scotland, who scruple their submitting to that
power in Being over them, nor their owning it, though those who now govern
affairs there, were brought in by a greater force then ever our Parliament
groaned under; another Parliament being there called, while the former was by
adjournment continued. And the imprisoning some of our Parliament Members, is
alleged by the Army to be (amongst other things) for Confederacies and
Correspondencies with that party in Scotland, which our Brethren there found
themselves necessitated to trample under foot; yet no man says unto them, why
do you so? This makes us think that Parliament-priviledges may be sometimes
looked at, as Formalities, rather then sacred and indispensable Rights, viz.
When the greater number of Parliament men set themselves in a way of utter
ruining, rather then of building up and establishing a Nation on the sure
Foundations of Peace and Righteousness.

Thus we leave what has been said to the Consciences of those men who set the
Covenant as a partition wall betwixt themselves and the Engagement: We come now
to the oath of Allegiance, and shall draw out our sense touching that, as
briefly as may be.

1. The ground of that Oath we conceive to be our actual protection, and not
merely the Kings obligation to protect us (as some would have it) for miserable
is that people like to be, See the Oxford Reasons, etc. Romans 13.4.
whose welfare is no otherwise provided for then thus; Kings having got a knack
to disoblige themselves of their duty toward their subjects when they list.
Men do not swear Allegiance to Magistrates, as dropping from heaven over them
(like poor Earthlings, created merely to bear up their trains) but as Ministers
ordained and chosen for their service and good. We ever thought, that the
Stipulations betwixt a Prince and people were Junius Brutus, p. 97, etc. Ames.
Med. de Jurament. and de Consc. l. 4. c. 2^.
mutual, and always held it a safe rule, That if he who promises mutually,
will not perform what he promises, our Obligation is not binding. But how well
the late King performed his part, we shall have reason to remember. Again, the
formal Cause of a promissory Oath ceasing, the Obligation it self cease; but
the formal Cause (as we said) of Allegiance, a Protection: This needs no proof,
the Arguments against it being nonsuited over and over in the Court of Reason
and Truth; therefore, we conceive our selves loosed from Allegiance according
to that Oath, its correlate and foundation being taken away. Thus the Portugals
plead in our case. The Kings of Castile, say they, Histor. Liberat. Lucit. l. 2.
Though admitted the Kings of Portugal, yet may be rejected.

1. Because they have not kept those Covenants which they were sworn to, at
their entrance on the Crown, cap. 3.

2. By reason of their maladministration of Government, to the destruction of
the Commonwealth, without hope of remedy, cap. 4.

3. By reason of their tyranny, cap. 5.

4. By the Law of nature, which enables a people to defend themselves against
all such as seek their ruin and extinction, cap. 7.

5. Neither did they conceive their Oath of Allegiance hindered this. Praeclaro
facinori non obstitit juramentum praes^itum regi Castellano, l. 3. c. 4.
Did we not cut our own throats? and were we not accessory to our own undoing,
if by the servile abasing our selves to a tyrants will, we should give him the
advantage of ruining us? This were a palpable yielding up that which most Kings
reach out their hands for, Even that we are made for them, and not they for us,
and for our good.

2. When we swear homage and obedience to our Lord and Superior, who afterward
cease to be our Lord and Superior, the Quum aufertur ratio formalis juramenti
juramentum cessat ratione even^us, qui casus est eorum qui jurarunt se
obedituros Domino aut Principi alicui, qui postea cessat esse talis. Am^^ de
Consc. l 4. c. 22.
Obligation cease. This Rule Henderson makes use of in his first Paper to the
King at Newcastle, and will be irrefragable by all the Reason in the world. Can
this Oath therefore bind us, now our Superior is not? (However taken away, by
might or right, cavent actor.) Well, but we hear many say, The King cannot die;
it is to be supposed, they mean it of a death in Law, not a natural death; and
then, being our Law is called the Soul of Reason, it would be known, what
Reason can be given of that maxim? Surely, a King dethroned, is dead in Law;
and this may persuade plain men to question the universal, and holding verity
of it. If he may die as King, we doubt not but his person may die; but a King
laid aside, or dead, dies as King, otherwise there could be no such thing as an
Interregnum, of which we read frequently in all Chronicles. Again we ever
thought, that a Kings Coronation was his actual investiture with Power, or his
Constitution as King; and sure it will be accepted, and excuse us; if when we
hear of any such King amongst us, we grutch him not our Allegiance; if we swear
Homage to the Kings Successors, they must either succeed him before we can
perform it, or else our Oath ties us to his Children, or Heirs while he lives,
as well and fully, as when he is dead. If any of the late Kings Children do de
facto succeed him, as King, or Heir, his Power, we shall be their Liege people;
but for a Succession de jure, as we are made no judges of any such thing, so we
know not what it means: We swear Allegiance not to Kingly power, as we
conceive, but to our Royal Protectors, and he that is not actually our Liege
Lord, we cannot be termed his Liege Subjects; for Relations stand and fall
together. We know little of the mysteries in Law, for the greatest part of us;
neither do we conceive it necessary (for the approving our hearts unto God)
that we apply our selves to the search of them. If there be any thing hid in
the Laws which prejudiceth our Rights and Just Liberty, as this Maxim, That
the King cannot die (according as it uses to be urged) seems to do; we shall
thank the Parliament for calling us to subscribe, if our subscription may work
its abolition. But if men, when they say, The King cannot die, mean this, viz.
That that Legislative, or Executive Power, Fundamental to a Nations Being,
cannot die; we are ready to kiss their lips, and grant it true. Thus that power
which the Spaniard had by Law in the Netherlands, still lives in the States of
those United Provinces, though he be rejected; and thus the Kings power lives
in our present Parliament, else we were all but dead men.

Having thus cleared our grounds for subscription, and showed its consistencie
with those sacred ties which fall not asunder of themselves. We shall conclude
with a request to our dissenting neighbors, that they would not confidently, or
magisterially slight what is capable of their serious consideration in this
our plea, Men that study an impartial search of truth and conscientious
satisfaction in the crowd of different persuasions, must not be resolved to
maintain any (...) Non est pudor ad meliora transire. Ambros.
Hypothesis of their own, however their understandings have been educated. He
that gratifies his affection at so high a rate, as to make it umpire in any
contest, cheapens the Jewel of truth so faintly, as if he intended not to buy
it, and basely prostitutes the sovereignty of his Judgment. We cannot weigh
things by affection and reason too, diverse weights are an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 20.23.
and a false balance is not good; a few grains of affection will overpoize
many drams of reason, and we are all apt to overween our habituated
persuasions, and to set them up as the first, second, and third argument
against contrariety in Judgment to us, however bottomed, we are apt to think
them, yea, and call them impregnable, and invincible; as Montanus, overvaluing
his two poor parishes in Asia, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. li. 5.
Pepusa and Tymium, called them Jerusalem. Hence commonly arises that
confidence, which makes men dictators rather then disputers, and is no
competent testimony of truth, being but like a wager, which according to the
proverb, Is a fools argument. Two Franciscan Friars would needs be burnt at a
stake, to prove Savanarola an Heretic; Phil. de Comm. li. 8.
and a Jacobine Friar offers himself to the flames, to prove he was no
Heretic: yet these premises were not demonstrative; or of power to espouse the
judgment of any impartial seeker to the conclusion they inferred. Savanarola
might hold the truth notwithstanding that argument the Franciscans brought
against him; and an error notwithstanding the Jacobines confidence, videtur
quod sic, and videtur quod non sic, had better becomed them both. Truly this is
the temper of many dissenters amongst us, as to the engagement, they will seem
rather to offer themselves to an outlary, banishment, imprisonment, and what
not (out of prepossession and prejudice) then show any face of reason at all to
prove the unlawfulness of subscribing to the present Authority. Others that
have their conscientious reasons are as shie of propounding them, as if those
who differ from them were not men to be argued with, as denying some common
principle, that carries its evidence in it self. It is not here (...) Athan.
undertaken, but essayed, to persuade their consciences; and briefly to lay
down some of those grounds on which our engagement with the Parliament out of
conscience is built, that it may not be presumed or concluded (as commonly it
uses to be) that there is little conscience in any, saving in those who put
themselves on the suffering side.

We shall not apologize much in the behalf of this our Plea, only thus, we
live far from the scene of action and information, and have little acquaintance
with great men's spirits and tempers (being of the smaller people) we know not
how this controversy is dignosc't and scand, or what ^hapes it puts on amongst
those larger heads, and men of greatned expe^iences, by reason of their higher
callings, relations, and employments, who ^appily (as it is said of Berengarius)
may know all things knowable: we have searched only to find out duties, and
must be excused (as igno^ant of their several Pleas) if we touch not upon all
men's gravamina, or those scruples which make them contrary in persuasion and
action to us. Yea, if sometimes we strike unwittingly besides the nail, if we
be less exact or full in our Salvo's then the nature of such a business may
require. Yea, if happily we mistake in any thing of moment, we speak but our
own sense, which at so great a distance, from Authentic informers, may be
easily deceived. Sed non pigebit nos s^oubi haesitamus, quaerere; nec pudebit
nos sicubi erramus n^^ corrigare. August. De Trinit. Li. 1. cap. 1.

FINIS.

