ANTI-FIMBRIA OR AN ANSWER To the ANIMADVERSIONS Upon the Last SPEECHES OF THE
^IUE JESUITS Executed at TYBURNE JUNE 20./30. 1679.

Ut Seductores, and Veraces. As Seducers; yet we are sincere. 1. Cor. 6.8. By
A. C. E. G.

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.LXXIX.

PREFACE.
FImbria, an impudent Ruffian, having attempted the death of a good, peaceable,
and honest citizen of Rome, and wounded him greiuously, though not mortally
(the poor man by turning a side his body avoided that) indighted him
afterward publicly, for not standing fair to receive his dart, and not
permitting himself to be killed out right: Quod non totum corpore telum
excepisset, says Cicero. It was his death, that Fimbria designed: and he
thought himself wronged, because his attempt proved ineffectuall.

A few factious Ministers have designed the natural, and civil death of the
Papists, to kill their Persons and their Reputation: which appears by their
Actings. They have been successeful upon uery many, as to the first part,
their natural death, which might satisfy their hatred; but that is only half
their design, their reputation remaining entire, and in deed uery considerably
increased by their Christian Patience in suffering, and their constant asserting
of their Innocence, to their last breath, accompanied with so many
circumstances evidently confirming their assertions, that the greatest and
wisest part of the world, do them justice: wherefore these Ministers arraigne
the reputation of the suffering Papists by daily shells.

The greatest, and most considerable of them which has come to my knowledge,
is that printed by Authority which I here undertake to answer: without doubt,
the Author of these Animadversions, is the same, who advanced an antidote
against the spreading uenome of clandestine transcripts: for the reasons there
only hinted at, are here enlarged: and in this Pamphlet there is little new,
besides citations, and words. So the french answer to that Antidote, if turned
into inglish, might serve for these Animadversions. Yet j have been advised to
spend some few spare hours, upon these, at least, for the Authors sake, who
is said to be in the highest Ecclesiastical dignity, the L. B. of L. Jndeed
that Character should either suppose, or give a spirit of meekness and Peace,
at least free the Person, who is honored with it, from such an implacable
endless malice, which is not satiated with the blood of those he counts his
enemies; but passes the Grave: yet his past life, spent for the greatest, and
best part in factious times (in which to speak no worse he went with the
seditious throng) and some late Pamphlets, which bear his name, and are of the
same strain, make the conjecture very probable. Yet j call him whoeuer he be,
Fimbria, because of some great resemblance in their Proceedings, equally
unjust, and groundless in their Beginning, violent, and cruel in their
progress, and implacable, and impudent in their End.

Yet j say this Copy of these Ministers out does that Original: for had that
Innocent Roman presented himself to Fimbria, and quietly permitted himself to
be butchered, this Ruffian's malice would have been satisfied. Of these
Innocent Romanists many voluntarily put themselves in to their enemies hands,
all offered readily their necks to the Halters, and their Bodies to the
executioners knives, they are Hanged and Quartred; yet these meek and
Merciful Ministers are not satisfied! The stiff neckt jews killed the
Prophets and stoned those who were sent unto them. (Mat. 23.37.) But when that
was done, they built their sepulchers, adorned their Monuments, (Mat. 23.29.)
Canonized their writings, and honored their memory. And it is unheard of that
they Arraigned their Innocence after their Death. That degree of malice is not
to be found, as far as j remember, amongst the Ancients: it was reserved for
this worst of times, in which ordinary wickedness will not satisfy those, who
resolve (and glory in that Resolution) to out do what soever, has been done,
by any before them. That monster, Bradshaw, said: Jf past ages afford no
Precedent to follow, we will give Precedents, for others to follow hereafter.
This sentiment, how barbarous, and infamous soever, seems to have past into
the Breast, and possess the soul of those, of whom j speak.

Did they regard either God, or Men, and consult either Justice, or Honor, they
would proceed otherwise. They think it odious te execute Men only for their
Religion, or because they are Priests: but is that Odium diminisht, by adding
to it as odious Calumnyes, by framing rediculous Plots, by seeking out men of
desperate fortunes, and wicked flagitious lives to confirm those fables by
false Oaths, by rewarding those Knyghts of the Post, for their Perjuryes, and
by thinking the world so simple, as to be imposed upon by so
ill-contriued-a-tricke? What is this, but to double, nay treble the jniustice,
to wash a spot out of white linen, with juk, and to justify one fault, by
others as great? Do not these men put an affront upon mankind, acting as if
they thought it had lost the use of its reason, at the same time, as they, by
their malice, seem deprived of the use of theirs?

J know scarce any out of England so weak, as to believe, there is, or was
any such thing, as a Plot of Papists: not only Papists; but Protestants them
selves openly acknowledge, they think it all fabulous. A uery wise man and a
great friend to the jnglish, told me ingeniously: he had lost much of the
opinion he had of our nation, seeing it capable of being deceived by such
fables. A commendatory Abbot, a great Preacher, preaching in Paris before her
most Christian Majesty of the labors, and sufferings of Jesuits for the
Propagation of the Faith, said: Witness the Blood of those Martyrs, still
reaking in our neyghbouring kingdom. Cardinal de Retz said: Had j now that
Authority, which j had heretofore in Paris (he had been Arch Bishop of it) j
would build a chapel in its Cathedral Church, to the honor of these five
Martyrs. J know of many others, some great Princes, who have declared publicly
the like opinion: which shall be produced as occasion shall require. For the
present this may suffice to show, that although these men of whom j speak have
had power enough to work upon their simple auditory in England, yet out of
it, they must seek out some unknown Land, if they intend to find credit for
such old wiues-storyes, as these are, which they charge upon Papists.

And j have a better opinion of our nation, then that any considerable part of
it should really believe such incredible incoherent Fables: howeuer some
Politicians promote uery hotly the persecution raised on that account, and many
others are content to be idle spectators of a Tragedy, in which they think none
suffer, but such, as they would willingly see ruined. Each sort of these have
their several Ends: yet howeuer they labor to attain them, they never will
be able to compass more, then God will permit, to whom they will at last be
accountable for all their actions: and to him alone, the Papists have recourse.

Two things are material, in all this Proceedure, for the honor of our
Country. One is that j do not find any of the Prelaticall Ministers of any
great repute for Learning, or Honor, engaged in the carrying on of these
Bloody Contriuances. For j am persuaded they will scarce disgrace their Degree,
by owning Oats to be of it: and as for D. Tongue, and the B. of L. if we
consider their past lives, we shall have reason to think them in the ministry,
but as saul was amongst the Prophets.

The other: that if it be a dishonor to our nation, that such notorious
Perjured men, as Oats, Bedlow, Prance, and Dugdale, were bred and borne in it,
it is for its credit and honor, that not withstanding all tentations of the
greatest fears, and greatest hopes, only four should be found in it, who
yielded to such tentations. To say nothing of Priests, or of Noble men and
Gentlemen, who may be thought to have a greater proportion of Learning, of
Conscience, and of Honor, we have seen a poor Comedian (Medburne) refuse a
reward considerable for one of his condition, 500. L. and choose rather to rot
a live in prison, as he effectually did, then acknowledge a crime, of which he
was jnnocent, and by that, concur to the death, or ruin of many jnnocent
Persons. His example and that of some others, who in alike manner chose rather
to be afflicted weth the people of God, then the temporal enjoyments of
sinful perjury (Heb. 11.25.) These examples, j say, j use to allege, to
restore in the opinion of wise men, the Honor of our nation, which the Perjury
of Oats, and his Associate, the Partiality of the Jewry, and Assistants, and
the Butcherly cruelty of some of the judges has brought uery low. Jndeed j
think it a great unjustice, to charge a whole nation with the shameful faults
of some few, howeuer invested with some public office, when so many others
constantly oppose them.

But j intend not an Apology for the nation; but a vindication of the
persecuted part of it, from those crimes, which are uniustly charged on them
even after their Death. Let us hear what is alleged against them.

ANTI-FIMBRIA etc.
FImbria page 1. Protestants, who make a conscience of their words, and count
it a horrid crime, to speak otherwise, then they think, when they are dying,
may be ready to judge those guiltless, who when they are dying, assert their
junocency with highest Asseuerations.

Answer. Jf we may guess at the Disposition of those dying Protestants, you
mean, by the whole tenor of their lives, we may conclude, they think it no
crime at all, to speak other wise then they think, seeing in their lives they
scruple at it so little. We can not judge certainly of the interior sentiments
of a man in particular by his actions, seeing these are often contrary to his
conscience, Passion prevailing over Reason, and hurrying him to what he knows
to be unlawful. Video meliora, proboque: deteriora sequor. But it is almost
impossible that a whole People, a nation, should be inclined to commit one, and
the same sin, unless the Rules of conscience, which would check them, be first
defaced in their mind: because it is morally impossible, that a whole nation
should as one time be deprived of the free use of reason, by one Passion.

Hence it appears, that the Persons you commend for sincerity in their words,
have really no scruple of any Lying. For seeing they reward Perjured Persons;
and with the greatest threats, and promises endeavor to work upon the
frailty of such as are so unfortunate, as to fall in to their hands, to bring
them to increase the number of false witnesses, and punish as guilty, of the
most heinous crimes such as prefer the Peace of their conscience, and their
sincerity before their lives, can we guess they scruple at lying, or Perjury?
No, no: it is in uaine to pretend to it, for your public actions convince the
falsehood of your pretense: and where these are known (as they are to the
greatest part of Europe) none will ever believe you count it any crime at all,
to speak other wise, then you think. It is true your endeauours have been for
the most part frustrated, having not met with many, who have had a conscience
hard enough, to bear Perjury: and those too you first made Protestants, before
you could make them False witnesses: but the smalnesse of their number, does
not excuse you, who use such unworthy means, for so dishonorable an End. At
least out of your Proceedings it is evident you little esteem sincerity, which
you punish; nor scruple at Lying which you promote.

Read the frequent Libels against Papists, which daily appear of late, full of
Lies, composed, as j am informed, by some Ministers of the Protestant Church,
some by your self, and without the help of a Revelation, you shall perceive a
Lying spirit in the mouth of your Prophets as there was in the mouth of the
Prophets of Ahab. 1. kings 22.23. We may with great probability guess, you say
as the jews did, Jsay. 28.15. We have put our hopes in a Lie: a Lie shall
protect us. A Protestant beyond seas considering this, with some confusion
said: Our Reformation begane with Lying, continues with Lying, and will end
with Lying. And can we think you make a conscience of speaking other wise then
you think?

You know, sir, who in scripture is termed the Father of Lies, (Joan. 8.44.)
But at the same time that you delivered up your will to the Workings of Error,
God, the God of Truth, struck your Understanding with such a blindness, that
you could not tell any Probable, or Credible Lies: as Gods Providence shows its
self, in joining Antidotes to the Poison of Scorpions. So that the means you
use to blast our Reputation, and to ground the opinion of a Plot, do destroy
themselves, whilst the things, you say, are not only untru; but also
incredible. For what man in his Wits can believe that a superior of a
particular Congregation of Religious men should by his letters Patents dispose
of all offices civil, Military, and Ecclesiastical, of a whole Kingdom, even
those of the Crown, and Bishoprics? That Oats a new man either un known, or
too well known to be trusted with any thing, as being thought unfit to live as
a private scholar in any of their Colleges, should be entrusted with the
distributing these Patents? That such a body as the Catholic Nobility, and
Gentry, should acknowlegde that unheard of Authority of that Superior, and
accept of his Commissions? That not one of these Commissions should be found,
or owned, by any who received them? That a Customary Trienniall Assembly of
Religious men, to consider of the Superiors of their Province, which is
constantly held by Jesuits, and other Regulars, should be esteemed a conspiracy
against the king and state? That Oats, who never had been one day, nay one
hour, a Jesuit, should be admitted in to that Assembly, when some, who had
been 25. years, some above 50. years Jesuits, could not enter into it? That
a war should be designed, and yet nether men, nor Money, nor Arms, nor
Provision, nor Ammonition, appear? That after so diligent informations, and
searchings into Papers, and houses, no footstep of so great a business, in
fourteen months time, should be discovered, but that all this machine should
still rely upon Oats his word? That when so many thousands were engaged, non,
but this one infamous Person should acknowledge so horrible a Plot? That this
same Person should several times contradict himself in his Depositions, and
yet his present Oath always be true, and men be condemned upon it? That
almost all the guilty persons, at least the chief, and most notorious of them,
should voluntarily present themselves to the officers of justice? That not one
of them all, though invited with assurance of Impunity, and Pardon, and great
Rewards should acknowledge the least Guilt, even at their last breath; but that
all should dye, protesting their Jnnocency, not one excepted? That having
ruined their Body by so detestable a Plot, they should all unanimously resolve
to damn their souls with a Perjury, at that moment when they were to be
presented to the dreadful Tribunal of the upright, and all-seing Judge? These
things cannot be paralleled in any Hystory, and are so evidently untru, that
they ground such a certainty of the Papists Jnnocency, that a greater in moral
matters can not be found. And some of these considerations having been
represented to the Public in French, an Eminent Person of the Reformed
Religion Petitioned his Prince, that they might not be printed in his chief
City, saying those evident unjustices acted in England, would, if known,
endanger the lives of all the Protestants in his Dominions.

Fimbria, ibidem. Notwithstanding men will have reason to judge them truly
Traitors, if they take notice, how full and clear the Evidence is, by which
they were cast: and understand the Principles of the Persons executed, who are
by common doctrine, taught amongst them, furnished with expedients, to deny what
is true, and affirm what is false, and that with solemn Oaths, -- and yet
nether lie, nor be forsworn, nor sin in the least degree. Their cheyse
Artifice is that of mental equivocation. The use of which is allowed by all
sorts of Papists. And you repeat this second part page 8. 10. 11. 14. and
caet. Indeed your whole discourse relyes on it.

Answer. Here are two Reasons alleged against all those clear proofs, of
the Jnnocency of suffering Catholics.

1. The cleernesse of the evidence against them. 2. That they hold mental
equivocation Lawful.
You only hint at the first, and so j shall be short. J never saw any
understanding man satisfied with the several Trials, even as you have printed
them. That of M.r Colman is published in other Languages: and several able men,
having examined it, with as much attention, and exactness (as they assured me)
as if they had been to pronounce sentence in the case, said: that the evidence
against him consisted of two parts. 1. What the Witnesses deposed. 2. His
letters. That the Witnesses Depositions were insignificant, a being evidently
false. That his Correspondence with foreigne Ministers, was suspicious, unless
with his king's Priuity. Yet in the letters themselves there was nothing
against the king's life, or state, or Government. So they doubted not of his
Jnnocency, as to the crimes contained in his jndictment, for which he was
condemned. Now if this be the sentiment of the wiser part of the world, in
Colman's case, which is undoubtedly the hardest of all, what think you is their
opinion of the rest? It is in the Eye of Europe so clear, that nether all the
Perjurys of Oats, nor all your sophistry will ever persuade the contrary.

Now to that Artifice, which you impertinently, and ignorantly call mental
equivocation, a word unknown to Divines and where of one part contradicts the
other. You might as well speak of a vocal thought. But let that pass. You
say equivocation is allowed by all sorts of Papists. J say this is false: for
the Pope, and Cardinals, and the Congregation of the Inquisition are certainly
one sort of Papists: and they allow it not; but condemn it by a solemn
Decree, published on the 20. Febr. 1678. or 2. March. 1679. Where they censure
65. Propositions. Of which the 26. is as follows: Si quis vel solus, vel
coram alijs, sive interrogatus, sive propria sponte, sive recreationis causa,
sive quocunque alio fine, juret se non fecisse aliquid, quod revera fecit,
intelligendo intra se aliquid aliud, quod non fecit, vel aliam viam ab ea, in
qua fecit, vel quodvis aliud additum verum, revera non mentitur, nec est
Perjurus.

And the 27. Causa justa utendi amphibologijs, est quoties id necessarium, eut
utile est ad salutem corporis, honorem, res familiares tuendas, vel ad
quemlibet alium virtutis actum: ita ut veritatis occultatio censeatur tunc
expediens, and studiosa. In Inglish thus.

26. Jf any man either alone, or in presence of others, either upon examination,
or of his own accord, or for Diuertisment, or for any other intent, swears he
did not do, what he really did, imagining he did not an other thing, or that
he did not that same thing such away, or any other interior Truth, that man
does nether Lie, nor is Perjured.

27. A just cause of using Equivocation, is when it is necessary, or useful to
preserve our Health, or Honor, or Goods, or for any other act of virtue, so
that when these occur, it may be thought expedient and laudable to conceal
the Truth. Thus the two Propositions.

Do they not contain that uery Doctrine which you (uery Learnedly!) call
mental equivocation? and which you assure all sorts of Papists allow? Jf it be
not? Tell us what is. If it be? Hear the following Censure of the
Congregation, or rather of the Pope with the Congregation: quicunque,
cujuscunque conditionis, status, vel dignitatis illas, vel illarum aliquam
defenderit, -- vel de ijs tractaverit, nisi forte eas impugnando, ipso facto
incidat in excommunicationem latae sententiae, a qua non possit, -- nisi a
Romano Pontifice absolvi. Whosoever, of what quality soever he be, shall hold
both, or either of these Propositions, or mention (speak of) them, unless it be
to impugn it or them, is ipso facto excommunicated: from which excommunication
none but the Pope himself shall absolve him.

You see, how ignorant you are in the Tenets of our Church, of which
notwithstanding, you speak so magisterially: you see that Doctrine forbidden
under the greatest penalty, the Church can inflict, which you assure is so
much endeared unto us. Own, that we cannot lawfully practice, what we can not
speak of, under so severe a sentence, unless it be to impugn, to condemn,
to detest it. And seeing your whole Pamphlet is built on our holding
Equivocation lawful, and practicing it, (for which reason you repeat it, so
often) your whole discourse falls to the ground.

To confirm this opinion of our abhorrency for Equivocations, j appeal to the
constant practice of the rigidest Papists, particularly Jesuits, who, as you
say, are particularly addicted to these Equivocations. Have they not all
unanimously, and constantly refused some Oaths, for containing some things,
which they thought untru, which by this their darling Equivocation, might
easily be uerifyed had they thought it Lawful? Have not many lost their
Liberty, by Imprisonment, and some their Lives upon the Gallows, rather then
take some Oaths, which you think we can so casily make innocent? What more
foolish, then to hazard the loss of life, or Limb, Liberty or Goods, for
indifferent things? Reproach, as long as you pleas, to Jcsuits and Papists, the
Doctrine, and Practice of Equiuocotion: that calumny cannot be fixed on them,
where they are known; their whole conduct, the whole tenor of their lives is a
sufficient confutation of it, and a conviction of its untruth. We say with an
ancient Father: Apologias non scribimus; sed vivimus. Our actions are our
Apology.

But you discover a greater defect, then want of understanding in this
Reproach, viz: want of Discretion, in taxing us with this crime, of which you
are as guilty, as we innocent. With respect to your present dignity be it
spoken: Did not you M.r Barlo D.D. and now Bishop of Lincoln, move with the
seditious Torrent (which bore down all Authority Ecclesiastical and Civil)
all the time of the Troubles? Did not you howl with those wolves? Speak the
language of Canaan? Take all Oaths tendered by those in (usurped) Authority,
how destructive soever they were to Monarchy, and Episcopacy, and contradictory
to one an other? Jf you changed your mind so frequently, and believed
sincerely, what you swore, what a Weather-Cocke are you? Jf you altered not your
sentiments, you must either have been often forsworn, or have recourse to
Equivocation. Deny not the fact, which public Fame confirms: and the
Terrae-Filius of your university reproched you with it uery handsomely, saying
all things would down with you, besides a Blacke-Pudding. Omnia deuorat
praeter nigrum fartum: your conscience scruples at nothing but that. You would
oblidge a considerable part of the world, who wonder at your conduct, in
letting it know whither this scruple arises from the prohibition of eating
Blood contained in the new, or in the old Law.

Fimhria p. 2. Garnet and Tresham used equivocation, in their answers, when
they were examined: and you cite Casaubon for it.

Answer. 1. Casaubon's credit in matter of Humanity is great, in Divinity
little, but nothing at all, in things of Fact, concerning the actions of
Papists, whose professed Ennemy he was.

Answer. 2. Nether Garnet nor Tresham are the rules of my Faith, or Opinion, or
Practice. Jf you could prove, as certainly j believe you cannot, that they
equiuocated, or Lied, or were forsworn that would not justify me, should j
practice either, nor prove, that j imitate them in it, or that j think, that
others may with a safe conscience, follow that example.

Fimbria p. 3. Persons, Navarre, and Sanchez approve of Equivocation.

Answer. 1. A hundred such Authors do not equal the Authotity of the Pope, as
uniuerfal, and supreme Pastor, teaching the Church, and prohibiting some
points of Doctrine under pain of excommunication. To these definitions we
submit our understanding.

Answer. 2. How little we Inglish Catholics ever regarded the sentiments of
those, or any other Authors, of what quality soever, in this matter of
Eqniuocation, or Oaths, does sufficiently appear by our perpetual refusing
such Oaths, as without having recourse to those petty euasions, could not be
verifyed.

Fimbria p. 4. Let the world judge, what regard is due to the words of such
dying men, whose Doctrine excuses from sin, and Lying, all untruths.

Answer. You nether have proved, nor shall ever be able to prove, that these
men, or any Papist alive holds that Doctrine: we condemn it, we detest it from
our hearts, and to convince you, and the whole world, that we do this
sincerely, we appeal to our constant unalterable practice, as is above said.
But you, who have without scruple swallowed so many Oaths, whereof some must
be false, (unless you can make contradictions true) you, j say, may be
suspected, without rashness, of Equivocation, in what you speak, or write, or
swear.

Fimbria p. 4. J cannot imagine, how what Gauan says can be true, that the
Jesuits allow not the Doctrine of king-killing; but detest, and abhor it: or
that none of them hold it lawful to kill a king, but only Mariana.

Answer. This Assertion contains two parts: 1. That the Jesuits detest and
abhor the Doctrine of king-killing. 2. That none of them but Mariana taught
it.


Now the first is so true, that j defye you, or any of your Brethren, to name
any Jesuit alive, who does not detest it. J have known several, and conuerst
with some of the chief of them both, for Learning, and Authority, very
familiarly, yet never beard them, or any one of them by the least word approve
of it, or speak of it without horror. This testimony j owe to Truth, and
justice. And if the Protestants please for their own further satisfaction, to
consult any of the Inglish Jesuits now in Prison, or any others either in
France, or Flandres, (where some Jesuits are ^^ill to be found, although in your
animaduersions on the speeches, you say they are banished out of both those
places) if you find any ^^e approve of that Doctrine, stone him.

J acknowledge, that at Louain lately some Theses were printed, which contained
that exploded Doctrine. But that hinders not the Truth of what j have delivered
here, concerning the Jesuits. 1. Because they were not Jesuits, who printed
those Theses. 2. Because, (...) j hear those Theses never were defended. 3.
Because the Ma^er, who had delivered that Doctrine, and composed the Theses,
was deposed from teaching, and cast out of that uniuersity, and all the
Netherlands, for that fault, by his Ecclesiastical Superior. By which you may
see, how unjustly that Doctrine is charged upon any Catholics, at all, which
was so severely punished.

As to the second: Gauan does not say, none but Mariana held (...); but that he
knew none but Mariana, who taught it. There is not one, (...) the best of my
knowledge, that allows of king-killing Doctrine, -- (...) Mariana, are his own
words. Now although there should have been 1000. others, of the same fentiments,
yet what Gauan said may be true, if he knew nothing of the rest. So j may say
truly ^^d sincerly: J know none, but the B. of L. who will take all Oaths
wit^^^^ scruple: although probably there may be others of the same Principle of
conscience, and Faith, unknown to me.

Nether is it to be wondered at, that Gauan should know of none (...) Mariana,
who taught that detestable Doctrine: seeing under (...) seuerest penaltyes
possible all mention of it is prohibited to the ^^suits by their Generals. And
he might have been ignorant of Mariana's Paradox too, and the memory of it had
been utterly blotted out of all men's minds, had not some hystorians of that
time, (which lie out of the common road of schools) and cheifely some
scriblers of Libells against Catholics, from time, to time renewed it. J
could never find that book of Mariana in any Library of the Jesuits, although j
have had the curiosity to enquire after it. Which is an evident proof of their
unjuersall dislike of such Doctrines. And if any Authors are extant in them,
who cursorily treat of such things, and incline to the like sentiments, they
are left there, for some other useful Treatises, which they contain, and not
for that Doctrine: as for alike reason the works of some Fathers are exposed,
which contain some errors, or heresies. Yet the dislike of that part, which
you so odiously charge upon us, appears by the perpetual silence of all
Jesuits, in that matter. Not one, these thirty, nay forty years, ever owned
it, even by private Writings, Theses, or Dictates, or in private discourse.
Probably not one now alive ever studied the question.

But say you, Mariana was printed at Toledo and reprinted at Ments. Answer.
What then? Cannot a book be printed in a Town, but each part of it must be
owned by those of that place? Are not Tertullian, S. Irineus, S. Cyprian, and
Cassianus, printed in several places, where no body approues Montanisme,
Chilianisme, Rebaptization, or semi-Pelagianisme?

Were j disposed to rake in this kennel, and retaliat, what a Catalogue could j
give you of those of your Reformed Protestant Church, who both taught, and
practiced as seditious Doctrine, as any in Mariana, for ought j know, who never
read or saw him: who having under pretense of Evangelical liberty cast off
all obedience to their spiritual Superior, did improve that same pretense to
loosen that due to the Civil Magistrate, like true (...) of Belial without any
yoke? The late times of troubles would afford matter sufficient in the
libells, they produced (where of some possibly may have been composed by your
self) for a Large Volume. But j will not imitate your indiscretion, or malice,
in renewing the memory of seditious maxims, which all faithful subjects
heartily wish, had never been broached, or might never be remembered: Because
whilst the memory of them is preserved, when Passion inclines, and occasion
inuites seditious practices will follow. J ingeniously profess, that j cannot
look upon these Reproaches to men, who disowne the Doctrines so reproached,
but as an effect of malice against their Persons, and a sly way to continu, and
communicate those same Principles: and j fear, that sad experience will
convince the world, at least our nation, (where some of the People are imbued
with so many Anti-Monar^^^all Principles,) that that way, which the Superiors
of the Society of Jesus have taken, and enjoined their subjects to follow, is
the most effectual, to settle People's minds, in due subjection to Lawful
Magistrates, and to prevent all pernicious consequences, of those pernicious
Doctrines.

Fimbria p. 6. Bonacina (so it should be) Valeneia, Suarez, Lessius, Molina,
and Filiucius, concur with Mariana, that it is Lawful for a private man to
kill such a Tyrant, as has no Title.

Answer. J know no king, who would be offended that a Rebel should be killed,
who plots his death, and designs to become king in his place. J know of no
Laws divine or humane, Ecclesiastical or Civil, which forbid it. In causa
Majestatis omnis homo miles est, says Tertullian. When the sacred Person of a
king is in eminent danger all subjects are authorized by the Law of nature, and
of all nations, to defend him, even by killing the Traitor. The sword in the
Arms of the Royal city, London, is a conuincing testimony, that kings are
not displeased with such attempts, which they have rewarded with such a lasting
badge of honor.

Fimbria p. 9. Kings deposed by the Pope, or by Heresy are no more kings.....
As all the kings of England, Sweden, Denmark, etc. are by the Jesuits Doctrine.

Answer. Name the Jesuit alive who ever writ, or said, that our dread --
Souueraigne is not lawful king of all his Dominions, and let him suffer as a
false Traitor: all Jesuits will sign his condemnation. Jf you can name none,
as j am certain you cannot, own that you are a malicious, unworthy
calumniatour. The mean while, the dying speeches of their murthred Brethren
confute sufficiently this false lie.

You had had some color for this calumny, had any Jesuit revived that
wicleffian Doctrine, which your pretended Assertor of Monarky M.r Oats,
published in his Dedicatory Epistle to his Majesty: where having said, that the
chief end, and work of all supreme Powers, is to suppress vice and encourage
virtue. -- By Banishing all vicious Livers from their Presence, and converse,
and advancing the virtuous in their stead. He adds: By the neglect of which
Principal part of their Royal Trust, and office, Princes depose themselves, as
VSELESSE before God, and their own consciences, what ever may be their state,
or Glory in fact, and by human Laws, and Power before men. Thus he. What king
can be secure of his subjects Allegiance, if they be possessed with that opinion?
Which will be easily applied to any Prince how virtuous, and just soever, by a
minor: and then who sees not the consequence? Could you have found so seditious
a Principle in any Papist, how Tragically would you have descanted upon it?

Comparisons are allways odious, and chiefly in odious matters: wherefore j
will not compare the Principles of Catholic Religion, with those of your
Reformation, to show, that ours are more conformable to Monarky. This j will
say, that Monarky flourisht more years in the Persons of Catholic Princes,
then months in those of Protestants: that it was never shaken till your
pretended Evangelical Liberty, (the ground work of your Reformation) had
Loosened the reins of Government, and weakened the hands of the Governors:
That before one age had past, you turned it out of the Throne, and since its
happy restoration, you put it to greater Plunges, then in all the time,
whilst Catholic Religion prevailed, it endured. Insomuch as j hear some of
your own are of opinion that Monarky in England cannot emerge, or long
subsist, without Popery, or Popish Principles.

You see, sir Libeller, that the whole first part of your Pamphlet, is down
right false. For.

1. We do not hold it Lawful, in virtue of any Equivocation, to tell any
untruth, or Lie: much less to confirm it by Oath.

2. We do not hold it lawful to murder any one, much less, our dread
Sovereign. Of which more hereafter.

3. By your own practice; and Principles, it is evident, you both speak, and
swear downeryght Lies, unless you excuse them, by recurring to Equivocation.

And 4. that your obedience to your Prince hangs but on a uery weak thread:
seeing your darling and Champion makes it depend 1. On the king's keeping the
Law of God. 2. On his banishing all those, who do not keep it.

Fimbria p. 7. J do not well understand their Prayers for the king. They would
have it thought, they had no design to kill the king, who can pray for his
prosperous reign. But do they think that his Majesty can truly prosper, till
he turn Roman Catholic? This they heartily wish, no doubt: whither they can
pray, or no, j know not.

Answer. You are more moderate here in your censure, then you were in your
Reflections on the speeches, where you boldly affirm, they were not prayers of
Charity; but curses of their malice. In which words you deliver the disposition
of your heart; not theirs, who never gave you any ground for it. Now having
better considered them, you say, You do not well understand them: Whence it
evidently follows that your former judgment was rash and uncharitable. But how
comes it, that your greatwit cannot well understand them? Are not their words
plain Inglish? Is not the construction easy? The sense and meaning obuious?
Wherein then lies the difficulty, the obscurity? At least we expected so much
Charity (which thinks no evil) from a Christian, and a Bishop as to interpret
in a good sense what is dubious. But that is not what you seek, nor answers
your desires. Had they Blasphemed God, cursed (which God forbid any should do)
the king, reviled their Judges, Jury, and Witnesses, called fire from heaven to
destroy the City, and Kingdom, dyed like desperados, and damned their souls
for an eternity, you had had your hearts wishes: their words would have been
understood: which because they dyed like true Disciples of Christ Jesus, like
true Jesuits, you cannot well understand, J hope no Jesuit will ever purchase
that advantage at so dear a rate. And as for these good men's, j am confident
all good men, who have not so thick a cloud of envy, and malice in their
minds, will easily understand their true Christian meaning, not withstanding all
the mist you cast before their eyes to prevent it.

They would have it thought, say you, they designed not to kill the king, for
whose prosperous reign they prayed. But how do you know that was their
design? Did they tell it to you? Had you it from God by Revelation? J know no
third way, to know what designs a man has in his heart. Jf you do, bless the
world with communicating it. But j weygh your words in the scales of Reason,
whilst you consult not Reason; but only your Passion, in what you write. J
think their design clear enough out of their words, to such as seek to find;
and do not study to miss it: viz. that having paid their duty to God, by
professing their Faith, and to justice, in asserting their Jnnocency, (to
comply with the command of the Apostle 1. Timo. 2.2.) they proceeded to pray
for the king, the kingdom, their friends, and themselves.

You ask whither they thought, that his Majesty could truly prosper, till he
turn Roman Catholic? A wise question for a Doctor of Divinity. J answer: no
Catholic in his senses ever thought temporal prosperity depended on Faith. We
all acknowledge with S. Austin, that the Roman Empire was for many ages
prosperous: that the Ottoman does still prosper: that Augustus had a prosperous
Reign, as well as Constantin: and that Henry VI. though a Catholic, was
unfortunate, as well as Darius a Pagan: It is true, that when we compare the
Blessings of this life, with those of the next, all temporal prosperity is not
considerable: and we may with reason fay, that the rich Glutton was miserable,
and poor Lazarus fortunate. And the Psalmist, Psalm. 143.15. denies those to be
happy; who enjoy Temporal Prosperity, and assures none ought to be esteemed
such, but those who adore the true God. Beatum dixerunt popolum cui haec sunt:
Beatus populus cujus Dominus Deus ejus. And j grant what you say, that they
heartily wished for this, v^^, that his Majesty were in the true, and only way to
eternal Bless. And you cannot blame them for that wish, without condemning S.
Paul, who offered a like Prayer for Agrippa, and his whole Auditory. Act. 26.29.
But when you add: Whither they can pray; or no, j know not: you bring to my
mind the words of Festus to that Glorious Apostle: You are mad: studyes have
besotted you. And j leave to the Readers consideration, whither they may be
applied to you, who having owned that they prayed: and labored in vain to
pervert the sense of their prayers, doubt whither they could pray, or no. As if
when you have heard me speak, and discanted upon my words, you should after
question, whither j could speak, or no. Sir, the scripture mentions a
Drunkenness, which proceeds not from wine: because some Passions have the
same effect, as to the hindering the use of reason. Consider whither or no, that
is befallen to you.

Then you tell us, that Garnet prayed for the success of the Gun
powder treason. And Charles V. for the Popes delivery, whom he kept prisonner.
J add: and so did the Parliament and Cromwell, and probably you your self
with them, for the delivery of the King, and Peace of the Kingdom, than which
nothing was Less intended by them. But what is this, though true, to the five
Jesuits, or me?

Then you fall again upon Equivocation, and from page 7. to page 12. You
pursue it. To all which j answer 1. we condemn Equivocation as well, and more
severely, then you. 2. By our constant practice, it appears, we never owned
it: as is above said. So j pass to the 12. page where j find some thing new.

Fimbria p. 12. My Author says, it is Lawful in defense of ones reputation to
kill another..... He that reads this, will not wonder, if they did not scruple
to murder Sir E. Godfrey, or that some Priests were so forward to be his
executioners.

Answer. The Author you mention, Amicus, being after the first impression in
Germany, reprinted at Doway, An. 1642. that whole proposition was blotted out.
By which the Jesuits, who ouersaw the Print, sufficiently declared their
dislike of it. And 23. years after this second Edition, viz: 24. Sept. 1665.
Alexander VII. condemned 28. propositions: of which the 17. is that you charge
on us in this place. According to this decree we frame our consciences, and
direct our actions; and not by the private sentiment of any particular Anthout.

As for the death of Sir E. Godefrey. j pray God from the bottom of my heart, to
grant true Repentance to the Authors of that horrid, and crying sin. Some have
already suffered on that score, who were in the judgment of wise men jnnocent of
the fact. Some discoueryes have been made of the true Author and those so
conuincing, that all art, and craft of such scriblers, as you are, will not
confute them. But j design not to accuse any body, and notwithstanding all
that j, and others have suffered, on that score, j desire the murderers, no
other harm, then what through sense of their detestable crime, they shall
inflict upon themselves, to appease the wrath of God, and prevent the heavy
stroke of Divine Justice.

Fimbria p. 14.15. and 16. You start again Equivocations and follow the game
hotly: and so you may for me, who know no Papist a live, that will defend or
practice them, since they are condemned by the sea Apostolic.

Fimbria p. 16. and 17. The Jesuits had great motives to use Equivocations, the
Plot could not be more effectually promoted. It makes Protestants stagger in
the belief of it: it Weakns the credit of the Witnesses: it allays the spirit
of the Nation: it incenses foraigne Princes against Protestants: and in fine it
entitles the sufferers to Martyrdom. When on the contrary, by acknowledging
their conspiracy, they had broken the neck of the Plot, endangered the Lords
in the Tower, silenced those, who question the King's evidence, made Popery
odious, and spoiled their expectation of Martyrdom.

Answer. In all this discourse you discover a mind filled with thoughts more
becoming a Pagan, or Atheist, then a Christian. A Pagan or Atheist, beleiuing
nothing of the life eternal to come, settles all his hopes, all his fears,
all his thoughts, and all his affections, on things of this life: and is
ambitious, even at his last breath, of the Plaudite which attends the exit of a
good Actor on the stage of this world. A Christian on the contrary knows this
life to be but a moment, if compared with that to come: that all earthly glory
is vanity, pleasures deceitful, health unconstant, and life it self
uncertain, so embracing the advice of our Blessed Redeemer. Mat. 6.19.20.
Regards not any treasure on earth, where it is subject to so many casualtyes;
but prepares one in Heaven, where he is certain he shall never be defrauded of
it. He is certain, it will avail him nothing to gain all the world with the
loss of his soul. Mat. 16.26. And if any be so unfortunate, as to be engaged
during his life, in some designs worldly and Politic, contrary to the Law of
God, yet these vanish at the ghastly sight of approaching Death. All hopes and
fears of this life then vanishing, and those of the life to come taking entire
possession of the soul.

Now consider what thoughts you fancy in these executed Jnnocents: of malice in
Promoting the Plot: spite against the Witnesses: revenge against Protestants in
all countries: vanity, and folly in purchacing the name of Martyrs in this
world, with the loss of their souls in the other, as if they would fry in Hell
fire really for an eternity, provided men upon earth for a time, might say
they were brave boys. What ground have you to surmise such Antichristian
Dispositions in their minds? At a much easier rate, and with less sin, or
rather no sin at all, as you say, they might have purchaced their Pardon, and
lived contentedly in this world, and dyed happily for the next, by only owning
the crime, of which they were really guilty. What reason have they given you to
judge them so silly, or so mad rather? Did they, whilst at liberty, discover
any signs of that vanity? No. Did they during the time of their imprisonment?
No. Did any such thing appear at their Trial, or execution? Nor then nether.
All who conuerst with them when abroad, and when Prisoners, all the spectators
of the last period of their lives, agree in a far different character of them,
from what you so confidently assert of their inclinations, although possible you
never saw their faces. What ground can you have then, for this hard censure?
Without your self nothing occurres: wherefore j am forced to surmise, that all
the ground you have is taken from your own heart, which is taken up, and
possessed with thoughts of this life, and worldly designs, and that you judged
of others by your self.

Fimbria p. 17. Upon far less account Equivocation in words, or Oaths is in
the judgment of their best Casuists lawful at any time, the hour of Death not
excepted.

Answer. 1. J challenge you to show one Casuist, who since that Decree of
Jnnocent XI condemning Equivocation, ever taught it Lawful at any time.

Answer. 2. These five Jesuits declare they use no Equivocation, but take their
words in their natural and obuious sense, which must be a Lie and consequently
no jnnocent action, in the opinion of all Jesuits, if their words were not
true, in their proper signification.

Fimbria p. 18. The greatest Lie and falsest Oath that ever was heard in the
mouth of a Jesuit, would become as true, as the Ghospel, by a secret cast of his
mind.

Answer. What opinion you have of the truth of the Ghospel, j can not tell: but
this comparison gives ground to suspect more then j will say. At least that
transforming quality of the Jesuit turning falsehood in to Truth, is much
better, then your turning good things into bad, and Truth into Falsehood:
changing (as the Prophet says) judgment into wormwood. Amos 5.7.

Fimbria p. 18. What the Jesuits were charged with, may be reduced to three
heads: a design to introduce Popery: to massacre, or destroy the Protestants
of these kingdoms: and to kill the King. Now in their judgment, if we can
discern it by their Doctrine, no one of these is a sin. And can you wonder
they dyed impenitent, when the saw nothing to be repented of?

Answer. You would be a formidable adversary, were your Proofs as strong, as
your Assertions are bold. But hitherto we have found you promise much and
perform nothing. Let us see whither your attempt be more successful here.

Fimbria p. 18. Could they count it a sin, to restore the Popish Religion in
three kingdoms, and establish it, by advancing a Prince, to the Throne who
would count it his glory utterly to extinguish Heresy?

Answer. There are none, but the factious Presbiterians, who dislike the
uniting all the world into one exterior communion. All good Christians, as well
as Jesuits wish it done, and profess their sincere endeauours to promote it,
by all Lawful means; not other wise: for as the Apostle says: we are not to
do evil, that good may come of it. But you maliciously hint at something,
which you dare not speak out: and j am Dauus; not Oedipus: so cannot unriddle
your misterious meaning. Yet in expectation of your discovery, j declare, that,
j know no Papist, nor Jesuit, alive, who thinks it Lawful to advance any
Prince to a Throne, which is not due to him: (...) that we do not think it due
to him, whilst it is possessed by another lawfully. When you shall further
discover your meaning, it shall ^^nd a fuller answer.

Fimbria p. 18. Do they count it a sin to destroy, or root out, all whom
they count Heretics, as they count many hundred thousands in these nations:
and then you cite a decree of the Council of Latran, ordering Princes, to root
out Heretics.

Answer. We all count it a sin, to destroy, or root out, any one man,
Heretic, or other, by private Authority, or without due form of justice: and
a much greater sin to destroy so many. The Decree of the Lateran council is
nothing to the purpose, it speaking only of absolute Princes, who have received
from God jus gladij, a right to kill: and they may as Lawfully destroy,
according to the laws of their Dominions, a Heretic, as any other malefactor.
And what is this to the five Jesuits, who never pretended any such power over
Lives?

Fimbria p. 19. Do they think it a sin to kill the King? Their Doctors assure
them, it is no sin, to kill a Tyrant, and they will have our King so, one way,
or other.

Answer. This malicious Assertion without any proof is an evident proof of the
ill will of your heart; but not of any defect of due Allegiance in the Jesuits.
I challenge you to prove, that any Jesuit either by word, or writing, disowned
his Majestye's just title to his Imperial Crown. We have seen a shrewde hint
in your great Favorite Oats, who teaches that Princes are deposed, when they
either do not keep God's Laws, or not punish all who break them. Js not this
that uery thing, which some ancient, and antiquated Divines, call
misgouernment: against whose sentiments you so tragically declame? There is
only this difference betwixt your party and the Catholics, that we have Laid a
side all those sentiments, for their manifest bad consequences; and you retain
them still.

Fimbria p. 19.20.21. and 22. Boucher the Jesuit (who never was one) Suarez,
Rosaeus, Sa, Bannez, Panormitan, and other hard names, teach strange Doctrine
concerning Kings.

Answer. We are not answerable for their sentiments, unless we make them our
own, by approving, or practicing them: their Doctrinall faults being no less
Personal, then their other sins. For reasons above given j will not
recriminate. Nothing in all those men's works of more dangerous consequence,
then what Oats lately had the impudence to print. It were more discreet, as
well as more charitable, to bury in perpetual oblivion all those shameful,
and seditious Principles: in which the reformed church has surpast the Roman
Catholics, both in Teaching, and Acting.

Fimbria p. 23. To conclude. J have great reason to be confident, that these
speeches were contrived for the promoting of their Grand Plot, upon which
their hearts were so set, that the thoughts of Death could not divert them.

Answer. J have great reason to say, you care not what you say, provided it be
against Papists. Prove first there was a Grand Plot, and that designed by
these, or any other Jesuits: which you will never do, because there never was
any such thing. You may remember, (it is not so long a go) who they were, that
under pretense of opposing pretended Popish Plots, carried on a real Plot, to
the ruin of the King, and three Kingdoms. You were in being then, and for
ought j know, according to your abilityes, acted then, as you do now, to
promote the opinion of a Popish Plot.

Fimbria p 23. J have endeavored to clear two things.

1. That by their Doctrine, though they were as guilty, as any malefactors,
that ever suffered, yet they might assert their Jnnocency, with all Oaths, and
Asseuerations, and that lawfully by the use of a secret reserve, or mental
Equivocation. This is so plain in their writings, that j never expect any
Priest, or Jesuit in England will disprove it.

2. That they were as much concerned to mantaine their pretended Jnnocency, how
guilty soever they were indeed, as they were for promoting their present
horrid Plot, or their Catholic interest depending on it.



Answer. Beyond your expectation you se your endeauours frustrated, and those
two points remain as obscure, as ever. The authority of the sea Apostolic is
irrefragable to us Papists, in matters of Faith, and good manners: and that
forbids under pain of Excommunication that Reserve, to which you have recours,
Equivocation. Now according to all Divines that censure never falls, but on a
mortal sin. So we all believe, that to teach Equivocation, is a mortal sin.
Yet you pretend, the Jesuits thought they might practice Equivocation, even
with Perjury, that is, add one mortal sin to another, without any the least
sin.

Your attempt, as to the second, has been as unsuccessefull: for that
depending on the real subsistence of a Popish Plot, which now uery sew, if
any, believe, and j am certain never was in Being, but in Oats his light, and
malicious head, that second point must fall to the ground.

Again. The thing contained in that second point, is a matter of fact, not
what might be, but what was the meaning of those words. And it is a secret of
their hearts: and who knows that, but the spirit of man which is in him? 1. Cor.
2.11. Now j desire my Reader to consider, not what reason is alleged by this
Libeller; but what can be produced in a thing of this nature, except it be from
a Revelation from the searcher of hearts, God, or from the testimony of the
Persons speaking? And to nether of these this Author pretends. This alone
shows, that all his reasons in this case are insignificant to a man of reason.

Fimbria p. 24. Let me only make this enquiry, and j have done: whether any in
Reason, Justice, or Charity, can against such Evidence, as the Justice of the
Nation counted clear, pregnant, and conuincing, believe those, who thought
they might uery lawfully deceive us, when they were dying, and apprehended
themselves most hyghly concerned to do it.

Answer. You state the case uery wrong, that so you might steal away your
Readers assent. The question is not: whither we shall credit the justice of the
nation, or five Persons interessed to deceive their Auditory? For the justice
of the nation, as well as the People, relied on the Deposition of Oats, the
sole fountain of all these Lies, and mischeifes. For as for Bedlows he was
newly come out of a Goal, and his staruing condition invited him to second
Oats, for a liuelihood.

As for Oats he had been a noted Liar, and a Perjured fellow from his
infancy. During his aboade at S.t Omers, he was notorious and odious for it to
all there, And j never heard but two true sayings of his. The one was, whilst
he hoped to be admitted into the Society, in confidence he said to one: j shall
either be a Jesuit or a Judas. The other was, when he had received a final
refusal, (the Provincial thought him unfit to live amongst any honest men) he
said openly: j will be revenged. Both these sayings he has made good. And all
his Lies against Jesuits are to be ascribed, either to his indigent condition,
or this desire of Revenge for this imaginary wrong. Where en passant, j desire
the Reader to consider, 1. what this man deserves, who to satisfy his private
malice has disturbed Church, and State, Court, and Country? 2. What honor it
is to the Nation, that so great a part of it should be employed, as
instruments to Revenge a wrong pretended to be done to that great man, TITUS
OATS.

On the other side are five Persons, of an Jnnocent, irreprochable, virtuo^^
life, as all will testify, who had the advantage to converse with them, during
(...) whole course of it.

Wherefore, this is the question, rightly stated: whither the Justice of the
Notion, and all the rest, are rather to believe 1. Five men, who are never
known to have spoken a false word: or one man, who scarce, ever spoke a true
one. 2. Five, who scarce ever swore; or one who has been often forsworn. 3.
Five dying men, who should be damned unauoydably, if they were forsworn; (...)
one, who would starve, if he were not. 4. Five, who would not speak an untruth,
to save their Lives; or one, who gets his living by swearing untruths. 5. Five,
who allways said the same things; or one who on all occasions altered (...)
tale, in some uery material point. 6. In fine, five, who say nothing, but what
is evidently probable, and credible; (...) one, whose story is evidently
fabulous, and incredible, if not impossible.


When this is considered, j doubt not, what verdict any judicious man (...)
give in this case.

Let this Libeller, in Authority, D. Tongue, and the whole seditious Presbiter^
^^rable, say what they can, to paliate Oats, his Lies, and Perjurys, he will
still be a great reproach to our Nation: and the only effect of their Apologyes
will be, to make the Authors of them partakers of his sin, and sharers in his
infamy. And as for the suffering Papists, as they are, j am confident, all
jnnocent, so that ^^nocency will daily become more, and more conspicuous, and
all this present shame will hereafter redound to their greater Glory. So that
they with joy, (...) say as Joseph did Genesis 50.20. Vos cogitastis de me malu^,
sed Deus vertit illud in (...).

END.

