SVPPOSITIONS, With this HUMBLE REQUEST And ADVICE OF MANY THOVSANDS.

To the Right HONORABLE The HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.

By J. W.



London, Printed for Ralph Mab 1642.

Suppositions, With this Humble Request and advice of many thousands, to the
Right Honorable the Houses of PARLIAMENT.
Toward the completing of every Structure, three things are necessary: the
workmen, the Materials, the Tools: this Structure is the Commonwealth; the
Workmen, those good and indefatigable Members of the Houses of Parliament; the
Materials are Orders, Rules, Ordinances, and good Laws, made, and to be made;
the Tools are the Judgments and opinions of Men; these Instruments (if
necessary to the building) although never so mean, ought not to be neglected;
and therefore though you find this paper amongst the Horchpot of Books, slight
it not: the Widow in the Gospel was commended for her mite, as much as the
bounteons givers. I am a Native, and Freeman in this Common Weal, and desire
among so many thousands to bring in my Manual also toward the good of this
Fabric, and therefore ad rem.

How horrible, how unchristian-like Civil War is, Volumes might be completed
in manifestation, one year in that more considerable then thirty of War abroad.

The cause of our Masacring one the other is not well understood; Reason in all
men is not alike; shall we butcher each other, we having no for^^ine enemy
amongst us, because each have not like understanding? O God forbid. Misdoings,
not misunderstandings, are just causes of punishment, and then surely not of
War.

Suppose the KING should conquer, were it certain whether all those good Laws
made this Parliament should still continue? whether those worthy men of that
great Council should not be miserably distroyed, yea, another Parliament had,
and old Laws for Subjects benefit and privileges nullifyed, Kings
Prerogatives more enlarged, established? Would not our Religion be in extreme
hazard, yea, his sacred Majesty, and Posterity, peradventure, by those
treacherous Papists, together with many other rablements, taking the advantage
of being in his Army, at the instant of his conquest, be in danger of being
conquered? May we not then fear many of our chiefest Nobility might be
attainted, or destroyed, and other upstarts, enroomed, and also many places of
all sorts bestowed upon people, who are both empty of worth, birth, and
fortune, in liew of their own cankred pernicious counsels? might not we
expect the plundering of our Estates, the ravishing of our Wives and Children;
yea all our Laws, Liberties, Religion, all the good we now happily enjoy, all
at once in the Laps and hands of Miscreants, Vermin, and base seducers of that
our Noble King.

Should we be conquerers, would not the King have it ever wrote in his heart,
how stained should we be with the blood of our Fathers, Kindred, Friends, and
Countrymen, etc? would not after-ages extremely blame us? would not other
Nations deride us? may not Kings in future times hate the Laws now made,
calling them forced? may it not happen, that in the trial of this victory,
some mischance may fall upon his Sacred Majesty, or upon our Noble Prince? did
not holy David's heart smite him for touching, yea, but the Lap, though of Saul's
Garment? Is every cranny of your heads pried into, and is there no other way
but war? what shall I say, think, or do, my Pen cannot express the horrid
conclusions of such a war? If there be any such that have drawn breath from the
poisonous aconites of the earth, as now to belch forth such venomous counsels
to proceed (if possible to the contrary) in this true-Religion-decaying war, my
Pen shall not honor them so much as to set down their curse, it was prepared
for them of old, and God is just, and in due time will render it them. Preces,
and Lachrymae, Arma sunt Ecclesiae. Clergy methinkes should take all caution,
not to blow at the bellows of this dissension, but rather labor to sweat
water and blood for prevention, and so to Oratory that to their Auditors.
Religion, the true protestant Religion, I trust in my Redeemer, I shall defend
with my life, next to that the Laws, and Liberties of our Nation, and the
Parliament, and Privileges thereof, being the top of our Inheritance, I would
sacrifi^e my dearest blood in defense of. But when these shall be but in dispute
of violation (although I confessed I think the world is satisfied, that there
has been unparallelled mistakes) hrongs of people stand amazed at the
beginning of such a war: yea, bleeding Ireland, those miserable comfortless
people there, breath out such sighs and groans at these distractions, that
heaven suffers violence. Changes and chances happen to all men in this mortal
life, like chances of gamsters at Di^e. If good chance, it may miscarry by
oversight, if bad, it may fortune to be amended by good play, shall then these
my humble concei^s happen in o the hands of any Member of that Great Council,
let me beseech him, (and surely if God hear my earnest prayers, they are in
some degree to do for me) let them promote with effect but this motion, that
forthwith a day of humiliation be set a part, yea with iniunction of more
strictness then ordinary, to council with God in this great work, and I trust
his Sacred Majesty will do the same. Where the wit of man ends, there the
Providence of God begins. Come out of your selves then you learned Council,
and let us together with you, fall flat upon the earth before the Lord, that he
the King of Salem, would now find a way of reconciliation. Cor Regis, manibus
Dei. This being done, assure your selves will vivifie the doubting spirits of
many thousands, and also God, even our own God, will give us his blessing.

FINIS.

