A FULL RELATION OF THE Desperate Design Of the Malignants, for the betraying
of MONMOUTH Town and Castle:

With the particular manner of the Discovery thereof by Sir Trevor Williams,
and the means used to prevent it by Col. Morgen and Lieut. Col. Kerle. And
diverse malignant families thereupon by Proclamation put out of the said Town.

Also, how Lieut. col. Kerle fell into the enemies Quarters near Hereford, and
took diverse Prisoners Horse, and Arms.

LIKEWISE, A copy of Col. Sandys Letter of the manner of taking Shelford house,
140. of the enemy put to the Sword, the Governor wounded, and 30 Officers and
common prisoners taken.

Published by special command.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bates, at the sign of the Maidenhead on
Snow-hill, Holborn conduit, 1645.

SIR,
ACcording to your desire I shall acquaint you with the passages in these
parts, Lieut. Col. Kerle being commanded from Chepstow by Col. Morgan to go
with a party of horse into Monmouthshire to fall upon a party of 800 horse of
Washingtons, which he pursued three days and three nights, until such time
as he drove them over the River some fix miles above Hereford. Whereupon he
returned to Chepstow and desired the Governor of Gloucester and Sir Trevor
Williams that they would draw all their forces together out of Chepstow, and
the county of Monntouth, before Monmouth, and he would engage his life, within
three days the Town and Castle should be surrendered. Upon the 20 past they
drew before it with horse and foot; a forlorn hope being drawn out of 600
Musketeers was commanded by Lieut. col. Kerle. The enemy seeing him come so
strong upon them, and knowing that he commanded the party left the Town and
fled into the Castle; whereupon the governor of Gloucester and Sir Trevor
Williams came instantly into the Town, called a council of War, and did advise
with the rest of their Officers whether they should fall upon the Castle
instantly or not; but taking into consideration that they had myners in the
Forest sent for them, put them to work the same day, and on Thursday
following they had made all things ready. The enemy within the Castle finding
the mynors had made the mines ready to spring, called a council of War within,
themselves the 23 received intelligence that the enemy had six mines ready to
be sprung and thought good upon good quarter to deliver up the castle, which
they did on Friday, and on Saturday morning the Governor marched to Gloucester
with all his foot, leaving only 100 in the Castle under the command of Capt.
Foster, and the Town to Sir Trevor Williams charge, the country assisting him
in that service. The Governor had no sooner gone for Gloucester, but the
country (being instigated by some malignants in the Town) began to draw
homewards, and told Sir Trevor Williams plainly that they did not come to keep
garrisons, and they departed the same night every man to his own home, leaving
the Town destitute of strength. Whereupon Sir Trevor Williams desired Captain
Foster he might have the assistance of his men to keep the Town; but he
having the charge of the castle thought it not his duty to forsake that, but
resolved to keep it to the utmost hazard of his life and fortune. Thereupon
Sir Trevor Willians seeing the danger he was in ( Ragland castle being within
seven miles of it) and the malignants gathering together, and giving out words
that the Town would be their own by morning sent a post to the Governor of
Gloucester to acquaint him, and also to the Forest of Deane, for present
supply, whereupon Lieut. col. Kerle and Cap. Gainsford came at 12 a clock that
night with 200 men, and before 12 a clock next day with 500 more, who guarded
the Town till the Governor had sent 200 commanded men of Gloucester for the
keeping thereof. The garrison of Monmouth being put into a posture of defense
and the malignants design prevented Proclamation was made by Sir Trevor
Williams and Lieut. col. Kerle, that upon Monday following those people that
were suspected to be against the Parliament should depart the Town, upon pain
of death, whereupon diverse families of malignants were put out. The Town thus
secured Lieut. col. Kerle the same day marched with his Troop toward Hereford,
and that night fell upon the enemies quarters within two miles of Hereford,
took 8 prisoners and ten horse, without the loss of a man. And the Governor
of Gloucester being commanded for Chester with his horse appointed the said
Lieut. col. Kerle to be an assistant to Sir Trevor Williams, for the better
security and safety thereof. And thus this desperate design of the malignants,
who would again have enslaved this Town and country to the malice of the
enemy, to the undoing of many well-affected persons who had declared themselves
for the Parliament, was by Divine providence discovered and prevented. Let God
have the glory of all. So rests,

Yours assured, C. W.
Monmouth, Novem. 4. 1645.
SIR,
I Suppose you have a particular relation of this days service, but thus much
from your friend: We assaulted Shelford house this day about four of the
clock, it was defended galiantly, and disputed half an hour at Swords point
after we got to the top of the works, but our men growing faint, I dismounted,
and being assisted by some Troopers that dismounted with me, stormed, and was
one of the first that entered in. We killed about 140. and gave quarter to about
30. the Governor (son to the Earl of Chesterfield) received many wounds,
and I believe some mortal, but I coming in gave him a longer time to repent
(for he is not likely to live,) We are to morrow for VVorton, I trust God will
go along with us. The King is yet in Newarke, and cannot probably escape. The
two Princes with their party about Belvoyr, and keep guards against Newarke,
and do hostile acts on the Kings party

November. 3. 9 at night. Your servant, Richard Sandys.

FINIS.

