Interna habeo. Eterna habebo. Externa habui. reposita 1. Tim: 4.8.

THE GAIN of LOSS OR TEMPORAL LOSSES SPIRITVALLY IMPROVED.

In a Centurye and one Decad of Meditations and Resolves.

By John Warner M. A. sometimes of Magd: Hall in Oxo: and one of the Ministers
of the London Brigade in the late Western Expedition 1644.

(...).

Plutarch in Paedag: Isai: 42.24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to
the robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned?

London. Printed by M.S for H. Blunden at the Cas^tle in Cornhill. 1645.

The Approbation.
I Have perused this Treatise, entitled, Temporal Losses spiritually
improved: In which finding nothing but what is pious, sound and profitable, I
allow to be printed.

November. 27. 1644. John Downam.

TO HIS HONORED FRIEND, that pious Gentleman, Mr. John Ash, a worthy Member of
the honorable House of Commons in this present Parliament.
Worthy Sir,
HAnnibal being to encounter with Minutius in the vale, Live. hist Polyb.
was not so much daunted with the present enemy, as with Fabius Maximus, who
faced him on a mountain in the Rear; and therefore said, he feared that cloud
hovering aloft, would ere long pour down upon him. It was not our enemies near
at hand I feared, being overpowered by our Forces, as that Western cloud,
which like Elijahs of a handful increased so as to overspread the face of our
country; and against the expectation of the wisest, poured down our next
Munk. ^on Ferdy in Wilts.
adjacent hill, and as a confluence of many waters, drove all resistance before
it. Hereby it came to pass, that the place where I lived, became like that
place to which Paul and his company were driven, Acts 27.4.
where two seas met; so that by the stronger waters the Bark of my estate was,
with some of my best neighbors, in a moment, swallowed up, and carried away.
Yet in this danger, notwithstanding the earnest inquiry of the enemy after me,
and as earnest pursuit, God gave me my life as a prey to my self. Now after my
escape, having got into a private Sanctuary, my sad spirit unfit for public
exercises, studied this Text which the enemies had given me, and from my losses
by them gained this Manuell of Meditations, useful for my self and others in
these times of losing, which were composed by me in as much danger as
Archimedes was in drawing his lines when the city was befieged. Made by me at
the siege of Gloucester.
Admire you may at first my boldness, why (considering my small acquaintance
with you) I should dedicate this poor piece unto you; but if you consider all,
you might otherwise admire my unthankfulness. For, Sir, you may remember,
(unless the multitude of your liberality to others make you forgetful) how
that some years since I did largely partake of your bounty; wherein I know not
whether your gift, or the manner of giving, exceeded, which was so far from
ostentation, that I dare say your left hand knew not what your right hand did,
seeing you had no distinct knowledge of the receiver, nor would you be known to
be the giver, till some months after an earnest desire of showing my self
thankful, prevailed with the messenger to discover such a hidden friend unto
me. But besides private respects, your activenesse for the public good, as
well in the City as Country, and your patience under great private losses, do
challenge all respect from your Countrymen. As you have done much for Christ,
so have you suffered much, not only by the Prelates heretofore, but by their
supporters now. In these evil times few great men are good, and therefore good
great men should be great in the esteem of others. Sad experience demonstrates,
how too many of the nobler and richer sort endeavor to make themselves by
undoing others, and strive to erect a Babell of their own estates, by the ruin
of many families. It was an observation of the Historian, speaking of the
Civil wars of Caesar and Pompey, Cluver. Oros. ii. 6. c. 4. c. 4.
that Nemo sanctus injuriam privatam patriae subversione vindicandam duceret.
Yet how few such men, or such behaviors are to be found among us, our
countries in the West do lametably show, which by the continued Cres cente per
rapinas stud to and voluprate rapiendi. Cluveri Hist. mund. p, 230.
rapine and cruelty of those sons of Belial, of a Garden of Eden, are made like
a desolate wilderness. The Lord of Hosts did lately raise an Army for the help
of those parts, but he denied his blessing on the design; not only because
the instruments were unworthy to deliver, but because the country was unfit for
deliverance; especially that Heathenish country of Cornwall (where God did break
our arm of flesh) who are a people that ever since the light of the Gospel did
first break out among us, under the reign of Camb den Britan.
Lucius our first Christian King, have hated to be reformed; and therefore have
openly opposed They did ever give voice for the Papal continuance, Speed.
Histor. p. 1090. col. 2. line ult.
all public Reformation of the Church, as not long since that in Edward the
sixth his days, so this now, as if that malignant spirit against the Gospel,
and their blind zeal for their Diana, were traduced to them from their
progenitors. Our hope and comfort is, that when the Ephah of the enemies sins
is full, the harvest ripe, that then the Lord will put in his sickle and avenge
himself of his adversaries; that though an Eastern wind could not clear the
country of those Locusts, yet a Northeast under God shall: twice did Israel
fly before Benjamin, but the third time they prevailed. Go on therefore,
worthy Sir, and do worthily in Ephraim, and be more famous in Bethlehem, with
draw not your shoulder from upholding the tottering frame of this Kingdom, and
you may assure your self of what that good Patriot Nehemiah desired, viz. that
the Lord would remember him for all the good be did to that people.
Encouragements hereto you have enough, if you consider how God has blessed you
with blessings of heaven above, with blessings of the earth beneath, with
blessings of the breast and womb. Perhaps the Lord may borrow some of these
blessings of you, but doubt not of his repayment, the promise whereof is a
hundred fold with tribulation here, and hereafter eternal life. This I believe
you will account as performed, when the Lord shall turn our captivity, drive
out those Canaanites, and bring us to our country again; till which time, and
for which mercy incessantly supplicates,

Your obliged servant in the Lord, John Warner.

TO ALL CHRISTIAN READERS; Especially the Plundered exiles of the West Countries.
BEing now in a strange place, Heb. 13.14.
and having no certain dwelling, Cirie or Country, but seeking and expecting
one, it should be the care of every believing soul, to get this time of
pilgrimage sanctified to him; for the accomplishing whereof, the performance of
two Christian duties are most helpful. The first is prayer and supplication,
and this is a duty that must not only respect our selves, but the public,
Psalm 122.6.
even those Countries which now are as Aceldama's, fields of blood. Though God
had decreed the restitution of Israel from captivity, Ezekiel. 36.37. Ier. 29.11.
yet for it he would be enquired of by the house of Israel. Though God does not
confer mercies on us because of our duties, yet he will not confer them
without our duties. O then if you would have the Sun arise on that land of
darkness in the West, Cant. 2.8. Mal. 4.3.
pray that Christ would come skipping over the mountains, arising with healing
under his wings, and enlightening them that have a long time sat in darkness,
Luke 1.79. Dan. 6.10.
and the shadow of death. Look toward them as Daniel did toward Jerusalem out
of his chamber, beseeching the Lord to perfect his own praise, and their
deliverance, that the Lord would save his people from the West country, Zach.
8.7.
that so they might fear his name from the West, Isai. ^9.19. The time of the
desolations of Israel was known to Daniel by his books; Dan. 9.2. v. 3.
and then being informed of it, he sets his face to seek the Lord by prayer and
supplication. Now though we cannot have such a distinct knowledge of the time
of deliverance for a motive to our prayers, as Daniel had; yet it is an
infallible sign that the Lord does hasten to deliver, when he enlarges the
hearts of his people with a mighty spirit of supplication. As therefore we may
be confident, Psalm. 102.13.
that there is a time appointed when the Lord will have mercy upon Sion: so we
may be assured that the Lord will observe his time, and keep his day See Exodus
12.41. Hab. 2. Psalm. 5.8.
. In the mean time we must stand upon our watch by prayer, and hearken when the
Lord will speak peace to his people. The second duty is more particular
concerning our selves, viz. Meditation. Hereby a soul acquaint; it self with
God out of his word, or works, either of mercy or judgment. A dejected mind is
hereby set on wing, and made to look above sufferings and danger. Want of
calling, place, and usual accommodation, do sad the spirits of many; and by
Satan's concurrence fill the hearts of many with discontent, murmuring,
repining. It is the Devils policy, having impaired our outward estate, to
endeavor to deprive the inner man of true comfort. It should be our care
therefore to cast out such fretting careful, vexing thoughts, and put on
heavenly meditations. A true Christians glory is inward, unseen to the world,
his happiness is above, which is Psa. 45.13.
reserved for him, and for which he is 1 pet. 1.4 1 pet. 1.5
kept, it being beyond the reach of the men of this (...). Epictet. l. 3 cap.
22. Aliae divitiae nec verae, nec vestrae. Bern. de bono desert. (...). Aeneas
Gaza Epist. 5.
world, so that all which his enemy can deprive him of, is only accessory to his
well being, not essentially required to his being. Raise up therefore thy
meditations to contemplate on thy high calling, and the high price of that
calling: and then in these times of losing, thou may say with that
Philosopher, who when the City was plundered, and he turned out naked, being
asked what he had lost, answered, Nihil perdidi Seneca de Sap. Constable. e. 6.
. What though the Lord takes all from thee, and gives thee more of himself
Perdiderat omnia quae Deus dedit; sed habuerit ipsum qui omnia dederat: manet
qui dedit, and abstulit quod dedit. Deus substraxit data, nen datorem, Aug. in
Psalm. 66. Omnia perdidit Iohus, and plenus erat, Aug. de diverse. 12.
? That man grows rich, to whom God draws nigh, and from whom the world
withdrawes. He only has lost all, that has lost his God Now if God be
thine, thy country and dwelling is thine, or else a better. Psalm. 42.12. Psalm.
45.4.
It was not the Sword or Bow of our Fathers that did plant them there at first,
but the right hand of God, and the same right hand of God may teach him as
terrible things by replanting us. Till which time if this Manuell of
Meditations may as a Flaggon taken from the Lords Cellar, stay thy fainting
soul, Cant. 2.5.
it shall be the happiness of the Auther, that he has comforted others with
the same consolations wherewith he was comforted. 1 Cor. 1.4.


Yours and his Countries in the Lord, John Warner.

Temporal Losses Spiritually improved.
I.
SUch is the degenerate nature of some spirits, that in mean losses they
discover great impatience: but if the loss of their estates befall (...), they
cannot but therewith ^^^e themselves also. The love of the world does herein
strongly appear, when not only the fruition of things present do ravish men's
hearts with joy; but the imagination of them absent, overwhelmes them with more
sorrow. The Mammon of this world is a God, and is served by the men whose
portion is only here in a most affectionate obedientiall manner; for if the
world and the things thereof keep near them, they serve and love it; if it
leave them, they follow and pursue it, with as much earnestness as Laban did
his gods. It should be our care then, that when we lose our goods, we may
not lose our wits; and that when they leave us, and take the wing, to pursue
them with a godly hope, and moderate endeavor, not with an immoderate sorrow,
or desperate behavior.

II.
PHilosophers observe, that the higher the Element is, the purer it is; Bac.
not hist.
water purer then earth, air then water, fire purer then air. And it is the
observation of a Naturalist, that by Art water may be conveyed as high as the
Fountain from whence it did arise. O my soul, remember from whence thou art
inspired, from how high and holy a place; remember also of what a divine nature
thou art made partaker; dwell not therefore on these earthly objects, but let
the consideration of thy heavenly nature, cause thee to contemplate on heavenly
things; or if thou busiest thy self about these things below, let it be to
extract some divine quintessence from them. God has removed these perishing
things from thee, that thou may seek for, and think of thy incorruptible
inheritance. The soul which is confined to earthly meditations, forgets whence
it came, and whither it should go. A heavenly spirit has its conversation in
heaven.

III.
WE read of some of the wisest Heathens, that cast away all, and became
voluntarily poor. Some might impute this to pride, others to madness, others
to wisdom and discretion, as if two objects were too large to busy the mind
on with profit. Mat. 16 24.
Our Savior also himself bids them forsake all, that would follow him; and
this his precept was seconded by the practice of many in those times. However
what they did do in effect, we must do in affection, depart with all for
Christ. Hab. 2.6.
That person who lades himself with thick clay, makes himself too heavy to
ascend up to Christ. The Emblematist describes him fitly, having one hand
winged for heaven, the other deprest with agreat weight. As then it is dangerous
to possess all and want Christ; so it is most safe to lose all, thereby to win
Christ, or keep him. In this case then, as I am not bound to cast away my
estate; yet I will suffer it either to be taken away from me as a snare, or
offered up to Christ as a sacrifice; for the further I am parted from earth,
the nearer I am to heaven. The more empty I am, the fitter I am for
contemplation, though unfit for action.

IV.
THough poverty and want be the portion of some of the godly, yet it is not the
condition of all: some are not only heirs of a crown hereafter, but have
also large pledges of Gods love in the things of this life; and that not only
to saciety, but to superfluity. This the abundant estates of Abraham, Job,
Jacob, Joseph, David and Solomon, do abundantly testify, who were all good
men in Gods eye, and great men in the world. The earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof. The Lord is their God, and thus are they made heirs of the
promises; and the promises are not only of the life to come, but of this
present. Yet seeing these things are subject to moth, thief, rust, if this were
all their portion, they would esteem themselves no ways happier then others.
God then though he gives them this for their maintenance, he reserves the
inheritance for them. The Lord, though he lays out much for his people here,
yet he lays up more for them hereafter. Thus though they have much in
possession, they have more in reversion. If then God be mine, though I am not
rich both ways, I am the latter. What I have not in feeling, I have in faith.

V.
THe book of the creatures is a large volume, such as very few do learn
thoroughly. Now as in some books there are many gilded and red Letters, but
more black; so though in the creature there seem much beauty and glory, yet the
black dismal discontents, sorrows and vanity that arises are more. The front
of every leaf is not fuller of content, then the backfide is of vexation.
Solomon though he were blessed with a confluence of all outward things, yet his
tongue nor pen could be bribed so as to speak nothing of the evil of them.
He wrote other books of the creatures virtue, variety, glory, yet the Lord
would have those concealed, and that only reserved for us which speaks of its
vanity and vexation, it being the fittest lesson for us to learn. We should
all desire to have some insight in the whole volume, and the best Schoolmaster
to teach us herein is affliction.

VI.
AS the creatures glory declare much of God, so its vanity declares much to
us. For when the creature becomes a vexing creature to us, it is the rod of
God, and this rod is a speaking rod; Mic. 6.9
He are ye the rod, and he that appointed it; It speaks to us of Gods justice
in punishing of us, of his mercy in moderating the punishment, of his power and
glory in bringing us out of tentation. Every blow is a legible character of
Gods hand, where ever it falls, in body, estate, good name; and like Jonathans
arrows, are sent to warn and direct us what to avoid, and what to do.
Unprofitable and unfit Scholars they are for the School of Christ, that can
learn nothing out of his Cross; that are taken up with the joy of outward
things, as Peter and James at the glory of Christ's transfiguration, saying,
Mat. 17.4.
It is good to be here; but when the Cross does come, do either deny Christ
with Peter, or forsake him with the other Apostles. Happy therefore is the man
whose ear is opened to both these kinds of Instructions. As we ought to
observe how the creatures declare the glory of God, so also when the Lord by
them declares our sin, and his wrath for sin; then let every one that has
ears hear.

VII.
THat God is the Author of every good and perfect gift, is a Tenent that none
but an Atheist in opinion can expressly deny; yet which all that are Atheists in
practice do not truly know. This appears when most sacrifice to their own
nets: others profanely say with him in the Prophet, By my own hand have I
procured me this; others more blind ascribe all to the blind goddess
Fortune, crying her up as strongly as the Ephesians did their Diana. Though
this be the practice of the children of this world, yet a child of God knows
that what he has, he has received; he seeeth God in every thing; apprehends
God above all, receives all as proceeding from him, saying still with Jacob,
Genesis 27.20.
The Lord brought it unto me; and with Job, The Lord gives; Whatsoever I have
then, or shall receive, I will labor to see God in it; thus will the gift draw
me nearer to the giver; and the plentiful showers of his favors powered down
upon me, shall make me more fruitful and abundant in the work of the Lord.

VIII.
GOd the giver, has gifts of a twofold nature.

1. Gifts of his right hand; Prove. 3.16.
as graces here, and glory hereafter; these are peculiar to his people, only
the childrens meat.

2. Gifts of his left hand; as riches, honors. All sorts of men partake of
this sort of gifts; Esau, Laban, Nabal, Belshazzar, had as large a portion in
them as any, Thus all things fall alike to all, neither can good or evil, love
or hatred be known by them. For if there were no other disting uishing evidence
of Gods love, then these fading tokens, then were the men of this world, yea
those Americans and Indians, who abound in wealth, of all men most happy. They
whose portion is only in this life, have it larger then others.; whereas the
portion of Gods people is not like Benjamins mess, larger then their brethren,
but lesser. Yet here is their qomfort, that what they receive from God, is
extended to them by Gods right hand; whereas others receive what they have from
Gods left hand. Laeva porrigere, was among the Latins an unwelcome kind of
giving. Whatsoever gift the Lord bestows upon me, if I might have my choice,
it should be that of his right hand; Let his right hand fall on my head, his
left on others. So though my portion be not the greater, it will be the better.

IX.
GOD is my portion, says David; Psa. 119.57. Deuteronomy. 32 9.
Ye are my portion and inheritance, says God; How happy and rich does the
Lord think himself in us, as to take us to be his inheritance? and can we think
our selves poor, that have God to our inheritance? 'Twas the honor of the
tribe of Levi, that they had no portion among their brethren, but that the Lord
was their portion. Every believing person is of Gods (...). 1 Pet. 5.3.
Clergy and portion; and therefore if God be his God, his lot is fallen in a
fair ground, he has a goodly heritage. O the humility of our blessed God,
that can denominate us to be his inheritance, that have nothing in us good, but
what is from him! O the happiness of that soul that can truly say, The Lord
is my portion! for that thou art Gods, does nothing benefit God, but that God
is thine, is all in all to thee. This is the only abiding, this the abounding
portion. If any one think not this enough, Let his portion be in this life;
Psalm. 17.14.
And then when times of losing come, it shall be said of him, This is the man
that took not God to his portion.

X.
GOD being Lord over all, even of the earth and its fullness, has an
universal soveraigntie over all, an independent royalty in all things; so
that whatsoever man does enjoy, is by his dispensation. Now if among men,
estates are incident to such forfeits, as their Landlords may by Law deprive
them, and reenter; why may not the supreme Lord of heaven and earth deprive us
of that which is his, when we break our Covenants with him, and run into so
many forseits and arrearages? And if in such a case, none dare ask a Prince or
Landlord, why he does it, so here neither dare any one open his mouth against
his Maker, seeing he may do what he please with his own. To him that has,
that is, uses well what he has, shall more be given, and from him that has
not, i. e. uses not, or abuses what he has, shall it be taken away. O Lord;
what I have is thine by right and dominion, thine by my forfeit and
self-deprivation, mine only by usurpation, at most by dispensation. I bless
thy mercy, for the forbearance of thy right so long, I bless thy justice for
depriving me of that right at last. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away,
blessed be the name of the Lord.

XI.
GOD as he is the author of all the good we partake, so he has a hand in all
the evil we suffer. His holiness denies him to be a cause of the evil of
sin, his justice forces him to inflict the evil of punishment. Is there any
evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? This Job knew; when he
says, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away; not only the Chaldeans and
Sabeans, though they were the thieves, what they did was by Gods permission.
Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord? God
concurreth in every evil action, though not in the evil of the action. The
substance of it may be of God, when the obliquitie is of man. God has an
overruling hand over all men's wills, yet those wills may have contrary motions
of their own. Foolish men are they then, who being afflicted, either look upon
the evil, and not the cause, or if the cause, either the wrong, or more
immediate causes, as misfortune, malice of man, want of discretion. I will
therefore look not so much on my affliction, as on my afflicter, and that not
subordinate, but supreme; so shall I find my suffering to be the more sweet,
as proceeding from a gracious father, whose hand as it casts down will raise
up, as it wounds will heal. Thus in looking up to him the agent, he will
look down on me the patient, and either remove the evil from me, or make me
able to bear it.

XII.
GOd as he made man good, so he made every thing good for man. Man was made
incapable of corruption, and they of alteration. If man had not fallen from God
his Maker, they had not fallen from man their owner. Thus by one man sin,
death, corruption, alteration came into the world. It is sin which separateth
God from man, man from man, soul from body, man from his goods, his goods from
himself. Sin corrupts not only the soul, but the body, not only the
body, but the earth whence he came, and the heavens whither he should go. It
breeds a moth in our garments, a worm in our provision, rust in our silver,
it exposes all to the these. It sets not only God at enmity against man,
but man with man, yea beast with beast, yea and makes one man be a beast, a
Wolf, a Lion to another. So that if we lose the creature, it is because we
have made it lose its primitive nature. Now there is no other way to gain this
permanency, either to our selves or others, but by righteousness, as this
corruptibilitie came by unrighteousness. But on the earth dwells not this
righteousness nor durablenesse; but we look for a new heaven and new earth,
wherein dwells not only righteousness, but perpetuity, and never fading
happiness.

XIII.
THe Lesson of the creatures corruptibilitie, is that which the word of God
does still dictate, and which this world does daily demonstrate. We have the
volume of holy Writ, and the large volume of the creatures to teach us this.
The Word says; All is vanity; The world shows wherein this vanity lies. We
see men daily taken from their goods, and their goods from them; We see
corruptions and alteration of things, and yet we dream of such an unalterable
condition in all things which may reach to eternity. Imaginary continuance of
things is in our heads, when real changes are before our eyes. Every creature
groans out this, and yet we hear not its voice. We build Castles in the
air, and upon the sandy foundation of our own speculations, promise to our
selves an estate above the reach of enemies, whereas the next storm that
rises, does not only discover the weakness, but overthrow the foundation of
this imaginary fabrique. The fool in the Gospel (well so called) hugged
himself with this conceit, that he had enough laid up for many days, and
therefore bid his soul take its repose; whereas the next night his soul was
taken from him. Had his soul not been taken, his goods might. God though he
had not destroyed his corn in the field, yet he could have sent devourers into
his barns; yea, if he had still brought his corn into his mouth, he could have
sent leanenesse into his soul. Teach me, O Lord, to know not only my self,
but all flesh to be as grass, and all things to be vanity; so shall I use the
world as if Iused it not; so shall I enjoy my goods, and not be enjoyed by
them. Thus the longer I possess my riches, the more I shall know them, and the
less shall be not only my affection to them, but my affiance in them.

XIV.
WEre Riches ever tokens of Gods love for good, they would afflict man's heart
with as much sorrow in lofing, as they do affect it with joy in possessing. But
we see that sometimes God gives some their wealth as Ebud did the present to
Eglm, with a dagger to destroy them; or as God gave Israel a King, in his
wrath; or as Saul gave David his daughter, to ensnare him. This God does out of
justice to satiate their exorbitant desires, till furfeit of the creature
coming thereby, causes some greater evil. He puts this knife in these mad
men's hands, whereby they will destroy themselves and others. Of such David
says, Their table shall be made a snare: So that if we are brought to low
commons, we are delivered from the snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken,
and we are escaped. If thy wealth then proceed out of Gods love, it shall be
as durable as comfortable: but if it be given thee out of wrath, it will either
be an occasion of misery and vexation for the present, or of thy ruin at the
last. The wealth of the ungodly is either a snare to entangle their souls, or
else a thiese to steal them away.

XV.
COuld the creatures vexation be separated from its substance, it would be a
desirable object: but experience shows that to be impossible. We see men vex
and trouble themselves to procure wealth, thinking then to be eased of trouble,
when they are laden with substance; whereas in stead of their desired content,
they find abundance of unexpected cares. Look upon a worldling either sleeping
or waking, standing or going, at home or abroad, and you shall find that his
distracted countenance, his needless fears, his jealous imaginations, his
corroding cares to get more, and keep what he has, do plainly demonstrate
this. Now God is pleased there should be this medley, to embitter these dugges,
to cause these prickles about these Roses, to intermingle our joys with
sorrows, and interlace our commodities with discommodities, that we may be
weaned from them, and seek for such treasures above, which are not only
without mixture, but without measure, even at the right hand of God for
evermore.

XVI.
MAn being a reasonable creature, does not in any thing show himself more
unreasonable then in this, to think that any thing in the world has that in
it which is proportionable to the capacity of his soul. This appears in
those persons whose desires seeming for a while to be satiated with several
objects, supposing that this, or that thing being obtained, will terminate
their appetites, and settle their roving souls with a sweet repose, as if
there could be a nil ultra to seek for: whereas indeed in the prosecution of
more, the soul loses what it has; and thinking to gain more abundance, is
deprived of the true use and comfort of what it enjoyes. For the hope of what
such a one may have, swallows up the comfort of what he has: So vast and
capacious a thing is the soul the sooner shall the barren womo be satisfied,
yea sooner will the mouth of hell be filled, then it be satisfied with the
greatest confluence of outward things; and therefore sooner will the Sun be
weary, and stand still in its course, then it in the prosecution of earthly
objects. The reason hereof is, because the world yields nothing proportionable
to the souls nature: its nature is divine, infinite, immortal; but things of
this life are earthly, finite, perishing. Now that which is earthly savours
earthly things, and is satisfied with them; but that which is spiritual,
savours spiritual things, and can be only satisfied with them. You may fill a
Chest with money, but not with wisdom, knowledge, grace: And so may the soul
be filled with knowledge, and grace, but not with money; for the one has
dimensions, the other none: so that in one the thing contained may equalize the
thing containing, but not in the other. That then which satisfies the soul, is
only that which created it, redeemed it. So that after all the rovings and
disquisitions of the mind, it can find no true rest, till it pitch on God in
Christ. Like Noah's Dove, it being sent about the earth, finding no place to
light on, it must return to the place from whence it came.

Thou, O Lord, who did endue my soul with such capacious faculties, fill
them with they self for after its manifold wandering in the circle of this
world, it find no adequate satisfactory object, but in thee its center, in whom
all fullness dwells, and who art not only above all, and in all, but All in All.

XVII.
GENESIS 33.19. we read: strange sentence dropping out of Esau's mouth; I have
enough. Afterward, verse. 13. Jacob is in the same tune, I have enough, (or as
some translations have it) I have all, i.e. both temporal and spiritual. Out
of the fullness of the heart the mouth speaks; and out of the fullness of
pride of heart might Esau say thus, in that he scorned to be beholding to
Jacob; or else out of a fullness of modesty, in that he would not seem to
receive any of his. He that could in an outward form, even with tears, say,
Have thou not a blessing for me? might rest unsatisfied with temporal
blessings. His rough hands were not only tenacious of what he had, but as fit
to receive more, hold more. Lautent. Anat.
The Anatomists observe one special Artery to pass from the heart to the
tongue, to show that Nature would have the tongue to be the hearts Orator, to
express the same thing moving in the same motion: Yet we see where the heart is
not right, the tongue is not uniforme, this Artery suffers a distortion. Many
men with Esau, say, I have enough; but it is either because they know not how
to get more, or use more Give me, O Lord, the blessings of Jacob, the blessings
of thy right hand, and then my voice shall be the voice of Jacob, I have
enough; yea, I have all.

XVIII.
FOolish men that spend their labor for that which satisfies not, and expend
their money for that which is not bread, that let loose their thoughts, which
like Noabs Raven, return not again, but rove about after the carrion of this
world! It was the complaint of Jeremiah, that they who are clothed with
skarlet, lie on the dunghill; and and how may we complain of them who are
highly deseended, yet do seek only things below? It Is true that every man is
placed here on the earth as a treasurer of his own soul, the godly lay up a
good foundation; the wicked also even in treasuring up the world, do treasure
up wrath and oppression. How abundantly then soever my estate comes in, I will
never bid my soul be at rest, till it find it in Christ; nor will I ever think
I have much laid up for many days, unless it be in heaven with the Ancient of
days.

XIX.
LVke 10. we read of the respect that two sisters bore to Christ; the one to
his person, the other to his word: Martha's care was to entertain Christ
delicately, Mary's was to hear him diligently. Such a guest as he was, was
worthy to be entertained exquisitely, and such an Orator as he was, that spoke
as never man spoke, was worthy to be heard attentively. Yet we see that our
Savior had rather be entertained in us by his Word, then by us through our
service; yet how many are there as far behind Martha in the duty of serving,
as she was behind Mary in the duty of hearing? Make me, O Lord, to know the one
thing which is needful; so shall I not be troubled about many things. Thus
shall Ibe a brother to Mary, and a stranger to Martha.

XX.
AMong the evils which Solomon saw under the Sun, this was one, Eccles. 5.19.
A man to whom God has given riches, wealth, honor, so that be wants
nothing; yet God gives him not a heart: and power to eat thereof, but a
stranger eats it. A disease it is indeed, and almost Epidemicall: For how
many see we whose Barns are full, Fats overflow, yet fare coursly themselves;
have costly wardrobes, yet not power to put it on; have silver and gold in
abundance, yet die to save charges? Thus the Lord makes them treasurers for
other men: he gives them the creature, but reserves the comfort and use of it
for others. So that such in a manner have no more benefit or comfort by their
Corn and Wine, then the Barnes and Cellars that hold it; nor of their money,
then the Chests that contain it. Thus though they have their goods, yet in Jobs
words, Their good is not in their bands, i. e. the use and comfort is not in
their power. When ever I beg for a temporal blessing, I will add this to my
prayer, that this blessing may go along with it, even a heart to use it. Thus
a stranger shall not intermeddle with my joy.

XXI.
BUt there is another evil, which is this, that as many have much, but not
hearts to use it; so many have much, yet have hearts to use more. As evil a
disease it is to have a mind exceeding ones means, as means exceeding ones
mind. The power which many have to abuse the creature, is as common as the
want of power to use it. The Moralists say, that prodigality comes nearer the
mean then covetousness; how ever it cannot come to the nature of a virtue. He
then that has this heart to carry him to a profuse spending of what he has,
is as much to be pitied, as he that wants this heart to make use of what he
has. And if either of these drawneere the mean, God must give the one a heart,
and renew it in the other. It shall be my endeavor so to use what I have, as
not to abuse it; and so to apply to my self the comforts of my substance, as
not to deprive my self of the substance it self. Otherwise I shall at last
repent of having both a heart and riches: for when all is thus spent, the
comfort vanishes, the guilt abides.

XXII.
RIches have wings; Pro. 23.
now what is winged will keep no constant abode, unless it be straightened, or
its wings imped; and in shortning the wings of riches, we set them flying:
neither can they so be caged up, but at some time or other they will leave us,
or be taken from us. Some birds being let loose, may be lured back again, yet
not all birds, nor at all times. If then my riches will once fly from mein
possession, my safest way is to fly above them in affection. Thus shall I
light upon a better object, if they light upon another subject.

XXIII.
THis earthly globe is that dug and breast which the children of this world lie
sucking at, and which they will not leave so long as there is any sweetness in
it. God therefore to wean them from it, does with his Marah imbitter this
dugge, that so the present bitterness may make them forget all former
sweetness. Lord, though since I came into this world, nothing could content me
but this breast, nourish me but its milk, quiet me but its sweetness; yet
seeing now I see it imbittered by thee, make me to behave my self as a weaned
child, cause me to suck at the breasts of consolation; let those breasts
satisfy me.

XXIV.
COmmonly one affliction to Gods people, is the forerunner of another; Job and
no sooner heard of the loss of his Oxen, and Asses, but before that sound was
out of his ears, he hears of the loss of his sheep, and after that of his
servants, and sons. The smaller loss does usually usher in the greater. Thus
many are the troubles of the righteous, many blows must be given, before we
are squared and made fit stones for the spiritual Temple. In this troubled
Sea, wave will follow after wave, one depth call for another, till we are come
to our haven. I will then after one affliction look for another, prepare for
another; thus shall I be not only forewarned, but forearmed: if God reserve
another trial for me, he will renew my strength to overcome, or my patience to
bear it. My comfort is, that as my tribulations do abound, my glory shall
abound. After all these sad messages, God will send me some good Ahimaaz, that
will bring me good tidings of great joy.

XXV.
THe Prophet reproves them that trusted in broken Cisterns, Ier. 2.13.
that would not hold water, and forsook the fountain of living water. All the
comforts of this life are waters, yea cistern waters, and therefore not so
fresh as others, being standing, neither so continuing as others, being in
broken cisterns. Whatsoever I enjoy then shall be in God the fountain, and in
his promises the streams; so shall my comfort be ever savoury and everlasting,
when that which others enjoy in cisterns, shall be both unsavory and unconstant;
Job. 13
For a Summer will come when such waters shall make them ashamed. When their
bottles fail with Hagar, they shall wish for death, and then will the Lord
discover unto me a fountain of living water.

XXVI.
WE see in Cities where space of ground is precious, that the buildings are
more high and lofty, making more bold with the air and things above, when they
are scanted of earth and things beneath. This may teach something, and edify
us in our spiritual building. When our lot falls out in a small portion of
land here, to seek for a larger inheritance above in heaven, where is room
enough for us all, and whither we may boldly go. Lord seeing my portion is
slender, my estate narrow, build me up some stories higher in grace and
goodness, that so the less. I have in earth, the more I may have in heaven;
thus shall I be brought the nearer to thee, and receive more from thee. Had I
more scope here below, I should not tend upwards, or mind heavenly things.

XXVII.
THe only Sanctuary in man's extremity, is Gods all sufficiency. Psalm. 84.11.
The Lord is a Sun, and a Sbield; a Sun for consolation, a Shield for
protection. Now from this fullness in God, all comfort and safety is derived to
man. The Sun enlighteneth others, the Shield defends others. If we have a
communion with God, we shall have a communication of all from God. Grace and
glory will he give, yea no good thing will he withhold. Here then is our
happiness, that though we are near the jaws of death, this Shield is near
us (the Lord being a very present help;) that though the night of adversity
be long, yet this Sun will arise; and although being risen, clouds may be
interposed, yet the Sun keeps his place, and notwithstanding its light be
eclipsed, its influence is not hindered. Though my sins and troubles may cause
Gods face not to shine upon me, yet will he then uphold me by the influence of
his Spirit.

XXVIII.
ACquaint thy self with God, and be at peace, Job 22.21.
so good shall come unto thee; All our good, present or future, consists in and
is derived from our acquaintance and communion with GOD. Estrangednesse from
God, makes us acquainted with many evils; for all our miseries that befall us,
arise from want of communion with God, or want of renewing it, and breaches of
it. That now which makes us renew our acquaintance with him is affliction; for
before David was afflicted he went astray. The woman in the Gospel, had spent
all on the Physicians before she came to Christ. When we know not what to do,
or whither to go, then we go to him, our eyes are toward him. In these
times we see many that stood at distance, as not beholding to, or depending on
God, draw near unto him in his ordinances. Afflictions of themselves drive us
further form God, and make us seek other hiding places, but being sanctified,
they make us seek God early. Thus then is it good to be afflicted, when thereby
we are brought near to God. It shall be my endeavor to renew my acquaintance
with God, both morning and evening, so good shall come unto me, his mercies
toward me shall be new every morning.

XXIX.
AS in these Divisions the thoughts of many hearts are discovered; so also in
the same heart manifold thoughts discover themselves. Psalm. 94.19.
In the multitude of the thoughts of my heart, says David, thy comforts refresh
my soul. His thoughts were sometimes vexing, sometimes dejecting and
despairing; doubting, impatient, distracted, careful, fearful thoughts were
often raised in him. As manifold thoughts may and do arise from us in these
times of trouble. Here only is our misery, that having David's malady, we
cannot apply David's remedy; Depth of misery still calls after depth, yet we
cannot draw water out of the Wells of salvation. We are more troubled with the
dimensions of the enemies hatred, then we are comforted with the height,
depth, length, breadth of the love of God in Christ. A sad thing it is, that
Christians who are called to rejoice evermore, should let loose the reins to
worldly sorrow, so far till it work death. Surely, as excess of sin
provoked the Lord to cast these burdens on us, so excess of sorrow may cause
him to continue them. As by over-sad thoughts we injure our selves, so we
dishonor God, disgrace our calling, disparage his Word. Let weeping and
wailing possess them that have no God to rejoice in. Though in the world I
shall have tribulations, yet will I glory in them, and triumph over them in
Christ.

XXX.
WHen Hagars bottle of water was spent, Genesis 21.
she fell a crying, whereas there was a fountain close by her, but those
waters that appeared from within her, hindered the appearance of any water
without her; her weeping hindered the sight of the fountain. The condition of
her is common to many puling Christians now, whose spirits do fail, being
overcome with grief, when their stocks are spent, and their trades decayed. In
this affliction of the people of God they might see in God a fountain to make
glad the city of God; but only excess of worldly sorrow causes a defect of
heavenly joy. For when our eyes do thus run down with tears, the eye of faith
waxes dim, and so we stand in our own light. Why art thou then disuieted, Oh
my soul? though the bottle of thy estate be empty, yet the Lord will either
fill it again, or discover unto thee a fountain which will always run afresh.

XXXI.
It Is an ordinary thing to see men under some temporal loss to hang down their
heads like bulrushes, and go mourning all the day long; and yet cannot have
their spirits brought one degree lower for the loss of Gods favor. Foolish
men! that let loose their affections on the least evil, and are not sensible
of the greatest. That indeed which we love most to enjoy, we grieve most for at
the departure. Now this error in affection arises from this error in
judgment, in supposing that temporal things are good without Gods favor, or
that Gods countenance and favor is not more then temporal things. Surely,
that man knows not what God is, or his favor, that knows not how to sorrow for
the lose of it. If God inflict a temporal loss upon me, it may produce a
temporal moderate sorrow; but if the Lord hide his face from me, never was any
sorrow like my sorrow. Of all losses, let me not lose the favor of my God.
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me.

XXXII.
OUr Savior forbids us to care for to morrow, Mat. 6.34.
and bids us cast our care upon him, for he cares for us. This prohibition, as
it should not make us careful, so it should not leave us careless. The eye of
the Lord runs to and fro the earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of
them whose hearts are upright; yet is not his eye so upon us, as if we should
turn our own eyes off our selves, and not look to the main chance. Gods
general providence over us does not take away our providence over our selves.
He that so casts his burden on the Lord, so as to ease his own shoulders
altogether, shall have more infirmities then his spirit will bear. He that is
altogether careless of himself, because of Gods providence over him, may be a
beggar at last. The care then of my heavenly Father as it forbids the care of
diffidence in him, so it requires and implies a care of diligence toward my
self.

XXXIII.
There Is none in this world but more or less, has or shall taste of the cup
of affliction. Some have only a sip at the brim, others drink more deeply of
it; yet the Lord deals with his people as a wise Physician, administering not
only according to his own pleasure, but their strength. God does not force
whole ^ups on them, if it be not for their health; not a dram or drop shall be
more in the Dosis then his wisdom shall direct, and their patience bear. If
any say he never tasted hereof, I tell him it is a sign there is a vial
reserved for him in the hands of God, which he must drink to the bottom. O
Lord, I know, that to flesh and blood this cup is bitter, even as the waters of
Marah; cast in the sweet wood of thy grace, or else let this cup pass from me.

XXXIV.
LIght is sown for the righteous, Psalm. 97.11.
and joy for the upright in heart, says David. Now that which is sown does not
presently appear, but may lie covered with clods; and a long time is required
before harvest come; in the meanwhile the husbandman waits patiently. O then
though I see no light, yet I may expect it, for it is not cast away but sown, and
being sown is not buried, but covered; there is hope it will sprout again. What
then? though I have sown in tears, I shall reap in joy; and though I have gone
out weeping, I shall bring my sheaves with me; though all I have be sown, nay
cast on the waters, yet shall it return after many days: I will be content
with all sorts of weather, so my harvest be seasonable and fruitful; let my
heaviness be all the night, yet joy shall come in the morning; and this I need
not doubt of, for though it be midnight now, shall I therefore conclude the Sun
will never rise, or that it is not nearer its rising?

XXXV.
WHerefore does a living man complain, Lam. 3.39, 40.
a man for the punishment of his sin? In which words the Spirit of God coucheth
a threefold argument against murmuring under our sufferings. First, we are
men, creatures, and what impudence is it for such to complain against their
Creator, who may place us in what condition he pleases? Secondly, we are
sinners, so that what we suffer, is our demerit and wages, and what madness
is it to accuse the just Judge of Heaven and Earth with injustice? Thirdly, we
are living men, and therefore God has punished us less then other sinners, as
we are on this side the grave and hell, and what unthankfulness is it to
repine against that hand that has punished us in mercy? These reasons well
applied, may stop the mouth of any murmurer: for as thou art a man, God has
power over thee as a Potter over his vessel, to make thee for honor or
dishonor. As thou art a sinner, it is Gods mercy thou art not consumed; for sin
being finished, brings forth death. As thou art yet alive, so praise the
Lord, and murmr not against him, who might as justly have turned thee into
hell, as he has turned thee out of thy house, and might have deprived thee of
thy life, as he has of thy livelihood.

XXXVI.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me?
Still trust in God. Here David reproves and directs himself. The spirit of a
man is a tender part, and yet a strong part. As there is nothing more sensible,
and apt to be cast down, so nothing is more strong, being upheld by divine
power. For the spirit of a man will sustain its infirmities, but a wounded
spirit who can bear? Extremities and pressures may for a while deject and
disquiet it, but falth will raise it up, and quiet it. So much unbelief as is
in it, so much weakness, and so much faith as is in it, so much boldness. Why
are ye fearful, Oyee of little faith, says our Savior: there we see the
excess of fear arose from the defect of faith. So far as my heart is evil,
it is unbelieving, and as far as it is unbelieving, it departs from God, and
as far as it departs from God, it departs from true peace and comfort. To
prevent this, David's own counsel must be mine; Still trust in God. Distrust in
God is the cause of all disquietnesse in our selves.

XXXVII.
IN the world ye shall have tribulation, Ioh. 16.33.
but be of good comfort, I have overcome the world, says Christ. The world as
it is a Christians prison and tormentor, so it is also his captive. Yet
notwithstanding the world be overcome, it opposes, though it be crucified, it
strugleth. The world is the way, and therefore may be foul as well as fair.
We are strangers here, and therefore are spectacles to the men of this world,
the objects not only of their admiration, but indignation. That dog which
fawnes on the inmate, may not only bark at, but bite a stranger. Our happiness
is that as we suffer here, we conquer here, yea we conquer whiles we suffer,
and do overcome whiles we are overcome. Yea we are more then conquerers
through him that loved us; and this is our victory that overcomes the world,
even our faith.

XXXVIII.
When believers are pensive and sad, by reason of outward crosses, they must
examine and try the object of their faith, and the grounds of their believing;
For usually sorrow is there excessive, where faith is little, and too much
sorrow for outward crosses does commonly argue too much confidence in outward
goods. Above all persons, a true believer may always rejoice, and then most,
when it goes worst with him. For his God is the God of consolation; the fruit
of Gods Spirit is joy unspeakable and glorious; it is one of Christ's offices to
comfort his people; The Ordinances yield strong consolation; by the communion
of Saints, their joy is made more full; and the fullness of joy, they are
assured of hereafter. It Is Satan therefore only that makes these consolations
of the Almighty seem light; for the Devil in the overthrowing the outward
estate, aims chiefly to impair the inward. In the spoiling of Jobs goods, it
was his endeavor to rob him of his comfort, and make him curse God.

XXXIX.
IT is observable that Paul though he had as much as any to glory of, yet he
gloried in nothing so much, 2 Cor. 12.5.
as in his infirmities, reproaches, necessities, distresses for Christ's sake,
in his bonds and chains for Jesus. Surely there was something in those bonds,
that made them so precious, it was the name of Jesus, which like a precious
Jewel fixed in these bonds, that did so endeare them to him. Yet we see what
was Paul's glory is others shame, when some glory in their wealth, others in
their power, others in their wisdom, none glory in the Lord, such glory in
their shame. But how much glory then have the persecutors conferred on Gods
people? Surely did they know that to be honor which they confer on them as
shame, they would dispose of it elsewhere. Why art thou then ashamed, O my
soul, of that which others did glory? Know that to these bonds is a crown
annexed, and if with the Apostle thou art laid in them, there is laid up a
crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge has not only given Paul,
but will give to thee, and to every one that loves his appearing. 2 Timothy 4.8.


XL.
A Sin poverty it is hard to keep under our nature, and bridle our mouths from
expressions of discontent and murmuring; so it is as difficult to restrain them
from glorying and boasting, when riches do increase. See this in good
Hezekiah, Isa 39.1
who was not happy enough to enjoy his gold, silver, spices, ointments,
unless also he might show it to the servants of Merodachbaladan. So vain are
our natures, that we never know we have enough, till others know it so also.
Such has also been the abundance of many among us in times of peace, that
their wealth and delectable things, have served only to satiate their own eyes
with reviewing, and others with viewing. Vain men would not only be rich, but
be esteemed so. Now as in a Plethora of body, so of the soul, something must
be taken from the whole, left the whole perish. Hezekiahs goods are showed to
the Babylonish Messengers, and therefore God threatens, that they shall be
taken away by the Babylonians. When we cannot be content with much without
showing it to others, we must be content with less for showing it to others.
It Is not only justice, but wisdom in God to have that stolen from us, which
otherwise would steal our hearts from God. If therefore the Lord has dealt
with thee as with Hezekiah, get his patience, saying, Good is the Word of the
Lord. Know that that is of most worth, which is not worth showing. We cannot
show our fullness to others, without discovering our emptiness to God. Let not
him that is rich, glory in his riches, for his glorying in them, may be the
only means to deprive him of them.

XLI.
When the pride of Israel did testify against it self, Isa. 3.
the Lord took from her her delectable and pleasant things. Of all sins God
does and will resist pride, for that does most resist him. That being followed
will depose him, and therefore he will follow to depose that. The mother of
pride is usually plenty, now this daughter would in time devour the mother,
did not God bring her down. As Isreal's, so Englands pride, does testify
against her; and therefore as he dealt with the daughters of Israel, he will
deal with the daughters of England. Because the daughters of Sion are
haughty, therefore he will smite with a scab the crown of their head; he will
take away their bravery and tinkling ornaments. Thus shall our sorrow for the
loss be more, then the comfort in the enjoying. That which was the pride of
many, is now become their shame. Those things which in possessing yield most
comfort, at parting produce most sorrow. Falst objects of love, yield false
comforts and true fears.

XLII.
AS nature is content with little for food, so would it be with as little for
raiment. But the excess in one is as great as the excess in the other. Dives
did not only fare sumptuously every day, but was also clothed in purple and
fine linen. Leaves and skins were our first parents array; raiment was to them
a shame, though it be to us a glory. Man had not known himself naked, had he
not sinned. Garments then are only a covert for that which sin laid open. If
clothing therefore followed man's misery, I see not how its excellency should
truly further man's happiness. Such adorned bodies may have naked souls. If
ever I am ambitious of clothing, it shall be of those garments of salvation,
which will alone make me glorious within. I scorn such array, wherein I shall
seem admirable to men, and abominable to my God.

XLIII.
TO all things there is an appointed time, Eccles. 3.6.8.
says Solomon. A time to lose, and a time to keep; a time for war, and a time
for peace. God is the Lord of times and seasons, and these times through his
disposing, have a successive intercourse in this life. Yet spiritually all
times, are one to a true believer; for in times of war he finds peace; when
the Assyrian is in the land, Christ is their peace; and in times of losing,
they are gainers; for as the outward man, like the house of Saul decreaseth,
the inner man, like that of David, waxes greater. But then in the next life,
when time shall be no more, there will be nothing but gaining, and keeping, no
losing nor wars and discord there, but peace and concord.

XLIV.
IN the history of Joseph we read, Genesis 45.
that he sent Wagons and provision for his father Jacob and his family;
having procured and reserved the land of Goshen for him till his coming. Now
lest Jacob might hardly be persuaded to leave behind him his household goods,
the King of Egypt bids him not regard that stuff, for the Land of Egypt was
before him: Joseph was a type of Christ, as well in his low estate when he was
sold, as in his high estate when he was able to give: Now Christ has invited
me to forsake all, and come unto him, having provided and promised me a Goshen,
a mansion; he also will send me enough to maintain me by the way. Why then
should I regard such stuff as will cumber me by the way, and be no comfort to
me at the end? I will be content with ordinary provision in the way, when I am
sure to find extraordinary entertainment at home.

XLV.
THe Church is described, Rev. 12. to be clothed with the Sun, and to have
the Moon under her feet. By the Sun is meant Christ, by the Moon all earthly
things, by being under feet, notes subjection, shame, disesteeme. Those new
converts therefore in the Acts, did not cast their money into the Apostles laps,
or put it into their hands, but threw it down at their feet, as so much dung,
fitter for trampling on, then handling. But as the Church does so, the wicked
do the contrary, putting Christ the Sun under feet, and the Moon on their
heads. Though for the present use I may have the Moon in my hands, yet in
opposition to the Sun, it shall be at my feet. I will esteem all these
sublunary things, as loss for Christ: For all things are so far under us, as
we are above our selves. He that is clothed after this woman's fashion, shall
surpass others as far as the Sun does the Moon in glory.

XLVI.
Where only temporal things are enjoyed by a man, that man is in danger of
being enjoyed by them; such objects are likely to engross his affections and
desires. But when by losses a divorce is made from the first love, another is
sought for. The heart will more easily be brought to affect a more abiding
object. Prosperity dilates the affections, and makes a man lose himself in the
creature; but adversity unites and gathers in all the powers of the soul, and
settles them on God more fervently and lastingly. Either we must leave earthly
things, or they leave us, before we affect or possess spiritual. The children
of Israel had spent their Garlic and Onions before they tasted any Manna.

XLVII.
ALL things are yours, 1 Cor. 3.21.
says the Apostle, all things present and and to come: yea, having nothing to
see, they possess all things by faith. Believers have a right to earthly
things, Iusad rem, non in re. Aquin.
though not in them; but they have a right to and in heavenly things. All
things then are theirs, as well what they want, as what they enjoy. Yet seeing
in this life a Christian is in his nonage, he has not actual possession of
all that he has title unto: However he shall not want what is required to
maintain him; he shall have comforts, yea and afflictions and wants, so as to
further him in the way. For sanctified afflictions are not the least tokens of
Gods love, or of a godly man's possession here.

XLVIII.
THe sum of all promises is comprised in this, Heb. 13.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Parents, friends, lands, goods, may
leave and forsake us, or we may leave and forsake them; but God neither will
nor can leave us. How can I give thee up, O Israel? says God. Now God is all
in all. Am not I better to thee then ten sons? said Elkanah to Hannah. So may
God say, Am not I better to thee then many goods, many friends? They may leave
thee, I will not. God may for a while seem to leave us; but it is only as a
parent does the child, to try it how 'twill go or stand by it self: nay, when
his hand is off them, he guides them with his eye. Gods children stand him in
as much, cost him as dear, as any mothers child, and yet a mother may forget
her sucking child, yet he Lord cannot forget his. Therefore let the world, and
all in the world, leave me and forsake me, yet I will not be cast down, if God
say but this to me, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

XLIX.
GEt thee out of thy Country, Genesis 12.1.
and from thy fathers house, unto a land that I shall show thee, says God to
Abraham. A strange command, fit only for him who was the father of the
faithful. Against this command first natural affection might plead, not to
relinquish his kindred and fathers house; then common reason might plead for
his right which he had in his native country, and to part with a certainty for
an uncertainty: yet this and all that could be said by Abraham, was silenced
by Abraham's faith; he makes no put-offs, he reasons not with flesh and blood,
he craves not time, he needs not an Angel to hasten him, as Lot did out of
Sodom; but away he goes: yet it is a question what Abraham would have done if
he had not had a promise given him as large as his command. For the most part,
the obedience of the best is mercenary, we have an eye to the recompense of
reward. What God did command and promise Abraham, the same does Christ command
and promise to all that follow him, viz. that they forsake all, and then his
promise is, that whosoever forsakes father, mother, sister, brother, lands,
goods, for my Name sake, be shall receive an handred fold: not eight or ten in
the hundred, but an hundred for one. Lord, how grievous soever thy command be
to me, how contrary to flesh and blood, I will not dispute, but obey, and obey
because thou command, I will bleeve because thou promisest. Thus if I have
Abraham's faith, I must have Abraham's obedience, and shall have Abraham's reward;
thou will be unto me, as thou wast unto Abraham, an exceeding great reward.

L.
AFfliction is Gods furnance, whereby he does, as twere with fire, purify his
people, called therefore the fiery trial. Now as the dross and corruption is,
so does God heat his furnace. The Lord is willing to do away these spots by
more gentle means, by water; but they are so grounded in us, that they cannot
be done out but by fire. In the younger days of the world, sin did abound,
and then the Lord took it away be water: but as the world grows older, it
grows worser, and is more abundant in sin, and therefore 'twill want fire to
do it away. Now though for the present this trial be grievous, yet the issue
is the peaceable fruit of righteousness. Though we are put into the fire by
the sons of men, yet the Son of God abides with us in it, as he did with
the three children, God will either abate or suspend the power of the fire, or
else increase our patience; so shall we come out with more glory, and less
corruption; this being all the fruit, to take away all the dross. Lord, thou
have kindled a fire among us, which among others has consumed my estate; my
comfort is, that though by reason thereof, I am left the poorer, yet I shall be
found the purer.

LI.
THe Apostle would not have us to think strange of the fiery trial, 1 Pet.
4.12.
i.e. as if it were a strange thing, and unusual, seldom seen or heard of:
However the thoughts of most are otherwise of it, when they murmr and say,
Never were the times so bad, never such a time of losing. Thus they who are
afflicted of God, become so many spectacles to others, as if they were so many
monsters. But grant we all this, that these trials are strange, yet the Lord is
just, who therefore sends them, because he finds in us as strange corruptions,
as strange fashions, strange swearing haunting after the strange woman. I will
think it strange then, if no strange judgment follow, when sin is more then
ordinary.

LII.
IT is usual with men to complain of the times badnesse, whereas the times
might as justly complain of their badnesse. For as many are made worse by the
times, so the times are made worse by many. If ever therefore we look to see
better times, we must look to be better persons. God must first mend us, and
then the times will mend themselves.

LIII.
Fear not, Isai. 41.14.
O worm Jacob, says God, though thou walk through the fire, it shall not
burn thee, and through the water, it shall not overwhelme thee, for I am with
thee. Gods presence sanctifies and sweetens any estate. What makes heaven but
the presence of God? And what makes hell but the absence of God? Let God be
present in any condition, and it shall be full of comfort, though it be full
of trouble; and usually God is more present with his in adversity then in
prosperity. It is not affliction, but sin that separates God from us. It
should be our care then to seek for his presence in troubles, comfort our
selves in it in troubles, behave our selves so as he may not withdraw it; for
as David having Gods presence, feared nothing, though walking in the valley of
the shadow of death; yet when the Lord hid his face, he was troubled.

LIVE.
When we see some escape scotfree from the overflowing scourge, and suffer no
losses through neutrality or malignancy, some there be that envy their
happiness; Hos. 4.14.
but when we read that the Lord chastises every son be receives, and
loves, and says, being angry, I will not punish your daughters, they should
rather be the objects of our pity, then of our envy. It is the greatest sign
of Gods anger, not to seem angry; and the greatest punishment to go
unpunished. In affliction this is all the fruit, to take away the dross; and
where there is nothing but dross, who will be at the charge of refining? He
then that in public sufferings undergoes nothing here, is likely to suffer
most hereafter, being reserved to that great day. Unhappy children, though
connived at for a while, are paid for all at last. It shall be my happiness
to suffer affliction with them here, with whom I shall reign for ever
hereafter. Better it is to be a child under wrath, then a chhild of wrath.

LV.
THe Lord does commonly punish sin in its own kind, so that in the judgment
we may read the fault. Thus Adonizedechs cruelty was rewarded with the like
cruelty. The old Law was, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; and there was
a thumb for a thoumb, a toe for a toe. Thus Pharaohs bloody intent turned the
rivers into blood. David's adultery in his neighbors bed, kindled the same fire
in his own. Dives his luxury brought on him penury. Sometimes also abuse of
good things is punished with the want of them; abuse of liealth with sickness,
of peace with war, of riches with poverty. Thou, O Lord, art just in
depriving me of my goods, surely I did affect them too much, or not use them
well, or trust in them too much. Deserved disappointment is usually the fruit
of presumptuous confidence. It is Gods will and our wisdom to learn to spell
our sins out of his judgments.

LVI.
IT is usual with men to complain of the suffering, when they do not of the
sin: For when Nature opens the mouth for the former, Satan stoppes it for
the latter. Now as quickness of the flesh is the cause of the one, so
deadness of spirit is the cause of the other. For when the eye is opened to
see sin, the spirit prssed with the weight of it, the mouth will open to
complain against it. See it in a clock, which if it have its just weight, sets
every wheel in its motion, and makes it sound: so let sin have its just
weight and pressure on the soul, and it will set every faculty of the soul,
and part of the body on work, and will make the tongue cry aloud against it,
though formerly silent. It Is true that extremity of pain makes wicked men cry
out against sin: I and my people have done wickedly, says Pharaoh. The rack
will open any man's mouth: but in the godly this confession is not extorted, but
free; I have sinned, says David, and done this wickedness in thy sight. I
will therefore not so much exclaim against my suffering as against my sin; so
when I have condemned my self for the fault, I shall through mercy be
acquitted from the punishment.

LVII.
When we see men fare deliciously every day, there is no reason why we should
repine at their fading happiness, having their portion only in this life, and
being fatted against the day of slaughter. Green herbs with contentment
(says the wisest) is better then a stalled ox with debate. Content is that
which sweetneth and sawceth the plainest fare. When I look upon my own
deservings, what sin has deprived me of, and also look to what I have
through grace in the promise, I need not murmr. The place where I am, is a
strange country, and strangers cannot choose their diet. As long as I am from
my fathers house, I may be glad with husks; but when I come unto him, the
fatted Calfe shall be provided for me, there shall I be satisfied as with
marrow and fatness.

LVIII.
THe tune of the world is, What news? What news? whereas if we call to mind
the days of old, we shall find nothing new. What befalls the Church now in
general, or any one in particular, the primitive times, and our predecessors
have partaken of. As bad wars, and rumors of wars, as great spoiling, as
many losses and crosses as ever be now. Thus no temptation befalls us, but what
is common to the Saints. But as man expects news, so God also looks for news,
even for new men and new minds, he would have old things past, and all things
become new. And indeed we are not fit for good news, till we our selves are
made good and new. Old bottles are not fit for new wine. Renew, O Lord, the
spirit of my mind, so shall I hear of joy and gladness; and what I hear,
shall not only be new, but good. I will therefore be as inquisitive what is new
within me, as what is new without me.

LIX.
TO you it is given in the behalf of Christ, Phil. 1.29.
not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake, says the
Apostle of his Philippians: implying that believing in Christ, and suffering
for Christ, are two different gifts of God; yet such gifts they are, as one
does in some measure accompany the other. A weak faith may suffer something in
loss of goods, or good name for Christ, though he cannot resist to blood, and
loss of life: for when faith is weak, fear is strong, and doubts are many. So
far as we incline to nature, we decline from and avoid sufferings. As our
faith is in Christ, so is our love to him, either in the sparkle or in the
flame, such as many waters cannot quench. There is such a faith as may make us
not only active, but passive for Christ. It shall be my desire and prayer, not
only for the gift of believing, but with it the gift of suffering. How can I
have a true faith in Christ, and no power from Christ to suffer any thing for
him who suffered all for me, nay who suffers all in me.

LX.
WE see in these days, what shifts the men of the world make to save
themselves. One to his Tower and Castle; some put their trust in horses; others
in riches; one hides; another flies. As the man is carnal, his confidence is
carnal, his weapons and helps of deliverance carnal. From this carnal
wisdom, a spiritual man may learn spiritual wisdom, viz. when he sees the
evil to hide himself; and where can he with safety hide himself, but in the
Lord, who is the Rock, Castle, Tower, and hiding place of his people? For what
safety, help, succor, confidence is in, or can be expected from any of these
earthly helps; the same in a more abundant manner is in the Lord. The Name of
the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous fly unto it and are safe. Such a
Tower he is (if any comparison can illustrate it) as the Tower of David, which
was for an Armory, wherein there hung a thousand Bucklers, all Shields of
mighty men. To this Tower I will resort, from this Tower I will fetch
Ammunition; so shall I be safe from the enemy, and strong against him. Let some
put their trust in Chariots, others in horses, I will put my trust in the Lord;
for a horse is a vain thing; vain is the help of man: He is only strong,
that is strong in the Lord.

LXI.
WE always read that God provides a refuge and hiding place for his people
in times of trouble and danger. An Arc for Noah; flaggs for Moses; a little
Zoar for Lot; a Midian for Moses; a Haran for Jacob; Caves and rocks in the
City Keilab for David; the Temple his own house for Joash; a cave for Obadiahs
hundred Prophets; an Egypt for Paul; a Pella for the Christians leaving
Jerusalem. The Lord hides them, because they are dear to him; they are his
jewels, his treasure; now in times of danger men hide their treasures, and
jewels, have their Cabinets. I am thine, O Lord, and therefore be thou my
hiding place, cover me with thy feathers, hide me in thy Pavilion, keep me
secretly in thy Tabernacle from the pride of men and strife of tongues. Thus as
the lame and blind having got into the Tower of Sion, derided David; so having
gotten thee to be my Tower, I will laugh at calamities, wars, dangers.

LXII.
The wicked are as a troubled Sea. Psa. 42.7. Rev. 12.15. Isa. 59.19. Psa. 32.6
The troubles which they bring on the godly, are metaphorically called waters,
floods of waters. Now water is one of the most merciless creatures, if it be
not contained, it will of it self keep no bounds, but overflow all, carry
away all before it. The help which the godly may expect herein is from the Lord,
who has promised, that in floods of great waters they shall not come nigh
thee. If they do come nigh their souls, yet will the Lord be with them, so
that they shall not drown them. In such inundations, god does either provide
for his an Arc to carry them above, as he did for Noah; or one to draw us out,
as he did for Moses, or else will cause the flood to be swallowed up, and the
place made dry ground, as he did for the Church, Rev. 12. This distracted
Kingdom is as a troubled Sea, the waters thereof come nigh our souls. Our
hope is, that he who sets bounds to the Sea, that it shall go no further,
will limit the rage of these waters, and either carry us above them by his
power, or be with us in them by his presence, and make a way for us through
them by his providence, as he did for Israel, that so we may attain to his
heavenly Canaan.

LXIII.
MAny are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34.15.
but the Lord delivers them out of all. Job 5.19.
He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch
thee. Where some of the learned say, the Spirit of God alludeth unto the days
of the Lords work of Creation in the six days, and cessation on the seventh,
implying that his servants must labor all the days of their lives with grief
and sorrow, and shall not be refreshed till that everlasting Sabbath. Others
conceive, that by six and seven, are understood many evils, Pro. 24.16.
an indefinite number for a definite. However, if all my days must be spent in
sorrow, I will comfort my self with the assured hope of a time of refreshing
and rest at last. As my troubles are many, my deliverances shall be as many,
though my labor be long and tedious, my rest shall be joyous and eternal.
That Sabbaticall year will recompense me for the years wherein I have suffered
adversity.

LXIV.
Our light affliction which is but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17.
works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory, says the
Apostle most sweetly. Where we see a very elegant Antithesis or opposition
betwixt present afflictions and future glory. We shall have for affliction
glory, for light affliction massy substantial glory, a weight of glory; for
momentary affliction, eternal glory: Yea he adds, degrees of comparison
beyond all degrees; calling it excellent, more excellent, far more excellent,
an exceeding excessive weight of glory.A full and pithy speech, sufficient to
make one swallow down the most bitter affliction. Eternal glory will answer
temporal afflictions; A weight of glory, will weigh down light afflictions. I
will therefore not murmr at my afflictions, seeing glory succeeds them; I
will willingly go through momentary afflictions, when my glory shall be
eternal. My affliction shall seem light, when I think of that weight of glory.

LXV.
PErfection and perpetuity, are the two satisfactory conditions which an
enlightened soul requires in any defired object, neither is any thing by it
esteemed truly perfect, unless it be accompanied with perpetuity. Now if we
look for perpetuity in the creature, we may hear every thing say, as
concerning wisdom; The Depth says, Job 28.14.
it is not in me; the Sea says, it is not in me. To this demand, things do
thus subscribe; Riches say, Yours till a time of war; Honors say, Yours till
an enemy eclipse your Princes favor; Friends say, yours as you use him; Wives
say, yours till death; God only says, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. In him only is perfection, who is the most perfect, perpetuity only in
him who is the same for ever.

LXVI.
IT was a grievous affliction for David to be dispossessed of his Kingdom by
his own Son: Yet he says in that condition, 2 Samuel 15.20.
I the Lord say, I have no delight in him, lo here am I, let him do unto me
as it seems good in his eyes. The loss would not be of a small thing, but of
a Kingdom, and the person by whom he might have been dethroned, was not a
stranger, or an enemy, nor a familiar friend, but a son. Yet in all this he
submits his will to God. It is a hard thing to bring the will low, when the
estate is low; stubbornnes and pride may rest there where is no outward thing
to foment it. In some passion directs their wills, in most reason, but grace
only makes it stoop to gods will. Lord though I am driven out of all with
David, and if my estate be not framed to my will, frame my will to my estate;
as the one is low, let the other be low also. If I must have David's sufferings,
I desire David's patience, and then I will say with David, Lo here am I, let
him do with me what seems good in his eyes; or with the son of David; Not my
will, but thy will be done.

LXVII.
I Have been young, Psa. 37.25.
says, David, and now an old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor
then seed begging bread. How different then seems the condition of Gods people
now in these days, over it did in David's? Are the righteous more in number now
then they were then, and so is not their heavenly Father able to provide for
all? Or else does he take less care of them now, then he did then? No, God
forbid. The truth is, that David in his own observation in his time might not
see this; for he says not, the righteous is never forsaken, but that he never
saw it. Or else he might never see the righteous and their see too forsaken;
for we see godly parents want, when afterward their children do abound. Or
else David's meaning might be this, that he never saw the righteous forsaken in
begging their bread, i.e. no not forsaken when they are brought to beggary; but
even then the bowels of some might yearn upon them to refresh their bowels.
Lord though thou inflictest poverty on me, yet remove it from my seed; or if
thou have decreed both me and mine to beggary, yet let us not be forsaken in
beggary.

LXVIII.
WE know not what to do, 2 Chro. 20.12.
only our eyes are to thee, says good Johosaphat. Such may be the extremities
of Gods people, that they may be at their wits ends, neither wisdom nor
learning can teach them how to behave themselves in their evils, much less
how to come out of them. The Lord does often hide from us that help which we
look for in the creature, that we may look for it in him the creator. Our case
is not behind Jehosaphats; for if we look about us, we see nothing but
tumults, fightings, so that we know not what to do; if within us, there is
nothing but terrors, sorrow and sadness of heart: in this case then we should
look above us to God, who will instruct us in the way we should go. I will
therefore in my extremity, shut the eye of sense in looking on my misery and
weakness, and open the eye of faith to look on Gods mercy and power. Thus
lifting up my eyes to the hills, from whence comes my help, I shall receive
help from them. God will be seen in the Mount, my extremity shall be his
opportunity.

LXIX.
MArk 10. we read of Peter's demand to Christ, Lo we have left all and
followed thee; What shall we have therefore? If you did look for gain Peter,
it had been your wisest course to have made your bargain at your first
entrance into your Masters service. But what great matter was it that you did
forsake? Perhaps a torn net, an old pieced boat, a rotten oar: methinks the
livery of Christ, and the bare title of being his servant, should counterpoiz
all that you forsook for him. Had thou known what a faithful servant thou
did prove to him in the high Priests hall, shame would have stopped thy mouth
from this demand: yet to this saucy demand our meek Savior does not give him a
rough answer, bidding him go as he came, or tell him he should stand to his
courtesy; but tells him that for what he had lost, he should have an hundred
fold here with persecution, and eternal life hereafter. O Lord, my losses
perhaps do not come behind Peter's; I will not demaud with Peter, what I shall
have, but stand to thy courtesy: if with him thou repaiest me here an hundred
fold, I will look for persecution with it; but give me life eternal hereafter,
and then I shall say, I am paid, overpaid for all.

LXX.
THE shallowness of our thoughts in comparison of Gods, appears in this, that
when we see the means wanting, we think then God is hindered from working, and
our selves deprived of all hope of good. To help this we have the power of God
set forth sometimes above all means, and beyond expectation, as when he gave
Israel Manna, and Samson water. Sometimes by making a little means suffice, as
he did by feeding five thousand persons with five loaves and two fishes.
Sometimes without means, as he did by preserving Moses and Elias forty days
fasting. Sometimes against means, thus when the Disciples did drink poison, it
did not hurt them. I will never therefore despair for want of means, when I
can trust upon a God that can preserve me not only above means, but without
means, yea and against means. It is not for want of power in God, but from
abundance and multiplying of his goodness, that he uses any means at all.

LXXI.
COnsider the Ravens which neither sow nor reap, Luke 12.24.
and yet the Lord feeds them, says our Savior; Christ could have brought
other examples of holy men, and bid them consider Moses, Samson, Elijah, John
Baptist, who were extraordinarily cared for and fed by the Lord; but he would
not, because none should exclude themselves from Gods providence, because they
had not the holiness of those persons; as also because it should be an
argument for their faith, a majori, that if the master of the house provide for
the poultry, he will not neglect his children. Thy providence, O Lord,
extends to all, the earth is full of thy goodness; I will not then exclude
my self from it, seeing besides thy providence, I have thy promise, that I
shall lack nothing. Thy esteem of me does oblige thee to it, as I am of more
value then many Ravens; I am a child, and what child will doubt of present
maintenance from his Father here, who is assured of a future inheritance from
him hereafter?

LXXII.
FEed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and say,
Who is the Lord? Prove. 30.8.
was Agurs prayer, wherein he implies, 1. That that food is convenient for
some, which is not for others; the condition, custom, means, education of
some, being different from others. 2. That fullness is a mean, or occasion of
denying the Lord; they that have and possess all things in fullness and
abundance, are not so likely to come to the Lord for their daily food, as they
that have it for a day, not for the morrow. The larger the Cisterneis, the
seldomer we go to the Well. The staff of bread if it be long and large, is
still leaned upon without looking to the Lord. Nature is content with little,
grace with less, food brought in by Ravens, was more convenient for Eliah then
the dainties of Jazabe's Table; and Daniels pulse, then Nebuchadnezzars
delicious fare. A good conscience is a continual feast, it will make barley
bread taste well, digest well. Let the Lord feed me with any food, it shall be
covenient for me, so he sauce it with his Hidden Manna.

LXXIII.
GOD does not give all his children his blessings in the gross, but by little
and little; not for their lives, nor from year to year, but from day to day.
Should we have all at once, we should be less thankful, and less fruitful.
One excessive violent shower will not make the earth so fruitful, as often
dewes and rain. He that powers down one great favor, and withholds his hand,
shall not so oblige the receiver, as he that drops a token daily. Besides, the
Lord takes this order in the dispensation of his mercies, that we may by prayer
seek to him for our daily bread, therefore called daily, because we must seek
daily for it. Should the Lord with the prodigal give us our portion at once,
we should take our farewell, and never return till necessity drive us. The
better therefore to fly unto God on the wings of devotion, we are kept low,
thus shall we know his love, and return to him at a call; whereas if we had all
things at the full, we should take the wing and follow after vanity. When
mercies thus come by degrees, we are made to wait for them, desire them, sign
for them. I seek thee at the dawning of the day, my soul thirsts for thee in
a barren wilderness, where is no water, says David. Renew thy goodness to
me, O Lord, every morning, so shall my devotion, thankfulness, obedience, be
daily renewed toward thee.

LXXIV.
TRust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily
thou shall be fed. Psa 37.3.
We cannot do good unless we have trust and faith in God; neither have we
faith in God, unless we do good. These two must go hand in hand, and this
twofold duty has a twofold blessing here promised, habitation, and provision,
stability and satiety, dwelling in the land, and being fed in the land. Now as
we cannot do good, but by persisting in the work of our calling; so neither
can we be assured of a blessing on that work, unless we trust in God. I will
therefore be diligent in the calling whereto I am called, and what good I can
do, I will endeavor to do; and what is wanting in my doing, I will make up by
believing: For should I omit this doing, my trusting in God would be a tempting
of God. Thus though I I have no certain dwelling place, yet I have one in the
promise, as well for this life, as that to come; and though I see not how to
be fed; yet seeing thou have said, Verily I shall be fed: Verily I will
believe it.

LXXV.
IT is Gods usual course to help his servants at a pinch. When Isaaks neck is
on the block at a half blow, the Lord stays the execution. When Israel has
the sea on one side, and the enraged enemy on the other; when Jehosaphat knows
not what to do, when Peter is sinking, the Lord puts forth his hand. Not as if
God were not always the same, or could not help, for his arm is never
shortened; but because his wisdom directs his power, both to time, place,
manner, and means. Were the Lord seen in the beginning of troubles, we should
not reap so much comfort, nor God so much glory. God could have helped Lazarus
in his bed, as he did the Rulers son; or in his coffin, as he did the widow
of Naims son; but then his glory had not been so much, as to do it when he
had lain in the grave four days. It Is said therefore of his sickness, that it
was to the glory of God. The cure of some superficial scar, does not honor
the Surgeon so much, as an old festered foare. In my extremities therefore I
will take heed of impatience and importunity, so as to say with the King of
Isreal's messenger, What, shall I wait for the Lord any longer? I will wait on
the Lord, and the shall strengthen my heart. Yet a little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry. It Is good manners for me to stay his
leisure, and it is his great mercy if he help at last.

LXXVI.
CAst thy burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. Psa. 55.
There Is a gracious command, and as gracious a promise: who then will not be
beholding for another shoulder, when his burden is heavier then he can bear?
Now God bids us cast all on him, as being able to bear all, and willing to
take all on him. Most of our disquietnesse therefore in our conditions, is from
troubling our selves about that which is Gods work. He that will not help for
his burden, must bear it or lie under it himself. That only which makes him
refuse to take it off us, is because we retain sin within us. Our sins
oppress God more then our wants can. We read that God complains he was laden
and wearied with Isreal's sins, but not with their afflictions. This Jonah
then must be cast overboord before the storm cease. He that knows how to
bear the burden of sin, must know how to bear his burdens for sin: and
then it is a most heavy condition to be under the burden of affliction, and
the pressures of a guilty conscience.

LXXVII.
NOtwithstanding Gods providence over us, we must not be careless or
neglectfull in our own endeavors; we must up and be doing, and not cast all on
God, like the Clown in the fable, who when his Cart was overthrown, stood
still, and prayed to Jupiter. Jacob might have famished, if he had not sent out
horse and man to Egypt for corn; and so might Ruth, if she had not gleaned;
Paul and his company might have been drowned, if they had not swimmed. All
these had promises of preservation, and yet they did what they could to
preserve themselves. Gods decree toward us includes the use of the means. The
motion and proceedings of the secondary causes, proceed from the primary, and
are included in them, and carried about by them, as the inferior Orbs by the
first Mover; so that it would be in vain to depend upon the one, without the
use of the other. As I will not trust in the means, so I will not neglect the
use of them: otherwise my neglect of them, shall frustrate my hopes in them.
God has put the end, and the means together; and what the most wise God has
joined together, none but a fool will put asunder.

LXXVIII.
UPon whomsoever God bestows faith, he does withal give trials of it, more
or less, first or last. For as all men have not faith, so the seeming faith of
many is no faith. All is not gold that glisters, the touch stone shows what
it is. The fight demonstrates the Soldiers valor; a storm the Pilates skill.
A temporary faith may for a while flourish, but one fiery trial will make it
vanish. Corruption cannot, or will not discover corruption, but God will make
it appear, when it will not endure the trial. As grace is desirable, so its
truth and sincerity is more desirable. Now among graces, faith is the most
useful; and therefore it concerns us to look to the truth of it. I will
examine whether I be in the faith or no, and if my touchstone err, Lord bring
it to thine, so shall the trial of my faith being more precious then gold that
perishes, be found unto praise and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

LXXIX.
COmmonly the Lord does exercise our faith by trials in those things which we
most affect, that it may appear which has most of our hearts, either God or
them. Abraham had but one child begotten of Sarah, and the Lord will try
whether he will return that child to God that gave it. The circumstances of
the trial do greatly aggravate it. Take thy Son, says the Lord, not thy
beast; take thy only Son Isaac, not Ishmael; take him thy self, and seek no
other executioner; take him presently, and delay not the time, I Will not allow
thee a day or hour to confer with, or comfort thy distracted heart; Get thee
into the land of Moriah, three days journey, so long shall thy soul be in
suspense; When thou come thither, slay him, having slain him, burn him to
me in sacrifice; so many ways did the Lord exercise his faith. Thus our most
delectable things are those wherein the Lord tries us. It Is wisdom then not
to be too much endeared to that in affection, which we would still keep with
us in possession. I will therefore endeavor to take off my heart from those
things which God may take from me.

LXXX.
SOme there are who in prayer for temporal things, are importunate beggars; as
if such things were absolutely, and in their own nature good. But I know not
whether to admire in them, their folly or their sauciness. Had the Lord made
an absolute promise of temporalls, it would be a sufficient ground for such
prayers. But oftentimes those things which seem good, prove ill unto us; so
that by desiring them, we wish evil to our selves. So far as temporal
things may do us good, so far God has promised them, and we may expect
them. The Lord knows what to give, and what we want, better then we our selves.
But as for spiritual things, we may be as bold beggars as we will, either in
manner or measure. These are simply good, and are simply desirable. When ever
therefore I pray for a temporal thing, I will first say, Thy will be done, and
then Give me my daily bread.

LXXXI.
I Have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content, Phil. 41.11.
says the Apostle: A lesson which though Paul the Master had learned, his
Scholars may be to learn. Men's estates rise and fall, ebb and flow; now the
art is to make our spirits have the same cadence with our estates. For herein a
man's mind and estate, resemble the scales of a Balance, which when one
ascends, the other descends. Sometimes our minds are higher then our means,
otherwhiles our means are higher then our minds, greater, and requiring other
behaviors. Now nothing can exactly poize these, but a contented mind. If God
set us low, and give us poverty, we must know how to be abased, and to be
hungry; if he send us plenty and abundance, then to know how to be full and to
abound. The difficulty lies herein, that when some are brought low, they are
overcome with impatience, unbelief, murmuring; if they are set on high, and
have all things at full, they prove either forgetful of God, or unthankful to
God, or unkind to others. Now this knowledge and art of contentation, orders
our conversation a right in both. God gives some plenty, but withholds this
knowledge from them, and thus their rising proves to be their fall; God gives
others poverty, and teaches them this art of contentment, and then they have
more comfort in a low estate, then they had in a high. O Lord, I am brought
very low, make me know how to be abased, and if ever thou set me on high,
teach me how to abound. Let me not sink being now poor, nor swell if ever I
be rich.

LXXXII.
Godliness with contentment, is great gain. 1 Timothy 6.6.
No godliness without contentment, and no true contentment without godliness.
He that has enough may very well be content; but a godly man has enough, he
has all; he has both things present, and things to come: he is an heir of the
promises, and he may be sure of their performance, because faithful is he
that promises. A sufficiency he shall have here, a satietie hereafter. If
any one say he is religious, and is not content, he has but the form of
godliness, he denies the power. Godliness is of it self gain, but with
contentment it is great gain.

LXXXIII.
WHat way soever a Christian looks, he may fide something to forward him in
this art of contentation. If he look under him, he sees what he is, dust and
ashes, that from whence he come, and to which he must return. If within him,
he shall find nothing but unworthiness, whereby he is less then the least of
Gods favors. If without him, he may see many better then him, poorer and
lower then himt. If above him, he may see the place whither he shall go, and
where is fullness of joy. Thus both heaven and earth, our selves and others,
teach us the lesson of contentment. If thou art therefore discontent with thy
estate, thou forgettest whence thou came, whither thou must go, what thou
art, what others are. I will never murmr at my condition, seeing others have
less, I am less then it, seeing earth is my beginning, and heaven my end.

LXXXIV.
GIve me neither poverty nor riches, Pro. 30.8.
was Agurs prayer. A prayer which savours as much of modesty as wisdom: of
modesty, seeing beggars ought not to be chusers: of wisdom, seeing a mean
estate is the best estate. he that knows the inconveniences of a low or high
estate, will choose a mean. They that will be rich fall into many temptations,
and they that are poor, fall into them likewise. Either of these extremes are
fit baits for Satan, and our corrup. hearts; but he that likes and keeps the
mean, is freed from both. As I would not be a shrub of the valleys to be
trampled on by all, so I would not be a Cedar of the mountains to be envied at
by most. I have read a mean estate to be compared to the glass of a window,
which keeps out a storm, and admits the light; such and estate is best, as
frees a man from the storms of the world, and admits the light of Gods
countenance. A great estate like a great wall, may keep off the injuries of the
world; but not let in a beam of this light. As I will not pray then for
poverty, so neither for riches, but for a convenient estate.

LXXXV.
IT is written, Psalm. 4.5.
Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. The Word does not only sanctify our bread, but satisfy us in
stead of bread; when the staff of bread fails us, the staff of the Word
upholdeth us. They that think to live only by bread without the word, may for
the present abound; but they that can live by the Word when they have no bread,
are sure never to want. Carnal men may deride this kind of life, but at
destruction and famine they shall laugh: the surest way to enjoy our food, is
in the promise, I will satisfy her poor with bread: The heaven may withold
its rain, and the earth not yield her increase, but before one word or tittle
of Gods promise shall fail, heaven and earth shall pass away. Lord, I should
perish in my affliction, but thy Word quickens me. Thy House is the house of
bread, the true Bethlehem, thy Word is the bread of life; I will feed on it,
live by it; so shall I never want, when I am at thy finding.

LXXXVI.
I Will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted poor people, Zeph. 3.1.
that shall trust in the name of the Lord. Gods people, though they are a poor
people, yet they are a trusting people: And how can they be a poor people,
that are a trusting people? Does not the Apostle tell us, that they are rich in
faith? And we read of the riches of full assurance: it is only in the worlds
eye, and in worldly things that they are poor; none possess more then they,
none can show a title to more. All they enjoy is in God, and they enjoy all
things in God. When the plunderers have deprived them of all, the hand of faith
will receive more from God, or lay hold on all in God: It shall be my glory, to
be one of Gods poor afflicted people, so I may have this grace, to be one of
his trusting people.

LXXXVII.
GReat is the use of faith; glorious things are spoken of it: It is called a
shield, and as heretofore, many have done valiantly with this shield, so also
may we now. By faith we may be enabled with Abraham to leave our own country,
with Moses to forsake the pleasures and preferments of this life; yea, that
which in these days is endeavored to be done by strength of hand, may be done
assuredly by the strength of faith. We may hereby subdue kingdoms, and not
only escape, but learn, how by faith to handle the sword; faith making one of
weak, become strong: and wax valiant in fight. All our hope arises from, and
is stirred up by faith. In trouble faith stirs up prayer, prayer stirs up
God, God stirs up the means: Faith will with Jacob make us continue wrestling
with God till he bless us: Faith will draw water from the wells of salvation;
it will not only support us in trouble, but bring us out. By faith I will be
rich when I am poor; strong when I am weak, joyful when I am sorrowful. By
it I will conquer, even when I am conquered. Let the Lord give me this grace of
faith, and take away all that I have, yet by it I shall have as much as I had,
more then I had; all that a God can yield is then mine.

LXXXVIII.
IT is the nature of faith in its workings, to suspend the soul from
reflecting on its own weakness, and other difficulties, directing it to look
up to the Lord in whom its hope is, and from whom its help must come. In
affliction we should not only consider how unable we are to bear them, but
how able God is to help our infirmities. Afflictions and troubles are manifold,
but God is one and the same; and a true faith can make use of one God to
conquer twenty troubles, one promise to support him in many dangers. Sense
presents many enemies, but faith sees more with it, then are or can be
against it. What rule and course the Apostle, Heb. 12.13. prescribes to lay
aside any weight of sin, viz. To look up to Jesus, the same must we take to
be eased of any weight of affliction.

LXXXIX.
IT is written, The just shall live by faith. Now faith lives on the promise,
and the promise lives and abides, because God lives and abides the same for
evermore. The life of a believer is not maintained by any mutable perishing
thing, and therefore it cannot suffer mutation. When we have no other feeding
then, faith can be our bread, when we have no other stay, faith can be our
staff; and when temporal things are removed from us, yet if faith apprehend a
promise, it has plenty enough; one promise supporteth faith more then many
thousands per annum. He then that has a large faith, has a large living.
That only which causes discomfort in a Christian walk, is, the suspension
and intermission of faiths actings. For if we would let faith have its perfect
work, it would support us in all wants. Now faith does its work best alone,
having a higher principle then the life of sense. Faith acts upon a faithful
promise, and an Almighty God. Now as faith will not leave God; so God will not
fail faith. The duty then of believing only is ours, the work of helping is
Gods.

XC.
THe sight is the quickest of all the senses, for it can ken from earth to
heaven in a moment; and is also the largest, for it can behold the whole
Hemisphere by one act of viewing. Most fitly therefore in the Scriptures does
the Spirit of God set forth the acts of faith, by seeing, beholding, looking.
Hereby Abraham is said to see afar off; whereas unbeleevers are by S. Peter
described to be such as cannot see afar off. O then let us labor for a large
faith, as we have a large object; for we can never be straltned in our God,
unless we be straightened in our faith. If we had a thousand times more faith,
we might receive a thousand times more blessings of God. When the Prophet came
to the widows house, as many vessels as she had were filled with oil. The
reason why so many abide under wants, is because they cannot see more in God,
nor receive more from him. For to them all communicable good that they see in
God belongs unto them.

XCI.
IN Christ dwells all fullness; a fullness not only of sufficiency for
himself, but of redundancy for us. A fullness not of a vessel which will hold
no more, and of which a little being taken, its fullness is diminished; but a
fullness of the Ocean, which though it be still emptying it self, is still
full; A fullness of the Sun, which though it diffuseth daily light and heat,
has never the less. Though all the Saints in heaven partake of Christ's glory,
and all the Saints on earth of his grace, yet has he never the less glory or
grace. There is in Christ a fullness of power to protect, of wisdom to direct,
of truth to confirm us, of love to comfort us, of life to quicken us: Of all,
yea, and more then all we can ask or think. Now of this fullness, I may
receive grace for grace, for if I am a member, I must partake of the heads
fullness; If I am a Spouse, I must partake of my husbands fullness, to supply
all my wants. I will therefore never complain of emptiness and wants, as long
as there is in Christ not only a fullness, but a freeness to communicate; For
as sure as Christ is mine, his fullness is mine. Iam. 1.5
He gives to all men, and yet he gives liberally, which no rich man in the
world is able to do, because as he gives to others himself decreaseth.

XCII.
OUr communiion with Christ is that which may comfort us in the disunion of all
outward comforts from us; for our nearenesse with him, assures us of his
compassion under them, and his help to bear them. If then I have Christ with
me, there can be no estate cumbersome to me. If I am weak in body, Christ my
head was wounded; if dejected in mind, Christ my head was heavy unto death; if
I suffer in my estate, Christ my head was poor, even as poor as a servant,
even as any servant of his Christ's head has sanctified any thorns, his back
any furrows, his hands any nails, his side any spear, his heart any sorrows
that can come to mine. Thus though I bear the yoke, yet being it is Christ's
yoke, I have Christ's fellowship under it; I have his Spirit to help bear it,
and Christ's strength to draw it; I have his graces to be glorified by it; his
compassion to moderate it; his victories to overcome it; his crown to reward
it.

XCIII.
THe blessed Apostle Paul reckoned all things loss for Christ; not as if he
did actually part with all things (though if occasion had bin offered he might)
but as they were of no more esteem with him, nor did take more comfort from
them, then he could from that which was lost and taken from him. Most heavenly
Spirit, (would to God we were all like thee in this) thou had many
prerogatives in thy birth, many privileges in thy education, many common
gifts, much outward righteousness; and yet was all this but loss for Christ.
Surely in this many of us are but almost Christians, when we prefer a trifle
before Christ, and reckon that lost which is taken from us for Christ, or given
to his members. Lord if I have any thing worth losing, let me gain Christ; and
if I lose it not in possession, I will in affection esteem it as loss, yea as
dung for Christ.

XCIV.
WE know that all things work together for good to them that love God. Romans
8.
If all things, then afflictions, and losses. Now we see that afflictions and
worldly losses, work worldly sorrow, and worldly sorrow works death; how
then do they work together for good? The Apostle does not say, all things of
themselves work for good to such, but work together, i. e. together with the
sanctifying grace of God, whereby that which is evil, is turned into our good.
Of poisonous destructive Drugges, the Apothecary can compose healthsome
cordialls. Those things which are in themselves evil, God can so alter and
qualify by the ingredients of his grace, that they shall be good for his. As
in prosperity, God mingleth some evil to humbleus, so in adversity, he
infuseth some good to comfort us. So then, though our losses do in themselves
work much present sorrow and misery, yet being thus sanctified they shall
work together for good; even the good of grace here, and that of glory
hereafter. I will not therefore look so much to the present misery, as to the
promised issue. How bitter soever the pill be for a time, yet health will be
sweet at last. Crosses being thus mastered by grace, prove serviceable to us.

XCV.
THough the fig tree shall not blossom, Habak. 3.17.
neither shall fruit be in the vine, the labor of the olive shall fail, the
field shall yield no meat, the flock shall be out off from the folds, and
there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet will I rejoice in the Lord; I will
joy in the God of my salvation. It is a good thing to put cases of presupposed
dangers and wants to our souls. Such cases may not only be praemonitions of
them, but praemunitions against them; we may come thereby not only to attain
a knowledge of our present weakness, but obtain what strength was wanting.
Expected evils loose their venom and strength; and when they do come, the
patient may say in Agags words, that surely the bitterness of them is past.
Now in expectation of evils, we must not only praeconceive what may come, but
what possibly can come; See it in these gradations of the Prophets faith. Who
could not want figs one year, if the vine prospered, if there were wine
enough to cheer the heart? but though the vine were blasted, yet the olive
might help for a time; but if these liquors failed, yet if the fields give
their return of corn, water with it might preserve life; but if there were a
dearth of corn, yet if the pastures abounded with flocks, meat without bread
might serve a while; and if the flocks were baned abroad, yet the stalls at
home might preserve the life of the owners. Thus frarre the life of sense might
go; but when all these fail, and there is no outward comfort to be seen, yet
then to rejoice in the LORD, there is none but he that lives by faith can do.
What was the Prophets resolution, I will endeavor to make mine. As long as God
gives me the creature, I will use it, but not live only by it; I will live by
all, so as to trust in none. I will take some comfort in what I have, but no
true joy but in my God, and what I shall have from him. I will behold things
before me, but so as to look on things above me. If all fail me, my God is
all in all. He that lives by faith when things appear, shall not perish when
those things appear not.

XCVI.
I Seldom read in the sacred Volume, of any of Gods people suffering want,
though among strangers, and enemies, but have found favor in their sight, and
received kindness from them. The Egyptians were over and above courteous to
the Israelites, in that they would lend them their Jewels: This also the
kindness of Bozz to Ruth, of Nebuzaradan to Jeremiah, of Joseph's Keeper to
him, of the chief Captain to Paul, yea of the Barbarians to Paul and his
company, do plainly testify. This does not arise so much out of any love
which the one bears to the other, as from the overruling hand of God, which
can turn men's hearts to whatsoever object or act he pleases. The Lord can
make them instruments in such works to which their natures are averse. How
great soever my wants are then, and how few my friends, yet as long as a
stranger to me is left, I hope not to be denied courtesies, perhaps more then
ordinary. When my friends and acquaintance, to whom I am known, cast me off,
they to whom I am not known, shall receive me. He that is in favor with God,
cannot but find favor with men; happy is he whose God is the Lord. For the
Lord will do him good, either by himself, or by such instruments as are most
unlikely.

XCVII.
IF Believers in former times did suffer the spoiling of their goods with joy,
why should not we also in the same manner? We have the same God, the same
promises, the same hope and faith; and therefore why should not we express the
same joy in such cases of suffering as they did? Afflictions though they seem
grievous to the carnal part, yet they are tolerable to that which is
spiritual; and as they afflict the one with sorrow, so they affect the other
with joy, and that at the same time. See this in David, who when Ziglag was
burned, 1 Samuel 30.6.
himself plundered of his goods and wives, did at first weep till he could
weep no longer, and he was greatly distressed, thus far he let loose the
reigns to nature and passion, yet see how his spirit upheld it self, hwen he
presently encouraged himself in the Lord his God. David's case is now common to
the seed of David, where fire and sword prevail; the present apprehension
thereof may empty our heads of tears, but not our hearts of courage. When our
adversaries are increased, our strength fails us, our burdens increase, our
estates decrease, so that we can take pleasure in no earthly thing, yet then
may we encourage our selves in the Lord, and joy in the God of our salvation.
The seed of David, as they are heirs of David's sufferings, so also of his
consolations.

XCVIII.
WE are apt to observe and take notice of what the Lord takes away from us,
but not of what he gives us; thus minding one cross more then many favors.
Did we thus diligently look to our Book of accounts with God, we should find
that we are indebted to him, and not he to us: For when the Lord takes away a
blessing from his, he gives them as good or better; here only is the mistake,
that when the Lord does not pay us in our own coin, and in the same kind of
blessing, we think he is behind hand with us: as if he that borrowed so much in
silver, but returns the sum in a few pieces of gold, were still indebted.
God took away Elijah from Elisha, but he doubled his spirit upon Elisha.
Christ did withdraw his bodily presence from his Disciples, but he sent them
the Comforter. The Lord takes from us temporal goods, but then he gives us
content, in a lower estate, and faith for a better. I will not be troubled if
God deprive me of outward gifts, so he restore them unto me in inward graces.
None that ever had trading in heaven, can say, he is a loser, unless he
mistake his accounts.

XCIX.
IMpatient people think God has forgotten to be gracious, if he deliver not
in their time, and by their means: The Lord does therefore hide the means and
time from us, that his ways of deliverance may be the more mysterious. God
does not always deliver from the trouble, but from the evil of it; nay,
sometimes he delivers by the trouble, making that to be the means which is
our present misery. Thus is there a deliverance, when suffering the less, we
are freed from the greater, as many are delivered by death temporal from death
eternal; by losses of the death, from the loss of heaven. If therefore our
condition in suffering be so strange, that we know not what to do, yet the
Lord knows how to deliver. The Lords thoughts are not as our thoughts, but as
far surpassing, as the heavens do the earth. That sea which Israel thought
would have been their grave, was their high way. And if the suffering be long
and tedious, yet when the time of deliverance is come, the Lord will not only
answer us for our prayers, but for our patience and time in waiting.

C.
SKin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life; life being
better then goods. Now what bargain I should have made for my life, the same
has God yielded me my life upon: as he has given my goods as a prey to the
enemies, so he has given my life a prey to my self. Livelihood is good, but
life is better. Laban did Jacob much hurt in his estate, but God suffered him
not to hurt his person. And now, O Lord, as thou have given me this life, by
thy own inspiration, by thy Sons redemption, by this last preservation; so
being not mine own, but thine, I desire to live, not to my self, but to thee.
Henceforth to me to live, is Christ; he that has his life preserved from an
imminent danger, should not live only to live, but to God and his glory.

CI.
When I hear the enemy, with Saul, breathe out threatenings and slaughter,
saying, Kill, slay, hew them, pistol them, quarter them, I know not whether
does exceed, their fury, or their folly, seeing that which is an act of enmity
in the persecuter, is an act of amity to the persecuted: for hereby they are
the sooner dispatched to heaven, and wait the less time for their inheritance.
Could they destroy the soul with the body, or separate the soul from God, as
easily as they can divide it from the body, it were a high degree of revenge.
But this belongs to the Lord only, to whom vengeance belongs. I will not
therefore fear him that can kill the body only, but him that can destroy body
and soul. Thus though they destroy this earthly tabernacle, my spirit shall
return to God that gave it; and thus to die, would be to me gain, yea such
gain, that if the enemy knew it, his envy would be as great to my soul
separated, as his enmity was to it united.

CII.
ALL the comfort of a child of God is in this, that God is his God: for all
good is in God in a more eminent manner, and fuller measure, then in any
creature. Now as God is his God, so all in God is for his good. If God be ours,
all things are ours; but if he be not ours, though we had all, yet when losses
come, nothing would be ours. Nothing is so much ours, as God is ours; for by
his being ours, all things else are ours. Here also is the glory and crown of
rejoicing in a Christian, that when all things else leave him, he neither
loses his interest in God, nor God his interest in him.

CIII.
WE read of Jobs losses, that they fell out not at the same time, though one
came in the neck of another. Parallel in manner to Jobs were mine: For when
the Sabeans came, they dealt fairly (to see to) taking the one half that lay
open, leaving me the other that lay hidden, (thanks rather to their blindness
then their goodness.) Yet at last that which lay hid, did appear to them,
perhaps by Chaldean wisdom. Thus that which the Locusts left, the Caterpillars
have eaten. My comfort is, that my best estate is so hidden and laid up, where
such Thieves cannot break through and steal; such is that hidden meat and
Manna they know not of; or if they did know, would not trouble themselves with
it; but let who will take it for them.

CIV.
When the remembrance of my losses over-clouds my heart with a multitude of
thoughts, yet even then have I a multitude of comforts from God to refresh it.
Every depth of my misery, is accompanied with a depth of mercy. Amongst all my
losses, though not exceeding, yet the most affecting was that of my Library;
which as for variety was good, so for value was not small. herein my comfort
is, that now the Lord may give me a double portion of his Spirit, whereby I
shall not only know, but know all things: what I had by study and inspection,
I may now have by inspiration: and thus I need not complain for want of books.
Besides, having deprived me of books, had they left me a Peripatetick, not
having a chamber so well furnished as Elisha's was at Shunem, having in it a
bed, stool, table, or candlestick, their mercy would then have lessened my
misery; yet herein my comfort is, that I shall lie no worse then my master did,
who had not whereon to lay his head; and the remembrance of this my conformity
to my Master and Savior, shall make any lodging as easy as a bed of Down,
though it seem as hard as Jacobs pillowes of stone. Yet besides these losses
of bed and books, there had been some mercy in their cruelty, if they had not
deprived me of house and means; but in this my God is my comfort: for the
earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; so that though I am dispossessed
of one place, the worlds wideness, and the Lords goodness can yield me
another. But if I have no further lot ordained for me on earth, heaven also is
the Lords, and there are many mansions; and I am assured he will provide a
place for me there.

CV.
AS we ought not desire afflictions and losses before they come, so we ought to
pray, that they may be sanctified unto us when they come upon us. Now they are
never truly sanctified to us, till we see God in them, and our selves altered
by them. Many men that are non-proficients under the word of God, become well
learned being a while under his rod. They who only heard of God before with
the ear, will now see him with the eye. As for my own part, I ingenuously
confess, that what I have preached to others, I could never truly practice
till now. I have delivered to others many speculations of the use of
afflictions, of the life of faith in them, and now I find in my self
experimentally true, what I taught. I am, with the Apostle, made able to
comfort others which are in any trouble, by the same comfort wherewith I am
comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1.4.
In brief, I find these afflictions so far sanctified to me, that I can say
with David, It is good for me to be afflicted; yea, can say with him that said,
Themistocles. Periis sem nisi perussem.
I had been undone, unless I had been undone. True it is what Luther says is
required to make a good Divine, viz. Meditation, Prayer, Tentation.

CVI.
When I read of the beginning and end of Job, I know not whether to admire the
mutable insufficiency of the creature, or the immutable sufficiency of the
Creator. We all know our beginnings, but our ends are hid from us. The Lord
makes rich and poor, he sets up on high, and he casts down. The estate
of Job at first consisted of seven thousand sheep and three thousand Camels,
five hundred yoke of Oxen, and five hundred she Asses. Besides, his own issue
was seven sons and three daughters. Here was an estate seeming impossible to
begained by one man; but more impossible, being lost, to be repaired in one
man's time. Yet we read, that the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more then
his beginning: for his former substance was at the last doubled unto him in all
things, save only his children; they also, as some think, Conra: Dieteric. ex
Aug.
were multiplied, so many being in heaven with the Lord, as were on earth with
him. This should also be my judgment, were not my doubt that which was their
fathers, that they might at last curse the Lord in their hearts. O Lord, thou
have brought me as low as Job, and thou can advance me as high as thou did
him. I believe what thy Prophet told Amaziah, that the Lord could give him much
more then this. However if thou do not increase my substance with Job,
increase and continue in me the patience of Job.

CVII.
IT has been the usual proceeding of Believers for the acting of their faith
on some difficult thing, to reflect on some former act wherein the Lord
demonstrated his power. Thus did Abraham confirm himself in the faith of
Isaacs resurrection, because he was by the power of God raised to him from a
barren womb as a figure, Heb. 11.29. And Job from the resurrection of his
body, argues the possibility of the raising of his estate. Job 19.25.26, 27.
Now there be two demonstrations of Gods power, which being applied by any
believer, may keep him from casting away his confidence in the greatest
extremity, or distress and poverty. The first is Gods removing his sin
from him; for there is more evil and obliquitie in sin, then can be in any
affliction or judgment for sin; and therefore why may not the same God
remove the one that removed the other. The second is the resurrection of their
bodies at the last day, which if they truly believe, they cannot doubt of the
raising their estates now. Ezekiel. 37
That God that can make dry scattered bones reunite, can make scattered goods
come together; he that shall raise the bodies of his people from the dust, can
also raise the poor and needy from the dunghill, and set them with Princes.
That God who is a God pardoning iniquity and sin, will he so gracious as to
remove mountains of trouble. For he that can make the cause to cease, can make
the effect to discontinue.

CVIII.
TOo many there are that make have to be rich, I fear more have then good
speed, and have nested themselves on high, with more celeritie then sincerity.
It Is the end which most aim at, not regarding the means of attaining it, they
care not how bad the means be, so the end be great. Yet is it not unusual to
see men decline faster then they were raised, and poverty to come upon them
with more have then their wealth did. The higher the rise is, the swifter and
more precipitate is the fall. If riches be my end, I will choose the most right
and plainest ways, and use the fairest and most lawful means; and if my
corruptions drive me on too fast, I will slack my pace by faith. He that
believes does not make have; thus though I have waited the longer for an
estate, it shall stay the longer with me.

CIX.
OUr Savior having sent forth his Apostles unprovided to see too, without
staff, scrippe, money; demands of them at their return what they wanted, and
they said, nothing. A strange answer considering the length of their journey,
the diversity of their hearers, and the contrariety of their new doctrine to
flesh and blood, yet that they should be accommodated with every thing. No
question but they were truly welcome to many, and it might appear so by their
entertainment; yet such a work as they went about, might want a supply of many
things. Christ told them, That the labourer was worthy of his hire; but many
might think then, as now in our days, preaching to be scarce worth the
hearing, much less paying. Surely in this work of Christ, Christ was with
them in a more special manner; His fullness was enough to supply all their
wants, at least to make them content in all estates, and not murmr at their
pay, so their work went on. Lord, as thou wast with them, so thou have
promised to be with thine till the end of th e world. Go thou forth therefore
with me thy servant, who is to go forth empty as they, and then at my return,
their answer to thee shall be mine to others, I want nothing.

CX.
Wicked men are the rod of Gods anger, Isa. 10.5
and the staff of his indignation, so called by the Prophet; where it is worth
the observing, where it is said, the staff, i.e. the power in their hand, is
not their indignation, but Gods. Now the anger of God is but for a moment,
theirs is implacable; and if therefore they are Gods rod, we must not so much
look to the instrument, as to the hand that uses it. They cannot give a blow
more, if God lay down the rod; and when the child is chastised and amended,
the rod is cast into the fire. The rod of the wicked may fall on the lot of the
righteous, but it shall not rest there; Judgment may begin at Gods house; but
it shall be but a little while, Isa. 10.25.
and the indignation of God shall cease in ungodly men's destruction.

ISA. 33.1. WOe to thee that spoylest, and thou wast not spoiled, and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled, and when thou shall make an end to
deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. FINIS.

