SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE Late dangerous Petition presented to the House of
COMMONS, September 11. 1648.

PROVE. 22. 28. Remove not the ancient Land-markes or bounds, which thy fathers
have set.

PROVE. 24. 21. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1648.

Some Observations on the late dangerous Petition presented to House of Commons
September 11. 1648.
HOw specious soever this Petition may seem to some, as whatever pretends
removal of grievances is catching, yet upon a second view, you may observe a
continued vein of dangerous sophistry wrapped up in Equivocall terms from the
beginning to the end: so that to undeceive well-meaning people, it would
require a more sad animadversion, then my present leisure, or indeed abilities
can afford you.

He that will hinder a Serpents entrance, must mainly take heed to the
insinuations of the head, which once admitted, steals in the whole body;
Wherefore I will begin at the title, and unravel the whole piece, and in so
doing, I doubt not to evince all, that when these Petitioners tongues are
smoothest, their minds are roughest, when they give fairest language, their
intentions are sowlest, sondly designing with Mercury in the fable to pipe out
Argus his eyes, and imitate those thieves, who rob with music.

But withdraw the Curtain now. To the right Honorable and Supreme authority
of this Nation the Commons in Parliament assembled The humble Petition, etc.
Shows That no Government is more just in the Constitution then that of
Parliaments. Join these together and spell them, you that pretend so great
acquaintance with the constitution of an English Parliament: did you never
hear of we the Lords and Commons, etc. If you think the constitution of
Parliament just, do you think the conjunction of both houses unjust? Who are
you that take upon you to legitimate one of these twins, and bastardize the
other? Are you ignorant how they have been born and bred together? This was the
old plot, Divide and Impera. The court aim, to divide the two Houses; they
knew well enough the fall of the one, would be the evening of the others ruin,
that the first could not be stifled, but the second would be strangled. Will
you put a new cape upon an old cloak, and build upon a Malignant foundation?
Sure some new light has discovered unto these men, how to make a body subsist
all of belly, for trial whereof they are whetting apace to cut off our
Parliament at the wast; This is the reason why the Ordinances are styled
Illegal in the Warning-piece, because the Lords have a hand therein: The Peers
are the skreene which stands between Prerogative and Liberty, and keeps each
from scorching other; That Commissura cervicis which marries the head to the
body; The mean between the extremes, A Gallery between Royalty and Property
which makes them keep their due distance; They are lenitives, which allay
Monarchy, and of Mercury sublimate make it a wholesome medicine: In sum by
their means we are famed and envyed, for our happy mixed Government.

And as the end of all Government is the safety and freedom of the Governed,
etc. What do you quote the end of Government to the Par^iament? for did they
ever abridge just freedom? but what ever you talk of freedom, you mean
licentiousness as is evident as well by the whole tenor of this
Ochlocraticall Petition, as by the report of that warning-piece (but charged
with murdering shot) which is but the construing Book of this, as appears by
its complaint of the stop of this very Petition, and other seditious pamphlets,
in the last page. Now what great difference is there between tyrannical and
licentious Government? Are not both Arbitrary? The one pleases not good men,
the other displeases wise men: The one can easily do ev^ll, the other can
hardly do good: in that the insolent have too much sway, in this the foolish,
yet is there more hope in Tyranny, for be there one or two evil Princes like
droughts of immoderate raines, and rivers overflowing their banks, a good
successor like a fit of seasonable weather may repair the others breaches and
render us our own^ with Interest: but in an Anarchy what can be expected, but a
never dying succession of confusion? There is a lively analogy between the
populacy and the Sea, Both uphold only light things, let the heavy sink,
witness the horrible ingratitude to their bravest Captains and best deserving
Citizens of the Roman and Athenian people. However the Sea may sometimes
deceive the eye, with the smoothness of its glassy surface, yet we know it
always liable to storms and tempests and that as inconstant as the Planet
whose influence moves it, it has suddenly wrapped it self up in surd billows
and devoured whom even now it smiled upon: Thus the unbridled multitude when at
the calmest want but their flattering Orators to blow up their waves till they
tumble and gather, then foame by mutual attrition then roar and rage till the
mast crackes under the sails, the rudder deceives the hand of the Pilot, and
anon the whole Ship of the Commonwealth split against the rocks of their
inconsiderateness. Every head of this Hydra is another Eolus who makes use of
the popular winds viz. their affections, to reach the haven of his private
aims, and then shift for your selves. Of this tribe seems to me the primum
mobile of this Petition, whom I vehemently suspect to be some Licinius or
Sextius that gapes for the first fruits of a Plebeian Consulate. And to make it
the most absolute and free nation of the world. I am here extremely puzzled how
to tie ^^ the end of Goevrnment and absolute liberty into one knot neither with
all my tugging can I make the ones end reach the others beginning for what need
Government where every man according to their principles may be his own
Governor, or do they mean their Governors should be like glass eyes in a
blindmans head for fashion not use? Tell us in plain terms what you mean by
most absolute and free: If you mean an unrestraint in doing good, it is every
true, Patriots wish that piety and virtue may be the only ways to honor in
this nation and that hereafter good men may reap some other recompense besides
the conscience of their own well doings: but if your sense of absolute
freedom stretch to an unlimited freewill to do what ever shall seem right in
your eyes, to act your own dreams where and when you please without fear of
control, in contempt of authority, all which you daily practice; If this be
the, Butt you shoot at, give me leave to invert your maxim, and tell you, that
the end of all Government is indeed the safety of the Governed, in curbing that
licentious and absolute freedom here aimed at, and in restraining that Liberum
arbitrium, in conceit whereof all flesh is so prone to swell. But this is the
common sin of Prince and People who caught with the same fallacy, wherewith the
Devil foiled our first Parents and not content with the safe freedom of
knowing and doing good, are still fancying an additionall perfection till they
are justly left miserably free to bewail the loss of their original power,
and fall from their primitive estate of freedom.

Next ^ollowes a Catalogue of their grievances; They begin with the house of
Lords (though not vouchsafed that title viz. of a house) whose just convening
of Delinquents before them, they compare to the former supercilious proceedings
of the Conncell board: but how justly we shall see, by examining the argument.
Some Court Lords who moved but by the wire of their masters passions did
amiss; therefore no more Lords are to be trusted: Diverse particular Noblemen
usurped an illegal authority over their inferiors, some out of arrogance,
others only by imitation; therefore the house of Peers now acting as a court
of Judicature according to the known laws, is repugnant and destructive to the
Commons just liberty, how does this comparrison hold.

1. And therefore in the first place you will be exceeding careful to preserve
your just authority, from all prejudices of a negative voice in any person or
persons whatsoever etc. and that you will not be induced to lay by your
strength, till you have satisfied your understandings, in the undoubted
security of your selves, and those who have voluntarily and faithfully adhered
to you, etc. Here you tell the House of Commons in plain terms, the Lords are
but ciphers, which added indeed to their figure encreas^ the sum, but of
themselves make no number, whence learnt you this Parliamentary Arithmetic?
Since when came an Ordiance to be of no more force then an Order? this is to
tell the Supreme authority of this Nation, that they understand not themselves,
nor their Privileges, when they desire, to any thing, the Lords concurrence:
You Will alter your tone shortly, and tell the House of Commons too, they shall be
Supreme no longer then they please you. Does not the same spirit of wildfire,
which here breathes upon the Nobility drive equally against Lords and Commons
in the Warning-piece? Where their Councels are termed destructive, their Votes,
votes for Norman bondage, their Ordinances Illegal, where the Whole body of
the City is rayled against and no other term bestowed, then Proud Malignant,
Illegal Major of London, and his like brethren the Aldermen, and a few illegal
Common Council men. Who sees not by your insolent carriage, that your venom
is against all distinction of Orders? while you may be permitted to spit your
poison in secret, and to hatch young Cockatrices in your mysterious seminaries,
you p^t on a v^zard of zeal to the House, and are sure to hoyse up title
enough; (enough to drown them, if they set sail therewith) but upon the least
alarm against your party, they shall be no more the Supreme authority of this
Nation. But the vile of the House and their Confederates, a company of Traitors
to God and their Country, for thus are they already styled in the
Warning-piece; Nay, King, Parliament, Priest and People are there inveighed
against. I wonder whence these are, who are comprehended under none of those.
Shortly we shall have some of these seditious Tribunes step up, and prefer
Agra^ias leges: Is it not against the Common^ privileges to suffer any
enclosure? Why should any Patrician possess more land then a Plebeian? has
not the one as much of Adams blood in his veins as the other? The truth is,
they fear the State of Licinius, condemn^d by his own Law De quingentis
jugeris possidendis, and therefore aim at nothing less then an equality, or
extension of the Commons privileges. How pregnant is histories of examples of
such as always pretended the ease of the Beast, till themselves got into the
saddle, and then who rode harder then they? who ever tyrannized more then these
kind people, who now wear the pleas of Liberty and Conscience threedbare,
where they have enjoyed but an inch of Government? Let all Histories ancient
and modern speak. Let none of my Countrymen therefore be kindled by these
Jack-strawes, who will in conclusion burn themselves, and those who are set on
fire by them. Learn to know, that in a well ordered Commonwealth, there is
nothing more unequal then equality; let not the hands strain to submit the
head to the feets trampling, lest the neck of the body be thereby broken. You
know what became of the divisions between Abimelech and the men of Sichem; if
you opinionatly persecute the house of Abimelech, a fire may issue thence, when
you little dream thereof and consume you. Pray what got Athens by the Fines,
imprisonments, banishments of their Nobility? Even as much as Rome by their
Agrarian laws, and other encroachments of the Tribunes upon the Patrician
privileges, which fits of convulsion extinguished that flourishing
Commonwealth. During the War between the Florentines and Millanesi, an dom.
1427. The popular faction at Florence having abated the insolence of the
Granders, by subjecting their movables, and other goods to proportionable
taxes, began now to swell, and not content with present redress of grievances,
fell to ripping up old sores, and demanded satisfaction of the Nobility for all
unequal levies past: Indignation whereat had occasioned (says my Author) the
conjunction of the Nobility and Gentry with the common Enemy, (as upon the like
occasion they had formerly called in the Duke of Athens) had not John de Medici
timeously stopped the flux of these peccant humors, remonstrating the folly of
fretting at old wounds, when they ought rather to prevent new; and if their
usage had formerly been unjust, they ought to thank God, who had showed the
way to make it just, and content themselves with a middle-sized victory: For he
frequently undoes who over-does. 'Twas an ancient arcanum, Non in omnia
delicta, nec in singulos Authoresinquirere. Who ever desires a Map of our
English chaos, let him turn to the Florentine History, where he shall find the
mutual obstinate persecutions of the factions, ever barking at the present
government, to have strangled that Commonwealth, and introduced a Tyranny,
under which they yet groan; His ego gratiora dictus alta esse scio: sed me
vera progratis loqui etsi meum ingenium non moveret, necessitas cogit, Vellom
equidem vobis placere, Quirites, sed multo malo vos salvos esse, etc.

This devolving so much upon the people causes a double evil. 1. Honors are
heaped upon such as having never tasted thereof, relish them the less, and have
less occasion (going without them) to complain. 2 They are taken away from
such, as having been accustomed thereto, will never rest till they be restored;
as the Sea after a storm never leaves tumbling and tossing till his waves are
levelled. Thus the injury on the one part, out weighs the benefit on the other,
and for few friends, you make many enemies, who will always be more ready to
hurt, then those to help you; Since men are naturally more prone to revenge of
injuries, then recompensation of benefits, this seeming to import damage and
loss, the other profit and pleasure.

In the other branch of this Article, you desire the Parliament not to disband,
before they have well provided for their own safety, and their adherents. All
their Adherents, that I know, would be glad to see Armies disbanded places
disgarrison'd and the poor wasted Countries in some measure eased; as soon as
the Parliament shall judge it safe, whose very being induced thereunto is
argument enough to their modest friends of its safety. But who induces them to
divest their strength? any thing save reason? what sauciness is this to charge
Supreme Authority, with so supreme weakness, as that they are apt to be
induced to things against their own understandings? They know their greatest
st^ength lies in the peoples hearts, and out of mere returns of love have
entertained a ^ender care of their disburdning, as far as wisdom will dictate.
But who told you they were voring down the Army? Nay you knew the contrary, by
their late Votes for a new establishment under Sir Thomas Fairfax, unless you
interpret the voting of some Troops for Ireland a disbanding; however it be,
the Votes were already passed long before this bastard Petition was borne, and
which renders your impudence inexcusable, in your magisterial demands of
undoing what you knew was already done. But you love o walk in clouds, and may
you at length emb^ace a cloud in stead of your ambition'd Juno, shall be my
prayer: In plain English you are loath to see this Army by sub-divisions
enfeebled, upon whose strength you rely for support wherein you think are many
props of your extravagancy: you fancy to your selves wings out of their
feathers, and therefore unwillingly see any quill dropped; fondlings, you dream!
The bulk of the Army are otherwise possessed; The sounder part begin to smell
your rottenness; I know not by what misfortune, you have not so close girt
your Lamb^kins of late, but that you, Fox linings have appeared.

2 That you will take off all Sentences, Fines and Imprisonments, imposed on
Commons by any whomsoever, without due course of Law, or judgment of their
equals and to give due reparations to all those who have been so injurioush
d^alt withal, and for preventing the like for time to come that you will enact
all such arbitrary proceedings to be capital crimes. Here is a fine spun net
to catch the simple: but what g^eater enemy to truth then likehhood? If you
understand by due, har ordinary course of law what Malignant could speak
higher language, or find, fitter engine wherewith to batter down what ever the
Parliament has been rearing up these five years? The safety of the governed,
the end of government (to speak in your own dialect) has occasioned the doing
of many things above the ordinary course of law: strange diseases, unknown to
Gallen and Hippocrates, have forced our State Physicians to new ways of cure.
If shame forbids you now the owning this construction, all the sense I can
squeeze of this expression, is a charge upon the Parliament for their
commitment of some of your mutinous rabble, for which yet you would be loath to
stand to the due course of law. Dare you talk of the due course of Law, which
you labor to overthrow in diverse Articles of this very Petition? The complaint
were juster, that the Laws are no more duly executed upon such troublers of
our Israel. So when you demand reparations, you must unfold the riddle, for
verily to us poor Ignorants you speak in parables. I think you intend not
Delinquents compositions be restored, although its possible, to get some of
their hands to your Petition you may have gratified them in this Article. For
whom else has the Parliament fined, sentenced, or imprisoned? O, its true, I
had forgot Rabshakeh Lilbourne, whose sufferings merit at least Letters of
recommendation, to his namesake, John of Leyden K. of Munster, for the office
of Grand Master of his Ordnance.

3 That you permit no authority, etc.) Agai ne, so fierce for legality? long
may be in this good humor I But I am afraid you will shake hands with it at
the next turning. In the mean time let us examine whence comes this zeal
against an Oath ex Officio; is it not because they abhor the very name of
duty? will you allow never a grain more to the Parliament then Starchamber?
Must what this assumes for the present be unwarrantablebecause the other used
it? sundry emergenciesdaily happen which escape the foresight of the most
provident Lawgivers, who therefore have in every State, betrusted some with a
Prerogative, whereby the supreme Magistracy is empowered to provide in cases
extra legal for the Common wealths indemnity. The rule indeed usually holds
Nemo tenetur seipsum prodere but if the State judge it expedient for the
di^covery of any Jesuit, or Jesuiticall -- shall not the Public Obtain that
favor which the Law allows in case of Private interest? A clear conscience
fears not the touch stone, and whoever innocent starts from the trial is
therein nocent because contemptuous. Only such owls as you, dread discovery
and fly the day, therefore, whatever you may boast of your new lights they are
at best but candle lights.

4 That all statvtes, Oaths and Covenants may be repealed etc. What an ambush
of Banditi is here broken out against the poor Statutes? Did not I tell you
what would become of your pleas for legality? My Gentlemen are already skipt
from the Law, to a false Gospel: but no wonder they snarle here at men's
Statutes when they bark in the next at Gods Ordinances What a bitter pill is
this same Covenant? These Ostriches who so easily swallow iron (they swoon at
the noise of disbanding cannot digest the Covenant: oh this lies hard at their
heart for why? it is a Shibboleth whereby the mutionus Ephramites are
discovered; I commend Vulcans ingenuity out of whose forge came the warning
piece who although he halt villanously in other matters, yet tells you like an
honest rogue the Covenant is Antitichristian because it distinguishes the vile
of the house from the faithful of the house what unparalleld malapertnesse is
this to demand the abrogation of our laws, the nullity of our solemn vows as
far forth as they may be construed to their molestation? By whom shall they be
construed? by you? we are like then to have pretty endless work: for you know
you are not bound to believe to morrow, what you make us believe you do to
day, so that should we model our laws to your present liking, before we had
done you may have sprung a new opinion, or another tender-hooft Sect may arise
and task us anew; May not Priests turn Independents, and with equal reason
Petition against the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance? But you are peaceable
and well-affected: I wish you may prove so, if you have helped us hitherto we
see in this Petition by what hopes you were led, and that in the work you were
well affected only to your selves. For suppose a compliance with all your
fanatic desires, which yet is impossible, you draw so unevenly among your
selves, would not your peaceable maxims suddenly set the Kingdom on fire with
war, spiritual war, debates, heart-burnings, envies, strifes, contention? Read
the histories of your forefathers, and tremble at their examples: Who pleaded
more peace then the German Anabaptists, till they got the reins of government
into their hands, and then what devils incarnate ever acted such villainies? O
shun their footsteps who so desires to tread in the paths of life* Those Dutch
Sectaries first, to make way for their innovations, that no regard of
Conscience or fidelity sworn to the Magistrate might stop their proceedings
broached this doctrine, that all Oaths in the time of the new Testament were
unlawful, and that therefore taken, or to be taken, they were of no validity.
Ours only slice them as yet, and desire their qualification: when they have
obtained this, they will have something else ready to obtrude upon us; for he
that thinks they will ever be content, is to learn the nature of a Sectary: In
the tail of this Article lies this venomous clause, That none may be disturbed
for difference of opinion or practice in Religion: A worthy grievance! that
every Enthusiast should not have his allowed Teraphim! nay, they are not
content to believe as they list, nor to practice what they list, unless they
have Letters of Mart to take up Proselytes. All they can catch must be lawful
prize, and therefore they ask.

5. That no man for preaching or publishing his opinion in Religion in a
peaceable way may be punished or persecuted as heretical by Judges that are
not infallible, but may be mistaken as well as other men in their judgments,
least upon pretense of suppressing errors Sects or Schisms, the most
necessary truths and sincere professors thereof may be suppressed, as upon the
like pretense it has been in all ages. Mark how the Serpent creeps, and every
where leaves a filthy shine behind him; Hitherto they never pretended more then
a tolleration, now they will have a patent under the broad Seal for public
vent of their false ways, While they only used the buckler and weapons of
defense, we pit^yed and connived at their weakness, supposing that nothing but
a certain habit of private assemblings forced upon conscientious people by
Prelaticall tyranny without any other obstinacy, had continnued their
withdrawings from public worship: But now that they furbish the sword and whet
their teeth like sharp arrows, blow the trumpet with that man of Belial, Every
man to his tents O Israel. It is high time to rub our eyes and watch their
progress. Had they contained themselves within their desires and stuck to
their Penates they might still have pleaded the ease of weak brethren: But
that al markets should be open to their putid errors plainly shows they never
intended them other then for sale and I appeal to all understanding
Christians, and such as cherish the practice of piety and power of godliness,
whether this be not a strain beyond the tedder of a tender conscience! Did not
the Devil by these same instruments o^struct the growing re^ormation in
Germany? They complain the Parliament and Assembly have done so little: Thanks
to these Remoras? They should do less if they could hinder them. These
vermin that ferr^t into by corners grawing ^ut the bowels of religion, and
eating out the power thereof, first biting at Ministry, then at Magistracy
these dungwagons make us stink in the nostrills of all neighboring Nations.
But for sooth their Judges are not infallible; Very true. If you ask seeing we
may possibly err, how can we be assured we do not? I ask you again seei^g,
your eye sight may deceive you how can you be sure you see the Sun when you
do see it. Perhaps you may be in a dream, and perhaps you and all the men in
the World have been so, when they thought they were awake, and then only a
wake, when they thought they dreamt. Because we challenge not an impossibility
of erring, can we not be sure that all ought to be subject to the higher
powers, (which you labor to kick off) and that all sowers of envy and strife
and contentious persons are in the wrong, not to say what Saint Paul says that
such shall not enter into the Kingdom of God? Because the Bishops imposed the
nicknames of Puritan and Sectary, cannot we be sure they are your true names,
and pity it is they should be Christian names? Do you think there ever was
any such thing as Schism or faction? if so, give the Magistrate leave to find
it out and punish it or else set up your standard and own it. What pity it is
these men are not allowed to ride on a while! What a fine Egyptian miscellany
of religions would be introduced! We should shortly have Mahomet the second
appear with new revelations freshly coined in the mint of some Ulcerous
brains the itch of whose wit daily breaks out into some new botch or boil,
for which they deserve not little a clawing. Sure they have retrived St. Thomas
his Gospel out of the Vatican and would expound it in their Synagogues.
Profecto si essent in republica magistratus nullum futurum fuisse Romae, (vel
Londinis) nisi publicum consilium: nunc in mill curias concionesque cum alia
in esquiliis, alia in Aventino fiant consilia dispersam and dissipatem esse
rempublicam? Under the notion of a new mystery crept in the Bachanalia to Rome
a Seminary of the most horrid impieties, that ever were heard of yet veiled
over with such a fair show of pure devotion that it was spread all over Italy
before the Senate took notice thereof and then hardly with the death of many
thousands, and banishment of more, could stifle this Grecian Independency.

Do not many modern Libertines tread the same path, rending man and wife,
Father and Son a sunder, breaking the nearest ^ands, and captivating simple
souls into their new mysteries which hardly three or four of their whole
tribe understand where for ought we know, they are innitiated into as arrant
deeds of darkness as those of the Bacchanalia? I am sure these and the German
Anabaptistick conventicles run but too parallel. Neither will thoughts of
charity here satisfy a Master of a family, who is knowingly to rende acc^unt
of all ^^ose committed to his care. But thus most necessary truths may be
suppressed. Thus those errors which are necessary indeed for your building and
without the rooting whereof, your Babell will totte^, shall ^^ ^uppressed
together with their insinuating Brokers, as upon the like (...) it has been in
all ages. I will brand them in the forehead and leave them: They are Intruders
into other men's labors, reaping where they have not sown, worthless drones
who can by no emblem be livelier represented, then of Ants, that rob others
barnes to increase their proper store stealers of corn for their own
provisions, industrious for themselves to all others unprofitable: The true
Pastor is not so, but l^ke a Be innoxious, in-offensive, without any's
prejudice gathers his honey for others, eating as pleasant as profitable.

Yet again They are not satisfied that Controversies in Religion can be
trusted to the compulsive regulation of any. No, that is agreed upon you are
pretty well resolved against satisfaction. Must nothing then be done in a
State, til (...) mutineer be pleased to be satisfied, no law pass till every
Cobl^r be first made to comprehend the reasons which urged the enacting? what
if his brains be too swimming, and will not admit of impression? What if the
Tinker tell us the Tavern is his meeting house, where he first draws the
barrel dry, then sets himself a broach, and inspired by the spirit of wine,
spits out his froth (miscalled preaching) in the same vessel? Truly sirs, you
must come off your stilts, and have this principle beat into you; That not the
Magistrate ought to render yo^ reason, much less Gospel, for all his
Ordinances; but unless you can dismount them with demonstrative arguments, not
simple cavillations, out of Gods word, Gods word commands you to submit.

Note. Two sorts of people offend in point of Religion, some have a depraved
notion of God, and his worship, but confined to themselves; and these deserve a
teacher, rather then a torturer, and to be dealt withal in the spirit of
meekness. Others are not only Errones, but Turbones, stirrers as well as
errors, and have sucked the same malice from their errors, as is said to be
concomitant of the plague, viz. an itch of spreading their Leprosy. Now if it
be felony to intrude into company with a Plague sore, what punishment deserve
these soul infecters? Since the Jews for their malicious artifice in sowing
the Pestilence, were justly banished many Countries, what shall be done to
these, who by their Emissaries scatter their poison in all places? Either
confine them to the Pesthouse, or let them not walk without a white wand some
distinguishing mark whereby they may be known and shunned. 'Twas a ^ Heathens
speech, Sen. de Ben. l. 3. cap. 6. Violatarum religionum ali^bi a^que aliubi
diversa poena est, sed ubique aliqua; Better one perish then unity. Can an
injury be done to God, and not us? Therefore Clemency is here cruelty: for
certainly if the laws are binding only to moral duties, and loose to
Christian, the Magistrate to us bears the Sword in vain.

6 The Remonstrative part winds up the sixth grievance in these terms: The
oppressive Monopoly of Merchant-Adventurers, and others do still remain, to
the great abridgement of the Liberty of the People, and to the extreme
prejudice of all such industrious people, as do depend on Clothing, or Woollen
manufacture it being the staple Commodity of this Kingdom, and to the great
discouragement of all Tradesmen, Seafaring-men, and hindrance of Shipping and
Navigation. Grant all this to be true, yet you must give us leave to doubt of
your honest meaning; for he that uses by-ways, is justly mistrusted when he
keeps the road. The ingenuous are to be construed by their natures, the
crafty, by their ends: The plain hearted seldom suppress their inclinations:
The cunning man looks one way, rows another, and while he holds up
artificial hands, with his natural under his cloak, cuts your purse. Here
it is called a Monopoly, in the sixth Article ^ Company, so that when they cry
down this Company and others, till they explain, we may fear they strike
obliquely at all the London Companies, at least of Merchants. And indeed this
is but consonant to their doctrine, which urges an universal Community, and
esteems every enclosure a Monopoly. But that, part hereof is false, and all
the rest mistimed in the motion; The Western Gentlemen will bear me witness,
who in the House have no small sway, and will for their own Interest have a
special eye to Clothing, the chief riches of their Country, the West being
the staple of this staple commodity.

7 In the Preface I find these motives to your seventh Article. Also the old,
tedious, and chargeable way of deciding suits in Law is continued to the
undoing of multitudes of Families. The more undone, the better for you, for the
poorest are aptest to embrace your doctrine of Com^unity besides, whence comes
this care of us, since all out of you^ Church are Heathens in your account? No
wonder, if your new worships love not to walk in any old way: But wiser men
then you, who ever you are, did not use in old ways to stumble at every stone,
nor to cast off old customs, till old customs were ready to cast off them,
and if any law grew burdensome, they let it fall through disuse, and antiquated
rather then innovated; Physicians will tell you it is unsafe to disturb an
evil settled humor, and when an infirmity has kept possession twenty, thirty,
forty years, 'twere madness to try experiments upon an aged body. Many
Mountebanks, indeed by boasting their new receipts, as you do, often find some
impatient fool or other. who had rather die quickly, then live in a little
pain, and weighes not the hazard, in respect of the dispatch. But we poor
mortals are content to think the old way the safest, till your new lights
discover a better, for a Tinker will tell you, it is easier to find holes then
mend them. Again, you shoot beyond the Moon, when you style this the most
palpable and greatest grievance in the world; For who so knows any thing in
Foreign affairs, knows there is never a Kingdom in the Christian world,
where the course of law is more regular less ^edious, and consequently less
chargeable, although indeed, their Fees be lesser, then in England; Nay
therefore is the Foreign way more tedious, because less chargeable,
therefore in demanding a more speedy, plain, unburdensome way of deciding
controversies, and the publication of our Laws in English, you do like the
sons of Zebedee, and ask you know not what. Sure I am in France and other
parts, where the Fees are moderate, and the Laws in their own language, there
are a hundred Families to our one, utterly ruined by suites which continue from
Father to Son, even to the third and fourth generation, for where it costs
but twelve pence a time, every one will run to the Physician, and where every
worm eaten cankered fellow can have his Advocate for his half crown, the
least Punctilio must be pleaded, and the smallest difference turn to a
Process. There is another reason of their mischief: For where the Law is not
locked up, as it were in a strange character, as with us, but the way easy, and
the door open for all comers; Every Peazants son leaps to the Bar, till
Lawyers swarm like Locusts, as in France, whereas their principal study must
be in each Village to sow and foment divisions, for fear of starving? Do not
we frequently see fellows otherwise quarrelsome enough, and mutually incensed
commit their differences to the arbitrament of neighbors merely for fear of
charges? And if yet some peevish people will never be well till they have paid
for it, how outrageous would they be when they might disquiet others with ^esse
detriment to themselves? for my part I cannot but esteem it wisely done of our
State to fix some difficulties upon the study of the Common Law, which were
they all removed we should soon have all England full of brawles because full
of leaders even as now the facility of going to Law tempts many near to London
and Westminster to their utter undoing who had they lived in Wales or
Lancashire would never have dreamt thereof. Well but is this all? are they
content to accuse our Laws of injustice: no they further re^uire that they be
reduced to the nearest agreement with christianity and that all process and
proceedings theri^ may be true that so this nation may be freed of an
oppression more burdensome and troublesome then all the oppressions hitherto by
this Parliament removed.

How furiously th^se Jeh^'s drive boasting their zeal for the Lord pray God it
end not as Iehu's in the accomplishment of their own ends. In the interim we
stand deeply charged: with Paganism, what no less then unchristian? I
confess they are ancient yet can hardly believe K Alfred fetched his Laws from
China or that our forefathers have sinceborrowed any of the Turkish Aleoran or
Jewish Talmud althoughall these have many excellent constitutions, As
impertinent, is the other charge of untruth upon the proceedings which is an
arrant falsehood. But give the child his babble before he cry I ^uppose now the
Law's in English without any abbreviation, all fees limited and in print, will
it therefore follow this nation shall be for ever free? you Platonicks may
please your selves with your fine Idea's, but verily you seem to underst and
the world as ittle as you understand your selves, and those that know you say
that is little enough, The regular usual fee of a Physician's but ten
shillings yet whether to engrosse the Doctors care or out of oftentation. I
know not by what means it is come about that between the Physician and
Apothecary many are purged of super^^uities and are hardly left so much gold in
their purses, as there is about their pills, whose fault is this now? must
each man's fault be laid upon the States shoulders? so were the Councillors
highest legal fee, a piece, might not one all whose hopes lay at stake in one
cause underhand quicken his diligence with ten The like a second and a third in
a like necessity, til the wheels run in the old track? Nay may he not with
more equity demand of me ten pounds, in some cause then one in another? should
the fees be prescribed according to the p^eaders pains, or the causes
importance? for may not a business of mighty concernment be often dispatched
with less trouble then a petty but knotty case case can be opened? as you may
sooner read two chapters in a fair legible character then one in a small
impression. Again how can a Lawyers pains be estimated? either in the well
timing a motion (for every business has its golden hour) or in the manner,
or in the choice of the matter, or in the expedition, a hundred ways order it
how you can, an active faithful man's pains are invaluable, and in many cases
cannot be weighed in other balances then those of discretion To conclude, you
may as easily make a coat for the Moon as limit Lawyers sees. Something perhaps
might be amended, and will in time convenient, but to make such a mountain of
this mole hill, as in comparison thereof to make nothing of the Starchamber,
High Commission, Court of Wards, and all other Court tyranny makes manifestro
all who eye your practices that there lies a snake under this green grass;
once I will be your Edipus and unfold this riddle. I find in my story of
M^^tzer that Arch-Anabaptist, among other his tenants That Justice and
Iudge^ent under the new Testament ought to be framed and administered only out
of the word of God ^y which doctrine he made the poor People of ^huringia
believe their Laws and Governments were unlawful, and challenging to himself
by degrees the cognizance of all both Ecclesiastical and Civil matters. Our
Anabaptists are not yet grown big enough to speak plain and therefore whisper
in their preachments that there are stronger truths to be revealed but we are
not yet able to bear them. First our Laws must be disgraced and accounted as
remote from Christianity, no doubt because they are not all drawn out of the
Gospel. Next our Parliament must be bespattered because they will not alter
them to their minds: then will some contrary Justinian commend himself to the
people, by condemning our Statutes for tedious, and extracting a
quite-essentiall Law out of his chimericall revelations, which his Sectaries
shall cry up for Gospel. Whosoever reads me, read but the lives of these
Plebicolae, and after a month or two's observation you shall find them singing
Absalons tune in every corner to the people; Your matters are good and right
but there is no man deputed to hear you O that our Gospel might ^nco prevail
in the land, that every man that every man that has any suit or cause might
come unto us and we would do them justice. The whole bent of their wit all
their turnings, and windings and fetches; tend but to this to possess the
people against the present Government for this they affirm as many diverse
shapes as Proteus, with the honest minded insinuating a certain misterious
strictness of conversation with the ambitious, they deal by communications of
honors, telling them what a sweet thing it is to be looked upon as chief of a
party, that its better being the head of a Cat then the tail of a Lion; But
deal how you can with them they will amuse and hold you in suspense, but you
shall never squeese out of them what they would have, nor indeed can they tell
you being resolved to set up more or less sail according as the wind shall
blow. Mark this phrase in conclusion. To the nearest agreement with
Christianity as if Political Laws could not quite agree therewith, or we be
other then mungrell Christians while we retained any. This is pure Liberty.

8. That the life of no person may be taken away under the testimony of two
witness to do it upon the testimony of one you say is contrary to the law of
God or common equity. This is a grievance you have learned by revelation, for I
find no such thing in our laws: Indeed in some cases of main importance for
the example, where many circumstances compose a chain of strong probabilities
concurring with the deposition of a disinteressed eye witness I say in some
such rare case the law allows punishment of a notorious offender; And what can
you pick out of this b^ne now? But you must be applauded for the sole
deliverers from all bondage? And that in an equitable way you will proportion
punishment to offenses so that no man's life be taken away his body punished nor
his estate forfeited but upon such ^eighty and considerable causes as justly
deserve such punishments. What your Synagogues account just we neither know nor
care, but there is no man punished by the laws in any of these respects
without such cause as the whole Kingdom of England for many, many hundred
years successively have deemed weighty And that all prisoners may have a
speedy trial? Amen so be it, and may yours lead the dance; that they be
neither starved, nor their families ruined by long and lingering imprisonment.
And that imprisonment be only used for safe eustody not punishment. To a
Gentleman complaining of the dearnes of Sack, his companion merrily answers,
If it were at a crown the quart we should have fewer drunkards: So say I, if
persons were yet more troublesome persons would be more orderly; you see as bad
as they are, there are still enough found, that by their folly or obstinacy
will venture the going thither. But now what if there arise crimes of
contumacie, obstinate opini^^nesse, sedition, pertinacity in speaking evil of
dignities, etc. By the practice of all the Commonwealths that ever I read or
heard of, Imprisonment has been judged the most expedient punishment. 1.
Because these crimes are of a diffussive nature and therefore confinement the
most proper remedy. 2. That solitariness might breed in their minds, reflex
thoughts and so occasion repentance. 3. The indulgence of the magistrate could
pitch upon no milder way unless he should proclaim impunity for all crime^
not capital; This being the ordinary gradation of such, that the first fault
draws on Imprisonment, and sometimes fine, continuation in it Banishment,
surreptuious return from exile, or a third guilt of the same crime death, What
interest you have in deprecating such penal proceedings, Let your own
Consciences determine.

Another fools bolt is shot against tithes and al other enforced maintenance
and that nothing in place thereof be imposed but that all Ministers may be paid
only by those who voluntarily choose them, and contrace with them for their
Labors. That is being interpreted, that excepting London and the adjacent
Counties, all Ministers should be expeld the Realm of England, and how many
think you would be left in the Dominion of Wales? Truly considering the
pretty man age we live in; I wonder no such whimsycall Petition as this was
ever tendered, Humbly shewiug etc. That whereas for diverse years past there
have been sundry differences happened in and about Religion to the detriment
of the public peace, They would be pleased to order a suspension of all the
Ministry for 12. months, till all contentions about Gods worship cease. How
think ^ou? would not hands enough be got thereto? I, and seals too: Within a
while people would be so far from disputing of God. that they would never
think of him, your Petition has the sa^e sense. under other terms. The old
Proverb was Lik^ Priest, like People and both were bad enough; But if it be
inverted, Like People, Like Priest, we shall see famous contracts, and a^
worthy labors all performed in a blind alehouse. If tithes came so hardly.
when exacted from them by authority, is it to be imagined, their contributions
will flow in more liber^lly? The naked truth is this; If these shockes were out
of the way John or Leydens Prophets might happily reap the better harvest; for
its probable they would plant their Gospel, with equal zeal to the Spaniards
in the Indies. We are told there is no ground for either under the Gospel. A
simple cavil: The whole Orthodox Church of God for these foureteen or fifteen
hundred years, that is ever since any Churches were established, have
acknowledged more then abundant ground for both; Now because these fanatic
dreamers find it not couched in so many Letters and Sylables, they most simply
yet most wickediy cry down all legal maintenance and upon the same ground all
our other laws: For tithes or any other maintenance were never urged by us as
a precept of the Gospel, but as the law of England, and therefore in the
seventh Petition they in effect demand the abrogation of al our laws because
not expressly contained in the Gospel there termed Christianity: Yet I need not
grant them thus much for all sound Christians acknowledging a perfect harmony
in the word, that the old Testament is but Christ under the veil, and the new
Moses unveiled its enough for us to practice what God thought fit to be
enjoined in the one, till we find it positively, or by strong inference (for we
will not tie them so strictly to it as they do us) retracted in the other. But
this is another dream of these Pseudo-Evangelists to oppose Moses and Christ,
contending that the doctrine of faith delivered in the old and new Testament is
diverse in substance and that Christ in the new Testament proposed quite a new
doctrine. Those that will be blind, Let them be blind still; But God forbid the
whole Kingdom should therefore put out their eyes.

10. That you will take some speedy and effectual course to relieve all such
prisoners for debt as are altogether unable to pay, that they may not perish in
prison, through the hard heartedness of their Creditors, that the p^tion may
go down the better, they annex this clause as a gobbet of sugar and that all
such who have estates may be enforced to make payment and not shelter
themselves in Prison to defraud their Creditors. This was wisely moved believe
me; could you but set the do^res open and proclaim Jubilee to all prisoners you
might happily gain no small store of Proselytes, your communion of goods would
take fire here like Gunpowder; how quickly would such as have nothing left, cry
halves with their neighbors,? but by your leave, t^i^ motion ^ad been juster
that some stricter punishment besides prison may be inflicted upon all such
desperate spendthrifts as will rather obstinately hazard the perishing in
prison through their hard heartedness to their Creditou^s then bate an ace of
their vain expenses wherewithal to discharge the debt. Sure while the worst of
it is a retreat to prison' where many ^ive jollily and in riot they bear up as
long as they may and then let posterity sink or swim. Now admit the worst what
proportion is there between the ruin of one man who has spent his days in
vanity and folly and the whole families desolation? They err who think
punishments invented only for the offenders; they are for example sake and to
deter others. Are not many for crimes, which by reason of age or other
impediments they are no more able to commit yet hanged up for scarre-Growes?
It Is a most unjust custom of the Hollanders, when any man is attacht for
murder, the people usually help him to escape with this boorish argument one
man is killed already, why should we lose another? most foolish pity, yea most
wicked! I my self have known a dozen murders in one year by this means
escape unpunished, all which might possibly have been prevented, had the first
mvrtherer been hanged. Those who pity not themselves who can pity? and in case
of suretiship the usual weakness of soft natures, or whatsoever else may
merit regulation, we leave it to those whom it concerns without imposing our
sense upon the supreme Magistrate.

[11 In the next place here is a great stir about Prison keepers, and their
under Officers, I will join with you herein, and wish they may be of approved
honesty, but rather wish it, then hope it, for I know not by what fare, they
have never been better then they are; The contagion of the place, I think,
infects them. But that you should now foist this in, to make up your Bakers
dozen of grievances, is most, most ridiculous! What a happy condition were we
in, if we lay under no greater burden then this of Knavish Prison-Keepers. It Is
a sign you have little to say, when you interrupt the State-proceedings with
such petty matters: Is not this a worthy business, think you, for the
Parliaments cognizance, in the midst of the greatest difficulties, that ever
Parliament groaned under? This is with Rachel to say, Give me children or else
I dye: Is the Parliament in stead of God? Sometime you revile them, here you
deifie them. Can they make men honest? they may indeed displace knaves, but to
hinder others from becoming as bad, is not their work but Gods; Must the
State be troubled with the placing and displacing every under Officer? There is
one misterious phrase lurkes here, That they may detain no person or persons
without lawful warrant. Do they otherwise? why do not those detained exhibit
their complaints? for this is absolutely illegal, and the Prisonkeeper would
be soundly fined in any Court of England: So that it is frivolous here to
trouble the supreme Court. Stay a little, for I profess, I cannot pick sense
enough out of this to fill a nut-shell, except you mean a Parliament Warrant
is unlawful; for who else has committed any? It Is even so, The House of
Peers, or a Committee of Commons, has sent some of your Knipperdollings to
prison for their rudeness, and this makes you plead so hard for prisoners; All
the rest of the Article was but a shooing-horne to draw on this clause. But I
would wish you to be more modest, and not to harp too much upon this string.
for vetily, if you scratch your Superiors too hard, you may chance draw the
smart upon your selves. Qui nimis emangit, sanguinem elieit.

12 That you will provide some powerful means to keep men, women and children
from begging, and wickedness, that this Nation may be no longer a shame to
Christianity therein. I am confident no Nation under heaven has better
provided for the poor by laws, then ours, nor any where, Holland excepted,
are they better executed: name me any Kingdom in Christendom where are fewer
poor? besides that, many who seem poor among us are but counterfeit, and beg
out of wantonness, out of a vagrant humor of Libertinisme, which me thinks,
you of all others should not gainsay. Nevertheless I deny not but they might
be better ordered, and would be in that Government which you so much withstand.
It cannot be unknown to you also, how the City for their parts, have been of
late consulting hereabout; so that it ill becomes you Plebicola, to act the
Publicola, and to commend your selves to the people for the first movers of
that, which has been above these twelve months, to my knowledge, in
ag^tation, and that is a point beyond motion. But such is your arrogance, as
that you would infer to the people, that no body sees their grievances, but
you, all the rest of the world is blind, and hardly can you afford the
Parliament one oye as the Chinesi do the Europeans. And whence (I pray) this
render regard of the poor? do not we know that we are all Infidels in your
esteem? What care you for all the poor in the world, that are out of your
congregations? Verily of all graces, you have least cause to brag of charity.
Well, I say no more, but wish your heart may here have kept your tongue
company; So shall I hope, you may in time come to be honest Elders, since you
are already so stont Deacons.

13 The last is a Voluminous complaint, 1. That men call them by their names,
of Sectaries, Schismatics, factious, etc. It Is well they are ashamed of the
name, 'twere better they were ashamed of the thing; they disavow the titles,
but not the tenants. Their argument runs thus; All honest people, and such as
would not conform to the superstitions under Episcopacy, the then present
Government, were formerly most unjustly reproached as Puritans, Heretics,
Schismatics, etc. therefore neither are we truly so called for resisting the
present Government, (Although all those stumbling blocks be now removed, and so
the reasons why you refuse to join with us yet invisible.) I will match their
Argument, and then turn them both loose to stand or fall together. In the
reign of Queen Mary, diverse Socinians suppressing their blasphemous tenants,
and only preaching against adoration of Images, Purgatory, Invocation of
Saints, and other popish superstitions, are therefore taken for Protestants,
and together with the true Protestants persecuted as Heretics for opposing
Papisticall Government. Afterward in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign
while the reformed discipline of the Church was yet unsettled, they begin to
peep as from under the mask, and by degrees to appear in their own likeness,
seducing many simple people, who had admired them for their zeal against the
Papists. Now if these men apprehended for their horrid blasphemies against the
Trinity, and other fundamental Articles of our Creed, should come and plead
not guilty, because the best Christians had been branded with the name of
Heretics, as well as they, deny that they were Scmsmaticks, although they rent
the Church, and obstructed the reformation because the most godly had likewise
refused to common cate with the Papists, I ^uppose you would think this
inference more worthy of laughter then an answer. We do not say some of you
are Heretics, and others of you are Schismatics, because so called; but we
call you so, because you are so: Neither do we term you factious and
seditions; only because you refuse to conform to the present government, but
for that you therefore refuse it, because injoy^^d by the Magistrate, out of a
pure spirit of contradiction whereby you sh^ke the foundations of all
Authority. And therefore to your s^c^^d branch of this Article, That you will
not exclude any of approved f^^^lity from bearing office of trust in the
Commonwealth for nonconformi^y. I return this answer: If any remain
unsatisfied in any point of the present government, and be ready modestly to
render a reason of his non conformity, no doubt he shall be borne withal, and
not excluded therefore from any office of trust; for such a one will be content
to keep his opinions to himself. But we know that most of you value not that
tolleration which allows not the spreading of your Heresies, wherefore we have
as little reason to trust you, as the Protestants in the former case to have
trusted the Socinians, who might have pleaded as much fervor against the
Papists, as you can against the Royallists. What are we the better for your
milk, if now you kick down the paile? If you are good, and do good, shall
you not be accepted? and if you do not good, sin lies at the door, and
punishment under the threshold. You say you are the Parliaments real friends,
but I am sure you show little respect, and less friendship, when you tell them
(to their face? Nay, to the face of the whole world) that their Promotion of
Malignants is the chief cause of all our grievances. Lastly, that you may end
like your selves, you tell the Parliament, they are going to leave this Nation
in great thraldoms both of body, mind, and estate (is uot this to hunt counter
to the title of right Honorable in the beginning?) the sole prevention whereof
consists in the granting your humble desire, without which this Nation cannot
be safe and happy This is a very humble conclusion indeed! but something unlike
a Petition to say you must have what you ask, and cannot be without it.
B^ggars had not wont to be chusers till of late, can you tell be^^t what is
proper for the Parliament to gra^^ then they themselves? you pretend I
con^esse, the general good of the Commonwealth, but it your lives and
conversations you walk more like our Antipodes then our Countrymen.

But I am weary of raking in this dunghill. He that would know what we may
justly fear from this Gallimaufrey of E^cour^ let him read Spanhemins
Historical natration of the German Sect^^i^s, where in the beginning of the
second Chapter, you shall meet with a description of our present calamities:
Those that are unacquainted with History are apt to think all Relations of
such proceedings ^abulous, so ridiculous and santastick are many of their
principles. But so much the more daugerous are the effects, because we are so
prune to slight the causes. Mark but the progress of Herefie in all ages, and
you will easily discover whether we are going: for that which has been, shall
be, and there is no new thing under the Sun. The pretenses have alalwayes been
the same, of sweet communion, and increase of knowledge, the progress the
same, the casting of the Ordinances of Magistracy, and Ministry, the event
the same, the trouble of the Church for a while, but ever in the end their own
confusion. The storm of Persecution was no sooner blown over in the Primitive
times, then those civil wars of Religion began to divide the Church, and so
from time to time interchangeably continued till all settled in a gross fog of
ignorance under Popery: Again, God no sooner stirred up Luther and his
fellows to reform, then the Devil transforming himself into an angel of
light, stirted up the Anabaptists to retard and corrupe the reformation. And
how? by exclaiming against it as imperfect, condemning Luther for a flatterer
of Princes, as if he had left the people under tyranny, and had not preached
the full liberty of the Gospel; by which doctrine and cruel indulgence of the
Migistrate in a short space they drew after them whole armies of licentious
people, and lead them against their Princes. Which example puts me in mind of
Appius, saying in Livi^, Non miserris, sed l^eentia tantum concitum (...): ^t
lasciv^re magis pl^bem quam savire. All the sury is derived from the heads of
these factions, the rest are mad by contagion. To wind up all in a Character of
our Petitioners: 1. The whole rabble of them, is a beggars cloak made up of
diverse patches. A fair well built body to the eye but uncase it, and you find
an ill shapen carcass covered over with a thick crust of appearances. 2. Their
voice is Jacobs, but their hands are Esan's. 3. Their defigne is to clog the
Parliament with endless intricacy of work, that they may escape in the crowd
unseene, till the Monster be full grown, and then lock it in the face who
dare. Every good Patriot weigh well, and consider their actions! Trace them
afar off, but tread not in their footsteps: Harken rather to Solomon. Prove. 22.
v, 8. Pro. 24. v. 21. Remove not the ancient land-markes which thy Fathers have
set, and again. My son fear thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle not with
them that are given to change. If God challenge the firstlings, give the
Magistrate the second fruits of thine Obedience.

FINIS.

