CHURCH LANDS NOT TO BE SOLD. OR, A necessary and plain Answer to the Question
of a conscientious PROTESTANT; Whether the Lands of the BISHOPS, and CHURCHES
in England and Wales may be sold?

Prove. 20.25. It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy.

Sr Edward Coke, Instit. 2. c. 1. What ever is granted to Gods Church, i.e. to
Churchmen, for his honor and maintenance of his Religion and Service, is
granted for and to God: and what is given to God, is holy. Ezekiel. 48.

Prove. 23.10, 11. Remove not the old Landmark, and enter not into the field of
the Fatherless, for their Redeemer is mighty, and he shall plead their cause
with thee.

Coke, Ibid. Our Law Books teach us, that the Church is ever understood to be
under age, and to be as a Pupil or Fatherless: and that it is not agreeable
to Law or Right that such should be dis-inherited.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

The Heads or Points briefly touched in this Answer.
1. THat Lands may be given to the Church, for Gods Service, and Servants
therein. 2. That Lands so given, and accepted, become holy to the Lord. 3. That
the Lands of Bishops, and the Churches in England were so given, and therefore
may not be alienated or sold. 4. That such Alienation, or Selling is forbidden
in the Old, and New Testament. 5. That it has been so judged by the most
strict Reformers in the Protestant Churches. 6. That this kind of Alienation is
against Prudence, Justice, the good of the Kingdom in general, and of the
Tenants to such lands in special. 7. That it is against the Laws of this
Kingdom of England, which the two Houses of Parliament, and Kingdom, by their
several Declarations, Protestations, and Covenants, are bound to maintain. 8.
That it is against the Prudence, and Justice of the King; and against his
lawful Oath. 9. One and twenty Arguments, which are brought in defense of, or
color for such Alienation, are answered. 10. The Curses, and punishments,
which are set down, and executed in Holy Writ against Sacrilegious
Alienations, are held forth and opened.
CHAP. I. That Lands may be given to the Church, for Gods Service and Servants
therein.
DId I conceive it proper to this Discourse, and that it would move you, it
were easy to show out of very good Histories, that the Heathen (who knew not
the true God) and Infidels, (not believing in our Lord Christ) have set forth
lands and possessions for the perpetual maintenance of their Priests. I shall
therefore give you but a touch of this, and that in our own Land; wherein
(then Heathenish) were Idol Priests, Antiqu. Brit. Armica^.
whom Lucius (King in some part of Britain) being converted to the knowledge
and faith of Christ, (about the year 176.) rooted out; and taking away their
possessions and territories, he gave them to the Churches of the believing
Christians; which he endowed with addition of more lands, and larger
immunities. And that this may not seem any new or strange thing, I pray,
consider, that God by his Prophet Moses has bin pleased to express, that the
Egyptian Priests had lands; for so we read, Genesis 47.22. Only the lands of the
Priests he sold not: in the margin of which Text it is added, or of the
Princes: not as doubting whether they were Princes and not Priests, but
intimating that, as the original word signifies both; so, they were, or might
be, both Priests and Princes. And not only the Egyptians, but the Assyrians,
Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, Greeks, and Romans, honored their chief Priests,
as Princes: Baren ad An. 383.
yea, Constantine the Great being Emperor, and a Christian, yet retained the
title of Pontifex maximous. The great, or high, Priest. But to return to our
purpose, (for we argue not for title, but maintenance) out of that Text of Genesis
47. it appears that the people, who were (as the Apostle speaks) without God
in the world, Ephesians. 2.12.
yet by the light of natural reason, found and held it requisite, that their
Priests should have a settled maintenance, and that in lands. Give me leave
here to add what Mr Seldom, a man of great reading, has observed, that in
some parts of Europe, the maintenance of Priests lies wholly in lands. But I
must to the holy History, and tell you, that so soon as God had raised
himself a Church by the Ministry of his servant Moses, Acts 7.22.
(who was learned in all the Wisdom, Laws, and Policies of the Egyptians,) he
gave to his servants in his Church, besides 1. The firstborn of all men and
ca^^^; 2. Besides the first fruits of the earth; 3. Besides a part in all their
several Offerings; 4. Besides all the Tithes, both of their Goods, Weems
Synagog.
and of the increase of their Lands: (so that if an Husbandman had 6000.
bushels of grain or corn growing in a year, after that he had paid all his
Tithes, he had left to himself but 4779.) I say besides all this, (though the
whole land was hardly 160. miles in length from Dan to Beer-sheba, and but 46.
Ep. ad Dardan.
miles in breadth from Joppa to Bethlehem, (as Saint Jerome, who lived long
there testifies,) God gave them 18. Cities with the Lands, and Suburbs round
about. And although the Tribe of Love, at that time of division of the Land,
were but 23000. and the Tribe of Asher was 53000. of Nepthali, 45000. of
Zebulun, 57400. of Issachar, 64000. of Dau, 64000. yet the most of the Lands
allotted to any of these Tribes, exceeded not 19. Cities; so bountiful was God
under the Law to a corporal abouring Levite, which was but a shadow of the
glorious Sunshine of the Gospel, and the Royal Priesthood which we enjoy.

And yet, as though nothing could then under the Law be done too much for the
Servants in Gods Temple, King Solomon (a Type of Christ) not only suffered them
to enjoy what before had bin given them immediately from God, but, to show the
high esteem which ought to be had to the Priest, whereas the King had a Coin
estamped with the Sword and Scepter, (which was the Royal Coin,) the Priests
had their Coin too, bearing the pot of Manna, and Aarons Rod, to show it a
Royal Priesthood; when as yet (as before is said) it was but a shadow of that
Royalty, which after appeared under the Gospel, whereof Bishops, and
Presbyters, are the Ministers.

And so long as this honor, and honorable maintenance was continued to the
Priests, the Church of God, and the whole land flourished, until the time of
Jeroboam, who by his Rebellion, Idolatry, and Sacrilege, begat that confusion,
which by degrees brought all to utter destruction.

Neither did the Convert Christians, with Judaisme, renounce this kind of
Dedicating Lands to God, and his servants; for what was that act of the
Christians less, which the Apostle mentions, Acts 4. and 5? Whereupon Beza,
and other learned Divines hold, that the Christians then and there dedicated
the lands themselves, but because the times were such, wherein they lived under
the spoilers and nobbers of the Church, therefore they sold the lands, and
brought the whole price thereof to the Apostles, (the then Governors of the
Church) and sure it cannot be conceived in right reason, but that those
Christians would as willingly and readily have given their lands, which might
have continued for a perpetual standing maintenance and revenne, as to have
sold the land for money in present to be expended.

And that I give but this one instance in the New Testament, you will not
wonder, when you consider, 1. that the Church, so long as the Apostles dived
and wrote, was yet in the wilderness, but in swaddling clouts, and under
grievous tyranny, and persecution, and therefore not capable of lands. 2. As
yet it had been improper to have given command or counsel herein, for fenre of
a greater persecution to the Christians: and therefore they left both the
advice, and the thing then to be done, when the Church should by Gods mercy
obtain some settlement; and this was the course, which Moses observed; who,
until, by vanquishing the enemy, he had obtained peace in the Land, settled
not lands, and a perpetual maintenance for the Priests and Levites in Gods
service.



laid down at the feet of none but the Apostles, and this laying at the feet,
gives the power of interest, and dispose of that which was so laid; which might
be confirmed by several places both in Holy and Profane Writ. The case then I
suppose is clear, that the Primitive Christians (spoken of in the Acts of the
Apostles) dedicated their lands to God for his servants in the Church, which is
the joint consent of Calvin, Beza, Deeda^, and other reformed Divines: although
by reason of the persecution, they were constrained for present use and
necessity, to turn those lands into money. 2. It is as clear that the right,
title, or interest of that money, being laid at the Apostles feet, was in the
Apostles. 3. That as the money (the price of the lands,) so should the lands
likewise have been in the Apostles power, if they had been held in kind. 4.
From all summed up, I conceive it cannot be denied, but that if in a settled
time the lands had continued unsold, the lands themselves being dedicated to
God, the title and interest thereof had been in those Apostles, who were Gods
Vicegerents, as Mr Calvin judiciously observes on that place.



Is it not lawful for out to do what I will with mine own? Mat. 20.25.
Where the Interrogation has the force of an undoubted affirmation; as if he
had said, questionless, in a just, right, lawful way, it is lawful for me, or
any man, to do what I, or he will with mine, or his own; and this I hope
comes home to the Proposition or Assertion premised, that lands may be given,
to the Church for Gods service and servants.

Hitherto I have but barely kept word with you, that we have from Gods word a
Charter, whereby we are enabled to hold lands, if any will give them; now will
you be pleased to consider whether God in the Old, or Christ in the New
Testament have not given, if not a command, yet a counsel or strong persuasion
so to dedicate or give? That in the Old Testament, which sure has the power of
a Precept, is, Prove. 3.9.
Honor the Lord with thy substance, whereby substance, is more especially
meant our temporal and worldly substance, (and why not lands here included?)
and by the Lord, there is meant the immediate honor and maintenance of the
Priest and Servants of the Lord God.

And when our Savior tells it, to the worlds end, Mat. 25.40.
that what ever good any Christian, or other shall show to his Apostles and
Disciples, he takes it as done unto himself, and he will reward them; does he
not herein vehemently persuade all true Believers (at least) to be good and
bountiful unto them? And can we conceive that Christ straitened the Christians
bounty only to a competent maintenance, because he there speaks but of
feeding and clothing? No surely, this were too narrow; it can intend no less
then this, that who shall in my name give unto my Disciples and Apostles, my
servants and Ministers present, or perpetual maintenance, in diet, lands, or
otherwise, he shall not loose his reward. And if Christians be counseled or
persuaded by Christ thus to give to his Apostles, Disciples, and their
Successors in his Name, and as for him, sure it cannot be denied, but that
those Apostles, Disciples, and Successors, may receive, and hold such gifts,
as in the right of their Lord Christ. And that this proposition (the Ministers
of the Gospel, may have lands for their maintenance in Gods service,) may be
rightly asserted from the Old and New Testament, I doubt not but to be the
opinion of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and of all learned Orthodox
Divine in Christendom.

CHAP. II. That Lands so given and accepted, become holy to the Lord.
THe next point is, that lands so given for the service and to the servants of
God, change their common quality or nature; and are by dedication and Gods
acceptance become Gods, and therefore holy: for there are in holy Writ, four
kinds of holy things. 1. Holy manners. 2. Holy means leading thereunto; as the
holy Word, holy Sacraments, holy Prayer, Deuteronomy. 33.8. Lev. 27.9. Jer. 2.3.
and holy Censures. 3. Holy men, as the Priest is called Gods holy One: For
there is sanctitas vitae, or conversationals, for all men; and sanctitas
Officii, or Functionis, for the Priests. 4. Holy maintenance; all that any man
gives unto the Lord, shall be holy. And Lev. 27.22. If a man sanctify to the
Lord a field, which he has bought, Ver. 23. it shall be an holy thing unto the
Lord. Prove. 20.25. Ezekiel. 48.15. V. 10. V. 12.
And of such Solomon speaks, It is a snare to devour holy things: The Prophet
Ezekul speaks this plainly, And Lev. 27.32. the Tithe is called Holy, the rest
of the land is termed a profane place, for the city, for dwelling, and for the
suburbs: whereas before, the oblation of the land mentioned for the Priests is
called holy; Deuteronomy. 18.1.
and this oblation of that land that is offered, shall be a thing most holy;
and the Priests and Levites maintenance is called the Lords inheritance: for
then, as now under the Gospel, by man's dedication and Gods acceptance, the
propriety, as by Liverie and Seisin in other lands, is altered and become the
Donees, Gods, and therefore is holy; which is plainly and fully confirmed by
that of our most blessed Savior, in that ye gave it to my Brethren or
Disciples, Mat. 25.40.
ye gave it unto me: where when they gave, and Christ received, it became fully
Christ's; and then and thereby, who will deny it to be holy? The Prophet tells
the Jews that they had robbed God; Mal. 3.
the Jews ask how, and wherein? to which Saint Hierom expounding the Prophet,
says, Ye have robbed me in taking that away which was given to my Priests. The
Primitive Fathers therefore, call Temples and Churches dedicated to God,
(though under the names of Saints) (...), the Temples or Houses of the Lord.
And Optatus says, Res est Dei, Lib. 6.
ubi Deo aliquid a quocunque oblatum est: And not only have the Primitive
Fathers and Councels spoken thus, but both Law and Gospel prove it; and Mr
Calvin calls Patrimonium Ecclesiae, Deo consecratum: (De neces. reform.
Ecclesiae.) And Beza on Acts 5. says, That now under the Gospel there is a
consecration of things to God is and now what is given to the Church, is given
to God. And Sr. Edward Coke, (from the most ancient learned Sages of the Law)
calls Church lands divine Tenements, according to which K. Ethelred, long
before, Anno 998. giving lands to the Church of Canterbury, styles them
Patrimonium Christi. Yea, Spelm. Conc. p. 506.
the Comment on Littleton says, That the King in our Law is Persona mixta cum
Sacerdote; and thereby his lands are called and held by our Lawyers to be
Patrimonium sacrum; how then can it be denied, that in our Law the Bishops
lands are such?

CHAP. III. That the Lands of Bishops, and the Churches in England were so
given; and therefore may not be alienated, or sold.
ANd that the Lands of Bishops, and of the Church in England were so dedicated,
is easy to prove; though first I shall plainly confess, that as God held not
himself tied in the acceptance of lands offered, nor yet the ancient Kings
held themselves bound, when they gave their lands, some five, some six, some
seven, some eight, some nine hundred years ago, to give them after the manner
of a Norman, or a later invented form of conveyance: so indeed can there not
be found in the dedication of those lands such formalities as the Lawyers of
our time would now require: yet I am confident, that on the Donors part, you
shall not find so plain and formal grants of any gifts, or offerings in the
Book of God, (unless you mention those of the Temple) as these of the Bishops
lands; and yet those God accepted, took, and held as his. The Tithes and
Offerings brought and delivered to the Priests and Levites, God calls them in
diverse places his Inheritance, his Offerings, his Tithes, Deuteronomy. 8.1. Lev.
27.10. Numb. 18.28. Eze. 48. Mel. 3. Acts 4.
yet where find we the dedication of them by the Donors to God? And the like we
may say of the Christians dedicating and selling their lands; yet because the
Israelites and Christians intended them to God, God so accepted them as given
to himself; and according, Marlorat, the Collector of the Comments of the late
Reformed Divines, terms that act of Ananias, Sacrilega fraudatio, quia
subduxerat quod sacrum fuit Deo, although there is no mention in the dedication
thereof to God. Annot. on Act. 5
The Assembly of Divines following Beza, translate it (...) to deceive, and say
that when Ananias had dedicated the possession to God for his servants, the
fraud concerned Gods interest. So that although much lands heretofore in
England, were by the Donors entitled to the Church, to such an Apostle or
Saint; yet it cannot be denied that they were intended and primarily given to
the honor of God; and so Sr. Edward Coke ingenuously confesses, Instit. 2.
cap. 1.
quod datur Ecclesiae, Dee datur: and again, what is given for God, is given
to God. For who can doubt but he that gives any thing to a servant in relation
to the honor and service of the Lord, that he gives it to the Lord, who will
accept it as a gift to himself?

But if we shall give credit to the best Records and Histories, we want not
plain proofs, that much of the lands held by Bishops and Churchmen, were in
express words given to God and Christ. Spelm. Cone. p. 119. Sumner. p. 47.
About the year 605. Ethelbert (the first Christian King of our English
Nation) giving lands to the Church, says, Dene, and concedo has terras Deo:
and as he was the first English Christian King that gave lands to God, so was
he the first (that I find) who gave them with this curse, Si quis de hac
donatione aliquid minuere rentaverit, aut irrirum facere, sit in praesenti
sepvratus a sancta Communione Corporis, and Sanguinis Christi, P. 350.
and in die Judicii a consortio sanctorum. K. Ethelnulph Anno 855. dat terras
Deo, (as Spelman cites diverse Historians and Records for the proof thereof) and
before him K. Offa Anno 790. giving lands to the Sea of Canterbury, Sum.
Appendix of Cant. p. 377.
faith, Hanc Eleamosynam offero Deo omnipotenti pro pignore Christianae Fidei:
for which Sumner cites the original grant: and K. Ethelred Anno 998. confessing
that by ill counsel he having taken away lands from the Bishop of Rochester (in
Brumleigh,) he now grieved in conscience for that wicked act, Regist. Roff. f.
8. B.
restores them Omnipotenti Christo: I could add many more the like of the
Saxon Kings.

After whom William the Conqueror (in the fourth year of his reign in
England) chooses and swears twelve, the best and most learned men in the
Laws of the Kingdom, diligently to search, and truly to set down the Laws
and Customs thereof, Spelm. Cone. p. 619.
as they were in use in the time of K. Edward the Confessor: among which
Laws, this is set as the first, Omnis Clericus and Scholaris, (and I hope
Bishops then as now, might and may be understood under one of those terms) and
omnes little possessiones, ubicunque fuerint, pacem Dei, and sancta Ecclesiae
habeant: and can any deny, but by the peace of God there is understood an
immunity from rapine, alienation, or selling those possessions, as belonging to
God? A grant of the Conqueror expounds this, wherein he says, Lamb. Archaiol.
f. 125.
Teneant terras and possessiones suas in pace Dei, ab omni exactione injusta
libiras. His son K. William the Second, giving lands to the Bishop of
Rochester, Regist. Roff. f. 11 Ib fol. 13. Ib. fol. 14.
says, Hoc Regium donum facio Deo. And K. Henry the First, in his Inspeximus
confirms that grant in the same words, K. Henry the First, concedit terras pro
Deo Ecclesiae Roffensi: which is a clear exposition of other grants, which
run as many of the Saxon Kings did, Sancto Petro, Ecclesiae, etc. K. John, as
diverse other Kings, dat terras Episcopo Roffensi, Ib. p. 14.
and successoribus suis, in liberam, puram, and perpetuam Eleemosynam: And what
is given in Alms, is intended as given to God; according to which, the Jews
Corban is called (...), Luke 21.4.
the offering of God. And the Bishop of Rochester pleaded long since, Ib. p. 53.
that he held his lands in puram Eleemosynam. Sr Edward Coke (that generally
accounted, and so by most called, Oracle of our Law) speaking of Frank
Almoigne, or free Alms, says, Instit. 1. part. p. 94. B.
This grant of Frank Almoigne is an ancient grant, and shall be allowed as the
Law was, when such grants were made: and adds, Our old Law Books describe it
to be when Lands or Tonements are given to God, i. e. says he, to such as are
consecrated for his service: For says he, What is done for Gods sake, is done
to God; P. 96.
and withal cites and allows of that in the Canon Law, where it says,
Offerings are described to be what ever things are given by Christians to God,
Instit. 2. part. p. 489.
and to the Church.

But to break off this long discourse, consider I pray, in stead of all, the
great Charter, which speaking of the Rights, Privileges, and Franchises of
Bishops and their Churches, says, Concessimus Deo, we have granted to God,
that their Rights, Privileges, Liberties, remain for ever inviolable; and sure
their lands must be comprised here, for Sr Edward Coke in his Institut. on that
Charter, adds, that the words there, are now to be construed, and that in as
large a sense, for the benefit of the Church, as they were then intended when
first written: and by what is before spoken, it cannot be doubted that they
understood the words, Part. 1. f. 86.
as of other things, so of lands too. Let me add what I find in Sr Edward
Coke, The Bishop, says he, Non facit homagium Regi, dicens, ego sum homo tuns,
does not homage to the King, saying, I am your man; sed fidelitatem (but
Fealty) quia homo est solius Dei, because he is the man only of God. Ib. Sect.
133.
And then what is given to the man of God, in our Law is given to God.

CHAP. IIII. That such Alienation or Selling, is forbidden in the Old and New
Testament.
NOw me thinks that which has hitherto been said, might terrify any
professor of Gods truth, from the selling, buying, or alienating such lands so
given; but, because nothing but express words in Scripture will now a days
serve the turn, (and would to God that might serve) I pray consider the word of
God by his Prophet, Ezekiel. 48.14.
expressly saying, Ye shall not sell, nor exchange, nor alienate, what is
offered to the Lord. Where God, to stop the mouth of all cavillers, does, as
our Lawyers, put in words enough; Ye shall not sell, nor exchange, nor
alienate. against the Law established by God: Ye shall not sell, nor exchange,
nor alienate, for it is holy to the Lord, and so were become his; and such (as
I have proved) were the lands of Bishops in England; and the same being the
ground and reason of the prohibition now, as then, because offered, given, or
holy to the Lord, I cannot see but the prohibition has the same force against
selling lands given to God under the Gospel, as it had under the Law.

And, if we well weigh the punishment of Ananias and his wife, it will appear
that in Gods judgment, Act. 5.
the prohibition should hold more strong under the Gospel, then it did under
the Law; for there Ananias but intended, or promised his lands, or price
thereof to the Church; and they were his own, and so much his own, that Saint
Peter tells him, V. 5.
that is was in his power, not to have promised them: and yet for deteining but
a part of this so lately his own, he is suddenly struck dead, and for ought
we know without repentance. Believe thou the Scriptures? Then believe and
know God will not be mocked with cavils, or Law-termes, or distinctions; but,
as he is a God that knows the heart, and searches the reins, so where he
finds Christians, as Ananias, to go about to deceive or cheat him, he will
find this man out, and though he strike him not suddenly dead, yet shall Gods
wrath come like water into his bowels, and like oil into his bones, or it
shall be as a fire to consume his house. But I fear too many there be, who, as
they deny all relative holiness to the Churches, the utensils, and the
Ministers of God under the Gospel; so upon the point, they would that an Index
expurgatorius should pass upon all Sacrilege, as though under the Gospel, there
were now no such sin: for to profane Gods House and Ornaments, is with them
no Sacrilege; to contemn and abuse Gods Ministers, is (as Christ prophesied)
in their account, to do God service, and no Sacrilege. Yea, it is almost
published, that it is no Sacrilege to deteine, or utterly to take away the
maintenance of Ministers, which are Tithes; and yet if we believe Saint Paul,
there is such a sin now, which if it be not materially in the Houses, the
Tithes or the Ministers of God, then sure it must be in the patrimony of the
Church: Romans 2.22.
for Saint Paul fights not with the air, neither reproves or forbids he that
which is not sin.

And it will appear, that the Sacrilegious person in alienating the Church
lands, breaks two Commandments in the first Table, and two in the second. The
sixth Precept, saying, Thou shall not kill, Exed. 20.
is not bounded alone in depriving a man of his life, but in taking away his
livelihood, the maintenance of life. Whose robs his father, Prove. 28.24.
(God,) his mother, (the Church) homicidae particeps, is a companion (so our
Bible) in sin, and sentence with the destroyer; Psalm 74.10. de Leg. 10.
and this kil-man, is said to blaspheme God too, and therein to break the
third Commandment. Plate speaks it, who dares do this, says (in his heart at
least) either there is no God, or which is all one, thinks him not just, or not
omnipotent, and therefore, per se, as actor, per aliot, as author, blasphemeth
God. D. Fulk Aretix. in Act. 5
Yea, some late Divines, of no mean rank, stick not to say, that Ananias
committed the sin, not to be prayed for, against the Holy Ghost, and
therefore was suddenly struck dead without repentance. But holy Writ will
directly indict the Sacrilegious person for breach of the eighth and of the
second Precept: to the first, this alienating and selling Gods, and the
Churches lands, is the sin, which by the Primitive and best reformed Divines,
Diodat. in Act. 5
is called Sacrilege. After consecration, the thing is no more thine but Gods,
and in taking or detaining it, thou have committed Sacrilege: which in
Scripture language, Prove. 20.25. Ezekiel. 48.14. Mal. 3.8. Romans 2.22. Act. 19.37.
is expressed by devouring: in Ezekiel, by selling, exchanging, alienating: in
Malachi, by robbing God: in Saint Paul by (...), which from the derivation of
the word, is to steal that which is holy: and so we translate (...),
Church-robbers; by all, if not by every of which Texts, it is plain, that to
alienate, or sell, lands or goods of the Church, is a sin against the eighth
Commandment, which forbids all manner of taking away that from any other,
which is his, and not thine.

Some learned, not only ancient, but modern Divines go further, and say that
it is Sacrilege to invert or turn those things to other uses, which were
primarily dedicated to God and his service; and thus much Mr Calvin plainly
affirms, saying, It is Sacrilege, facultates Ecclesiae in alienos usus
convertere: Tract. De neces. reform. Eccles. Aunot. in Prove. 20.25.
to employ the revenues or goods of the Church to any other uses, then for the
Church. And the Assembly of Divines at Westminster say, That to take that which
was appointed to Gods use, yea to go about to do it by enquiring how the Vow
may be avoided, On Mal. 3.8.
is to devour holy things. And they say, No Heathen is so barbarous, as to
defraud his God, and to deal deceitfully with him: And they add, To keep
those things back, which belong to God, On Ver. 9.
and are to furnish out his service, and for the maintenance of his Officers,
is to rob God. Some ancient, S. Chrysostom. M. Calo.
and later choice Divines have thought that the words of Saint Paul, Romans 2.22.
were spoken of some convert Jews, new Christians, who thought they might
without offense, robb and spoil the Temples of the Idols; and yet the Apostle
condemns this as a sin in them, saying, Thou that abhorrest Idols,
committest thou Sacrilege? Which if it hold so, then how much more surmounts
the Sacrilege of our times that of the first convert Christians? When as we
stick not to nickname it to be pure Religion, when we take away, or spoil
that which was offered to the true God, and his Servants. And may I not here
take up the words of the Apostle, O thou that abhorrest Idols! Yea, the very
shadow and word Idolatry, art thou become so abominable in thy hypocrisy, as
to robb thy God? and yet would be held a Reformed Protestarit, and lover of
God? Be not deceived, if Saint Paul judge right, (which none doubts but an
infidel) thou art a thief and a robber. And I could wish that Saint Paul from
this Text, could doom thee no further then a thief, and transgressour of the
second Table; for I fear upon a review of the Text, it will be found, that
thou have sinned against the first Table too. St Augustine affirmaes it
directly, which Mr Zanchie, the best Reformed School Divine shows thus; He
grubs up the root, the maintenance, which gives life to the branches, the
Ministers; which failing, the fruit, Gods honor, must needs fall to the
ground. But without straying from the Text, observe Saint Paul, Thou that
preachest a man should not steal. do thou steal? Ver. 21, 22.
And thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? In both which, the sins are of the same nature, and against the
same Precept: as stealing, and stealing; adultery, and adultery; and presently
he subjoynes, Thou that abhorrest Idols, commatest thou Sacrilege? Which
shows, that as the two former, so these are the breach of the same
Commandment. And so Mr Calvin upon the place says, The Apostle here opposes
Sacrilege to Idolatry, as a sin of the same kind: and rightly so, for as God,
where he forbids the worship of Idols, there he forbids the offering, or
giving lands, or goods to them, or to their Priests: so, when he commands to
worship God, he commands to add what we may, but in no sort to take away what
is given or offered for his Honor or Service: for this is a breach of his
divine Precept in the first Table. And I cannot readily say, whether or no
Saint Paul in this comparative speech, Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest
thou Sacrilege? makes not Sacrilege a greater sin then Idolatry; for, before
in the two former comparates, he reasons from the lesser sin to the greater;
as, Thou that preachest a man should not steal, or commit adultery, which are
sins in another man, do thou commit those things, which must needs be a
greater sin in thee, who actest what thou preachest against, and condemnest?
And so, thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou robb God of that which is given to
his Honor and Service, which must needs be a greater sin in thee? For, if to
give God more worship then he requires, or otherwise then he commands, (though
it be done with a good intention) be Idolatry, (as Reformed Divines say) why
then may it not reasonably be conceived to be a greater sin, utterly to take
away that from him which is given for his Honor, then to give him some more
Honor then he requires? But I leave the determination of this point to the
Assembly of Divines, Annot. on Romans 2.22.
who upon the words, move the Question, Why the Apostle changes the word? And
whereas he said before, steal, and steal, commit adultery, and commit
adultery; Why, say they, does he vary and say, Why thou that abhorrest Idols,
committest thou Sacrilege? To which Question, they, in their Notes, thus
answer: The Apostle uses have an aggravation, as if he should say, Thou that
abhorrest Idose, do thou commit a worse sin? to wit, Sacrilege, which
robs God of his Honor? Thus they. Let me add, that it is a sin, not
against the positive written Law alone, but against the very Law of nature; for
so the Prophet argues, Will a man? any man? Mal. 3.
any Pagan, Heathen, natural man? will he robb his God? i. e. He will not; for
it is against the Law of nature. How great then is this sin in a Christian,
who has not only the Moral Law of Nature, and the positive Moral written Law
of Moses, but the Law of grace to restrain him?

CHAP. V. That it has been so judged by the most strict Reformers in the
Protestant Churches.
IT were easy to give you the sayings of many Primitive Orthodox Fathers in
this case; but conceiving that the later Divines relish better with you, I
shall therefore set down the judgment of the three Oracles, (as they are held
by many) of the first, best, and strictest Reformed Churches, in Germany,
France, and Scotland: And for Germany, Dr Luther, On Gal. 6.6.
when he saw the Clergy despised, and their lands taken away, Preached and
Printed these words; [The Apostle] here closely touches the manners of our
Contrymen, who most securely contemn our Ministry; and especially the
Nobles, who make their Pasters, as their base and obnoxious servants; in so
much, that if we had not so godly a Prince, (as God be thanked we have) and so
great a lover of the truth, they had, ere now, driven us out of the land; and
yet these would be accounted Gospellers. After this, he meets with a tacit
Objection: viz. That these Revenues of the Church were given in the time of
Popery; to which he answers in these words, Gram it that these goods were, by
moore imposture, heaped up for Papists, yet God, spoiling the Egyptians, i. e.
Papists, of their goods, transtated them to good uses in our Land.

He goes on, The Devil has but two ordinary ways to destrey Religion, the
one is by the errors of Heretics, (against which we had by Ordinance a day of
Humiliation,) ^a^t. 10. 1646.
the other by depriving of Gods Ministers of their Rights; and this says he,
is the Devils masterpiece, hereby to destroy Religion, without either the
force of Tyrants, or the subtle work of Heretics. But know (says he) that
although God for a time defers to punish, yet in his own time he will find you
out, and plague your dog-like scorn and hate to Gods Ministers: For says he,
The highest of the Gentry, and most covetous of the City, and the basest in the
Country, when they draw near to death, shall find that God will not be
mocked: but as they have sown, so shall they reap for ever. Thus far the
first great public Reformer of the Protestants Church in Germany.

Next to him, De neces. reform. Eccles.
hear Mr Calvin thus speaking; I profess, says he, that I am much displeased
that the Revenues of the Church are not employed for those uses alone, for
which they were dedicated: and that it is not so, I and all good men heartily
grieve. For, says he, it is an inexpiable Sacrilege to take the patrimony of
the Church, and to wast the same on profane uses: and what he means by
profane uses and wasting, he explaines in these words, when he says, I assent
to this as a truth, that it is Sacrilege to convert or change the goods or
revenues of the Church to any other use, then for the Church: And adds, Seldom
have I found but that such Alienations of Church lands, have drawn some
mischief after them: and he not only determines this kind of Sacrilege to
be such a grievous sin and dangerous to the State, but even to the persons
plotting and acting in the same; for so he concludes, I confess, says he,
that in Scripture grievous punishments are pronounced against such men, as
shall spoil the Church of her goods and Revenues. And when you shall consider
that Mr Calvin wrote this Treatise to the Emperor and Princes of Germany,
assembled at that time in a Diet (or Parliament) for the Reformation of the
Church; then well weigh how at this time, his judgment and sentence should
prevail with you in this case, who, for holiness, learning, and judgment, is
so extolled by the Protestant Churches. Will you hear but one passage for
many, from Mr Beza successor to Mr Calvin in Geneva, and it shall be that
which he wrote in his answer to Dr Saravia? who touching upon the dissolution,
and passing away the Lands of the Religious Houses in the time of K. Henry the
Eighth, says, We and all good men heartily bewail that scattering of the
Church Lands, accompanied with a most wicked, and detestable Sacrilege.

And from Germany and France, let us to our Polestarre in Scotland, and here Mr
Knox the prime principal Reformer of that Kirk, who, with his brethren
Ministers, In Book of Disc. 1560.
desires the Lords of the Council, for fear of the loss of their souls, to
make restitution of the Lands of the Church, and of the Friars: and in his
Letter on his deathbed, In the year, 1572.
he commands his Brethren to withstand the devourers of the Church Patrimony,
wherein if they (the devourers) shall persist, yet communicate ye not with them
by consent, or by silence. And in the Book of Discipline, 1569.
The Patrimony of the Church is declared to be all things doted to the Church:
and it pronounces them to be thieves, who have taken them from the Church; and
affirms, In second Book of Policy, c. 9.
to take away any thing which was given to the Church, to be detestable
Sacrilege before God.

Moreover, the whole Church of Scotland in their Assembly, enjoynes a public
Fast throughout all the whole Kingdom, At Edinburgh, 1582.
To appease Gods wrathon the Land, for that crying sin of Sacrilege therein
committed. Now can any, who have sworn to maintain the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of Scotland, know this, and yet Vote the selling of
Church Lands? If so, why may we not pray, Lord have mercy on them? For did ever
any Protestant Church maintain, that Church lands might be taken or sold from
the Church? If not, (which I persuade my self they have not) then why do you
not fear that you are not in the right way, or not right Protestants, but
rather in this point, that you are Papists? For that these only of all
Christian Churches have allowed the practice of it? and yet these do it not
but under the colorable and falsely pretended power, which the Pope usurps, as
being Christ's Vicar on earth; Whereby, he says, he may dispense with the
Church lands as he pleases: which title or power, I hope our Parliament does
not assume or challenge to themselves, although K. Henry the Eighth in the
dissolution of the Abbeys, thus argued, If the Pope and his Legate the Cardinal
do it, then why not I? And yet I pray note by the way, that K. Henry the
Eighth, so decryed for a notorious Sacrilegist, yet never did he take away the
lands of Bishops, nor Cathedrals: but on the contrary, he founded some, and
enlarged others. But why in Gods name are not the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster consulted with in this point? Or why do not our conscientious
Brethren read the Annotations of the Assembly, who note, that Egypt (which
would not in the greatest extremity of famine, On Genesis 47.
when all other men's lands were sold, yet then that they would not sell the
lands of the Priests) shall rise up in judgment against the alienators or
sellors of lands, which have been dedicated to God or his Servants.

CHAP. VI. That this kind of Alienation, is against Prudence, Justice, the good
of the Kingdom in general, and of the Tenants to such Lands in special.
BUt were there not so much said in Gods Book, and by learned Orthodox Divines,
shall neither our own Laws, nor Prudence, nor Justice prevail in this case,
to keep us from selling of Church Lands? For what Justice is it to sell that,
which is not our own? And that these lands are 1. Gods, I hope it is proved
sufficiently by Gods words, the verdict of allowed Divines, and shall be
further proved anon by the Laws of our Land. 2. They are the Bishops, who are
Gods Assigns and Usufructuaries; and these lands are theirs by as good title
in Law, as any man can hold any land in this Kingdom. 3. They are by
Patronage, the Kings; for this is very lately professed in a good Parliament, 1
Jacob. 3.3
in these words, Whereas all the Lands of the Bishops in England, and Dominion
of Wales, were given by Kings of England, (the full truth whereof I will not
dispute) whereby the King is become the lawful and rightful Patron of all
those Lands; therefore it is desired that the King would enact. (not that they
without the King would or could, no such power then known) and what is
desired? not that the Bishops Lands should be sold, but that they may not be
leased out by the Bishops, for longer terms of time, then for 21. years, or
three lives, no not to the Crown? And is this Justice so soon forgotten, or
so soon changed, in so short a time, that without the consent of God the
Proprietary, of the King the Patron, and of the Bishops the Assigns, the lands
shall be utterly sold away? And yet must we call this Justice? I pray God this
Justice call not for judgment from heaven.

And whether it can be just to sell the Bishops Lands, I pray, examine by that
rule and touchstone of true Moral Justice, which our Lord Christ has
expressed in two short Precepts; the one, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self: The other, Mat. 19.9. Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do you even so unto them,
for this is the Law and the Prophets. Now by the first rule, examine your
selves, whether in this act of selling the Bishops Lands, you love the Bishops
as your selves? And try this by the other, whether you would yield your
consent, as to a thing just, that if the Bishops had your power, they might and
should preserve to themselves their own lands and expose yours to sale? If your
hearts speak the truth, I fear they would deny this to be just in the
Bishops against you: and if so, then be assured, that in this act of selling
the Bishops lands, you do not that, which by the verdict of your own
conscience, is just. And if you will (as Lawmakers should) look forward, and
provide for future times; stands it with civil Prudence to sell those Lands
away, which do and will yield so much for maintenance of the King and
Kingdom, in Tenths, First Fruits, Subsidies and Taxes, which for the most part
will be swallowed up, when fallen into Lay-hands? 2. Stands it with civil
Prudence to robb Tenants of so good penniworths, as they now hold from Bishops
and Churchmen; which they must not expect, when in Lay-hands, whereby they
have been enabled the better to serve the King and Kingdom in time of need?
3. Stands it with Prudence and Charitr, to cast so many into a state of
beggary, and danger of theeving, who by Bishops and Churchmen have been
reasonably relieved by under Offices, and places in the Church? Upon the
dissolution of the Religious Houses, in the Reign of K. Henry the Eighth,
Chron. f. 773.
Mr Speed says, that a great Rebellion was raised in Lincolnshire; and the
Rebels expressing the cause thereof to the King, they say, We grieve for the
suppression of so many Religious Houses, whereby the Pooralty of your Realm is
unrelieved, and many put off their livings, which is a damage to the
Commonwealth. Soon after another Rebellion arose in Yorkshire, where 40000.
with Horse, Arms, and Artillery, rose for Religion, who had upon their sleeves
the Name of the Lord; the ground of their rising was (says the same Author)
That the King by his evil Counselors, will destroy the Ministers of the
Church, f. 775.
which makes against the Common good. 4. Stands it with a Religious, and civil
Prudence to robb Learning and Religion of that profit and preferment, which
encouraged the study and increase both of Learning and Religion? Prove. 14.4.
Where no oxen are, the crib is clean: And the Land, soon after K. Solomon,
found this true: 1 King. 13.33.
for, when Jeroboam had taken away the best maintenance of the Priests, what
followed? but that the Priests were chosen out of the lowest of the people?
(Which I would it were not too true now in our Land,) and in after times, the
Church suffered more under Julian, then Dioclesian: for this took away the
able men; but that Apostate their maintenance. I shall close this point with
that memorable passage of Sr Edward Coke in Winchesters Case, The decay of the
Revenues of the Church, will draw after it the downe-fall of Gods Service and
Religion: which God in mercy avert.

CHAP. VII. That it is against the Laws of this Kingdom of England, which the
two Houses of Parliament, and Kingdom, by their several Declarations,
Protestations, and Covenants, are bound to maintain.
BUt if neither Gods Word, nor the Verdict of best Divines, nor Justice, nor
Prudence, can be heard; yet I pray hear what our Laws say in this case; and
yet before I urge these, (to which I am as much a stranger as to the
Profession) let me remember you with that, which I have heard to be a Maxim in
our Law, That no Statute, Law, or Custom, which are against Gods Law, or
Principles of Nature, can be of any validity, but are all null: which if
granted, it will save me the pains to cite our Laws, as having before proved,
that it is against Gods Law, to sell away the lands of Bishops.

Yet let me add, that one Statute says, 1 Edw. 3. c. 2.
That the King by evil Counselors, caused the Temporalties of Bishops to be
seized into his hands, for a time, to the great damage of the said Bishops,
which from henceforth shall not be done: and this Statute is not repealed, and
therefore is in its full force at this day, as all other Statutes unrepealed
are.

I might add another Statute, 17 Edw. 2.
that when the Templars (theeving, bloody, decried Soldiers) had their Lands
taken from them; yet were not those lands then divided among Parliament men,
nor sold for the Commonwealth, (although the Kingdom at that time was in
distress and want enough, I believe more then now) no, the then Parliament,
surely, conceived, they might do neither of these; they therefore translated
those lands, and settled them on the Priorie of St John of Jerusalem: and in
the same Statute it is inserted, that the Parliament then did not alienate the
Lands of those Templars: 1. Because they were given to God, though possessed by
men. 2. Because they held it a sin to rob the Donors of their gift. 3.
Because they held it would prove mortal to the Alienators: and these causes
were then held sufficient to keep a Parliament from selling or alienating
Church Lands. And it is in the same Statute provided, that if in after times,
the said Hospitalers, or their successors, shall be put out of any of those
lands, they shall have power to recover the same according to the Law of the
Realm.

I have likewise read, that in the 25 Edw. 1. it is declared, In the Review of
the Covenant, Printed 1644.
That Laymen have no authority to dispose of the Lands or Goods of the Church,
for they are only committed to the Priests to be disposed of. I confess, I
find it not in the printed Statutes; but this I find and read there, That
none, high nor low, by any occasion, 3 Edw. 1. c. 1.
shall course in any Park, nor fish in any Pond of a Prelate, or other
Religious person, without the leave or will of the Lord, or of his Bayliffe. In
those times, sure the Parliaments found not that they had power to sell away
the Bishops Lands; and I conceive that the Parliament deemed not then, that
they had any such power, by reason of the great Charter, granted by this Kings
father, (which Charter Sr Edward Coke calls the Bulwark of the Subjects
Tenures in England,) and therefore upon this, give me leave a little longer to
insist, as being a maine part, and foundation of our Laws.

One Statute enacts, 42 Edw. 3. c. 1.
That if any Statute be made contrary to the great Charter, it shall be void;
which Statute is still in force: and now hear, what this Charter speaks
concerning the Lands of the Church, and of Bishops, and then say truly,
whether it be not against the Law of England, to sell these Lands. In this
Charter (confirmed two and thirty times by our best Parliaments) it is expressly
said, We have granted to God, and by this our Charter have confirmed for us,
and our heirs for ever, that the Church of England shall be free, and shall
have all her whole Rights, 2 part Institut. in Procemio.
and Liberties inviolable. The great Charter, says Sr Edward Coke, is no new
Law, but it is declaratory of the principal fundamental Laws of England. 25.
Edw. 1.
And he says, The Nobles and great Officers were to be sworn to the
observation of it: and by a Parliament, it was judged to be taken as the Common
Law of England: and well may, considering the four causes or ends of that
Charter, as is expressed in the entrance: viz. 1. The honor of God. 2. The
health of the Kings soul. 3. The advancement of the Church. 4. The amendment of
the Kingdom.

And now hear this Law speak (which is almost the same which was granted by
K. John in the nineteenth year of his Reign) with the interpretation of the
Oracle of our Law; Paris. p. 255. Sir Edward Coke on the Charter.
and first (as all best Grants have) it begins with God, and says, Concessimus
Deo; where the Interpreter says, What is given to the Church (as Bishops lands
were) is given to God: and what has this Law granted to God? Why, that the
Church shall be free: where the Interpreter tells you, that by the Church is
meant all Ecclesiastical persons, their possessions and goods: And these shall
be free, says he, from all exactions and oppressions. and to sell away their
lands, is it neither oppression nor exaction? If not, hear the Charter and
Interpreter go on. We have granted to God that the Church shall have all her
Rights entire, i.e. says the Interpreter, That all Ecclesiastical persons
shall enjoy all their Rights wholly, without diminution or substraction
whatsoever: Whereby, says he, all their Rights are confirmed, as they had
them before, or as at the first grant; and then they had them not to be sold.
It goes on, and that the Church, or Churchmen have, and hold all their
liberties; Which liberties, says he, grants them the liberty of the Law of
England, the Privilege of Parliaments, and all Grants by Charter or
Prescription: and shall none of these keep the Bishops Lands from sale?
Moreover these Grants are not alone for that, or any set time, but for ever;
Hear the Charter, This we have granted to the Church, i.e. Churchmen, for our
selves, and our heirs for ever: Which, says the Interpreter, is added, to
take away all scruple, that this Charter or Grant should live, and take effect
for ever. And which is not unworthy your observation, 12 Hen. 3. p. 23.
in our printed Statutes, there is an heavy Curse denounced against all those,
who shall break this great Charter.

And now if you grant (which I think you will not deny) that this Charter is a
part of our Law, then I hope, it will follow, that by our Law, the Lands of the
Church or of Bishops, may not be sold or alienated.

You have seen what the Charter has granted the Bishops, as Churchmen; Chap.
19.
now consider what the same Charter grants them as freeborn Subjects of the
Kingdom: Nullus liber homo, says it, capiatur, vel imprisonetur, vel
disseisiatur de libero Tenemento suo, vel libertatibus, vel liberis
consuetudinibus suis, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, vel per legem
terrae. Where the Interpreter expounds, 1. Who is a freeman: 2. What
disseising is: 3. What is the Law of the Land. To the first he says, That
every freeborn Subject is meant here to be a freeman. To the second, to be
disseised, says he, is to be put out of his seisin, or dispossessed of his
freehold, that is, lands or livelihood. To the third, by the Law of the Land,
says he, that is, either by the Common Law, or the Statute Law, or the Custom
of England. And for further explanation adds, by the Law of the Land, is
understood by process of Law, by indictment or presentment of good and lawful
men: And all this, says he, is no new Law or grant, but it is only
declaratory of the Law of England. And this, says he, should admonish
Parliaments, that in stead of this precious trial by the Law of the Land, they
bring not in absolute, and partial trials by discretion.

CHAP. VIII. That it is against the Prudence, and Justice of the King; and
against his lawful Oath.
AS the selling Bishops Lands is against our Laws, which the two Houses, and
Kingdom, by their several Declarations, Protestations, and Covenants, have
solemnly bound themselves to maintain; so it is against the Kings Prudence,
against his Justice, and against his lawful and just Oath.

It is against the Kings Prudence to divest, and rob himself of those
Immunities, 25 Hen. 8.20. 26 Hen. 8.3. and 1 Eliz. 4. 14 Ed. 3.4. and 5
Rights, Profits, and Revenues, which the Law of this Land has settled in the
Crown: as, Collation of Bishoprics, First Fruits, and Tenths.

It is against the Kings Justice, to take or make that away from his Heirs and
Successors, which by our Laws are justly and rightly granted unto them; and
these Rights the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland have sworn to maintain.

It is against his Justice, to do, or suffer it to be done, in respect of the
Bishops, to whom the King, as the fountain of Justice, is bound to see Justice
done, (as to his Subjects in general;) 2. Institut. 1.
but then, considering, from Sr Edward Coke, that by our old Law Books, the
Church is ever under age, and in the custody or guardian-ship of the King, who
is bound to maintain and defend the Rights and Inheritances of the Church, and
that it cannot be agreeable to Right and Justice, that Pupils under age,
through the negligence, or default of the Guardians should suffer loss, or
disinheritance, I pray, well weigh, whether it will not amount even to a crying
sin in the King, to do, or suffer such an injustice to be done to his Pupil,
the Church, destitute of all help on earth, save only what she may justly
expect from the King? Solomon the wisest King on earth, from the Spirit of God
has spoken it; Enter not into the fields of the Fatherless, for their
Redeemer is mighty, and he shall plead their cause with thee. Prove. 23.10, 11
And when you well consider and weigh, what an Oath the King has taken at his
Coronation, you cannot, I believe, acquit the King of a flat perjury, if he
shall assent to the selling away of the Bishops Lands.

But what I shall urge in this point, is not so much to inform the King, (who I
am verily persuaded by the illumination of Gods Spirit, his frequent reading
the holy Scriptures, and by the Principles received from his most religious and
learned Father, of ever blessed memory, is so fully satisfied and resolved,
that neither height nor depth, nor any creature, shall be able to separate or
deterr him, from the just defense of the Church;) as to let the world see, that
it was not (as some ignorantly, and uncharitably may term it) pertinacity in
the King, not to assent to the destruction of the Church established, but the
dictate of a good conscience rightly informed. And that it may well be so, be
pleased to hear and consider what, how, to whom, where, when, the King swears.
For being to be Crowned King of England, in the convention or presence of his
Nobles, Clergy, and People in the Church, the Bishop asks the King; Sir, will
you grant, and keep, and by your Oath confirm the Laws, Customs, and
Franchises granted to the Clergy, according to the Laws of God? The King
answers, I grant and promise to keep them. Then the Bishop speaks to the King;
Our Lord and King, we beseech you to grant and preserve to us, and to the
Churches committed to our charge, all Canonical Privileges, and due Laws, and
Justice; and that you would protect, and defend us, as every good King ought to
be a Protector and Defender of the Bishops, and Churches under his Government.
The King answers, with a willing and devout heart, I promise, and grant, that I
will preserve, and maintain to you, and the Churches committed to your charge,
all Canonical Privileges, and due Law, and Justice; and that I will be your
Protector, and Defender, to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good
King in his Kingdom, by right ought to protect and defend the Bishops, and
Churches under his government.

Then the King at the Communion Table, makes a solemn Oath, in the sight of all
the people, laying his hand upon the holy Book, and says: The things that I
have before promised, I shall perform, and keep: So help me God, and the
contents of this Book.

Now, I beseech you all good Christians, judge whether this be not an Oath,
able, with fear and reverence, to bind the King to the performance? For 1. it
is taken by the King, Gods Anointed. 2. In Gods House, the holy Church. 3. At
Gods holy Table. 4. Upon Gods holy Book. 5. Tendered by Gods Ministers, the
Bishops. 6. In the presence, sight and hearing of Gods people. 7. To defend
Gods servants the Bishops, and the Church. 8. With the imprecation of Gods
curses, and forfeiture of Gods blessings, in case of not performance: so that,
if ever Oath could truly be called the Oath of God, this is it.

And yet, if I mistake not, there is somewhat more that adds strength to the
Obligation of this Oath; and that is, That it is upon a contract betwixt the
King and the Bishops; for so the Oath is tendered to the King, by, and for the
Bishops: and from such a Contract and Oath, if just and lawful, (as this is)
who can absolve, but he alone, who is concerned, and to, and for whom the Oath
and Contract is made, which are only God, and the Bishops?

I have cast mine eye upon a Treatise touching the Kings Oath, published by
Order, and written by Mr Geree, Preacher of Gods Word at Saint Albans: wherein
he goes about to persuade, that the King, without impeachment of his Oath at
his Coronation, may assent to the abolishing of Episcopacy. I cannot, without a
great digression, answer his Arguments, which might easily be done from his own
words and grounds: but in stead thereof, I shall set down his own words, whence
I hope it will appear clearly, that the King cannot, saving that his Oath,
assent to the selling away the Church Lands.

His words are these, The intention of that Oath is not against Legal ways of
change, but against invasion of the Rights of the Clergy. So that, if selling
the Lands of the Church be such an invasion, then he professes, that the King
by his Oath, is bound from it: and whether it be so or no in his sense and
judgment, hear himself speak in the same Treatise, where he expressly says;
To abolish Prelacy, and to seize the lands of Prelates to any private, or civil
interest, undoubtedly, could neither want stain, nor guilt. So that by the
plain express verdict of this Preacher of Gods Word, the King is proclaimed
before hand, to be a man of a stained and guilty conscience, if he assent to
the selling Church Lands, according to the Ordinance: And I am confident, by
the discourse I have had with the most able of the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, that at the least three parts, if not all of them, are of the same
judgment with this Preacher; and that they would openly profess as much, if
they were put to answer the question.



Zach. 5.4.
Perjury shall remain in the midst of the house of him that swears falsely, and
shall consume it; by which house is not only meant the material house of timber
and stone, but (as often in Scripture) his wife, children, and posterity; it
shall consume them. Yea, Mr Geree, above mentioned, confesses, That the King
by his Oath is bound to protect the Church, so far as he can, without sinning
and being injurious: now in not assenting, against whom sins he, being not
bound by any Law to assent? Whereas, if he do assent, he is palpably injurious
to the Church; and therefore this Author concludes thus, Then the King, at the
worst, is to get the Clergies assent: Wherein he seems to implie, that without
that, the King justly may not give his assent; and he gives his reason for it
in the same place; where he says, The King may not engage himself against the
Laws, and legal Rights of others: For that were (says he) not cedere jure suo
but alieno, to give away another man's right, which is unjust.

Will you give me leave to put you a Scripture case? The Gibeonites, (by Nation,
Heathen; by Religion, Idolatrous,) by fraud and a lie, gain from Joshua, and
the Princes of Israel, a promise to protect them; Josh. 9.
Now observe, although this promise was fraudulently obtained, and rashly made,
without asking Gods counsel, or the consent of the people; yea, although it was
against that which was enjoined Israel, (which was to destroy all the Nations,)
how zealous God is, that an Oath be kept, which is made in his Name, for his
honor, and whereof he is a witness; That, because Saul brake this League or
Covenant with the Gibeonites, above three hundred years after, when a man
would hardly have conceived that King Saul had been bound to performance of it;
2 Samuel 21.
I say, for the breach of that fraudulently got, and rashly made Covenant, God
puisheth the whole land with a famine for three years, year after year; and
yet would not be pacified, without the hanging up of almost all Saul's
posterity. And if God be so severe a Judge, in such a case as this; what can
the King, or this Land expect from heaven, if he should, after much
consultation, long deliberation, and the many protestations, (as I am informed)
that it is against his conscience, violate so just, so holy an Oath as this?

But, I trust, the King, though he had never taken such an Oath, will in his
frequent reading Gods holy Word, consider that act (before mentioned) of King
Pharaoh, who, Genesis 47.
in that greatest case of extremity, famine, would not then suffer the Priests
lands to be sold; and the rather I hope the King will remember and consider
that act of Pharaoh, 1 King. 2.26.
because the Bishops (as K. Solomon spoke of Abiathar the high Priest) have
bean afflicted in all as the King.

Faith, says our old Protestant Religion, s to be kept with Idolaters and
Heretics, whom we hold the worst of men; and must a pious Protestant King be
forced to break it with the best of his Subjects? O how will the enemies of
our Religion blaspheme for this! and what King, or Nation, will hereafter trust
our King, who in breaking so just, and solemn an Oath, as that at his
Coronation, will rob his God, lose his faith, forfeit his soul, destroy agoodly
flourishing Church, and utterly undo them, who have hazarded all, thereby to
keep loyalty, and a good conscience? I close this point with this wish, that
all they who press the King, contrary to his Oath, to assent to the alienation
of Bishops Lands, would remember that Justice Trisilian was hanged for causing,
Speed Chron. in Rich. 2.
or procuring the King to break his Oath; as it has been often urged in this
Parliament.

CHAP. IX. One and twenty Arguments, which are brought in defense of or color
for such Alienation, are answered.
BUt avarice, pride, ill affections, or finister ends, I fear (notwithstanding
what has, or may further be alleged) will urge, what I shall here endeavor to
answer.



It Is true, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; Resp. Psa. 24.11.
all are Gods by Creation, Providence, and Preservation; yet when God has
given them to man, they are the man's, and he in our Law language is become the
Proprietarie; which is no more then Sr Edward Coke says, What is given to
Churchmen, is given to God, and it is then Gods. Yea, in Gods word, Instit. 2.
c. 1.
Saint Peter says of Ananias his land, While it was thine own, was it not in
thine own power? Acts 5.4.
But when men shall give this again to God and that God accepts it, then it is
as plainly Gods again, and God is the Proprietarie of it, as of his own. Proved
likewise from the same Text, where after Ananias his dedication, Saint Peter
says, that he did (...), with a lie deceive God, Ver. 3.
in that he did (...), purloyne or cheat God of that which was now become Gods.
Yea, and Christ accepting as his, what was given to his Disciples and Apostles,
makes himself, by the acceptance thereof, a Proprietarie of that too; Mat.
25.40.
so he professes, In that ye have given meat and drink to these my Brethren,
ye have given it to me; and what is given to me, is mine, as well as what I
might have purchased, or might come to me by descent; Mat. 10.1.
and that by these Brothren, may rightly be understood his Disciples and
Apostles, read Chap. 10. 1. where he calls his twelve Disciples, whom he sends
to preach; and then in the close, speaking of them, he says, Who receives
you, Ver. 40.
receives me. And accordingly, Saint Paul, as I before proved, makes
Sacrilege, or taking away holy things, a breach of the first Table, which
concerns God: which could not be, unless God were the Proprietarie, and
owner of them; but of such disputers, I may say as Christ did of those Jews,
Mark 12.24.
Do you not err, because you know not the Scriptures, nor the power of God?
What need we plainer proof then our own Law, when as the great Charter
speaking now in the name of King and people in Parliament says, We have
granted to God, etc.



Englands garden: and I presume, it savours not of Popery, but to such as have
their senses stopped, or themselves ill affected. But if there be any Popery
proved in the Grant, take that away in Gods name, but let the Rights and the
Lands continue; for I know not how these can be capable of Popery: But will all
others who receive benefit by that Charter, hold it null, because granted in
time of Popery? I trow not. That which silences all such cavils, is that, as
before it is proved, this Charter was, and is but the declaration, and
confirmation of the ancient Law of this Kingdom, and therefore ought to hold
and bind. and then let me add, the first Impropriations in England were in
time of Popery, and by Popes, who of 9284. Parishes, impropriated the Tithes
of 3845. of the best of them; which Tithes now for the most part, are in Lay
hands. And thou that abhorrest Popery, committest thou Sacrilege? For we say,
the Receiver is worse then the Thief: Or why rather abhorrest not thou that
act? And why restorest not thou the Tithes being Sacrilegiously taken?



Lucius, who An. 176. gave the Church in England Lands, was he superstitious?
Or those times such? Who can prove it? But which are the superstitious uses in
Bishops lands? Are they Preaching, keeping Hospitality, doing acts of Piety,
Justice, Charity, paying the King his due, and serving the Public? For I find
no worse. But grant there were some superstitious uses in the first Grant, yet
why shall the lands be taken and sold, if the abuses be by the Bishops, or
other ways taken away? And Mr Geree before mentioned, page 19. says it, What
was Antichristian, and contrariant to the Laws of this Land, was taken from
the Church in the reign of King Henry the Eighth. And though the impulsive
cause of giving some lands might be ill, (as to pray for the souls of the
dead, or the like) yet the final cause being good, as given to God, why not
separate the ill, (take away praying for the dead and the like) all which is
done, and yet continue the good, the keeping the Lands for Gods Honor and
Service? For read you not that the bullock which was set apart for the
Sacrifice of Baal, Judge. 6.26.
yet Gideon sacrificed it to the Lord, because it was not then in state
Idolatrous? Things, I confess, which have and retain the matter, form, and
dependence on Idols, (as having the badge of Idolatry) these are not to be
offered or continued to God and his Service; which Bishops Lands neither had,
nor have, no not so much as is continued in the City of Londons Arms, or some
great men's Coats; they have not so much as a Cross on them. But if all should
be taken away, that has been given to superstitious uses, what would become of
our Churches? and if all abolished that has been abused, what would become of
our Pulpits, Communion Tables, Sacraments? yea, of Parliaments, or that most
adored piece of Gods Service, Preaching? Exodus 23.2.
In a word, the censers are by wicked persons, to as wicked ends, abused by
Korah, and his accomplices; what then? are they therefore sold, or turned into
pots, kettles, or the like? (the like whereof has been done in our times) no,
but they were by Gods own ordinance, preserved in their holy kind: Ver. 18.
and that because, as it is expressed in the Text, They were hallowed to the
Lord.



(Elegerint,) and shall confidently say, that the King is no more bound to
assent to what they decree, then they are bound to decree, and to sell the
Bishops Lands, to which they are not bound, if the thing be not just and
agreeable to the Law of God and man: which whether so or no, Chap. 4, 5, 6.
I desire you consider what is before expressed. The Precept of God, I hope, in
your judgments holds, Exodus 23.2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: again, if that, which appears
good and just to the two Houses, be evil in the conscience of the King, the
King is not bound, nay he ought not to join with the two Houses: for
Protestants, as they rightly hold no salvation by implicit faith; so neither
that one man's conscience should ride upon the back of another: so that,
although some in Parliament may in part be excused in doing that which is not
just, through the false guidance of an erring conscience; yet the King in doing
the same thing, against the light of his conscience, may sin; whereupon
further it may become a fearful sin by any tentation of promises, threats,
restraints, to draw or drive the King to assent to what his conscience forbids
him to do.

Again, the case betwixt the King and the two Houses, in selling the Bishops
Lands, is very different; for the King is bound by Oath to the Bishops to
maintain them, and their Rights, in their lands and possessions, according to
Law and Justice: to which the two Houses stand not alike, and so deeply
obliged; whereupon it follows, I conceive, that though the two Houses might,
(the contrary whereof is before proved) yet the King ought not to give his
assent.

Lastly, 1 Jac. 3. Coke Instit. 4.
the King (as the Act of Parliament styles him) is the Patron of the Bishops
Lands; and our Common Law makes him the Churches Guardian; and is the King
bound to follow others, who have not the like charge or duty on them? and so
defraud a Pupil, whom by Gods and man's Law, his own Oath, and conscience, he is
bound to defend and maintain? The Bishop doing fealty, the King holds the
Bishops hands betwixt his own; which, says Sr Edward Coke from Bracton,
Britton, and others, shows, that the King promises him protectionem, Instit.
1. p. 1. Sect. 85.
defensionem, and warrantiam: And adds, that this the King promises to him,
not as to a Subject, but as to a Bishop; and not to his person alone, but to
his possessions. And this Sr Edward Coke calls Foedus from Fides, and terms it
Sacramentum Fidelitatis: which therefore the King may not, upon other men's
judgments and consciences, break. Consider, I pray, what the wisest King on
earth counseled all Kings, and others; Be not rash with thy mouth, Eccles.
5.2, 4.
and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing or word before God: but when
thou vowost a vow to God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in
fools, pay that which thou have vowed. And which comes home to the vow and
thing vowed, It is a snare to devour holy things, Prove. 25.20.
and after the vow to make enquiry, i.e. how to break it.

Scotland, thereby to gratify his people there; and why not then to do as
much for his Parliament in England?

men, have had their lapses; but they are so far from being bound, after the
sight and sense of an error, to fall into the same again; that on the
contrary, they are obliged to repent, and eschew the like for ever. 2. What the
King, in that case, there has done, whether it were voluntary or compulsory,
suddenly or deliberately, I cannot tell; only this I say, if through passion,
ill counsel, or the like, he did that once there, which should not have been
done: it follows not that he may or should do the like again, or here. But
3. we are to understand whether the Bishops stood so enstated in their lands in
that Kingdom, as the Bishops do in England. 4. But especially to know,
whether the King stood bound to God, the Bishops, the Kirk of Scotland, by the
same, or such Contracts, Oaths, Charters, as he stands in England; wherein if
there be a difference, as I verily persuade my self there is, then it will not
follow, the King did it in Scotland, therefore he may or should do it in
England.



Calvin from Saint Gregory says, De neces. refor. Eccles. Chap. 4, 5, 6.
Privilegium meretur amittere, qui Privilegio abutitur. So that if it be true
(which I laid down before,) that it is a sin to alienate such Lands, then a
factoad jus non sequitur Argumentum: it has been unjustly done, therefore it
may be lawfully done, a Plough-man will say holds not. Now to affix, or
conceive an inerrability in a Parliament, is, I hope, more then the Parliament
will assume to themselves; we Protestants have denied it to the Church of Rome;
Ball. Catoples.
nay, their own greatest Jesuits disclaim it in matter of fact. But if a
hundred years sithence, the King in Parliament used this power to alienate
Church Lands, yet not much above forty years ago, 1 Jac. 3.
in King James his time, the Parliament, without the King, waved the having any
such power or privilege; For that Act shows, that the two Houses in
Parliament, had not power to hinder Bishops from making Leases to the Crown,
for above one and twenty years, or three lives; and how in this short time,
the Power and Privilege is so vastly increased, I know not, except it be by the
Sword, which kind of Power, as it was never held the best, so it has not ever
proved long lived, or, I am sure, not ever peaceful. Belshazzar might have
argued thus, I use but those holy vessels, which my father in a lawful war,
has gained from a common enemy, and left them so to me his Heir and
Successor. And did not the rebellious Israelites seem to plead the like? Mal.
3.
We do but deteine the Offerings as our Fathers have done before us. And does
God admit of these? No, their Prescription he uses as an aggravation of their
offense, saying, From the days of your Fathers ye have departed from mine
Ordinance: Ver. 7. Dan. 5. Mal. 3.11.
and therefore, hear Gods sentence on both Belshazzar and Israel; where the
King is punished with loss of the Empire, and a sudden fearful death; and
Israel is struck with a lamentable destroying famine; and such are Gods just
rewards upon unjust Privileges, and unlawful Prescriptions.



Id possumus, quod jure and just possumus: We are not truly said, to may, or
can do any thing, but that which we can, or may justly do: Now, if it be, (as
before I proved) against Gods, and man's Law, and Justice, to sell away Bishops
Lands, then the Parliament may not do it. For the Parliament, this Parliament
often has declared, and sworn to maintain the Laws of this Kingdom, which are
utterly against such Alienation. The Jews are told, 1 Samuel 8.
the King shall take their sons, their fields, etc. and they shall find no
help: What, I pray, is the sense and extent of that power in the King? Is it,
that by his just Right he might do all that is spoken of him in that Chapter;
because it is said, Ver. 10.
this will be the manner and custom of the King so to do? Ask the Assembly of
Divines at Westminster, and I doubt not but they will tell you, that if that,
King, and Sanedrin, and all Israel, jointly go beyond the Word of God, and the
Laws prescribed to them, all their power could not save them from the guilt of
sin, nor reprieve them from Gods severe wrath.

When the lands were given, as most were, in the Saxon Kings times, I dare say,
it cannot be proved, that there was such power in the Nobility and people, as
to sell away the Church Lands: for the first large Grant or power of
Parliaments, was in Henry the Third's time; and the same King it was, that
granted the Charter, wherein is expressed, that the Rights of the Church shall be
ever inviolable: Now if that Charter, and those Parliaments say, the Rights of
the Church in special, cannot, may not, by any power, be violated or taken
away; do they yet grant such a power to Parliaments to take those Rights away,
and so expressly contradict themselves? And can you conceive that King Henry the
Third, who first granted that Charter, and gave the right Power to Parliaments,
would have suffered the two Houses, yea, or that himself, would after that
Grant, made to the Church, have decreed, that he might justly use the power of
Parliament to sell those Lands? Or can you conceive, that those Kings who gave
the Bishops Lands, (for so it is said, that the Kings of England gave them,)
and that with such curses on their Successors, or any who should dare to
alienate, or sell them, ever meant they should be sold? And tell me, I pray,
for I am to learn, where ever good and lawful Parliament, did ever take away
any single man's whole estate, though it were to pay the Public debt, or for
Public use, except it were in a legal course? And can you conceive, that the
two Houses may do that to the inheritance of God, the Patronage of the King,
and the Rights of the Church, which they cannot do to him, who has yielded up
his assent, by giving his Vote to his Proxy in Parliament; which neither God,
the King, nor the Church has done, Page 700.
in this Parliament? I pray you consider, that in the Book of your
Declarations, it is said, That the Rights of Public trust, are not to the
prejudice of any man's particular interest.



England, by a mutual assent, may change the general Laws, or such Laws, as
they hold sitting and convenient to be altered, for their better good; for here
is neither injury, nor injustice to any; but yet special Laws, which concern
the good of some in special, (I conceive with humble submission) may not
justly be changed, except it be by the assent, personal Vote, or Proxy, of
those interessed: none of which can here be said of the Church, or Bishops; or
unless some offense liable to such a penalty has demerited such a sentence or
change of that special Law; and that no such offense has been committed
deserving such a penalty, I presume to be true, for that the Bishops have not
been legally accused, heard and tried, which was ever the ordinary and right
course used by the Hebrews, Romans, and all Religious, good, and Civil
Nations; and which is the Law of this Kingdom, Chapter 14. and 29.
as is expressed in the great Charter. But, I fear, these two last Arguments,
and many more such, are built on sands, which washed, or driven away with a
little wind, all the building falls to the ground: for they take it for granted,
that the two Houses, or rather that some Lords Temporal and Commons make the
Parliament; for the discovery whereof, I pray consider, 1. The conception: 2.
The birth: 3. The growth and strength of Parliaments.

In the Saxon times, when the seed or conception of Parliaments was, at the
making, consirming, or witnessing Laws, seldom is there any mention, but of
the King, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, (except the Kings Servants,
Aldermen, Spelm. Council.
some wise men, etc.) Nay, when our Parliaments first were borne, in the nineth
and twentieth of Henry the Third, there is no mention then, but of the King,
and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. Yea, at the Grant of the great Charter,
there is only mention of one and thirty Lords Spiritual, and two and thirty
Lords Temporal, Coke Pro^m. to 2 Instit. Mat. Par. p. 435 Id. page 580. and
581. Id. p. 636.
in the one and twentieth of King Henry the Third, in Parliament at
Westminster. And in the one and thirtieth of Henry the Third at London, which
were for the relief of the distressed Kingdom, yet there were only mentioned,
the King, and the whole Nobility of the Kingdom: viz. the Bishops, Prelates,
Earls and Barons. But in the two and fiftieth of Henry the Third, say our
printed Statutes, The King providing for the Estate of this Realm, the more
discreet men of the Kingdom being called, as well of the higher, as the lower
estate, the King has made these Acts, Ordinances, and Statutes, which he
wills to be observed of all for ever: And so the forms of Acts in Parliament
ran, The King wills, provideth, ordains, grants. In the 31 Henry 6.1. The
King ordaines, by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and the Commons being in the said Parliament. In 1 Rich. 3.6. The Commons
prays, that it may please the King to ordain. 1. Eliz. 3. We the Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons, representing the three Estates of the
Realm of England, make our humble petition to your Highness: Chapter of Parl.
fol. 1
Whereupon, says Sr Edward Coke, Without these three, Lords Spiritual, and
Temporal, and Commons, no Act of Parliament can be good; and rightly, for as
all the Freemen in England have Votes, so the Bishops vote for themselves, and
all the Churchmen in England. And thereupon, if they have no Votes in
Parliament, then either they are the only slaves, and no Freemen; or else
those Churchmen are not bound by these Laws: it being a Maxim in our Law,
that no man is bound to that Law, wherein he had no Vote in person, or by
Proxy; which no Bishop, and I think no Churchman, has now in this Parliament.

But, not to dispute this, though agreeable to all Law, Justice, and Reason;
yet sure it cannot be rightly called a Parliament, or any Act therein binding,
without the Kings Royal assent: for as in a natural body, so in this, no life,
nor motion without a Head, which is the King; yea, therefore he is called
Principium, 4 Part Instit. s. 3, 4.
Caput, Finis Parliamenti: because, without the King, or his Royal assent, it
is no binding Act. See but one Act for many, 1 Jac. 1. where it is thus said,
We the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, beseech your Majesty, etc.
which if your Majesty shall be pleased to adorn with your Majesty's Royal
assent, without which it can neither be complete and perfect, In answer to
Judge Jenkin.
nor remain to posterity. And 1. C^r. 7. the two Houses beseech the King, to
give his Royal assent to such Bills as they then passed; and H. P. confesses,
(which was never denied till of late, and that but by some) that no Acts of
Parliament can be complete, or formally binding, without the Kings ^^ent. And
so Mr Prynne affirms, Power of Parl. f. 47. Ib. fol. 104. In his Vindication.
p. 6.
that the Kings assent is generally requisite to pass Laws, and ratify them.
And Judge Jenkins, that undanted Champion of our Laws, affirms, that in all
ages, without any controversy, this has held so, that no Act of Parliament
binds the Subject of this Land, without the assent of the King, either for
person, lands, goods, or same; and refers you to Sr Edward Coke, where many
Law Books are cited to that purpose. 1 part Ins^it. sect. 234.


The ignorant or wilful mistake of diverse, holding the two Houses, and their
Ordinances, to be truly called Parliaments, and Acts of Parliaments; as it has
deceived many in their consciences, and of their lives, so may it in this of
their moneys, if not timely foreseen, and prevented.



Plowden, and Sr Edward Coke, have determined for Law; Comment. f. 21^. and
242. In Calv. Case.
and they say, that the Natural, and the Politic body of the King, make but
one body; for as long as the Natural body lives, the Politic is inherent in
it, this being a thing imaginary, and invisible. And, I pray, consider how well
our Law may be called Holy, in that it agrees so well with Gods own holy Law;
Romans 13.1, 2.
for so Saint Paul speaking of the Politic power not to be resisted, settles
this power in the person of the King, to whom it belongs, when he says, Ver.
3. Ver. 4.
Will thou not fear the power? then do that which is good, for He, not they,
is the Ruler, and He, not they, it the Minister of God. And Saint Peter differs
not, but rather declares the same, when he thus speaks; 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
Submit your selves to the King as supreme; and, honor the King: and what can
hence be less inferred then this, that the power, whereby he is a King, and
his Supremacy, whereby he is above all, naturally rests in the person of the
King? and therefore, he is to be honored for his power, and he to be submitted
unto, because he is King and Supreme.

Now, can any man reasonably conceive, that this power being an essential
accident inhering in the King, should without the Kings consent and will,
vanish from its own proper subject, and be of it self truly inherent in
another subject, which is not capable of such an accident? I say not capable,
for the two Houses being and remaining Subjects, witness their own usual
style, We Your Majesty's humble Subjects, are not a subject capable of
Supremacy, in that Supremacy and Subjection are opposite Relatives; and
therefore cannot be, at one and the same time, in one and the same subject.

The King, I grant, though bodily absent, yet may be present representatively,
in the two Houses, speaking either by his great Seal, or by his Commissioners,
by himself appointed, which has been often used in our Parliaments: but to
say, that his power is in the two Houses, without his will, or grant, is all
one, as if we should say, the influence of the Sun should be inherent in the
earth, without the natural inclination or motion of the Sun: seeing that as no
body can be the proper subject wherein that influence does naturally inhere,
but the Sun; so no body, nor persons, can be the proper subject to contain,
and hold Royal Power and Supremacy, but the person of the King, or they to
whom he will, as the Sun, dispense the rays or influence thereof.

And if it has been, or now may otherwise be, why, I pray, both now, as
heretofore, have, and do the two Houses supplicate, desire, crave, and beseech
the King, to give his Royal assent, which naturally arises from that his
Politic capacity and power, thereby to make that Law, without which Royal
assent, no man worthy the name of a Lawyer, ever held that any Bill, Decree, or
Ordinance, was of force to bind the Subject, as to a standing and continuing
Law? which is plainly showed in Answer to the Argument next before. But,
notwithstanding that an Act made by the King, Lords, and Commons, does bind;
yet if that Act be (as I before have proved this Ordinance of selling the
Church Lands to be) against Gods and man's Laws, it is to be repealed, because
it is unlawful and unjust, so to ordain or enact; and the Parliament should do
nothing against Law and Justice.



David intended to build an house to the Lord, but the Lord would not that
David should build it; and yet the Lord said, David did well, 1 Reg 8.17, 18,
19.
that it was in his heart to do it: God commended, and accepted of David's act,
although that act were no where commanded to King David. And in Ezra, mention
is made of the free-will-offerings of those, who offered willingly for the
House of the Lord: Ezra 1.3. and 7.
whereas elsewhere, under the Law, the general precept for Free-will-offerings
to God, his House, and Servants, is avowed to be a part of Gods Service,
although the particular offerings, of what, how much, is left, un-commanded, to
every man's liberty, to give this or that, more or less, as God shall put into
his heart. And although there be no particular command to this or that man, to
give this or that to Gods Service, and Honor, yet under the general Precepts,
Prove. 3.9. Luke 6.38.
Honor the Lord with thy substance; and, Give, and it shall be given unto you;
there is warrant enough, if not Precept, according to every man's ability,
freely to give, and offer to God for his Honor and Service, whether by money,
lands, or other goods. Let me a^^ Where does Christ command the Jews and
Gentiles, to feed and clothe his Disciples and Apostles? What then? Were they
not to do it? And Saint Paul calls the Corinthians Offerings (...), 1 Cor. 16.3.
Luke 22.1.
liberality; and the Corban of the Jews, as before cited, was called (...),
gifts; now gifts and liberalities are free-offerings, and not duties of
command. And says not Christ, Luke 17.9, 10.
Does he thank that servant that did the things commanded? I trow not. He who
will allow God no more then what commanded, shall in this robb God of his
offerings, the Donors of their reward, and his servants of their relief: and it
would prove a pestilent Jewish opinion, and too great an enemy to Christianity;
which consists, as in voluntary sufferings, so in voluntary offerings, above
that which is in special commanded. To conclude, the Ministers under the Gospel
hold not their lands by any special command or Precept from God, but by
free-gift of the Donor, man, and by the divine acceptance of God in Christ,
which is sufficient in this case.



Act. 4. Gal. 1.15.
would not have given them lands, as it may appear by that story in the Acts,
and by that of Saint Paul, I bear you record, that you would have plucked out
your eyes to have given them to me. But one reason Saint Chrysosto^e gives,
that in the first planting of the Gospel, the Jews or Gentiles might perchance
have supposed, that the Apostles had preached rather for the gain of their
wealth, then for the salvation of their souls: and who knows, but that Saint
Paul to that end spoke that sentence, 2 Cor. 12.14.
I seek not yours but you.

But, because the Fathers of the Primitive Church are not heard in these times,
I desire you to hear Saint Paul, who for himself, and the other Apostles,
gives a more full answer hereunto, 1 Cor. 9.11. Ver. 12.
when he thus speaks; If we have sewen unto you spiritual ^^^^gs, is it a great
thing, if we shall reap your carnal things? And then, If others be partakers of
this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless, we have not used this
power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. In
which words, the Apostle evidently shows, that the reaping, or maintenance,
out of their carnal things, should be according to that which was sowed, viz.
spiritual things: and what proportion of carnal things can compensate for
things spiritual, let the spiritual, and not the carnal man judge. Now the full
Answer to this Objection, (which S. Chrysestome might happily collect out of
this Text) is this; though we the Apostles have power to require all this as
due, (not of Alms, but morally, as the seventh Verse of that Chapter shows
it) yet we use it not, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ thereby.

And yet a second reason, that the Apostles had not lands for their
maintenance, lay in the time, wherein the Apostles lived; who, at that time,
had not only no continuing city, or certain place of abode, but wandered
about, Heb. 11.37.
being afflicted and tormented. Again, the Romans, the chief lords of all,
were so far from letting them enjoy any lands at that time, that they hardly
afforded them the air, wherein to breath and live: distinguish therefore of
times, for it holds both in Church and State, aliter in constituta vivitur,
aliter in constituenda. At first planting of either Church or State, there is
neither the same Privilege, nor the same wealth, but each grow by Gods blessing
in time.

And what is here spoken of the maintenance, may in part hold for the
Government of the Church; that is, that when Saint Paul wrote (from whom the
most is gathered, both for the Presbyterian and Independent) the Church was not
then divided into Parishes and Provinces, no, nor into publicly known
Congregations: and therefore, it being under bloody Persecution, it could not
have the face of a visible Church: Whereupon, though then the Apostle, and
Apostolical men, ordained by him, exercised Episcopal authority, yet it could
not, nor indeed ought it to have been in that height of visible power; as no
doubt Saint Paul himself would, and those Apostolical men did use it, so soon
as God had added greater numbers to the Church, and given them favor with the
Civil Magistrate: the Apostle, both for that, and all succeeding times, leaving
this one general Rule, 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently, and in order. And, can any indifferent man
hold it just and reasonable, that, when all other men grow in state and wealth,
the Churchmen alone should decrease, and be abused? What if I should urge to
any Gentleman or others: Your Predecessors, two or three hundred years since,
had not such estates, therefore, neither should you, but be content with that
which your Forefathers enjoyed? would you hold this Argument to be of force? I
do not in your cases and, I pray, be you as just to us. But, that I be not too
tedious, and irksome in this arguing, let me make an indifferent motion, (which
may well serve for this Objection) be you now Christians, as they were in the
times of the Apostles, and the Bishops will be very well content with such
maintenance, as the Apostles had in the times of those Christians; for then the
Christians sold their lands, and goods, and laid the price thereof at the
Apostles feet: which if you hold unfit now to be done, as I do; then, I pray,
conceive it as unreasonable to reduce them now to the indigency of the
Apostles, when all the land besides, God be praised, enjoyes plenty; which the
two Houses have found, both in City and Country.

England, rather then they?

England therefore? 2. Perchance they had lands, but, as they complain, they
are taken away by Church-robbers. 3. The time and state wherein they live,
happily, will not so well bear it. But, 4. would not those Churches accept of
Lands, if time, the State, and Benefactors would afford it? And is thine eye
evil in Scotland, because God is good to us in England? The Commons in Germany
and France, live like Boors and Peasants; and the Nobles in Russia and Turkey,
like slaves, and vassals. Hold you this a good Argument, therefore it should be
no otherwise in England? We are no more bound in England to live without Lands,
because other Churches have none; then other Churches are bound to live upon
lands, because we have them: every Church or State, are in these cases to be
governed, and live by their own Laws and Customs; 1 Cor. 11.16.
and hitherto, God be praised, We have no such Custom, no, nor all the
Churches of God.

England, are held per Baroniam: which Baronies, with their Votes in
Parliament, being taken away by an Act, the lands are, or may likewise be taken
away.

G^^ssar. ad verbum, Ba^on.
Sr Henry Spelman, inform me right, then it cannot hold, that all Bishops in
England hold their lands by, or in the right of their Baronies; for he
affirms, that the title of Baron was not known in England, till the time of
William the Conqueror; whereas most, I dare say of some Bishops lands, were
given, some one, some two, some three, some four hundred years before the
Conquerors time; and then judge, whether those lands were given to hold per
Baroniam!

Again, the same Author says, that in England there were three sorts of
Barons; the first, who were made by William the Conqueror, and these hold their
Honors and Places in all Courts, by Prescription, rather then by Tenure; and
were therefore called, Barons Praescriptitii. The second sort were called
Rescriptitii, who, in the time of Henry the Third, were called by Writ to the
Kings Courts. The third sort called Diplomatici, who by the Kings Patents, were
first created in the time of Henry the Second, and in that right had their
places. Now, can any say, but, that ever since there have been great Councils
in England, the Bishops had their places there, and so were to hold them by
Prescription, rather then by Tenure? And if by the great Charter, the Rights
and Liberties of the Church be inviolable, i. e. such as rightly cannot be
broken; then this Right, Custom, or Privilege, cannot justly be taken away. I
conceive this true, that the two Kings, Williams, Father and Son, and after
them King Henry the Second, out of spleen, ambition, or avarice, have impaired
the first ancient Dignity of Bishops in England; and may have changed some of
their Lands, to be held per Baro^iam, which at first were granted in puram and
perp^tuam El^emosynam: Whereupon, Sr Henry Spelman calls the now Bishops,
Barons El^emosynaries: yet does it follow, that, if some have unjustly changed
their Tenure, therefore, others more unjustly, may take away their Lands? Had
it been ill in David to have cut off the lap of Saul's garment, might he
therefore have killed the King?

The case then, as I conceive it, is briefly this; The Saxon Kings, first chief
Donors of much, if not of the most of the Bishops Lands in England, gave, and
confirmed them to be held, either in Franc-Almoigue, free from all Service, or
for Divine Service, and they to hold them as Gods Almes-men and Servants; and
this continued to King Edward the Confessor: after which time, some Kings, (how
justly judge you) as Conquerors of this Land, altered the Tenure; making some,
or most of their Lands (yet not all, for two are excepted, Carble and
Rochoster, so an ancient Register) to hold per Baroniam. After which, King
Henry the Third, whether moved in conscience, or upon some other good causes,
restored the Lands to their ancient just Rights, for his Charter could intend
no less to the Church, it looking back to the time of Edward the Confessor at
least. So that the Question is, whether the Lands of Bishops in England should
now hold per Baroniam, as changed by the Conqueror, or his Successors, or as at
first they were granted, and after restored by the great Charter, to their
first Rights and Liberties, 1 Part Instit. p. 94. 2. Instit. c. 1. Ibid.
which was either in Franc-Almeigne, or for Divine Service. Sr Edward Coke
affirms this later; and further says, By the great Charter, all the Rights
are confirmed to the Church, and Churchmen, which they had before, or at their
first Grant. And in the same place more fully says, The Church shall be fres,
i. e. freed: By which, says he, a restitution is graved of all such
Immunities, and Freedoms, as they enjoyed before, and to free them from all
such changes, as have been usurped, and encroached upon, by any power
whatsoever.

And, I believe, that if the case were put concerning your own Lands, you would
soon resolve, that they shouldhold as by the first Donors grant, and after by
the great Charter confirmed, rather then by that imposition of a Conqueror. And
why the same judgment should not be given on Bishope Lands, as on the Lands of
other Freemen of England, I see not.



Edward Coke cites the Canon Law, and approves of this, as agreeable to our
Law, which says, Wh^^ things are gi^^^ to the Church, 2 Instit. p. 489.
are holy Offerings, whether they beres solid, or mobiles, whether they be
moveable or immovable. Now does our law say, there is no theft in things (...)
only says it, theft is in movables? If this, and not that, then why (for the
honor of our Law, that it may not appear to cross Gods) may we not say, that
our Law has only made theft in movables punishable, because it does not
conceive, how land, in the proper and strict sense of robbing, can be taken
away and stolen? But, because Sacrilege, or taking things immovable, is not by
our Law punishable, does it therefore follow, that it is no sin or punishable
by Gods Law? Suppose we have no Law to punish an Atheist, an Idoater, one that
takes Gods Name in vain, who prophanes the Lords day, who dishonors his
Parents, who tells or makes lies; are therefore, these no sins, punishable by
the Law of God? And that by Gods Law, defrauding God or man of immoveables, (be
it of Lands) is a sin; be pleased first to bethink your self, 1 King. 21.
whether King Ahah sinned in taking away Naboths Vineyard, (an immovable, I
conceive, in your sense and acceptance) and if he sinned in this, then what
Commandment brake he? Was it not the eighth, which says, Thou shall not
steal? And then does it not plainly follow, that theft may be in immoveables?
And that God may be robbed of immoveables, which is Sacrilege? And does not God
by his Prophet Ezekiel, speaking, not only of Tithes and Offerings, but of the
holy Lands, say, Ezekiel. 48.14.
Thou shale not sell, nor alienate them? which to do, is Sacrilege.



course, which (as proved) is against Gods, and man's Law? I remember, Mat.
Paris.
it is storied, that the Pope requiring great sums of money from the Clergy, at
which they repined, the Pope answered, that there was a necessity for it: Yet
upon examination in a Council in France, it was discovered, that the Pope had
made, or brought on the necessity, and partly to that end, that he might fleece
the Clergy; which that just Council well weighing, put the holy Pope besides
his plot, and made him find some other tricksom way, to salve his necessity.
To answer therefore, if there be such a just real debt, just it is, that it
should be satisfied; and as just, that they should pay, who have caused the
debt: if this be not liked, yet that the debt should be discharged by a just
and legal way, which I cannot see how it is, by selling the Bishops lands, who
were not the causes; but if they were, yet it cannot be just to take from God,
what is his, for his Servants offense: In answer to last Argument.
(of which, more anon.)

That it will prove an hazard to the Church and State, unless these Lands be
sold, I conceive is an Argument, that lies either in the opinions, or wills of
them, who other ways may remedy it, if they will; partly by finding the true
proper causes of this mischief, and necessity; or by levying the money by some
general Tax on the whole Land, who so much groan under the present calamity,
and oppression, that, I persuade my self, they would rather pay that debt, then
longer bear this burden.

But suppose you cannot, or will not find out any course, whereby to discharge
the Public debt, but this; then confider, how just and agreeable to Gods Word,
this course is: and unless you can show, by Gods Law, that you may sell these
Lands, then, I dare affirm, that, be the necessity never so real, never so
great, you may not sell them to any end: In which case, Saint Paul is bold and
peremptory, when he says, Some affirm, Romans 3.8.
that we say, Let us do evil that good may come whose damnation is just: just
to them that say or teach so; and just to them who follow and practice so. Let
me for your memory repeat that acts of Pharaoh, Genesis 57
(the Heathen King, and a Tyrant) who would not in the greatest necessity,
which was of famine, yet in that necessity he would not sell the Priests Lands;
Annot, on the place.
and may we not fear a famine, or some other great plague to fall on those
Christians, who shall dare do contrary?

And will you give me leave to add, and close this with the Note of Mr Calvin?
What bowels, On Acts 4.35.
What souls have we Christians now a days? For the Primitive Christians sold
their own lands, and laid the price at the Apostles feet, to relieve in time,
and case of necessity; whereas we are not content alone malign, like
Malignants, (this was the sense of the word then) to keep close our own, but
cruelly and unjustly we take away that which is other men's: they sincerely, in
faith, and a good conscience, offered their own for the Public necessity; but
we use a thousand pretexts, arts, and tricks fraudulently, and falsely, on all
hands, and from all sorts of men, to rake and draw to our selves other men's
goods and estates. I beseech you lay this to heart, and considering the too
much truth of it at this time, what in you is, labor to correct and amend it.



Richard the Second, Speed in R. 2.
(for so those times were called) when many Peers and Commons, (not Ordained,
it was not then come to this, but) Petitioned the King, that the Temporalties
of the Church might be taken from the Ecclesiastical persons, adding, that it
were charity thereby to humble them. Whereupon, says he, diverse Parliament men
designed among themselves, out of which Religious Houses each of them would
have his share. The King heard them, says the story, as I hope our King will,
but yielded not to their wicked projects. But if the Bishops be not yet humbled
enough, prove who those proud ones be, in what, or how, and let those proud
suffer according to Law; for is it enough to say, such an one is a Felon, and
without more ado, condemn him, and forfeit his estate?

And if it be said, they have too much, have they any more, or have they so
much as their first Donors, and Benefactors gave them? and hold they it not by
the same Law, by which all other Subjects hold their estates? I before told
you, what the Levites held under the Law; and that God, who gave it them,
thought not that too much, no not for them, who were but bodily laborers, as
it were, in the Temple. And, if it may not offend to ask the question, why in
Gods name, may not a Scholar, as well born, as well descended, and as well, if
not better bred, then others, who has spent all his life time in the study of
Humane and Divine knowledge, whereby to teach the people, and govern the Church;
why may not he, I say, without envy, have and hold as much as a Lawyer, a
Merchant, a mechanic Tradesman? and leave for his wise and children thereby to
live after him? For God held it just to apportion the opulency of his Priests
under the Law, to the wealth of the times, and the Land wherein they lived:
yea, and that, if there were any exceeding, it was on the Priests behalf. I
would you would be pleased to read two places of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 9.9, 10.
Gal. 6.6.
with the Notes of Mr Calvin, Bucer, and others; who observe, that Saint Paul,
in those two places, made not a simple and bare comparison, that, as the ox,
and the husbandman, lived by their labor, and had no more, so it should be
with the Minister. But, they say, there should be a proportionable equity and
equality in their maintenance; and this to be according to the dignity of their
Function, and the quality of their work: and all this may be rightly evinced
from those Words of God himself, Luke 10.7.
The labourer is worthy of his bire. And who but an irreligious Atheist, or an
ignorant Mechanic will say, but, that the Study, the Function, the Work of a
Bishop, or Minister of the Gospel, is sequal to the best Lawyer, Merchant, or
Tradesmen? God forbid, that we should be fallen into the times of Sylla, who
banished or sold the best of the Romans, if they were rich?

But, to return, if some one of that Order be rich and proud shall the Function
be rooted out for the offense of the person? or, was this ever held agreeable
to Religion, Law, Justice, or right Reason? There was a Judas, a Traitor, who
carried the bag among the twelve Apostles of Christ, did Christ therefore take
away the Apostleship? Some Angels rebelled against God, did God therefore
destroy all the Angels, as Rebels? James and John, would sit one at the right,
the other at the left hand of their Lord Christ; must all the Apostles
therefore be despised, as proud, and usurpers?

And, to take away the Bishops Lands, and give them a portion, is it not to
take away their meat, and make them feed all on pottage? Or to deal with them,
as some Idolaters, or Eli's sons did, who took the flesh, or best part of the
Sacrifices to themselves, and sacrificed the bones or worst to God? Or comes
not this too near our English Proverb, to steal a goose, and stick in place of
it the feathers?

And when it is said, they shall have a sitting maintenance, for that is all
can be challenged from the Scripture; remember what Christ replied to those,
that murmured at the lord of the vineyards bounty, to some of the laborers
more then others, Is thine eye evil, because I am good? Mat. 20.15.
Or repinest thou at that which I have given to those laborers, being it is
lawful for me to do with mine, what I will? which holds right, both in the
several Kings giving the Lands, and Gods accepting, and allowing them to his
Ministers.

But, if we be to be pittanced by a competency, (as it is called) who, I pray,
shall be the Steward, or Distributor? Shall he that robs the true man of his
purse, give back, what he thinks competent? And shall this be held just? If we
understand, and believe the Prophet, it is God that is robbed, and who shall
judge but God? Or what competency is fitting to be allowed to him? Is it one or
two hundred pounds per Annum? If the best Interpreters, even of our modern
Divines, may be heard, they will tell you from Gal. 6. and 1 Cor. 16. that this
maintenance must be honorable; and has this been performed, when for two,
three, four years, you have taken all from them, and, yet not so much, as
charging them with any offense against Law, or your own Ordinances? And is this
Justice, or an honorable maintenance? Or would your Honors be content with the
like?

England anciently had the First-fruite, and Tenths of all the Spiritual
livings in every Diocese, which were the proper maintenance of those Bishops,
and that therefore these might be restored to the Bishops in lieu of the Lands,
which by the Ordinance should be taken from them.

England, was by lands, such as were given them by their Royal Benefactors, and
others. 2. The Bishops in England held, or had not those First Fruits and
Tenths, but the Bishop of Rome, who under the false pretended Title of
Universal Bishop, Mat. Paris. in H. 3. p. 849.
usurped, and took the same in England, (as he did almost, in most parts of
Christendom besides,) witness that Grant of the Pope, who, De potestate sibi
a Deo concessa, Pol. Virg. Hist. Angl. lib. 20.
gave those Tenths for three years to K. Henry the Third. And the like of Pope
Urban, who gave the Tenths in this Kingdom to K. Richard the Second, to aid
him against Charles the French King, and those that upheld Clement the Seventh
against him: after which, they were paid to the Pope again, until they were
restored to the Crown by K. Henry the Eighth, 2 K. H. 8. c. 3.
for that the King (as in that Statute he was styled the Head of the Church,
or) rightly is the Defender of the Faith, and Supreme Governor, in all causes,
and over all persons Ecclesiastical.

Now then, if it might be just to grant the Bishops these First Fruits, and
Tenths, in lieu of their Lands, yet what Justice can it be to rob (as we say)
Peter, to pay Paul? to take that which is the Kings just right from him,
thereby to satisfy for that, which is unjustly taken from God, and the Church?
So, that as this Project fails in the ground, so in the superstructure too, it
tends to a double Injustice; the one against the King, and the other against
the Church: and yet, if this could be done without Injustice to either, I know
not how to clear the act from impiety, or Sacrilege; when God by his Prophet
(as I before urged the Text) says, Thou shall not exchange that, which is holy
to the Lord: Ezekiel. 48. Lev. 27.13.
Except (as it is excepted) for the Levite, and Priest, it may clearly appear,
that the exchange be for the better, which this cannot be. Again, if by an Act
these Lands, on these conditions, be now taken from the Church, then, by
another Act of Resumption or Restitution, those First Fruits and Tenths may be
taken away from the Church again, and restored, as of right belonging to the
Crown; and wherein then shall there be a maintenance for Bishops in the Church?



Knox in Scotland, counseled after this manner, Pull down the Crows nests,
said he, (for such homely, or slovenly Similes they mostly use, as best
becoming them, and sitting the palats of their Auditors) for else the black
Birds will build again: but of this counsel, ere he died, he repented, (though
too late) for when the steed was stolen, he advised the Clergy, by word and
pen, to gain-stand this black Sacrilegious act, of taking away the patrimony,
and possessions of the Church.



they have sworn thereby, to sell away the Bishops Lands: for that these may
better, and more justly, (as in the times of Edward the Second, Henry the
Fifth, and Henry the Eighth,) be converted to other uses and services in the
Church. But grant, that they had expressly, and directly sworn, to have sold
these Lands, are they therefore, or thereby bound to do it? unless they can
first prove, that by the Law of God and man, they might so do? For otherwise,
by the same reason or rule, Herod had been bound to have beheaded John Baptist,
and the Jews to have slain Paul, for each had sworn and vowed those bloody
acts. I doubt not, but your Assembly of Divines will teach you, that rather you
should repent, then prosecute the performance of an unjust or unrighteous Oath.

And, what is urged, that after, and upon this Act, they have sworn to settle a
new Government, most agreeable to Gods Word, etc. I verily believe, that
thousands, who have sworn, neither did, nor yet do understand, what in this
they swore: Jer. 4.
and how such swearing agrees with that of the Prophet, Thou shult swear in
judgment, I cannot see; Lord have mercy upon them. For, 1. they swear
positively to maintain the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, of the Church of
Scotland: and how many in England understand what the Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline, of the Church of Scotland are?

But, perchance, it will be answered, that they swear to defend them against
our common enemies, for, so it is changed from the Scottish Copy, by our
Assembly at Westminster: but, who are those our enemies, against whom we are to
maintain the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, of the Church of Scotland? Are
they the Infidel, and Turk? for these are the Common enemies to Christ and his
Gospel. Or, be they the Arch-enemie of mankind, the Devil? For who can be more
properly our common enemy, then he, whom in our Baptism we all covenant to
forsake, as our enemy? But, this common enemy in the Covenant, thus being left
at large, for every man to interpret or mean whom he will; is it not as much
against judgment, or worse, then that late decried [etc.] in the last Canons?
But, if some Oedipus will take upon him to expound these common enemies to be
Papists, as some of the Assembly do, 1. Who gives any one, or more, power to
put a sense upon a National Covenant, as this is called and pretended to be? 2.
How can Papists, in common sense, be called our common enemies, rather then the
Devil, yea, or then Turk or Insidel? For the Papists agree with us in the main
fundamental points of our Creed; whereas the other three, the Turk, the
Insidel, the Devil, accord with us in none: and he is not so much our common
enemy, who agrees in the maine, as he who differs in all.

And, is the Presbyterian Government proved by the Word of God? then, I pray,
from what Text of Scripture, do they confirm their Parochial, Classical,
Provincial, National Assemblies, which are the pillars, upon which, some say,
Wisdom has placed her house? It is not, I hope, that Prove. 9.1. for there is
mention of seven pillars. And, is this Government (as now settled or set forth)
agreeable to the best Reformed Churches? But who must tell us, which these best
Reformed Churches be? or must we pin our judgments and consciences on other
men's souls, who tell us, that the Scottish and French are those best Reformed
Churches? And were these the best, yet how can we settle our Government with
these two, which differ one from another? Yea, and neither of them allow of any
Appeal from their National Synod, in Ecclesiastical or Spiritual things; which
this new Covenant, now held forth in England, does? And yet, that Government of
the Church, which has continued in England, ever since Christianity professed,
(which is almost 1500. years) and wherein-nothing has justly, or can be
proved, to be in the essence and being of it, against the Word of God, must be
abolished, to bring that in, which neither agrees with the best Reformed
Churches, nor can at all be proved by Gods Word.

I pray, take this Note by the way, that the settling of the Presbyterian
Government in Scotland, was the seditious, factious, tumultuous work, of four
and twenty years; viz. from 1572. to 1596. And think on that of the Prophet,
Hos. 10.4. De neces. reform. Eccles.
They have spoken words, swearing falsty, in making a Covenant: and at parting,
hear Mr Calvin, writing to the Emperor, and Princes, in the Diet, or
Parliament in Germany, and complaining of the Tyranny of the Bishops of Rome,
where of other Bishops he speaks thus, and in these very words; Talem nobis
Hierarchiam si exhibeant, in qua sic emineant Episcopi, ut Christo subesse non
recusent, and tum vero nullo non Anathemate dignos fatear, si qui erunt, qui
non came reverenter, summaque obedientia observent. From which words it is
plain, that Mr Calvin allows, and approves of an Hierarchy, and Government in
the Church by Bishops; and not only so, but, that he further professes, that
all they, who do not with all obedience reverence and observe such Bishops,
who subject themselves to Christ, are worthy of the greatest censure in the
Church.



Jehu thrived by killing his King, and rooting out his posterity, does God
allow Rebellion, and Murder, and deposing of Kings? Or shall we conclude, that
the Pope, Mahomet, or the Turk, have been in the right, because of their
wonderful victories, and enlarging their Dominions? O the wretched, and most
deceitful guile of the Devil! for who knows not, both in Sacred,
Ecclesiastical, and Profane Histories, that, as God often suffers his best and
dearest servants, to be troubled, persecuted, and cast down in this world; so
he as often lets the tyrannous, proud, and ungodly, to exalt themselves, that
being left the more without excuse, their condemnation might be the more just,
and their punishment more grievous. And may it not be, that God may have a
controversy with you, and call you to an account for all your doings? And who
knows, whether this sentence may not follow: I never knew you, depart from me,
Mat. 7.23.
ye that work iniquity, notwithstanding all your victories?

You may, perchance, blame my needless pains, in answering so many frivolous
Arguments, and you may wonder too, who they be, who have framed such simple
Objections; but, you will cease to wonder at this last, when you consider,
that, in these later times, the man has been accounted without zeal, or to
want wit, that has not something to say against Bishops; whom to vilify, and
slander, has passed for an evidence of holiness: and, if you blame me in the
former, I contesse, I had rather answer too much, thereby (if I could) to
satisfy you in all, then to leave you unresolved in any thing, though it be
not material, nor worth the answering.



For the abolishing of Archbishops, and Bishops, and providing for the payment
of the just and necessary debts of the Kingdom, into which, the same has been
drawn by a War, mainly promoted by, and in favor of the said Archbishops, and
Bishops, and other their adherents, and dependents, Be it Ordained, that all
their Lands be sold, etc.

Charles Herle, President of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, by
authority granted him by the two Houses of Parliament, has licenced, and which
is accordingly printed and published, 1645. where it thus speaks. Page 7.
Christ, Mat. 28. gives a charge to the Apostles, which has special reference
to matters of Discipline, for the right Ordering and Government of the
Churches: And it is evident, says he, by some passages in the New Testament,
that some things were delivered to the Churches, and particularly to the
Ministers thereof, which were not then committed to writing, but were delivered
from hand to hand, called therefore Traditions. And these Ordinances, says he,
1 Cor. 11.2. 2 These. 2.15. 2 Timothy 2.2.
set up and practiced by the appointment of the Apostles, are equivalent in
authority, to what Christ himself has immediately ordained. Hence therefore,
is that, 1 Cor. 14.37. and hereupon, says he, the custom of the Church, which
is established, must stand for a Law, to quiet the conscience of him, that is
willing to be satisfied: as is proved, 1 Cor. 11.16.

What may appear to have been ordained by the Apostles, Page 8.
and used by the Churches, even from the days of the Apostles, why should it
not be acknowledged, to be the commandment of Christ? But, you will say, says
he, how may it appear to have been the custom of the Churches ordained by the
Apostles? to which himself answers, It is worth our observation, that the
pattern and precedent, from whence most, if not all the customs in the
Churches were taken, was the custom of Israel in the Old Testament. And this,
says he, may be one special reason, why the providence of God did not take so
much care, for the writing of every custom and ordinance, for the Government
of the Church in the New Testament; because the precedent from whence they were
taken, being at hand, if any alteration did creep in, it might easily be
amended by reducing it to the pattern. Yea, who, says he, can tell, whether
the wisdom of God, did not hereby provide to uphold the credit of the Church
of Israel, against the frowardness of some to disesteeme it. And that the
Institutions, says he, of God by Moses, for the Church of Israel, were the
pattern for the Apostolical Traditions, which were appointed for the
Discipline, and Order to be observed, it will appear by diverse particulars.

1. Page 9.
In the Old Testament, there was one day of seven set apart for holy rest; in
imitation whereof, the Apostles, says he, by direction of our blessed Savior,
consecrated the first day of the week, called the Lords day.

2. Israel had Synagogues besides their Temple; and in the Apostles times,
says he, there were places set apart called Churches.

3. The directions, says he, for Censures, were received from Israel; and
that, not only by the appointment of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. Tit. 3. but of
Christ, Mat. 18.15.

4. The liberty, says he, which women take, to come to the Table of the Lord,
must be acknowledged a Tradition of the Apostles, taken from the pattern of the
Passover.

5. The custom of the Apostles, to baptize the whole households of them that
believed, whence, says he, should they have it but from the pattern in the Old
Testament?

6. The maintenance of Ministere, says he, Saint Paul affirms to be ordained
of the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
in conformity to the Ordinance of the Old Testament.

7. So for Persons, Israel had those, who were set apart to the service of the
Altar and Temple; and accordingly, says he, the Apostles ordained in several
Churches, Elders.

And whether, says he, the Subordination of some in the Ministry, were not
likewise an Apostolical Institution appointed by Christ, and this also fetched
from the pattern of Moses, I dispute not.

He says, he disputes not, for what needs it any dispute, confidering what he
had proved before, and what he allegeth from Saint Hierom? the Father thus
speaks, That we may know, Ep. 85. ad Evag.
that the Traditions of the Apostles were taken from the Old Testament, appears
by this, that what Aaron, the Priests, and Levites, were in the Jewish Temple,
the same, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, do rightly challenge in the
Christian Church. And that there was a Superiority, and Subordination among the
Priests in the Old Testament, is so well known to all, that it needs no dispute.

The Author having laid down these grounds, concludes in these words: viz. Why
this Rule should hold in so many particulars, and only fail in this point, I
leave for them to give a reason, who know what difference is, betwixt reason
and absurdity; especially, since it is plain by the testimony of the Ancients,
who lived in the next Ages after the Apostles, that this was a custom
established by the Apostles.

The Author, answering an Argument, Page 11
drawn from Heb. 3.26. says, The office of Moses was to settle the
Commonwealth, and National Church of Israel, by particular Laws and
Ordinances; where as the office of Christ was the reconciliation betwixt God
and man, and the Redemption of mankind: and therefore, Christ loft it to his
Apostles, and their successors, in several ages, to provide for the welfare,
and good of the Church in the New Testament; and thereupon, concludes all thus,
What was instituted in the Old Testament, and is not repealed in the New, nor
is incompatible with the state of the Church in the New, that is understood, to
be continued, and commanded to the practice of the Christian Church. Now, that
an Hierarchy, or Superiority, and Subordination of the Priests was instituted
in the Old Testament, I think is denied by none, that understands the
Government of that Church: and, that this kind of Government is repealed in the
New Testament, appears not; for the words of Christ forbid only an Heathenish
Tyranny, and not a Christianly Superiority, or an over-lording, and not an
orderly ruling. Luke 22.25, 26 1 Pet. 5.3.
2. When in that place our Savior explicitly forbids such Dominion, or
Lordship, as the Kings and Gentiles exercised, not ones mentioning, alluding
to, or touching that Government, instituted and practiced in the Old Testament;
me thinks it stands to reason, that this kind of Government by Superior and
Inferior, is rather confirmed then weakened by our Saviors prohibition: for,
had be intended the abolition of such a Government, is it not probable, being
now as it were upon the theme, that be would in some glance at least, have
struck at that Superiority, and Subordination among the Jews? Especially, when
you consider what before was spoken, that the Apostles and their Successors
did, and were to order the Discipline, and Government of the Christian Church,
by the pattern of the Jewish: and, whether the like kind of Hierarchy was, or
is likely to be incompatible for the Christian Church, which was instituted for
the Jewish Church, we may judge by the first, and after continued practice of
the Christian Church from the Apostles, and succeeding times.

And here I shall cite, (whom you may as well credit, as you are willing to
hear) Mr Calvin, Instit. 4.4.
who confesses in the Primitive Christian times, they chose one called a
Bishop, who was as Consul in Rome; and the Consuls in Rome were above the
Senators, in place, and power. And Mr Beza, and Mr Moulin come nearer to us and
truth, who confess, that either in, or very near after the Apostles times,
Bishops ruled in the Christian Church; where they deny not Bishops, to have
been in the Apostles times, only they will not, lest they should offend or
lose by the truth, say what they did generally read, and I am persuaded did
believe, that Bishops were in the Apostles times: yet in the other, they are
plain and peremptory, saying, Bishops were soon after the Apostles; and could
they have proved it, they would as readily, and as plainly have said, the
Bishops were not in the Apostles times but soon after; but by an artificial
blinding or hood-winking the truth, they chose rather to express it as they
do. Whereas Bucer, Professor of Divinity in Cambridge, in K. Edward the
Sixth's time, speaks as plainly, as truly, saying, From the first Ordination,
and perpetual Institution of Christian Churches by the Apostles, it seemed good
to the Holy Ghost, to have in them Bishops: and in the Book of Consecration of
Bishops, made, and set forth in the fifth and sixth of K. Edward the Sixth, and
confirmed by Parliament, 8 Eliz. 1. it is thus said, It is evident to all men,
reading the Scriptures and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles times, there
have been these Orders of Ministers in the Church of Christ: viz. Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons. And, if it were as evident, that the Apostles either
instituted, or commended a Presbyterian Government, and not Episcopal, may it
not be as a wonder and astonishment, that so soon as ever the Apostles were
deceased, or the most of them, the whole Christian Church, dispersed through
the whole world, would suddenly conspire, and convene to change that
Government, instituted or commended by the Apostles, into Episcopacy? And that
Episcopacie, and not Presbytery, was the Government, generally, I may say
universally, used in the Christian Churches, from the times of the Apostles,
besides the authorities above mentioned, I appeal to all the best Histories.

Moreover, it cannot be denied, but that this Government came into this
Kingdom, with the first planting of the Gospel here, which was almost 1500.
years ago, and has been ever since established by our best Laws, but has
been confessed by the best learned of the Assembly, not to be repugnant to Gods
Word, and by the most learned and strict Presbyterians, Calvin, Beza, Monlin,
acknowledged to be, either in, or soon after the Apostles times; and by the
full consent of the best Historians, proved to be instituted, if not by Christ,
yet by his holy Apostles, and by, and from them, spread over all the Christian
world: and yet, to the end this holy Government may be abolished, this
detestable sin of Sacrilege must be committed. The end and the means we see
meet, but then well weigh and consider, that if it be damnation to him that
does ill to a good end, as the Apostle testifies, then what damnation shall
attend them, who to such an end, as the abolishing so holy, or divine a
Government as Episcopacy, shall wilfully commit so detestable a sin as
Sacrilege.

But the second end, perchance, is better; which is (as professed) to pay
necessary debts; a good end, I confess, I would it were practiced by all, yea,
or in this case. But would not the Excise, and Compositions have discharged
that debt, had the money been rightly employed, as it was pretended? I pray,
remember, that Charles Martell of France, under pretense of pay for the Holy
War, seized on the Church Revenues, and though he promised restitution, yet was
proclaimed by the best Historians, to be a notorious, and a damnable
Sacrilegist.

But, how ever the ends meet, perchance, there is some great cause, that moved
or provoked the two Houses to this selling; yes, and the cause is expressed;
for this late War was promoted by the Archbishops and Bishops, and in favor of
them, or their adherents, and dependents. I confess, it seems strange to me,
that their Lands should be sold for what was done in favor of them, who know
not by whom this favor is done, neither are their favorers once impeached for
the favorable act; for suppose one do an evil act in favor of, or for Mr
Speakers sake, who never desired, nor acknowledged the favor; shall Mr
Speakers lands be sold away for this? And yet more strange it is, that their
lands should be sold, because the War was in favor of their adherents, and
dependents.

But, it is said, that the Bishops promoted this War; and yet not said, who,
nor when, nor how; but may not that more truly be said, (which I would not add,
were it not visible and apparently known to all) that some one at the least of
the Bishops, have stood with, and by the two Houses in this War? For, has
there been wanting one, who has sought, and received dangerous wounds, (as it
is reported and proclaimed) and that in the War for the two Houses against the
King? For which, he has not only by suit, obtained a pardon for his former
disservice, (so called) but bath received thanks, and two thousand pounds per
annum, bestowed upon him for his later service? Do Protestants, think you,
maintain the Popish Tenent, remissa culpa remanet po^^a, to punish after
pardon? Yea, which is more, to punish after pardon, and reward? Or may not Gods
example work somewhat for preserving the Bishops Lands, which did proclaim it
self for the saving of all Sodom, that if but ten of so many thousands, could
be found for God, he would spare all those thousands grievous sinners, for the
sakes of those ten? Or did God, when ten could not be found, involve Lot, and
his family in the general judgment of Sodom? And shall the Lands of that
Bishop, who has deserved so well of the two Houses, be sold with the rest? for
the Ordinance concludes the sale of all.

If it be yet said, (as what has not been said, no matter how untruly) that
the late Archbishop of Canterbury promoted this last War; yet was it any part
of the charge at his trial? And says not our Law, for Treason of dead persons
not attainted or judged in their lives time, 34 Ed. 3.12.
their Lands shall not be impeached nor challenged? And if not their own, then,
as I conceive, much less shall the Lands be impeached which they held of the
Church.

But, I proceed, have all the Bishops promoted this War? (which none yet with
any shadow of truth has said, for ought I ever could hear) and if not, why, I
pray, shall Robert be punished for Richard? And if any of the Bishops have
promoted the War, have they been called, or suffered to answer the charge? And
was it ever found agreeable to Justice, Law, or Reason, to give sentence,
before the party was heard, if he may be found? Sr Edward Coke says, it is
against the Charter; nay, 2 Instit. c. 29.
was the late Impeachment of the eleven Members, though by a special charge
written, and professed to be proved, I say, was this Impeachment Voted and
Declared illegal, and unjustifiable, as to the suspending their Votes, but for
a time? And shall such a general charge as this against the Bishops, be held
legal and sufficient, for the selling away the Lands of all Bishops in England,
born and unborn, without summoning, hearing, or giving the charge against any?
And, if upon trial, some Bishop shall be found guilty according to Law, (which
I presume never shall be) yet shall the punishment of one, or more personal
Delinquents, extend to others, who are innocent? Yea, to Successors, which are
not heirs at Law? Or shall the Lord of the Land, which is God, lose his
interest for the offense of his Assign or Tenent, which is the Bishop? Or is
this sin in the Bishops greater, then that vast damning original sin in Adam,
to condemn all, not only that come of his seed and race, but all his
Successors, who are as little kin to his body or his soul, as to his offense?
Nay yet, shall the insensate thing, that is, the Land, be profaned, and let
the pretended Delinquent, the Bishop, go unquestioned? which is, as if a Judge
should take away the Sword, and break it in pieces, because it killed the man,
but let the murderer escape the while.

The Charter says, (...)
( Nullus liber homo, etc.) that no Free man shall be amerced or punished, but
according to the quality of the offense: and yet so, as with a salvo sibi
contenemento: where the Interpreter says, this Free man extends to Bishops,
and expounding contenementum to be his countenance, says, That, as the Bishop
is a Scholar, his books are his countenance; and as he is a man of holy
Function, an honorable maintenance should be his countenance: which if it
might have held, then some Bishop in this Land should not have had, (not only
all his maintenance, Spiritual and Temporal, for these four years, utterly
taken away, not allowing him in all this time one shilling, but not) his
bedding, all household stuff, and goods, yea, and all his books, not leaving
him one; nor all, or any of these taken by the plunder of rude Soldiers, but
by the Warrant of an honorable Committee, although without any Ordinance.

The Charter goes on, and says, That no Ecclesiastical person shall be
amerced, or punished, according to his Ecclesiastical, but to his Lay fee:
whereas, here the clean contrary is published, and practiced by this Ordinance;
^^od. 32.
Aaron the high Priest made a golden Calf, Ver. 28.
and built an Altar before it, and proclaimed a Feast for it, and said, To
morrow is a Feast to the Lord: for which abominable act, 1 Samuel 21.
Moses caused three thousand men to be slain. Abiwelech the Priest, victualed
and armed David against his King, for which act, Saul (the furious King) caused
fourscore and five of the Priests to be slain. 2 Reg. 1.7. 1 Reg. 2.26.
And K. Solomon said to Abiathar the Priest, who had helped Adonijah to be King
against Solomon, Thou art worthy of death. I could instance in many more acts
of these Priests, most displeasing to their Kings, and some really sinful
before God; yet do we find that any went about for all these acts, to deprive
the Priests of their Lands, and maintenance for ever? Might I not put you in
mind, that we have had in the time of Popery, a Becket, a Langton a Wolsey, and
other Bishops, who instigated by the blind false Principles of their Religion,
have fallen into gross treasonable acts? yet did the King, and the two Houses
for their offenses, sell away the Lands of the Church which they held? I read,
in the Reign of King Henry the Third, that the Jews in England were forced to
pay the third part of their estates, Mat. Par. p. 489
that they might enjoy their peace; but must Bishops be worse used by
Christians, and their Contrymen (contrary to all Law) then Jews?

And may not the Bishops truly say, what the eleven Members give for their
Answer in their printed Papers: viz. We must be removed, and that we may so be,
we must be represented to be what we are not; and what ever is amiss in the
Kingdom, we are made the cause, and must bear the blame of it. Christianos
adignem: what public calamity soever befell in the Primitive Persecutions, the
poor Christians were said to be the cause, and must be made the expiatory
Sacrifice for all. But let men say what they will, Elijah the Prophet of God,
was never the more the troubler of the Kingdom, because he was called so; and
therefore, we will say as Job, Our witness is in heaven, and our record is on
high. Thus far they, and so the Bishops.

But, for the close of all, supposing the Bishops were, what is here or
elsewhere unjustly charged upon them; yet give me leave to put you a Scripture
case, and Gods judgment thereupon, and I shall leave it to your judgment and
conscience to make the Application: the case is set down, Numb. 16. where three
ringleaders, and a hundred and fifty chosen men, Princes, and seducers of the
people, (malignants these indeed, for they) rebelled against the Prince, whom
God had set over them, and raised a destructive Schisin against the high
Priest, and his Successors, utterly to extirpate them; in this case, God will
not suddenly condemn, without examination of cause and persons, though he knew
both, (as, neither would Christ cast out Judas, a thief, and a traitor,
because, as Saint Augustine notes, he was not so convict, according to the Law)
but God, to let the malignants have a fair, open, and just trial, bids them
bring their censers before him, and there to have the cause fully examined:
whereupon, God found those maliguants to be the offenders; and, although the
censers were used by them in the maintenance of this Rebellion and Schism, yet,
what does God? Does he let the persons go free, and sentence only the censers
to be sold, and turned to pots and the like, for the service of the
Commonwealth and State? No, quite contrary, he punished the malignants with an
unheard of fearful kind of death; but the censers of these sinners, Make them
plates for the Altar, Ver. 38.
for, says God, they were offered before the Lord, therefore, they are
hallowed. What then shall we say to this? Is Gods judgment unrighteous, to
punish the malignants, and spare the thing offered before the Lord? Or, is
yours just, to sentence and sell the thing offered before the Lord, and let the
malignants (so called) go free? Or, why judge ye not according to Gods
judgment, O ye sons of men?

A wise, and great Peer of this Realm, spoke truly well in this Parliament,
when he said, That a Law, or Ordinance, when it is made, (according to the just
power of it) binds to obedience: But, says he, it follows not therefore, that
this Law or Ordinance is good, and just, for that the best, and wisest
Lawmakers of men, have been found to blame in this kind; for so I read, Solon
made one Law to abolish all debts, whereby the honest creditors lost, and the
false debtors gained. Another Law he made to punish all Neutrals in time of
Sedition; which Plutarch condemned, For, says he, this is to infect the sound
party, which might otherwise strengthen the weak. Lycurgus, without respect to
Religion, Justice, or Temperance, (a Policy too much used now adays) made Laws
only to breed and encourage Soldiers, whereby the Lacedaemonians continued so
long, as their Wars held, and no longer. I could give instance in Laws and
Ordinances nearer home; but I forbear, and close with that counsel of St Paul,
Prove all things, hold fast that which is good: 1 These. 5.21.
for all things are not good, and just, only on this ground, because they are
Laws and Ordinances.

Some more there are to be found in the common Pamphlets, which I know not what
to call; Objections, if you will; for they do not deserve the name of
Arguments: yet this, in regard that it seems so plausible, and is so much cried
up by the back friends of the Church, and her Revenues, I could not but take
notice of, and labor to satisfy the judicious and reasonable. This, what you
will, runs thus,

The Lands were given to the Bishops for their Preaching; and therefore they,
not performing this service, ought to lose the benefit, i. e. the Lands.

Although, I cannot but approve of that, as prudent, (and the rather, because
observed and practiced by all best States, until within these last hundred
years, it has been altered by Factious and Rebellious people) that, among all
Religions, true and false, they have made, and held a distinction of Priests;
giving to some more honor and maintenance, then to the rest: Yet, I must, and
do, with all reverence, submit to that of Saint Bernard, saying, That a man
dignified without merit, is like smoke in an high candle-stick; and that a man
in high place, not able to govern, is like an ape on the top of an house: and
therefore, as the Labourer is worthy of his hire, so an honorable maintenance
does require a worthy Labourer. Now, in this case, what is the labor of the
Bishop, becomes the Question.

To which, the Arguers against Bishops, (or rather against their Lands) seem to
say; Preaching is that their work or labor.

But, then let me propound three other Questions, 1. What is meant by
Preaching. 2. Whether Preaching alone be the Bishops work. 3. Whether, not
withal, (or not more rather) the well ordering, or governing the Church be his
work.

And, that I may clear the last Question first; consider, I pray, when Saint
Paul in two places: viz. 1 Cor, 12.28. and Ephesians. 4.11. had set down both the
extraordinary, temporary, and perpetual ordinary Officers of the Church; that,
of the later sort, he mentions only two, Governments and Teachers, 1 Cor. 12.
and Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.

Now, if the Governor and Pastor, in these places be distinct from Teacher,
then, I hope, it is evident, that Preaching alone is not the office, or work of
a Bishop, as some would have it.

And, that they are distinct, it may be conceived, for, that the other Officers
mentioned in those places; as, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, are
distinguished one from the other; and therefore, probably, these two, Governors
or Pastors, and Teachers, ought, or may likewise mean two several works.

And, when Saint Paul in each place, says, God gave, and God set these in the
Church; in that he gives them several names and titles? why may we not
conceive, that under the distinct names, the works likewise are to be
distinguished?

And, that Pastor, in Saint Paul to the Ephesians, may be the same with
Governor, I appeal to Saint Paul himself, who Acts 20.28. sending for, (not
(...), as he terms them to the Corinthians, and to the Ephesians, but) (...)
the Elders of the Church, in his charge to them, uses not the metaphor of a
Schoolmaster, or Teacher, but of a Shepherd; and therefore begins, Take care
to the flock. And what is he to do in that care? why, (...), to feed the
Church: And may not he be rightly said, to take care of, and to feed a flock,
that so oversees them, as that they may be well ordered and fed? And for this,
the Apostle calls not these Elders, (...), Teachers, but, (...), Overseers, or
truly Bishops.

And does not the same Apostle, Tit. 1.7. call this Bishop or Governor in the
Church, by an other like name, when he terms him (...), a Steward? And in what
consists the duty or office of a Steward, but in this, that, as a Bishop, a
Shepherd, a Governor, he take care, and so order it, that the family may have
their several allowances; and be wisely, and rightly governed, by exhortation,
admonition, and if need be, by casting out?

And from these Texts, or (if you please more plainly, without any borrowed
speech) from that Romans 12. verse 6. Saint Paul having premised, that in the
Ministry there are diverse gifts; he subjoyns, Let him that teaches, wait on
teaching, Ver. 7. and he that rules, let him do it with diligence. And from
that, 1 Timothy 3. in the 1. Verse, having spoke of the office of a Bishop, he
adds Ver. 4. He must be one that rules well: For, says he, Ver. 5. If he know
not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God?
Which phrase, [taking care of the Church] both in this place, and that Acts
20.28. must signify a ruling, or governing of the Church, and flock of God. I
say, from these several Texts, it will plainly appear, that the office of the
Bishop consists not alone in preaching to, but in governing the Church.

And, here I may conceive, that the office, or work of a Bishop in this,
differs not much from that which is practiced among Soldiers, Sea men, and
others, who, after much time and pains spent in the inferior places, at last,
partly as a reward of their former service, but especially, for their great
experience, and authority gained, are advanced to higher places; wherein they
rather stand, sit, or ride, to direct, guide, and govern others under them,
then to work and labor, as they did before. And seeing the Levites, Soldiers,
and almost all professions have a time, when, having spent their best strength,
and arriving to the age of fifty or fixty years, they are emeriti, and freed
from their former kind of labor; yet must the Bishop only of all others, be
deprived of this so just a grace and benefit?

But sithence that no compassion can be showed to the Bishops, from men, let us
see whether from the holy Text some indulgence may not be found; and to this
purpose, let us examine what it is, in Scripture-understanding, to Preach. Now,
the word in the holy Gospel, which we translate to preach, is (...); which is
spoken of Christ himself, Jesus began (...) to preach. Mat. 4.7. Mat. 10.7.
And when Jesus had sent abroad his twelve Apostles, his Commission is in the
same word, (...), preach; and the same word Saint Paul uses most frequently,
and seldom any other, to this sense. And, that Teaching, and Preaching are,
and signify the same thing, see Mat. 11.1. where it is said, that Jesus
departed, (...), to teach and to preach; and from the several Texts, where this
word is found, it will easily appear, that to preach the Word, in the Gospels
and Epistles sense, is to declare, and make known the Doctrine, the means, and
the way to faith and salvation, whether by word, or by writing; whether
privately, or publicly; though the Preacher never go up into a pulpit, or
desk, there to expound some place of Scripture: for, if Preaching consisted in
this, and not in that, how can we prove that Christ or the Apostles did so
frequently preach?

And, now that the Bishops in England, since the Reformation, have, according
to the right sense of the word, been Preachers, I appeal to a learned Judge,
and unpartial witness, Doctor Moulin, (the famous Presbyterian in the Church
of France) who, in his third Epistle to that pious, and most learned Bishop
Andrews, thus writes, I very well know that the Reformation of the Church in
England, and the ejection of Popery, next to God and your Prinees, is chiefly
to be ascribed to the learning and industry of your Bishops. And, have we not
beside our own knowledge, (if envy or malice will suffer us to speak what we
know) the testimony of forain, godly, and learned men, who have openly avouched
the Sermons, and writings of our late and present Bishops in England, to be
answerable, in worth, if not preferred before the most of any in other
Countries?

And, can it be denied, that the most of the present living Bishops in England,
did often preach, (even in that sense as you take Preaching) until they were,
as of late, either directly hindered, or else not suffered to preach, unless
they would take the new Covenant? which if they should do, they might truly use
the words of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27.
While we preach unto others, we our selves are become cast-awayes, i. e. doubt
of our salvation, or to be rejected.

But, if the Bishops case be such, that they must be cast away, because they
do not write or preach, (as is objected) then, I pray, let me ask how many
Sermons have some of the Assembly of Divines (in England) preached, within
these four or five years last past? And I dare affirm, they are not so many, as
most of the Bishops usually did preach before the time of their suspension, or
persecution. And, though the number of the Assembly of those Divines, three
times exceeds this of the Bishops living; yet have there so many of them wrote,
and confuted him, whom in their Covenant they style the common Enemy, as there
be of the Bishops yet living who have?

Lastly, have these Divines (in the Assembly) preached or wrote much, except it
were to destroy, what was lawfully established, and thereby to raise themselves
into power, maintenance, and authority?

But, to end this Answer, If the Bishops Lands must be sold, because they
preach not, then, either this is but a pretense and excuse of iniquity, or else
none but Preachers must have and enjoy them: and, if none but Preachers must
have them, and yet they must be sold for a great price, then, I fay, either the
Presbyterian Preacher, is grown very rich in these later times, or else none
but the Lay-Independent can purchase and have them. For the Independent in
Orders, professes himself, like some Orders of Friars, to live on alms, or the
charity of others, and therefore he is not able to make such a purchase;
whereby it must come to pass, that the Lay-Independent must prove the Chapman,
being that he alone has money enough, and has withal obtained the Grace to
be a Preacher. And, if these can gain so much by their preaching, I cannot but
commend their wit, while in the mean time I smile at the Presbyterians folly,
who has so many years been beating the bush, till another, as it were out of a
bush, does catch the bird.

For a close, I pray, keep this in mind, that if the Bishops must lose their
Lands, because they are not constant Preachers, then, by the same reason, none
but constant Preachers ought to hold those Lands.

CHAP. X. The Curses, and punishments, which are set down, and executed in Holy
Writ against Sacrilegious Alienations, are held forth and opened.
IF your patience would suffer it, I could, by way of an additional, fill much
paper with the direful curses, and sad consequents, if not effects thereof,
upon the several Invaders of Church Lands within this Kingdom; who might have
used the like Escutchion and Motto, which Julian, that Apostate Persecutor, and
Enemy of our Lord Christ had; which was an Eagle struck with an arrow,
feathered from the Eagles own wings, Hos. 13.9.
and had this word, Propriis configimur alis: which in the Prophets words is,
Perditio tua ex^te, Thou have destroyed thy self. But other better pens have
saved me this labor.

Therefore, that Curses may be used and in this case, consult, I pray, Deuteronomy.
17.17.
with that of Moses, Cursed be he that removes his neighbors Landmark, and
all the people shall say Amen. Now, if a curse may be pronounced against him
that removes the mark of any neighbors Lands, then much more against him who
removes the mark of God, or his Ministers. 2. If, for removing the mark,
whereby the bounds might be known, then, why not for taking and selling them
away, that they be no more seen to be the Ministers?

And, though we are apt to translate the deaths, and punishments of
Sacrilegious persons, to other causes then to Sacrilege; yet it is a general
certain Rule, Innatum est sceleri supplicium sceleris: Hos. 5.12.
and therefore it is said, God will be as a moth and rottenness, i. e. the
punishment that God inflicts on sin, shall be as a moth to cloth, and
rottenness to the tree, or body of man. Now, whence comes the moth that
destroys the cloth, but out of dust and filth that lay hid in the cloth? And
whence rottenness to destroy the plant, or body of man or beast, but out of
the moisture and corrupt humors in the same body, which is by it destroyed? The
Sacrilegious man in himself, or posterity perishes. Say not then, it was his
want of providence, it was his suretiship, or the like; no, Sacrilege was the
moth, or rottenness: for, as Solomon, Pro. 20.25.
It is a snare. Yea, but say some, the snare does not overtake, or not
presently; so neither does the moth, nor rottenness: but know, that as the
moth, so the snare, it makes no noise, that men may hear and take warning; and
so divine Justice winks when it sleeps not, and kills while we sleep, or little
think of it. But be sure that the snare, which God sets as a trap to catch the
Sacrilegious person, he so sets it, that first or last it shall take hold; and,
as the man devoured holy things, so shall this snare destroy the devourer. And,
that we may fear to fall into this snare, hear, I pray, what God has
threatened, and executed upon transgressors in this kind; and I think before
hand, I may say, and say truly, that more, and more heavy curses and plagues,
have not been recorded in holy Writ, to have been inflicted upon any sin, then
on this of Sacrilege.

I shall orderly proceed, as I find them laid down in Gods Word, yet omitting
many instances, and examples, though pertinent to my purpose, only for brevity
sake. And first, when Moses, in Gods stead, blessed the Tribe of Levi, Deuteronomy. 33.
(Gods Ministers in his holy Service) he did it in these words, Lord bless his
substance, and accept of the work of his hands: and then immediately follows
the curse upon all that shall attempt to spoil or hurt them; Ver. 11.
And Lord smite through the laynes of all that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again. This was first denounced by Moses
their first Prince, and see how soon this begins to work; for in the next
Princes time, when Achan, in war, had gained, and privately kept that wedge of
gold, which was due to have been dedicated to God, all Israel smarts for it:
Josh 7.
for this they were discomfited by their enemies, until the Sacrilegious person
Achan was put to death, and an atonement made by all to pacify Gods wrath.

The Jews are carried away captives by the Chaldeans, 2 Chronicles. 26.14, 17.
as a punishment of their profanation of the Temple, and contempt of the
Priests; each of them being branches of Sacrilege.

Solomon, the wisest earthly King, being counseled (as the most learned
conjecture) to make use of what his Father had laid up toward the building of
the Temple, answers, No; for says he, Pro. 20.25.
It is a snare to devour holy things: in which metaphor, the possessions of the
Church seem to be the corn or bait, and the Devil to be the hunter who holds
the snare, wherewith he entangleth the Church-robber to destroy him.

Neither did Solomon, the Type of Christ, alone pronounce this sentence; but
Darius, an Heathen King, when, in favor of the Jews, he dedicated the
building of a Temple to their God, sets this curse upon the invaders, spoilers,
or robbers thereof: Ezra 6.12.
The Lord destroy all Kings, and people, (not any one or other, but both) who
shall put their hands to alter, and to destroy this House of God, which is at
Jerusalem: and whether God said Amen to this Prayer of Darius, judge ye, by what
happened to Antiochus, Nicanor, Crassus, all whom, as they were robbers, and
prophaners of that Temple, so the goods thereof became snares for their
destruction.

And this accords with that of the Prophet Jeremy, Who devour things holy to
the Lord, Jer. 2.3.
shall offend, and evil shall come upon them, says the Lord: and see how soon
this Prophecy was fulfilled, for Jehoiakim the King takes the Cedar out of Gods
House, Jer. 12.
(he takes not all the Lands, and perpetual maintenance of all the Priests,
but) he takes only the Cedar out of Gods House, wherewith he sieled his own
windows, (he sold it not) but sieled his own windows with it; hear the
judgment, Jehoiakim shall be buried like an Ass, Ver. 19.
and shall be cast out beyond the gates of Jerusalem. Dan. c 1. and 4.
After this, Nebuchadnezzar robs Gods House of the gold and silver vessels
therein; what follows? He lives with, Dan. 5.
and lives a Beast seven years; and Belshazzor his son, for profaning those
vessels which Nebuchadnezzar his Father had taken away, came to a sudden end;
the Empire is taken from him, his race, and posterity for ever.

Neither does this Curse and Snare reach and destroy individuals alone, but it
lights on the whole Land, where the sin is committed; we found it before in the
punishment of Achans Sacrilege, Mal. 3.
and now we may see as much expressed by the Prophet Malachi, who tells the
people, that, for robbing God of what was offered to him, Ver. 9.
Ye are cursed with a curse, i. e. ye are certainly and heavily cursed. And ye
are cursed, even ye, the whole land; and that curse no less, then the most
dreadful to nature, with the curse of a general, and great famine. And see how
God proportions his punishment, even to the nature of the sin; for in Joshua's
time, the people for Sacrilege committed in war, is punished in war by the
sword of the enemy: and here in Malachi, they have robbed the Priests of their
maintenance and bread, and themselves are therefore punished, and ready to
starve for want of bread; where me thinks the Prophet tacitly gives a reason
for this severity, when he says, Will a man rob his God? God his Maker, his
Preserver, his Redeemer? Will he be so ungracious? so unnatural? Yea, and will
he rob that God, who we believe is coming to be our Judge? Will he be so
audacious? For if this Judge will cast the unmerciful into hell, because they
relieved not the poor; what torments shall be prepared for them, who so
ungraciously, so unnaturally, so audaciously have robbed God their Father,
their Savior, and their Judge?

Will you have a more full view together of Gods anger and wrath against this
sin? You shall find it in two several Psalms, in one, Psalm. 74. and 83. Psalm.
74. v. 4, 5, 12, 19, 20, 25.
Psalm. 74. you shall hear God six times call Sacrilegious men his open, and
professed enemies, and adversaries; and that he called them so for this sin,
read Ver. 4. of that Psalm, where the cause of those terms is couched, Ver. 5.
For thine enemies roar in the midst of the Congregation, and have set up their
Banners for signs: and what the fuller sense of those words are, see anon
after, They have defiled, or profaned, Ver. 8.
the dwelling place of thy Name, i. e. the Temple or Church: and yet they stick
not here, who begin here, and therefore go on, and see further, They have said
in their hearts, Let us destroy them, Ver. 9.
i.e. the Prophets. And, will you know how they will destroy the Prophets? then
cast your eye on the other forecited Psalm 83.3. where it is said, They have
taken crafty counsel; Psalm. 83.3. Ver. 9. and Ver. 5
and they have said, Come, let us cut them off from being any more: (here is
root and branch) yea, they have consulted together with one consent, yet more,
they are confederate, or covenanted, with whom? Assure also (out of the North)
is joined with them. Ver. 8.
But, by what means shall these Prophets of God be rooted out, after all
consulting and covenanting? Ver. 1^.
That is also expressed, Let us take the Houses and Inheritances of God in
possession.

You have heard the first part of this Psalm, which our last Translators call
Gods complaint against the conspirators against his Church; and the second part
of the Psalm, they term a Prayer, Imprecation, or Curse, if you will, against
those conspirators and enemies; where the Prophet speaks thus, Arise, Psalm.
74.22.
O Godplead, thou thine own cause: as though God had forgot his Church, and had
been too long silent in his own cause; and, in pleading, Remember, how the
follish man blasphemeth thee. The Sacrilegious man, in Gods and the Prophets
sense, is but a Fool, first or last he will prove so; and such a Fool, who, by
robbing God, whom the world may hereby think (as Plato called God on this
occasion) a tame idle God, to see himself robbed, and not right himself; by
this, says the Psalmist here, causes God to be blasphemed, and ill spoken of,
and is therein himself the Fool. Ver. 23.
The Prophet goes on, O Lord, forget not the voice, i.e. the counsels and
votes, of thine enemies: for the tumult of those that rise up against thee
increases, or ascends up to heaven, more and more. Again, remember: which
remembrance in this place imports, 1. to punish, 2. with an eternal punishment,
never forget it, O Lord; 3. In this 74. Psalm, being of little more then three
times seven Verses, yet in these, the Prophet calls to God seven times, to
remember, and not forget to punish those enemies; the like to which I do not
remember, in any the like scantling of Scripture. And, 4. he hastens, Ver. 3.
Ver. 10, and 11. V. 20. V. 12.13 Psalm. 73.12.
or spurs up God; Life up thy feet, and then, usque que? and again, quousque?
5. He adjures God to it, by putting him in mind of his Covenant, and what-he
had done. 6. Will you be pleased to take one Note more, as Psalm. 74. the
Prophet calls to God seven times, not to forget to punish these sinners; so
Psalm. 79. Ver. 12. he prays God to render sevenfold into the bosoms of such
sinners: and then Psalm. 83. see accordingly a sevenfold punishment inflicted
upon them. 1. O Lord, do unto these thine enemies, as thou did unto the
Midianites, V. 9. and 10. V. 11. V. 13. and 15.
which pevished, and became as the dung of the earth. 2. Make their Nobles like
Oreb and Zeb, (both slain) who said, Let us take to our selves the Houses and
Inheritances of God in possession. 3. Make them, O Lord, as a wheel, and as the
stubble before the wind. 4. As the fire burns a wood, persecute them with thy
tempests, and make them afraid with thy storm. 6. Fill their faces with shame.
Ver. 16. and 17. Ver. 18.
7. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever, yea, let them be put to shame
and perish; that men may know, that thou art the most High over all the earth,
(and over all counsels, powers, and potentates therein.) Tell me now, whether
in any like compass of words, you find the like jealousy, wrath, and
indignation from God, against any sin, as against this here of Sacrilege? I
will not except Idolatry.

And these are the Originals, from which our Christian Benefactors have copied
out their several Curses upon the Invaders of Church Lands; holding it just to
pray for a separation of them from God, who separate, and take that from God,
which is his, and is given to the Church.

I fear, some with a strong breath, will seem to drive all this away, by
saying, These threats and curses indeed we find in the Old Testament, where God
had given the Jews laws, and commands against this sin; but, in the New
Testament, as you find not any Tithes or Lands appointed; so, neither have you
any laws or punishments herein, whereby to keep them untouched.

But, to stop such mouths, hear our Savior, Luke 16.29.
Ye have Moses and the Prophets, hear ye them: where Christ sends us, though
not from, yet in the Gospel to the Old Testament: and, as a Comment thereon,
Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.11.
Now all these things happened unto them, (as before you read) for ensample,
and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are
come. So, that not a tittle of what has been alleged against Sacrilege in the
Old Testament, but may, and ought rightly to serve for the instruction and
terror of all Sacrilegious persons, who live now, and profess the Gospel. And
justly, for, as I proved before, from Deuteronomy, Leviticus, Proverbs, and the
Prophet Malachi, this is a sin against Gods Moral Law, both natural, and
positive. And, yet we want not dehortation enough, and severe punishment enough
of this sin, in the New Testament: I shall cite but two Texts; and wonder not
that I cite no more, but, rather wonder, that the Holy Ghost there had left so
much; considering, 1. that he had been so plentiful, and large against it in
the Old Testament. 2. Considering that, whilst the Apostles lived, they were so
far from having Lands, or Tithes, or settled maintenance, that they had not
houses, nor holes to put their heads in, except they were in prisons; and
therefore, then to write against taking away the Lands, and goods of the
Church, when they had neither, would have been accounted but a labor in vain:
and notwithstanding all this, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, the one by his sound
Doctrine, the other by his miraculous power, have taught and admonished every
good Christian enough, whereby to avoid, and beware of Sacrilege.

I will begin with the Doctrinal part, Romans 2.22. which is so plainly set down,
(as before I made appear) that all the best Divines do, and cannot but
confess from that Text, that alienating the Church Lands, is a sin of an high
nature, and therefore utterly to be abhorred. Acts 5.
And, what judgment has passed upon this sin, is as plain in the story and
case of Ananias, who, for detaining but part of that which he had promised to
God for the Church, was suddenly struck dead: which visible death, says Mr
Calvin on the place, was Symbolum, the fore-reckoning, or fore-shot of the
death eternal; which, says he, was just, 1. to punish Ananias for so heinous a
sin: 2. to admonish allo after him. For, had not Saint Peter thus severely
punished this sin, many, says Mr Calvin, under color of Religion, would have
been forward to have robbed the Church.

And, now for close of all, will you be pleased to compare the Sacrilege now
intended, and begun, in selling the Bishops Lands, with that of Ananias? Where,
1. he sold only the lands, which were his own; but here that is taken away,
and sold, that is Gods. 2. He had but promised those lands to God, but here in
these lands, God, and his Assigns and Servants, have for his use, been in real
and actual possession many hundreds of years. 3. He there kept back but a part;
but here, all must be taken away, both root and branch. 4. There, probably, he
might think to keep back a part, whereby to maintain himself, his wife, and
family alive, in the great persecution: but, here the rich and wealthy take
them away, thereby to join land unto land, and Gods inheritance to their own
possessions. 5. It may well be conceived, that, as this Ananias was but one
private man of no great note, so that he might be of no extraordinary
knowledge, and understanding; but more then probable, that he being a New
Convert from Judaism, or Paganism, was but a novioe in the Law of God, or at
least of Christ: whereas they, who take and sell these Lands, are many,
selected, and chosen, as the wisest, ablest, most just in this great Kingdom;
and then, how far this Sacrilege does exceed that of Ananias, in respect of the
persons, the matter, the manner, and almost all circumstances, judge you.

And, yet I may add one circumstance more, which does heighten this fin, as
much, if not more then any other; for, in the late Covenant, you have sworn to
extirpate Episcopacy, which is the main and leading cause in the Ordinance,
wherefore the Lands of Bishops must be sold; and not only have you sworn this
your selves, but, by threats, and forfeits, have urged, even the Bishops
themselves to take the same: so, that they, who are to be spoiled and undone,
are urged, contrary to Law, Justice, and Nature, to swear their own
extirpation. O heavens! O earth! I had almost said, O hell! Did you ever hear
the like?

In the Preface to the Covenant it is said, that this Covenant is made
according to the commendable practice of this Kingdom, and the example of Gods
people; and, I doubt not, but it has been Preached, (as it has been Printed)
that this Covenant is warranted, as agreeable to the Covenants in holy Writ,
and in the best Reformed Churches: how truly this is spoken and printed, I
refer to that which Mr Nigh, Cov. with narrative. p. 12.
one of the Assembly, has printed; where he says, It is such an Oath, the
like has not been in any age, or Oath we read of in sacred, or humane Stories.
And, I say, that when this shall be proved by the Word of God, by the example
of Gods people, and the commendable practice of this Kingdom, that a few of the
people, without their Head, did first covenant themselves; and then by threats,
fears, and punishments, did compel all, both head and tail, to extirpate the
Religion long settled by Law, and confirmed by the blood of many holy Martyrs;
against which, nothing is brought in proof, that it is repugnant to Gods Word:)
and thereupon, to take and sell away, what was lawfully given to God for the
maintenance of his Servants in the Church; I say, when this shall be proved, I
will take the Covenant; both which will be ad Graecas Calendas, that is, as we
say, the morrow after Doomesday, or never.

I have proved, that alienating of these Lands, in Gods Law is Theft; and I
have showed Gods threats and judgments against this sin; we have a proverb,
what need a rich man be a Thief? (for few but such cast in their lots for
Christ's garment) and thereby to hazard the wrath of God, and their own fatal
execution? The Philistims, a people out of the Covenant of God, 1 Chronicles. 6.
yet for detaining, but a while, the Ark, wherein the Law was kept, were
shamefully punished in their hinder parts, and some with death; which caused
the living to restore what was unjustly taken, with interest of much gold. And
when Moab and Ammon had consulted, covenanted, and voted, utterly to take away
Gods inheritance; it so came to pass, Psalm. 83.
that after all the Church flourished and kept her own, when Moab and Ammon
were utterly extinct, and laid in the dust: which like consideration, has
moved some, as wise, as pious, never to mingle their other lands wlth the
Churches inheritance; and others, as pious, as wise, never in Parliament, to
give assent to any Bills, for the Alienation of Church Lands.

It is conceived by many holy, and learned Divines, that the 74. Psalm was
penned, upon the robbing of the Temple at Jerusalem, by Antiochus Epiphanes;
which if so, then read and consider the sorrow, confession, and death of that
Antiochus: Now, says he, 1 Macc. 6.12.
I remember the evils that I did at Jerusalem, that I took away all the vessels
of gold and silver, that were therein: I perceive therefore, that for this
cause, troubles are come upon me, and behold, I perish through great grief.

It is time you will say to conclude, and I pray, let it be with Prayer, and
such as Mr Calvin used in his Comment on Acts 5. Lord grant, that, as, upon the
sudden fearful punishment of Ananias his Sacrilege, Acts 5.11.
Fear came upon all the Church, and upon as many as heard these things, so the
same, or the like fear, may strike all our hearts, that so, (out of a true
love, and due honor to God, and that we may escape the dreadful curses and
punishments, threatened and inflicted on this sin) we may in time, while it is
called to day, repent us of this, and all other our sins, and so obtain mercy,
and eternal life in Christ Jesus our only Lord, and Savior.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, Psalm. 2.10.
be instructed ye Judges of the earth.

Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Ver. 11.


Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish. Ver. 12.


The end.
Errata.
TItle Page [And what is given to God is holy, Ezekiel. 48.] add in the Margin p.
5. l. 19. Matthew. 10.1, 40, 41, 42. Mark 9.41. John 13.20. p. 6. l. 17. dele and
Lev. 27.32. p. 9. l. 29. d. Ibid. p. 53. in mar. p. 17. l. 7. for here. r.
hear. p. 19. l. 14. Mat. 19.19. p. 32. l. 30. d. Exodus 23.2. r. Number. 16.38. p.
33. l. 33. Pro. for 25.20. r. 20.25. in mar. p. 34. l. 31. for Ball. Catoples.
r. Bell. Staplet. in marg. p. 41. l. 11. for 3. r. 4. in mar. p. 42.12. r. Gal.
4.15. p. 43. l. 29. r. abased. p. 48. l. penul. r. 47. in mar. p. 52. l. 20. r.
25 Hen. 8. c. 20. in mar. p. 55. l. 25. for Covenant r. Government. p. 60. l.
4. r. Christ and S. Peter. p. 61. l. penult. r. Romans 3.8 in marg. p. 64. l. 33.
r. 1 Samuel 22.18. p. 69. l. 33. r. Mat. 4.17. in mar. p. 75. l. 26. for 5. r. 4.
l. 29. for 8. r. 7. l. 32. for 9. r. 8. l. 36. for 9. r. 4. p. 76. l. 4. for.
11. r. 12. p. 80 for 1 Chro. 6 r. 1 Samuel 6. n mar.


