AN HUMBLE MONITORY TO THE MOST GLORIOUS MAJESTY OF THE High and Mighty MONARCH
CHARLES the Second KING OF Great Britain, France and Ireland, DEFENDER OF THE
FAITH, The Great Representative of the Almighty in Majesty and Mercy.
Presented unto Him in His Passage from the Abbey of Westminster, upon the
Glorious and happy Day of His CORONATION,
By His most humble and faithful Subject, THOMAS WARMSTREY, D. D.
DRead SOVEREIGN, in the midst of all Your Glory,
Think what will be the period of Your Story:
And though Your state be Excellent and Brave,
Yet even in this You're marching toward the Grave.
Remember the Afflictions you have had,
And who it is this happy Change has made;
The Heavenly Sun that has displayed this Beam,
The Fountain, and the Channel of Your Stream;
The Author, and the Instruments whereby
You are advanced to this Majesty:
Suppose Your self in Holland or in France,
At Worc'ster Fight, the Rout! and then the Dance
Through night and darksome Woods, the Oak, the Lane,
That did secure you from the poisonous bane
Of your malicious Foes; how ill the Clown
You acted, and how often to be known
You were in danger, and how glad you were
To quit your Kingdoms to discharge your fear.
Remember France again, and yet again;
And (though but once removed) how you were fain
(Oh the French Complement!) thence to remove,
To let us know the Frenchmen and their love.
Remember Brussels, Bruges, and the Hague,
Where you have been secured from the Plague
Of pestilent Sedition, and preserved
Unto that Honor wherewith now you're served.
Remember Spain; and (which I had forgot
Almost) how you were used by the Scot:
Remember to forget it, and may they
Forget to do the like another day.
The stormy rode of your Calamities,
Present as in a Map before Your eyes:
Let this the prospect of your Haven be,
The methods of Your Mercies thence to see:
And then remember how from all Your grief
You have been rescued by a strange relief;
An harmony of Wonders, whoes consent
Did make three Kingdoms all at once relent;
And laid asleep your foes, whose palsy hand
Could wield no Sword, Your Glory to withstand:
Give God the Honor then, and let Him be
Advanced in all Your State and Dignity.
Oh! let each day to us these tidings bring,
That You're the Holiest and the Happiest King
That England or the World did ever see;
Long live, as Good, as Great, Amen, say we:
And when you do ascend unto Your Throne,
Remember, all this Glory will be gone.
Remember that the brightest Earthly Ray
May be obscured by a Cloudy Day,
And must be shrouded in the Night of Death,
Which will condense the Air of Humane Breath,
With a cold Frost to mourners tears and dust;
And all Your Gold is subject to this rust.
It Is but the shade of Heaven, when that Light
Appears, this shall no more be bright:
These Glo-Worms shall be dim, these Stars shall be
Combust in the Rays of the Divinity:
For what think you Sir? Can Your Dukes and Earls,
With all their Rubies, Diamonds and Pearls,
Contest with those great Courtiers above,
That shine with Heavens Brightness, burn with love
Of that Celestial Flame? With Seraphims,
And those that next attend the Cherubims?
Can all Your Viscounts, Barons, or Your Knights,
In splendour equallize those Heavenly Lights
Of Angels and Archangels, and the rest,
That do repose themselves in God's own Breast?
Raise then your thoughts to that immortal Crown;
That when this Sun of Glory shall go down,
You may be Crowned with that, and be as high
In Heaven, as here you are in dignity.
LONDON, Printed by Matthew Inman, and are to be sold by James Magnes, living
in Russel Street, near Covent Garden, 1661:


