The Young Man put to his Dumps: being a Gallant Discourse on May Day last,
between two witty Lovers.
Here in this Song you may behold and see,
A Gallant Girl obtained by Wit and Honesty;
All you that hear this Song, and mark it but aright,
May say true Love's worth Gold, and breeds much more delight.
To a Pleasant new Tune, called, The Lovers delight, or, The Cambridge Horn.


LAte in the Country as I abroad was walking,
all in a meadow green I heard two lovers talking
With kisses sweet the young man her saluted,
then I drew near to hear what they disputed.
Then I drew near to hear what they disputed.
Young Man. Fair Maid, quoth he, this merry May morning,
present one smile to me, and be no longer scorning,
Him who had vowed to be thy own for ever,
O say but to me, our loves shall never sever.
O say, etc.

Maid. Indeed Sir, quoth she, it is a misty mo^ning,
But I would have you know I always hated scorning,
And as for love, as yet I mean to smother*
I know not one as yet, I love better than another.
I know not, etc.

Man. True love, sweet-heart^^d he, if e're you chance to know it,
It cannot smothered be, but at last you will show it:
The first time that I saw by sweet and comely carriage
I ever since desired that we were joined in marriage
I ever, etc.

Maid. Love Sir quoth. she, ^s like a Fishers Angle,
which often has golden ^ai^s ^lly maidens to entangle,
And cunningly call out by young-mens false inventions
then marriage they will pre^ent when it is not their intentions*
Then marriage etc.

Man. O'tis so my dear, true Love is like a Fountain,
which casts out water clear, out of a rocky mountain
Whose stream for to stop, you will say it is a wonder,
likewise it is ^s strange to clear the rocks in sunder
Likewise, etc.
Such is my love to thee and shall be ever,
No unconstant thoughts, or fickle mind shall sever
My he^rt from thee which always shall be bringing
Fountains clear and fresh which from true Love is springing.
Fountains clear, etc.

Maid. Your comparison, says she, I must confess is witty,
To stop the stream of true love it were a pity,
But your heart you compare indeed to rocky mountains
For stony often they are, and cast out several fountains.
For stony, etc.
As from some fountain several streems are running
so many feigned loves you often have by your cunning,
It Is hard in^eed to pierce your flinty hearts asunder
And stop our ^ickle streams it is a wonder.
And stop, etc.

Man. Fie, fie, sweetheart, your wit does over-match me,
No words can impart, but presently you catch me:
You maidens now each day, do grow so coy and witty,
let young men beg and pray you will take of them no pity
Let young men, etc.

Maid. Fie away for shame, you young men can dissemble,
Your wits are ripe, your tongues are quick and nimble
Indeed you will beg and crouch sometime to get your pleasure,
Then leave us in the lurch, and we may repent at leisure.
Then leave, etc.

Man. I must confess dear love, there is many are so minded
but if thou would prove my constancy thou wilt find it
Do thou but once command, through danger I will enter,
And for to gain thy love through an Army would I venture.
And for, etc.
Sweetheart i would have you know I never could dissemble,
and my complements are slow, my tongue was never nimble.
it is none but faithful love that makes me come unto thee,
It is not for thy wealth, but for thy virtue that I love thee.
It is not, etc.
With that a ^ush of May this lovely Maid esyed,
Near to a bank of Time, whereto she quickly ^ied:
Down she plucks the May which was both green and tender.
And up she plucked the Time, with her pretty arm so slender.
And up, etc.
she stuck the bush of May in the time, and did present it,
Unto this young man, which was soon discontented
Here Sir, quoth she, if that you will be eased,
Read but this riddle, sir, perhaps you may be pleased:
Read but, etc.

Young man. He took it from her hand and received it as a token,
Then in a dump did stand, and never a word was spoken
Blushing then at last, he modestly replied,
Your Riddle I can read love and shall not be denied:
Your riddle, etc.
This May ^^uck in Time, which is to me presenting,
Show that I may in time gain your love with sweet contenting
which if I may, i will stay your time and lesure
No time i will think too long, so at last I gain the treasure.
No time, etc.
He took her by the hand, and lovingly they walked,
being tied in cupids bands, most amorously they talked
they on each other smiled, with interchanging kisses
O it is pity time beguiled such lovers of their blisses
O it is pity, etc.
Perhaps sweet Sir, you by your Riddle reading,
May think you gained me by little or no persuading
Which if you did it is yet at my pleasure,
I am not bound to you yet, but you must stay my leisure
I am not, etc.
Then let this heart, which in this breast lies panting
No happiness e're see, but let joys be ever wanting,
If e're I think an evil thought of thee,
Let mirth be banished quite, and sorrow wait upon me.
Then let mirth, etc.
If it be so, quoth she, thou bearst such true affection,
Hereafter i will agree to be ruled by thy direction,
No friend shall sever or break our loves in sunder,
For loyal loving hearts will be the worlds wonder.
For loyal, etc.
the time that late was mine to thee shall be presented
All that I have is thine then rest thy self contented,
Thy gallant wit, thy modesty and carriage,
Has won my heart, we will be joined in marriage.
Has won, etc.

Young Man. He took her at her word, and modestly replied,
Short time I will afford, long time shall be denied,
This being the first of May our hearts being joined and wedded,
Before the 5 day in wedlock we will be bedded,
Before, etc.
five hundred pounds it is said with this maiden he obtained,
on marriage day was paid which by his wit he gained
Although no means he had she never a whit repented
He was a gallant Lad, and she was well contented.
He was, etc.
Now all you pretty maids that live in town or City,
the author you persuades to learn from this his ditty
If a youngman you love, look not then for his treasure
For if he honest prove, in him is wealth and pleasure.
For if, etc.
you young men i will persuade likewise to hear my motion
If you affect a maid regard not then her portion,
Hang ten pounds, give me the lass that loves me,
If a constant wife thou'st found, no joys on earth above thee
If a, etc.
Young Men and maids that lately went a maying*
if you mark the nightingale, one tune he is always playing
Iug, jug, jug, sweet is all the note she sings,
As when faithful lovers meet no double tongues they brings
As when, etc.
All you pretty Maids that are civil in your carriage,
This song is sent to you to be wary in your marriage,
Try before you trust, be careful in consenting,
When you are bound obey you must, for there is no rerepenting.
When you, etc.

FINIS.
London, Printed for VV* Thackeray, T. Passinger, and VV. VVhitwoods


