THE PRIVILEGES OF THE PEOPLE, OR, Principles of Common Right and Freedom,
briefly laid open and asserted in two Chapters. I. Containing the distinct
Interests of King, Parliament and People; consisting in Prerogative, Privilege
and Liberty (as they have formerly obtained in this Nation.) II. Discovering
the Peoples Right in Choice, Change, or Regulation of Governments or
Governors: Together with the Original of Kingly Power, and other Forms of
Government.


Propounded to the Consideration, and published for the benefit of the PEOPLE
of ENGLAND.

By Jo. War.

Tacit. Principatus and Libertas res olim dissociabiles.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson for Giles Calvert at the sign of the black
spread Eagle at the west end of Paul's. 1649.

CHAP. I. Discovering the distinct Interests of King, Parliament, and People.
SECT. I. Of Prerogative or Kingly Interest.
THe Interest of the King having advanced it self into a Principle of
Distinction, Separation, and Superiority above the Interest of the People, is
called Prerogative or Kingly greatness; which is a Tuber or exuberance growing
out from the stock of the Common wealth, partly through the weakness and
indulgence of People to their Kings and Rulers, (which has been most eminent
in the English Nation) and partly through the ambition and lust of Princes
themselves, who not considering their greatness as in a principle of union
with the People, in a way of tendencie and subserviencie to the Peoples good,
have heightened themselves beyond their due bounds, and framed a distinct
Interest of their own, pretendedly Supreme? To advance this Interest, Kings and
Princes have politiques, and Principles of their own, and certain State-maxims,
whereby they soar a loft, and walk in a distinct way of opposition to the
Rights and Freedoms of the People; all which you may see in Machiavils Prince.

Hence it is that Kings have been always jealous of the people, and have held
forth their own Interest, as a Mystery or Riddle, not to be pried into by
ordinary understandings: And the Proselytes of this corrupt and tyrannous
Interest have always served it up, as a Sacred thing, a thing as much above
our reach, as it is truly and indeed against our Freedoms.

So that Ignorance being the Mother and Nurse of Bondage, such Principles have
been watchfully observed, as have ushered in any Light, or discovery of the
corruptnesse of the Prerogative Interest; hence is it that the Expositions of
Pareus upon Romans 13. were censured and condemned by the Court Party, as giving
too much Liberty to Subjects, to resist their Kings: and the Genevah notes upon
Exodus 1. v. 17. were disliked by King James, because they countenanced the
Midwives disobedience to the King; not, but that the thing commanded was
unlawful, but it was interpreted to open too great a gap to the ruin of this
Interest, of which we now speak

And yet some have not been wanting, who in times of greatest hazard have
adventured their own Freedoms as a Sacrifice to the Public; and have made
forth discoveries of the corruption and rottenes of this oppressive Prerogative
Interest, upon conscientious grounds of Public Freedom. Though this has been
censured by the Potencie of that Interest which it did oppose, as an offense no
less then piacular; And their Persons loaded with calumnies of all sorts, as
being a faction or Party of Levellers, as King James calls some in his
Star Chamber Speech.

And though we may possibly suppose that the corruption of this Interest, may
be in some measure discovered to those that use it, and that Kings themselves
may suck in some principles of common Right and Freedom; some glimmerings
whereof, seem to sparkle in the writings of King James, yet their judgments
are so over clouded by their Interests, that they do not only blind
themselves, but hoodwink others, and all to establish that, which God himself
purposes to destroy and overthrow.

For when Principles of light and knowledge shall be advanced amongst men, they
shall then scorn to be subject to the corrupt Wills and Lusts of others: they
shall know no Policy, but integrity and honesty; False interests shall
tumble down truth and righteousness take place, and Prerogative be worried, as
an Enemy to Freedom.

And if this were made out to Princes themselves, they would not only profane
their own mysteries, and make them common, but sacrifice their greatness to
the light of Truth, (which has so often sacrificed Truth to it self) and study
which way to advance the Peoples Interest, though in opposition to their own.
And if this self-denying spirit were in them, and the power of Truth, the rough
way of worldly force and spoil would be prevented, and the work rendered more
easy to themselves and others.

SECT. II. Of Privilege, or Parliament Interest.
IF the voice of Common Right or Freedom could be heard amongst Men, the world
would not be so deeply engaged in factions, and distinct Parties, as they are;
but this is the misery, The minds of men being prejudiced with corrupt
Interests of one sort or other, and pertinaciously adhearing to them, do
contribute their utmost assistance to maintain them, partly through the inbred
corruption within men, and partly through those provocations which (in the heat
of contest) they meet with, from Interests which are at variance with their own
(for even truth it self will justle its adversary in a narrow pass) Hence it
is that some are said to be for the King, some for the Parliament, some for the
Army.

But is Truth divided? Is there not one common principle of Freedom, which (if
discovered) would reconcile all; It Is true this Principle may be weakly and
imperfectly managed by the Children thereof, but the miscarriage (whether real
or supposed) is not to be charged upon the Principle it self; And yet this is
the practice of corrupt men, who take advantage from common frailties in the
prosecution of just things, to cry down the things Themselves, and so to
strengthen their adhesion to their own Interests, though never so corrupt.

The purest civil interest, is the Peoples Freedom, which may be crushed by
Privilege as well as Prerogative; For Prerogative and Privilege (in its
usual acceptance) are near of kin; and it is possible for a Society to
exercise Tyranny as well as a single Person. What has been spoken of
Prerogative, may be affirmed of Privilege, the Impe thereof; For Man being
naturally of an aspiring temper, mannages all advantages to set up himself, and
to this the Peoples election is a fair temptation, and though the gentleness
of the phrase does word the Parliament, To serve for their Country, yet it is
sometimes in the same kind of oratory, as the Pope is the servant of the
Church, whilst he exercises rule and domination over it.

Privilege has formed it self into a distinct Interest, as well as
Prerogative, and has forgot its original and fire, thinks it self complete
without superior or equal: Thus has it broke off it self, from its stock, and
like a succor draws nourishment away from the true branches; so that, where
Prerogative and Privilege are in a thriving posture, the Freedoms of that
People are underlings and lean as being crop'd on both sides.

When things do continue in their proper place and order, they stand in God,
and are useful to those ends for which he has appointed them; but when they
warpe, they turn aside from God; and when they leave their station, and would
be of themselves (as Lucifer) they fall down into Hell and a condition of
darkness; The way to advance Privilege is to keep it within its due bounds.

It Is true, somethings do naturally ascend, but it is to their own place and
Center, and when they are there, they are clothed with Majesty and glory.
Every thing is beautiful in its place and season: There is a beauty in
Privilege (thus considered) as well as in Liberty.

To ascend beyond due and measured bounds, is no way honorable but monstrous,
as if the Feet should grow out of the Thighs, or the Hands upon top of the
Head; this is a disorder and confusion, and thus Pride is the womb of
darkness, which may be verified in Privilege as well as Prerogative.

It Is true, Privilege has a stronger plea, as being founded upon Election and
Consent, but this will not justify the Abuse thereof: for when Privilege
soars high, the people sometimes follow it, either through ignorance of its
Nature or bounds, or else that they may not lose the benefit of that, which is
truly so called, and is useful in its place. For as Water ascends for the
continuation of it self, so the interest between Parliament and people, must
not be discontinued. And yet this motion on the peoples part is violent, not
natural: for Liberty should not ascend to Privilege, but Privilege should
stoop down to Liberty, as its Center and Rest.

Privileges may sometimes mount so high, that Liberty cannot only not follow,
but is endangered by it. In this case Privilege discontinues it self, and
Liberty casts off homage and subjection thereto, such Privilege is to be lop'd
off as a burden to Freedom.

True privilege of Parliament is this, in a principle of Union with the
peoples Right, an Immunity and Freedom to mind just things, and to prosecute
impartial grounds of rightcousnesse and Truth, other privileges may be pared
away, as bearing no proportion with their End, but this shall continue as
subservient unto Freedom.

SECT. 3. Of Liberty, or the Peoples Interest.
IN every Commonwealth the Interest of the People is the True and Proper
Interest of that Commonwealth; other Interests have advanced themselves,
pretendedly to exalt This, and yet being once gotten into the Throne of Rule,
they labor nothing less, or rather indeed they bend their utmost endeavor to
overthrow It.

Prerogative and Privilege Interests, (as formerly explained in their corrupt
notions) are altogether inconsistent with True Freedom: Hence it is that there
is an irreconcilable contest between Them, which will never cease, till either
Prerogative and Privilege be swallowed up in Freedom, or Liberty it self be
led captive by Prerogative. He which has the worst Cause may sometimes have
the best Success, (for Time and Chance happens to all) and thus Liberty may be
worsted by Privilege, as having less specious advantages in the Flesh. For
true Freedom is in the Mind, and its Proselytes are but few. Most men give up
themselves to the Idoll-Interests of Prerogative and Privilege, as being more
taking with flesh and blood.

And when Liberty is once put to the rout, it is not easy to rally again, or
to redeem it self, for the darkest Dungeon is its Prison, it is chained with
oaths and servile bonds, yea and the strong bolts of humane Laws do keep it
in subjection. Thus are all things made sure, with a Gravestone, a Seal, and
a Watch, and oppression rides in triumph upon the backs of the people.

All imaginary gaps for the re-entrance of Freedom, being thus stopped up, it
were impossible for it to arise from the dead, or to recover its true and
proper state, if God himself did not appear, and laugh the counsels of men to
scorn, yea and open the Iron gates, and knock off the bolts, and lead forth
Freedom to open view, as the Angel did Peter.

In this design God co-operates with Man, and makes him isntrumental in the
work, by clearing his principles, and stirring up his spirit. There are some
sparks of Freedom in the minds of most, which ordinarily lie deep, and are
covered in the Dark, as a spark in the ashes. This spark is the image of God
in the mind, which is indeed the Man, (for the divine Image makes the Man.)
This Man is hid in most persons, only the Tyrant, the Beast, or the slavish
principle appears, and the whole bulk is hurried about by the motion of that
principle, and the Man within us swimmes with the stream.

But God favors all weak things, and has a special regard to tender ones,
when under darkness and oppression. And in order hereunto he lays the Axe to
the root of the Tree, and strengthens our weak principle, he lays the
foundation of Freedom within us, and so proceeds to blow up the fire, till the
room be too hot for unrighteousness and wrong.

Thus Tyranny being driven out of the Spirit, or Mind (its surest hold, its
Metropolis, or City of Refuge) it is hunted too and fro like a beast of prey.
Neither is this a rare thing, but according to the usual proceedings of God in
the World, who spoils the Spoyler, and punishes oppression in Methodes of its
own, that Men may see and admire his Greatness and Power.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of the earth.
Most of your designs are founded upon Self, and are against the Lord you
establish your selves and your own greatness; your hands are against every
one, and every ones hands against you, you have led Liberty captive. It Is the
voice of God to you, Let my oppressed go free. Some of you have allowed a Mock
freedom to Liberty, your prisoner, when you could keep it close no longer, you
have sent it abroad, but with prison garments, some badges of Slavery have
remained upon it; no portion of Freedom has been wrung from you, but through
exigence or necessity. Thus have you demeaned your selves, as if the people had
been made for you, not you for the people. For these things does God arise, and
the day of your vistration is come.

For why? It Is not possible for a people to be too free. True Liberty has a
clear light Principle or Rule, and a large compass, a spacious walk, it is not
limited or circumscribed, but by the bounds of righteousness. Liberty is the
daughter of Truth and Righteousness, and has Light within it, as the Sun,
other lights are borrowed from it. Tyranny is as a Clog, or an Eclip^e to
Freedom. God sees good that Liberty should recover but by degrees, that so the
world may be balanced with light and knowledge, according to the advance
thereof, and be more considerate in her actings. The deeper the Foundation, the
surer the Work. Laberty in its full appearance would darken the eye newly
recovered from blindness, the principles thereof are infused to us by degrees,
that our heads may be strengthened (not overturned) by its Influence.

CHAP. II. Of the Peoples Right in the Choice, Change, or Regulation of
Government, together with the original of Kingly Power, and other Forms of
Government.
ALL Governments being fundamentally (as to Man) seated in the People, which
Maxim is sufficiently spoken to of late. The inhabitants of several
Countries, for the equal distribution of Justice to the whole, have
voluntarily submitted to several Administrations and Forms of Government,
either under one or many Rulers: so that Election, or Consent (setting aside
Titles by Conquest) are the proper source and Fountain of all Just Governments.
Hence it is that the power of Rulers is but Ministerial, and in order to the
peoples good, which has given occasion to that known Maxim, That the safty of
the people is the supreme Law.

From hence we may see the Reason, why some Governments are more or less
Free, viz. according to the prudence or neglect of Ancestors in bargaining
with the Princes, and setting limits to their Power. Some have (as it were)
given up themselves to the Wills of their Princes, and out of confidence of
their integrity have left them to themselves, not considering, that just men
are liable to temptations, when they are in place and power; which if it were
possible for them to avoid, yet Justice is not hereditary, nor goes by descent.
Some Nations having been pinched with this inconvenience, have afterward set
Bounds and Laws to their Rulers, according as Tully does excellently describe
it. Lib. 2. de offic. Eadem constituendarum legum fuit causa, quae Regum, Jus
enim semper quasitum est aequabile, neque aliter esset Jus, id si ab uno just,
and bono viro consequebantur, eo erant contenti, cum id minus contingeret,
Leges sunt inventae, quae cum omnibus temper una and eadem voce loquerentur.

Englished thus, There is the same reason for Laws, as there was for Kings, for
People have always sought after Right, or an equal dist^^bution of things,
which if they did obtain from one just and good man, they were content
therewith; but when they failed thereof, Laws were found out, which spoke one
and the same thing to all men.

Those Nations which have been most strict in prescribing such Rules, are most
Free, unle^e in process of time, through the oscitancie of the people, Princes
have trampled upon their bounds, and made them common; and in this case, as
good none at all, as not observed.

Though then Governments have been diversifyed according to the different
tempers and apprehensions of their Founders, the People; yet the Rise of them
all, is One and the same: ^o that what Tully affirms of the original of
Monarchy, or Kingly Government, may be said of all the rest, his words are
these, lib. 2. de Offic. Apud majores nostros fruendae justitiae causa videntur
olim been morati Reg^s constituti: nam cum premerentur olim multitudo ab lis
qui majores opes habebant, ad unum aliquem confugiebant virtutem praestantem,
qui cum prohiberet injuria tenuiores aequitate constituenda, summos cum infimis
pari jure retinebat. The effect, of which in English is this, Our Ancestors
first appointed Kings for the administration of justice: For when the multitude
was oppressed by great and mighty men, they presently addressed themselves to
some one eminent and virtuous man, who defended the poor from wrong, and kept
both poor and rich within the bounds of Equity. An instance of this kind we
have in Herod: Clio, where the Medes revolting from the Assyrians, chose one
Deioces for their King, a man of supposed strictness and Equity in preventing
disorders and abuses amongst them. But this remedy in time proved as bad as the
disease, so that people were enforced to seek protection under several Rulers,
which they missed under One. Hence it came to pass that the Romans banished
their King and his Government together, and submitted themselves to another
Form.

But at first they which subject themselves to the government of One, may by
the same reason submit to many, which is Aristocracie, or may alter their
government from one Form to another: For they that choose may change, provided
it be upon just and valuable grounds. Famous was the dispute had before
Octavius Caesar by two of his Favorites and Counselors, about continuance or
change of Monarchy, of which you may read in Dion. lib. 52. The story is this,
When Octavius Caesar had by the Arms and successes of his predecessors and his
own, reduced the world to peace, and made a complete conquest of the great
known part thereof, he took counsel with Agrippa and Mecoenas, two of his
intimate friends, whether he should maintain the Empire and Monarchy in his
own hands, or resign it to the Senate and people of Rome; Agrippa makes an
eloquent Oration against Monarchy, persuading him to surrender up the
Government into the hands of the Senate. On the other side, Mecoenas persuades
the contrary, and pleads for Monarchy, whose counsel was followed by Caesar,
yet so, as that Agrippa was still honorably entertained and respected by him.
From which Story we may observe two things.

1. That Anti-monarchicalnes is no crime at all, but a difference in judgment
about an External Form of Civil government: Yea great Statesmen (such as
Agrippa) have given in their judgments freely against Monarchical government,
as Agrippa here did.

2. That to persuade and endeavor the alteration of Governments from one form
to another, has been the subject of the discourse and action of wisemen, as we
see here in Agrippa.

And though there may be a beauty in Monarchy, (duly circumscribed) as well as
in other forms of Government, yet such cases may sometimes fall out, when
Reason and Judgment may not only call for, but enforce a change; A
provocation it must be of grand and fundamental importance, which if it cannot
be otherwise or not so conveniently redressed, may undergo this kind of cure;
which in cases of extremity has been practiced by Nations.

Smaller inconveniences may be redressed without the abolition of a form, viz.
by prescribing limits to those Rulers, who have abused their Power, which under
pain of guilt they may not exceed; For the whole body of the People is above
their Ruler, whether one or more.

Not to spend much time herein, I shall conclude this with the argument of the
Bishop of Burgen in the Council of Basil (which was in the reign of our Henry
the 6th) where disputing against the authority of the Pope above Councels, he
urges this argument, that as Kingdoms are and ought to be above Kings, so is a
Council above a Pope. So that former ages have had some light, as touching the
Office and duty of a chief Ruler or King and would have been able to descry
the flattery of those, who ascribe so much Majesty and Sacredness either to
Man, or Men.

For are not Rulers themselves under a Law? are they not accountable for what
they do? Are they not subject to frailties like other men? Are we not all
derived from one common Stock? Is not every man born free? when we ascribe so
much to Man, we detract from the praise and glory of God.

True Majesty is in the spirit and consists in the Divine Image of God in the
mind, which the Princes of the World coming short off, have supplied its
defect with outward badges of Fleshly honor; which are but Empty shows and
carnal appearances, when void of the substance.

But as weak as they are, they have dazzled our eyes, through the darkness
which is in us, when we our selves shall be raised up to an inward glory, we
shall then be able to judge of that Majesty and Glory, which rests upon another.

FINIS.

