THE JEWS SABBATH ANTIQUATED, AND THE LORDS DAY INSTITUTED By DIVINE AUTHORITY.

OR, The Change of the Sabbath from the Last to the First Day of the Week,
asserted and maintained by Scripture-Arguments, and Testimonies of the Best
Antiquity; with a Refutation of sundry Objections raised against it.

The Sum of all Comprised in Seven Positions.

By EDM. WARREN Minister of the Gospel in COLCHESTER.

REV. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day.

(...), Athanasius in Hom. de sement. ad init.

Imprimatur, EDM. CALAMY.

LONDON, Printed by David Maxwel, for W. Weekly of Ipswich, and are to be sold
by John Rothwel, at the Fountain in Cheapside, and also by Nath. Web, and Will.
Grantham, at the Black Bear in Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

To the Right Worshipful JOHN GVRDON Esquire Justice of Peace in the County of
SUFFOLK.
HONORED SIR,
THe design of this Dedication is not so much to shelter the ensuing Treatise
under the protection of your name (let it stand or fall at the bar of Scripture
and right reason) as to show my real and unfeigned gratitude for the many and
much-obliging favors you have been been pleased to heap upon me, both while I
lived under your roof, and since my removal to a more public station: I
thought thus with my self, It is the first, and likely to be the last time of
my appearing in Print, therefore the best and fittest season to signify my due
resentment of your love and friendship, which from first to last, since my
acquaintance with you, I have experienced so firm and constant; as also to show
the precions esteem I still have of you and your pious Family, which as I
found, so I left most religiously devoted to the practice of the truth here
pleaded for, the keeping holy of the Lords day, the undoubted Christian
Sabbath; it is verily no small joy to me in these days of liberty and looseness
to find any (especially of your rank) walking in this truth of Christ. Go on
(dear Sir) in this good old way of truth and holiness, be you still a friend to
this good day [the Lords Day] and the Lord will be a friend to you in in an
evil day, yea, in that great day of his appearing, Concerning which, as Paul
prayed for Onesiphorus and his household [the Lord grant that he may find mercy
of the Lord in that day] so prays for you and yours

The Unworthiest of Christ's Ministers EDM. WARREN.

A Word by way of Preface to the Courteous Reader, With a Word of Advice to my
Christian Friends and Hearers, in and about the Town of Colchester.
Good Reader,
I Shall not tire thy patience with any tedious Prefatory Discourse, only hint
a Word or two concerning the occasion of this Treatise, with the Method
observed in the composure of it; about a year and half since, or something
more, amidst that African brood of Erroneous Books which the lawless liberty of
the Press has Midwiv'd into the world, came forth a Treatise swelling as, with
a Timpany of vain glorious confidence for the Jews Saturday-Sabbath; so no less
opprobious contempt of the Lords day, our Christian Sabbath. The Author of it
Mr. Tho. Tillam by Name, by Profession an Anabaptist, was pleased in Print to
found a challenge and provoke me to the combat in answering of it. It was some
time before I was fully resolved what to do, the sense of my own Insufficiency
bespake my silence, and willed me rather to sit still in obscurity, than
venture abroad to the view of a captious and quarrelsom World: Besides, my
Pastoral charge and Preaching-work would scarce afford me that leisure which
others of more natural promptness and dexterous parts and gifts might well
enough spare for such an Employment: But on the other hand the spreading of
this Jewish Leaven, together with the pressing Importunity of some Christian
Friends persuaded me to undertake this work, which accordingly I did, and after
I had spent much time and written many sheets in answering this Author Page by
Page, I found his Method so confused, his excursions so many, his eructations
of putrid choler and calumny so bitter, that I had not the patience to follow
him any longer in that wildgoose-chase, but laid all aside, and resolved upon a
new Method; namely, to assert the Truth thetically in distinct Positions, and
answer his most material Arguments as Objections against it. He would fain
persuade silly people, That Antichrist changed the Sabbath, and goes about to
prove it from Dan. 7. where we read of a little horn that thought to change
Times and Laws; and with this little horn he makes a loud noise up and down his
Book. But who told him that this horn was Antichrist? Our best Expositors take
it to be meant of Antiochus Epiphanes, and indeed Dan. 8. clearly proves it.
But what desperate insolency is this, to take the crown of Christ and set it
upon the head of Antichrist? Is not the change of the Jewish Law attributed to
Christ, Hebr. 7.12. and did he not also change their times and seasons of
worship? was their weekly Sabbath exempted? I pray where or how? not by the
fourth Commandment, for we have proved that the seventh day from the Creation
was never the substance of that precept; nor by any clause in the New
Testament, for there it is rather repealed. It Is true, the Moral duty of rest,
remains still in a holy day of weekly recourse, according to the Commandment,
but the old Sabbath being of a shadowy nature in the after observation (if not
in the first Institution) of it, is certainly done away by Christ the substance
of all Legal shadows; yet not simply, but in way of exchange for a new day of
the same number, though not of the same shadowy nature.

What I have argued for the change of the day is sufficiently authorized by the
Scriptures, the Fathers, and our own judicious Divines. My Arguments are but
few in number; more might have been added but for oppressing the Reader's
either purse or patience. Mr. Cawdrey and Mr. Palmer have largely handled, what
I have but briefly touched. If what I have written be answered with scurrilous
gibes, and railing Rhetoric, as Mr. Jenisons Book was, My next answer shall be
nothing but silence and contempt; which I the rather hint, because the
Adversary has threatened a Reply before he read my Book; right or wrong, it
seems he is resolved to have the last word, for which I purpose never to
contend. If I know my own heart, it is truth, not triumph that I seek and thirst
after; truth I say, grounded upon the Scriptures, sealed with the blood of
Martyrs, attested by the Primitive Fathers, and maintained by the pens of the
most Reformed Writers; such is the truth here asserted, and I shall own nothing
as an Answer to it, but that which fully answers all these.

Now my Christian Friends and Brethren, I beseech you love and live this truth;
stand to it, stand for it, and stand in it as long as you live. Take heed of
corrupt Books and broachers of error; you may be too credulous, too cautelous
you cannot be. Let neither the pompous Phrases, nor proud threats of men either
allure you, or affright you from the truths of God. T. T. abounds in both these
Artifices; charming some with his Rhetoric, scaring others with his Bulls and
big words, as he does William Sloat by name, leaving him (as his Printed Book
speaks) under the unpardonable sin to the judgment of the great day: and yet
this William Sloat is known to be a man of sober conversation, professing
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; only he must
be expunged out of the Catalogue of Christians for not being able to keep the
Jews Sabbath, and damned to the fiery furnace of Hell, because he could no
longer dance after this man's Pipe, or bow down to Images that he has set up in
his fancy; Opinions I mean. To conclude, I beseech you, Christians for the
Lords sake, and your souls sake hold fast the Good Old Truths of Christ in this
hour of Englands temptation, and cleave to that Good Old Cause the (Christian
Sabbath) which the rigid Prelatical party sought to subvert by the Book of
Sports, and many pernicious Pamphlets and practices, till the wrath of God
brake out upon the land in those late bloody showers, the Remembrance whereof
methinks should daunt the heart of the most Goliah-like Adversary, that shall
dare to draw the sword of defiance the second time against this Christian
Cause: If any will be so foolhardy as still to fight against God and the Lamb,
in profaning, and teaching others to profane his day, by working, as formerly
some did by sporting; yet be exhorted all you that fear God and love the Lord
Jesus to keep holy the Lords day, making it no otherwise a working-day, then by
working out your salvation with fear and trembling, which is the humble and
hearty advice of

Yours in all Gospel-Offices EDM. WARREN.

A TABLE of the Contents.
Position 1. THe Sabbath made alterable (as to the day) in the first
institution of it, evidenced by three Arguments. Arg. 1. From the time when it
was instituted: Viz. after the fall. Adam sinned the same day in which he was
created, proved by five Arguments, page 1. to 7. Two Objections answered to p.
17. Arg. 2. From the command by which it was instituted, p. 17. to 21. Arg. 3.
From the ground or occasion, on which it was instituted, either Gods providence
or promise, p. 21. to 32. Seven Considerations premised to clear it, p. 33, 34,
35. Two Scruples resolved p. 37, 38, 39.
Position 2. THat the Old Sabbath was further manifested to be alterable (as to
the day) in the second Edition of the Sabbath. For, 1. It was never propounded
as the substance of any moral Law: Here the fourth Commandment is vindicated
at large p. 46. to 58. 2. It seems to be pointed at as a sign in the Ceremonial
Law p. 70.
Sundry Objections answered p. 59. to 70 and 78.
Position 3. THe Old Sabbath was further evidenced to be alterable in the
after-Observation of it p. 78 to 83.
Position 4. THat the Sabbath was actually altered and changed from the Last to
the First day of the Week, by the authority of Christ; upon the account of his
Resurrection, etc. Four main Arguments to prove it. Arg. 1. From the New
Creation, p. 83 to 90. Arg. 2 From the New Covenant: The Covenant changed in a
threefold expressure of it, in the Mandatory, the Promissory, and shadowy part,
p. 90. to 105. The Old Sabbath proved to be of a shadowy nature, from Col.
2.16, 17. p. 106, 107, 108. Four Objections answered from p. 109 to 112. Arg.
3. From the Introduction of a new rest, Hebr. 4. explained and vindicated, to
p. 122. Four Objections answered to p. 130. Arg. 4. From the designation of a
new day with the discharge of the old. The old seventh day Sabbath is
discharged from Obligation under the Gospel, p. 130. to 138 Four Objections
removed. The First day of the week is designed for a day of weekly solemn
Worship. For, 1. This is the day above all others on which (in the vacancy of
the old seventh day) God has set his mind in the Law p. 158, 159. 2. This is
the day above all days on which Christ has set his special mark in the Gospel.
A sevenfold mark he has set upon it.
1. His resurrection from the dead this day, p. 161. to 169. 2. His frequent
apparitions on this day p. 169. to 175. Four Objections silenced. 3. His
gracious speeches and actions at those apparitions: 4. The Mission of the Holy
Ghost this day: The day of Pentecost proved to be the first day of the week. p.
179. to 187. Two Objections answered. 5. The Inscription of Christ's blessed
name on this day, it is the Lords day p. 190, 191, 192. Three Objections
answered. 6. The Apostles and Apostolical Churches observation of it, Acts
20.7. cleared. Six Objections satisfied. 7. Apostolical prescription about it,
1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Four Objections answered to p. 214.
The Best Antiquity for the Change of the Day. TEstimonies of the Ancients. 1.
Ignatius. 2. Justin Martyr. 3. Dionysius. 4. Tertullian. 5. Origin. 6. Cyprian.
7. Athanasius. 8. Hilary. 9. Ambrose. 10. Hierome. 11. Chrysostom. 12.
Augustine. 13. Eusebius, from p. 216. to 232. Opposite Testimonies answered, to
p. 245.
Position 5. THe Lords day the Christian Sabbath, proved, and Cavils refuted,
from p. 236. to 242.
Position. 6. THe Sabbath begins in the morning, Four Objections answered, from
p. 242. to 246.
Position 7. THe Lords day must be kept holy to the Lord. Rules of Direction:
1. For Preparation to the Sabbath. 2. Sanctification of it. 1. By holy rest,
from our own works, words, and thoughts. 2. By holy work, both in private and
in public, from p. 246. to the end.


ERRATA.
PAge 4. Marg. for John 29. read John 19. p. 54. marg. for evening Communicant,
r. Evangelical Communicant. p. 80. for merval, r. marvel. p. 86. l. 5. for
latter, r. letter. p. 91. marg. for (...), r. (...). p. 97. for must with a
promise, r. meet with a promise. p. 107. for ^^brae and praeterita, r. umbra
and praeteritae. p. 109. after it is very questionable, add I say. p. 126.
marg. for (...), r. (...). p. 132. for stay, r. stop. p. 180. l. 1. r.
wonderful, p. 181. l. 5. for there r. their. p. 182. l. 9. r. where. ibid. for
some, r. come. for were r. was. p. 192. for constitution, r. contestation, p.
194. l. 31. add the p. 216. marg. for (...).

Other false spellings and false pointings there are, which the Reader is
requested to look upon, rather as Errors of the Press, then the Pen, yet no
other then such as are common and ordinary in all Treatises printed in the
Authors absence.

POSITION I. That the Old Sabbath (as to the Day) was made Alterable and
Changeable in the First Instituon of it.
FOr the confirmation whereof we shall consider 1. The Time when it was
Instituted. 2. The Command by which it was Instituted. 3. The Ground upon which
it was Instituted.


1. First, let us soberly examine the time when it was instituted; the
obscurity whereof may easily be gathered from the variety of opinions and
apprehensions about it. Some think the first foundation of it was laid upon
mount Sinai, induced thereunto by those words of Nehemiah, Thou came down
upon the mount, Nehem 9.13, 14.
and made known to them thy holy Sabbath by the hand of Moses thy Servant.
Others have traveled a little beyond the mount, and have found (as they
suppose) the first footsteps of a Sabbath in the wilderness of Sin, at the
first falling of Manna. T. T. p. 71.
Mr. Tillam, with some others, is confident that it was instituted before the
fall of man, and founded upon mount Paradise; not a little abusing that
Scripture to prove it, Psalm 87.1. Gods foundations are in the holy mountaint.
Belike he would insinuate, with Tostatus and some other Popish Authors, that
Paradise was some mountainous place (a fancy purposely devised by them to
shelter Enoch from the flood:) But this is to build castles in the air; such
notions may pass for glorious truths among Vulgar heads, when judicious pens
have branded them as Popish Legends. For the opinion it self, viz. That the
Sabbath was first instituted in Paradise before the fall of man, we shall in
due time discover the weakness of it, and give satisfying answers to all the
seeming arguments brought to support it. But first I shall propose, and
endeavor to prove a Counter position, namely, that it seems more consonant to
Scripture, to affirm, that the Sabbath was instituted (though in the beginning)
yet after the fall, in man's corrupt and vitiated estate. The probation whereof
depends much (though not altogether) upon the decision of that often canvassed
question, Whether our first Parents sinned the same day on which they were
created? I shall not be so peremptory as to pass a damnatory sentence upon
those that are for the negative; yet after some study and inquiry into
Scriptures and Authors about it, I am inclined to undertake the affirmative,
namely, That our first Parents were created and corrupted, Genesis 1. and 2 chapter
compared with chap. 3.1.
made and marrd, alive and dead in one and the same same day; which seems very
probable by this, that as soon as Moses had spoken of their creation, without
mention of any other thing considerable, he passes to their defection. This is
no singular notion, but the generally received opinion of ancient and modern
times. (...)
The Greek Churches and Fathers were so almost universally of this persuasion,
that it is well known to have been their common sentence, speaking of Adam, The
same day he was created he fell. Among the Latins Augustine and Bernard were
also of the same mind; August. de genes. ad lit. lib. 9. c. 4. Bern. l 4.8.
and among our own writers, Reverend Mr. Cawdrey, and Mr. Palmer incline this
way: Dr. Willet, Mr. G. Walker, Mr. H. Broughton have strenuously argued it
from Scripture. I shall but hint a few of the many Scripture-arguments, that
have been and may be alleged to this purpose.

1. From the testimony of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has told us expressly,
that the Devil was a murderer (or manslayer) from the beginning, a liar and
the father of lies; John 8.34. (...)
not from the beginning of the worlds creation, but of man's creation, which
most properly and precisely implies the sixth day, wherein the Serpent beguiled
our first Parents by lying, and murdered them. That word (from the beginning)
is the same in the Syriack version which is used Genesis 1. and it usually refers
to some date of time within the creation, as the learned in that Language
observe. This cannot be denied, that when our Savior affirms the Devil was a
murderer from the beginning, we must lay it as near the beginning as we may,
without crossing other texts of Scripture: now it crosses not a tittle of
Scripture to state it on the sixth day; nay it consents with other Scriptures;
for

2. The verity of Gods threatening seems to put it out of question that Adam
sinned and was slain by the Serpent on the sixth day; for let the words be well
weighed, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye. Genesis 2.17.
Die quo Deus condidit redemit and hominem, i. e. sexta feria. Bern.
I demand whether this sentence were fully executed on the first Adam in the
day that he sinned? or whether in his and our behalf it were not also verifyed
on the second Adam in the day that he suffered? If the latter be granted (as it
cannot well be denied) then it will rationally follow, that the second Adam
suffering and dying on the sixth day of the week, the first Adam also sinned on
the sixth day, in which he was created. John 29. v. 14, 15, 16. compared with
Mat 27.46, 50.
That Christ suffered the sixth day, needs no dispute. Romans 5 14. That the Holy
Ghost speaks so sparingly of the state of innocence, evidently shows that it
lasted but a very little while. Mortons threefold state, ep. to the Reader. In
all reason (as another says) if Adam had stood long, his good deeds as well as
his evil deeds had been committed to history, especially how he kept his first
Sabbath; which had been an excellent pattern to posterity. But not a syllable
of this in Scripture.
Most probably therefore the first Adam, the figure of him that was to come
(and that in respect of this point) sinned and fell on the sixth day; and so
the Divine threatening was punctually fulfilled. The force of this argument
cannot without shameful wrangling be evaded: For to say that this may as well
state the fall on that day seven-night as on the first sixth day, is to say
little to the purpose. For by the same rule you may as well carry it to that
day three weeks, or that day month, yea that day twelve-moneth, and so in
infinitum. I should rather think, that since by Christ's sufferings it appears
that Adam sinned on a sixth day; and our Lord affirms that the Devil was a
manslayer from the beginning; that therefore certainly our first Parents fell
on the first sixth day. Some have not unfitly observed a remarkable conformity
betwixt the sin and curse of Adam, and the sufferings of Christ, in many
concurrent circumstances. As our Saviors agony in the garden, answering to
Adams sin in the garden; his bloody sweat, to the curse of eating bread in the
sweat of our brows; his crown of thorns, to the curse of thorns; his
suffering upon a tree, to their sin in eating of the tree, etc. a fit subject
for a devotional pen. But that which I insist upon as argumentative is only the
day in which out Lord suffered and dyed, which in my judgment does much help to
determine the day in which Adam sinned.

3. The parley betwixt the woman and the serpent insinuates as much; for both
the serpents demand and the woman's reply speak plainly that as yet they had not
tasted the sweets of Paradise: Genesis 3.1.
Has God said ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden? The serpent had
not been subtle to ask whether that might be done which had been done already;
and the woman's replying in the future tense, we may, or shall eat hereafter,
makes it more probable that as yet they had not eaten. (...)
And it is utterly improbable that they would have continued a whole day in the
Garden, in the midst of all that delicious fruit, and not have tasted of some.
Besides, the tree of life being sacramental (as Augustine says, Erat homini in
lignis aliis alimenium, in hoc vero Sacramentum, Aug. de Genesis ad lit.
in other trees there was nourishment, in this a Sacrament) may it not well be
thought that if Adam had stood the first Sabbath, he had tasted of the tree of
life? Doubtless he had observed all the ordinances of the day. But that he had
not yet touched that tree, is evident from that speech of God, where he
resolves upon his speedy banishment out of Paradise, Genesis 3.22.
lest (says the Lord) he put forth his hand to the tree of life, and eat and
live for ever; which had been spoken too late, if he had already done it.

4. The policy and activity of Satan in contriving of mischief may assure us
that he was tampering with our first parents betimes, partly that he might take
the advantage to shake them before their habits of grace were settled and
confirmed by exercise (as new-planted trees are more easily plucked up at
first, then after they are more deeply radicated;) but principally, that by
poisoning the fountain of mankind before any streams issued from it, he might
the more easily and certainly corrupt the whole current of man's posterity. Such
as have been taught by sad experience how crafty an adversary that old serpent
the Devil is, cannot but subscribe to the validity of this argument.

5. To all these I may add the circumstance of time when these malefactors
were brought to the bar, and arraigned for what they had done; viz. in the
cool of the day, Hebr. in the wind of the day, Genesis 3.8.
in the wind after midday, as Hierom renders it, or in the Even-tyde, Adversus
haereses lib 5. cap. 15. ad fin.
as Irenaeus. Now it is very observable (says a late Worthy) that this is the
first evening mentioned after the creation of Adam, Mr. Roberts myster. and
medulla. Bibl. p. 39.
and the covenant made with him. Adam was arraigned and sentenced toward the
evening of the sixth day, therefore he sinned the same day.

As for that of the Psalmist, Adam being in honor loaged not a night, Psa.
49.12.
but was like the beasts that perish (for so it is in the Hebrew word for word)
although I will not restrain it to the first Adam, for (as learned Ainsworth
observes) it may be meant both of the first man Adam, who continued not in his
dignity, Annot. in locum
and his posterity also; yet it does most singularly point at him, and is most
pregnantly applicable to him, as being in the greatest honor that ever man was
in upon earth, Lord of all the lower world, and father of all mankind. Exodus
23.8. Deuteronomy. 19.4. 2 Samuel 17. Psalm. 30.5.
And the word baal jalin does properly signify to lodge or tarry for a night.
What if it be in the future tense, as. T.T. suggests, yet as Dr. Twiss
great a Rabbin as himself has told us that it is nothing strange for the
future tense (the structure of the words requiring it, (...) Assimulatus fuit.
as here it does, the next word being of the preter tense) to signify the time
past. Again, what if the context does not in every circumstance suit with Adam?
Is it any unusual thing (especially in the book of Psalms) for one and the same
sentence to point at several persons? How often are David and Christ both
intended in the same place; yea, where every thing spoken of the one does not
agree to the other? The adversary might therefore have spared that passage,
that this text cannot be applied to Adam, because it is said, v. 19. He shall go
to the generation of his fathers, unless I could show him what fathers Adam had
to go to. p. 10.
I will answer his Dilemma with another; when he himself says, that innocent
Adam had all the Ten Commandments written in his heart, let him tell me, what
father and mother had Adam to honor in a second. Table sense? But to let that
pass, enough is said (if this text was silent) to make it more then probable,
that the transgression of our first parents presently followed their creation,
i.e. the same day. To be sure there is more evidence of truth in it then all
his objections to the contrary are a ble to obscure. Indeed his confidence is
great, but we shall now scan his evidence, and accordingly judge of his
confidence.

He argues, [That man, T.T. Obj. 1.
yea and the Angels also stood in their integrity with the clo sure of the
sixth day, for then all things were very good, Genesis 1.31. And no sooner did the
sixth day end, and the seventh begin, but God rested, and sanctified his holy
Sabbath, and was refreshed, and exceeding well satisfied with the goodness of
his creatures, which must needs precede sin.

This great argument has many little ones in the belly of it, and accordingly I
shall return several answers to it.

Whereas he dictates, then is an addition to the text; And therefore the whole
weight of his argument hanging upon this wooden pin of his own making, must
needs fall to the ground. It Is a conclusion founded upon a fallacy, which the
Logicians call a Fallacy of composition, when those things are jumbled together
which ought to be taken asunder; for the detection whereof let it be
considered, that in the text alleged, Genesis 1.31. there be two distinct
clauses; first, Gods approbation of his works, He saw every thing that he made,
and behold it was very good. Secondly, the conclusion of the day; and the
evening and the morning were the sixth day. Now to take these two clauses
conjunctly, which are related distinctly, and to argue (as this Author does)
that man had not sinned on the sixth day, for then all was very good, is a mere
sophisme, such as every puny in Logic is able to resolve; for why might not
Gods approbation be given forth in the morning or forenoon of the sixth day,
and time enough left before night for sin to creep into the world? To clear
this, let it be noted, See Dr. Willets Hexapla in Exodus 31.
That although God was pleased to parcel out his work into six distinct days,
yet he measured not every days work by the hourglass of time as we creatures
do, but what he did on each day was done in an instant. He did but speak the
word and it was done, he commanded and it was created. Psalm. 33.9. Psa. 146.5.


This is evident from principles of reason as well as from the forementioned
places of Scripture; for creation is the production of something out of
nothing, or that which is as much as nothing. Now betwixt the being of
something and nothing there can be no intermediate state, and consequently no
imaginable space of time, but an imperceptible moment: Hence that received
maxim, that Creation is in an instant. Now to accommodate this to the work of
the sixth day, consisting of man and beasts; certainly the forming of these
creatures being momentaneous in the sense above mentioned, took up but little
of the day. I can see no color of reason to the contrary, but our first
Parents might be created, and the whole creation completed in the fore part of
the sixth day. And doubtless, as soon as the creation was ended, the divine
approbatiom was added; And God saw that it was good. For surely as soon as the
creature was, the Creator saw what it was, and he saw it to be good, for he
made it good. And although the conclusion of the day be presently added, yet
it is without dispute, that many other things were transacted (though not
expressed in the first Chapter) before the close of the sixth day: as the
naming of the creatures, the joining of our first parents together in marriage,
and disposing of them in the garden, yea the giving of the Law, and in all
likelihood the breaking of it too. And so the first knot is untied.

Whereas he adds, very uncertain, if not a false supposition, viz. That the
order of the words and Chapters is exactly answerable to the order of the
things done. Whereas in the judgment of the learned here is a manifest
dislocation or misplacing of the sacred story, as to the order of things; for
if we regard the exact order of things done, the second chapter of Genesis
would begin at the fourth verse, as learned Junius affirms: And the second and
third verses would come in at the end of the third Chapter, Junij Praelect. in
Genesis 2.
and so the mention of the Sabbaths institution would follow the description of
Adam's sin; as an acute De. Lightfoot's Harmony of the Old Testa. and he gives
this solid reason why the words stand as they do, and why the mention of the
Sabbath is set down before Adams fall, viz. because the Holy Ghost would
dispatch the general history of the first seven days together without the
interposition of any particular story.
Writer of our own has observed. But because the adversary will say these are
but humane fancies, let us see whether they have not sure footing in the Word
it self. To this purpose let the Reader turn to Genes. 2. and view the texture
and composure of the whole Chapter. In the three first verses you have an
account of God's finishing the heavens and the earth, as also his resting on
the seventh day. From the third to the eighth verse you have the creation of
Vegetables, herbs and plants, which was the work of the third day. From ver. 8.
to ver. 15. you have the planting of the garden, and adorning of it with trees
and rivers; which (if it were a work of creation) was done before the seventh
day, though it be not mentioned till after it. Again, ver. 7. you have the
forming of the man, and from ver. 18. to 22. the framing of the woman; as a
also the creating of birds and beasts, and the naming of the creatures, which
you see are all mentioned after the seventh day, yet all, or most of them done
on the sixth. So that should we strictly cleave to the letter, In Scriptura non
est prius and posterius. The order of time is not always kept in Scripture,
but sometimes that is placed first which was done last, and contra.
and believe that all things were done in the same order as they are here set
down, we must believe that herbs and plants, birds and beasts, man and woman
were all created after the creation was ended, and God had rested the seventh
day. Yea, if the literal and historical order of the words must be maintained,
how will T.T. make good his Mount-paradise-notion? For according to the order
of the words, Paradise was not planted till after the Sabbath. How then could
Adam keep his first Sabbath in Paradise? Viderit ipse. Hitherto therefore he
must of necessity yield a transposition; that is, that although these things be
mentioned after the seventh day, yet they were done before it, (...), Haec est
un^ de regulis ad intelligendam Scripturam sanctam necessariis. Luth. loc. com.
p. 75.
and here set down by way of Postscript: Now let us see what may be said for
that which follows, ver. 16.17. compared with the three last verses; you have
the woman given in marriage to the man, and the Creators Law touching the
forbidden fruit given in charge to both; and that all this was done on the
sixth day will be readily granted. Well then, Chap. 3. you have the story of
the Serpents temptation, the transgression of our first parents, their
conviction in the cool of the day, and lastly their expulsion out of Paradise;
and the juncture of all this lying so close to the story of the sixth day,
Chap. 2. that unless you purposely loosen the connection, you may rationally
look upon it as one and the same days work. And verily methinks the Serpents
first onset sounds as if there were very little distance of time between God's
giving the Law, and Satan's tempting the woman to break it, Genesis 3.1. Yea, has
God said ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden? a very abrupt motion, if
it had not been made immediately upon the giving of the Law. The words are (as
one observes) a form of speech used by one who standing aloof, and over-hearing
what was forbidden, Mr. Walker, Doctrine of the Sabbath.
does presently step in and ask if it were not so as he took it to be: and
besides, the woman's answer (as was hinted before) being in the future tense,
we may, or shall eat hereafter implies that they had scarce eaten as yet. So
that all circumstances considered, it more then probable, that this third
Chapter is nothing but an history of what was done on the sixth day. And so the
mention of the Sabbath in the beginning of the second Chapter, may well enough
(in order of things) take place at the end of the third, and then it will
roundly follow, That the first sin went before the first Sabbath.

As to that which is further alleged, Exodus 31.17. Isai. 42.1. Mat. 3.17. Mat.
12.18.
unanimously testifying that our blessed Redeemer is the person in whom the
eternal God delights, in whom the Father is well-pleased. As for the other
Scriptures which T.T. crowds in for company-sake in his Margin, as Job 38.7.
Luke 2.13. the one speaking of the Angels song at the Creation of the earth,
the other of their joyful Hymn at the birth of Christ, I wonder how they make
for his purpose, to prove that man had not sinned before the Sabbath. But
impertinent quotations are no rarities in his book; he would make a glorious
show of Scripture, to dazzle the eyes of the simple, when the Scriptures he
cites are neither in sense nor sound applicable to his purpose; which if it be
not packing sophistry, let the world judge. Well, his first tripartite argument
is weighed, and found to light. And hitherto (for ought appears to the
contrary) the first Sabbath was not before sin.

I proceed to the second.

2. T.Ts. Argum.
[Some time (says he) must be allowed for the sin of Angels and after that for
the parley with the woman; and it was no little space wherein Adam gave
significant names to the creatures.]

For the Angels sin, 1 Timothy 3.6.
pride was a principal ingredient in their sin, and Job 4.18.
God charged them with folly for their pride; how much more folly shall sinful
man be found guilty of, who in the pride of his foolish heart shall presume to
be wise above that which is written? Some think that place, Luke 10.28. may
refer to the first fall of the Angels, being mentioned as a check to the
disciples, ready to be lifted up with pride at the success of their ministry.
Ne factis miraculis superbirent discipuli, adduxit Domiuus exemplum Satanae,
etc. Stella in loc.
However it is most consentaneous to Scripture, and Reason to conceive that the
Angels (being spiritual substances) must in their actings, whether good or
evil, be proportionable to their beings. And sin being a spiritual evil, how
quick a progress it might make in such creatures, let any man judge who can but
compare things spiritual with spiritual. To me it is no great difficulty to
apprehend, that in a very few moments, by an aspiring thought, legions of
Angels might become legions of Devils. Especially being (for ought I know)
linked together in a conjoined apostasy.

For Adam's naming the creatures, this also might soon be dispatched, T.T.
would have it) but only the birds and beasts were made to pass before Adam; of
which there are not many kinds, Primi parents insignes Philosophi. Luther, in
G^n. Cap. 1.
and not many of a kind created at first. And doubtless it cost Adam no study
to impose significant names upon them. He had natural Philosophy enough
concreated with him to know the properties and qualities of the creaures; 1
Kin. 4.33, 34
and he needed no dictionary to find out suitable names for them. If Solomon
after the Fall were so well read in the book of the creatures, that he could
write a complete Commentary upon it from the Cedar to the Hysop, what shall we
think of Adam before the Fall? But to put all out of doubt, Dr. Twisse moral of
the Sabbath, p. 51.
that the naming of the Creatures took up no long time is evident; for they
were all named before Eve was formed, Genesis 2.19, 20. So as all this might be
done before noon, and time enough left before night for the acting of that
fatal tragedy, the Fall of Man, as a judicious Writer concludes.

For the parley betwixt the Woman and the Serpent, Nothing is more certain then
that the Highest himself did both sanctify and celebrate the first Sabbath,
and that before sin. p. 11.
I may well say, nothing is more uncertain. I have given some
Scripture-arguments already to make it more then probable; I shall add more in
the third branch, to make it little less then infallible, that man fell on the
sixth day. For the present I shall only cast in one Argument against the
supposed institution of the Sabbath in Paradise,

If the Sabbath was instituted in Paradise, then Adam did observe, and was
bound to observe the first Sabbath in Paradise: But neither of these can be
proved from Scripture: Therefore, etc.

1. That Adam did unquestionably observe the first Sabbath in Paradise, cannot
be demonstratively proved from Scripture. This is undeniable, that whenever, or
wherever he kept his first Sabbath, he did it in imitation of God's example:
Now how could he rest a whole day by God's example, till God had fully
completed the first seventh days rest for his example? Ephesians. 5.1.
Imitation of God being a subsequent, not a concomitant act, a following of him
as dear children, not a fellow-acting with him. I can therefore see no
congruity in that passage of T.T. where he reasons thus against reason; p. 54.
Certainly if Adam were a follower of God as a dear child, he must needs keep
the Sabbath with his Father. With his Father! how then could he follow him?
Certainly God went before, if Adam followed him as a dear child. I cannot
conceive how he could possibly keep a Sabbath that God himself had not first
blessed and sanctified to that end. I may upon better grounds suppose (with a
late renowned Champion in this controversy) that God alone kept the first
Sabbath (as Christ alone the first Lord's day) that he might afford Adam an
example, Mr. Cawdrey's Sab. rediv. p. 3. cap. 1.
as of working six days, by his being exercised six days in the work of
creation, so of resting the seventh in it is next weekly return, and so
successively week after week. But it will be said, if Adam were bound to keep
the first Sabbath, we are bound to believe he did keep it: Therefore a word or
two of that.

2. If he were bound, I demand, quo jure, by what Law? By the Law written in
his heart? why then was he bound to keep a Sabbath before there was a Sabbath
to keep? for the Law was graven in his heart on the sixth day, as a branch of
that Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10.
divine image of God concreated with him, Whereas the Sabbath (to be sure) was
not instituted till the seventh day, if then. Besides, the Law written in the
table of Adam's heart was the same (in this Authors judgment) which was
afterward written in Tables of Stone, that is, the fourth Commandment: which
(if we take his and Mr. Brabournes Comment upon it) prescribes six days for
labor before a seventh of rest. Now this order Adam could not possibly observe
for the first week, being created but on the sixth day. He must therefore look
out some other Law, and where he will find it I cannot see, unless in Genesis 2.3.
and he must be very sharp-sighted to find any thing there that looks like a Law
binding our first Parents to observe the first Sabbath. For let the words be
well pondered, And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, Genesis 2.3.
Opened.
becase in it he had rested from all his works which he had created and made.
Whence we may clearly gather, It Is not said because he should rest, but had
rested.
that God's resting on the seventh day was in order of time before his blessing
and sanctifying of the day: as those words ver. 2. On the seventh day God
rested from all his works which he had made, See Mr. White of Dorchester Genesis 2.
imply the making of the works before God's resting; so ver. 3. He blessed and
sanctified the seventh day, because in it he had rested, must needs intimate,
that God's resting on the seventh day went before his sanctifying of the day,
or setting it apart for a Sabbath: Not long before I grant, As Chap. 1. where
Moses relates God's six days works as finished by him, then follows the
blessing upon them. So in the 2. Chap. he makes the blessing to follow upon
Gods resting, as before upon his working.
but evidently long enough to discharge our first parents by virtue of those
words from any obligation to keep the first Sabbath. And whereas T.T. argues,
that the Sabbath was made for man, and if Adam were a man, the Sabbath was made
for him; I grant the whole argument, only with this distinction, That although
it was made for man, yet it follows not that it was made for man as soon as man
was made. Neither has he alleged any one text of Scripture (Valeat quantum
valere potest) of sufficient evidence to support his grand conclusion, That the
Seventh-day Sabbath was instituted and observed in pure Paradise. Which if it
Yet I grant it not.
should be granted him, yet his feeble cause would receive no invincible
strength by it. For although it would prove a Sabbath, and a weekly Sabbath,
one day in seven to be moral and perpetual (which I deny not) (and herein I
could join issue with the contrary-minded) yet what is this to the perpetuity
and immutability of that old seventh day? since in the judgment of all
Interpreters, both ancient and modern (except Jews) only one day in seven, or
a seventh part of weekly time is here perpetually established, that old seventh
day only temporarily, and during the state of the old world. So Chrysostom;
Here (says he,) from the beginning God has intimated to us this doctrine,
(...), Chrysostom. Hom. 19. in Genesis 2.
instructing us to set apart one day in the circle of every week for spiritual
exercises. Note by the way, he says not it is expressly determined here, (that
is, left for the fourth Commandment) but it is intimated and implied here. And
the like says Junius. But to draw to a conclusion; I suppose it is more then
probably demonstrative (If I may so speak without a Soloecism) that the old
Sabbath was instituted (though in the beginning) yet after the Fall, in man's
corrupt estate, when he had put off his public capacity as the representative
of mankind, and was looked upon as a single person, yea a sinful person, and
one that stood in need of a Redeemer; and so the day must needs be alterable,
as shall be shortly argued and evinced. However, if we should suppose the date
of the Sabbaths institution to be utterly uncertain, as the institution of
Sacrifices is, I see not but this may argue (as to the day) mutability stamped
upon it. It is true, the solemn worship of God is unalterable, as long as
there is a God to be worshipped; but the old way of worship by Sacrifices was
mutable from the very first original of it. Thus I grant the time of worship,
Romans 12.1. Chrysostom. in Hebr. Hom. 11. Basil. in Isai. c. 20.
the Sabbath it self, being an inseparable adjunct of solemn worship, is
perpetual; but the old day, the seventh from the Creation; was made mutable in
the first institution of it. Indeed in some sense we have sacrifices still,
spiritual sacrifices; and we have a Sabbath still, yea Mat. 24.20.
a literal Sabbath: But old Sabbaths and old Sacrifices being twins, (though
both honorable, and serviceable in their generations) yet like Hippocrates
twins they lived together and died together, and let both together in God's
name be buried in the grave of Christ, so as never to rise again. 2 Cor. 5.15,
17.
But let our Gospel Worship and Gospel-Sabbath take life from our Savior's
Resurrection, which brought with it a new Creation, a new World, making all
things new, as the Apostle speaks.

2. That the old seventh day was made alterable in the first institution, will
further appear, if we consider the Law or command by which it was instituted;
which is no where to be found but in Genesis 2.3. As for the Law written in Adam's
breast, it is too dark to ground an institution upon. We must have a Law
written in God's book. And there is no other that I know of but Genesis 2.3. which
if I grant the Adversary to be a command (for some do stiffly deny it) yet I
must be bold to tell him, it is but a consequential command: For although it be
said, God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; yet it is not said, Let
man sanctify it. Here is included God's example, but no express command. And
if the New Testament do not afford us as much warrant for the Lord's day as
this amounts to, I will yield the Cause. But of that hereafter. Let the Reader
only take notice (by the way) how mortally T. T. has wounded his own cause,
Pa. 36.
by exclaiming so bitterly against Consequences. He calls it Philosophy, and
the deceit of men to establish Ordinances by Consequences. Why let me ask him,
Was the Patriarchal Sabbath for above two thousand years together an Ordinance
of God? for my part I never doubted of it. But he can never make it good
without a Consequence, he must make a new Bible first; for express command
there is none, only God's example, which without a precept is not always
binding. And so (to use his own words) the Lord has disappointed the devices
of the crafty, and snared him in his own wisdom, he dug a pit for the Lord's
day, and his Saturdays Sabbath is fallen into it, help it out how he can. For
his life he can find no more in Genesis 2. then an implicit command for that old
seventh day. And now the next question will be, Whether it be a temporary, or a
perpetual precept? If perpetual, it must be moral. But that it cannot be by his
own rule; for he has fairly granted, That a Moral Law is not merely good
because commanded, but therefore commanded because it is good: understand it of
a Moral natural Law. Now I beseech you, Sir, what natural goodness was there in
the seventh day more then in the sixth or fifth? Is one day in it self any
better then another as to God? And as to man, if any day had been naturally or
morally good above the rest, Genesis 1.28. Psalm. 8.56.
in all reason it had been the sixth day, on which God made man, crowned him
with his blessings, and gave him dominion over his creatures; or the first day,
in which he made the heavens, the Angels, and the elements. Therefore his
threefold mystery to the seventh-days morality, is but a threefold miserable
mistake, to make the best of it.

1. That it was written in innocent Adam's heart; for which he cites Romans 2.
where there is not a word of any such thing. ^. 10.11.


2. That it was afterward written in Tables of stone; for which he quotes Gal.
3.19. as little to his purpose as the other.

3. That it is also written in the fleshly tables of renewed hearts: which the
experience of almost all renewed hearts in heaven and earth does contradict.
For to speak in the language of Eliphas, Job 5.1. S. Paul Col. 2.16, 17.
Call now if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of the Saints
will thou turn? either Scripture-Saints, Cyprian cp. ad Fidum. 59. Chryso. Tom
de Res.
or Church Saints? Ask S. Paul, S. Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and
they will tell you that your antiquated Sabbath was so far from being written
in their hearts, that they have written against it with their pens. August. de
lit. and Spir. c. 14.
Turn over the works of the eminent Fathers, whose books neither you nor I are
worthy to bear, and their writings are so voluminous that we are not able to
bear them. Mr. Cawdrey. Mr. Palmer. Mr. Sheph. Mr. Byfield. Mr. White of Dorch.
and the whole Assembly of Divines Confe. of faith. Chap. 21.
Add to these, the most judicious, pious and zealous Ministers and Martyrs of
Christ, who have lived and died within the compass of these sixteen hundred
years; and most, if not all of them, will tell you, That they never owned your
Saturday-Sabbath; they lived without it, dyed without it, and are (I doubt not)
gone to their everlasting rest in heaven without it. Besides, how many faithful
witnesses of late years has the Lord raised up to bear testimony against it? of
whom I suppose the greatest part are yet alive, though some are fallen asleep.
In a word, God has promised to write his laws in the hearts of all his people.
Jer. 31.33. Hebr. 8.10, Char. 16. But not one of ten thousand has the
Saturday-Sabbath written in his heart; therefore it is now none of Gods laws.
how many precious, gracious and pious Christians are yet upon earth, men and
women redeemed from the earth, and crucified to the world (of whom the world is
not worthy) who look upon your Sabbath as a cipher? can freely labor and
travel upon it, buy and sell upon it, and that after accurate inquiries about
it; and to this day their consciences never reproched them, their hearts never
smote them for it? what will you say all these are Hypocrites, unrenewed,
unsanctified ones? This were to condemn the generation of Gods Children, and
Canonize your self, with your few misled associates, for the only Saints in
Christendom; which I would hope you dare not do, though I know you dare as
much as another.

Well, the adversary is brought to this Dilemma; Either God has no people in
the world but such as are of his persuasion, or his moral and immutable Laws
are not written in their hearts, or the Saturday-Sabbath is none of those
Laws. The last is the likeliest in the judgment of any indifferent Reader; let
his cause be tried where he pleases, either at Natures tribunal, or the throne
of Grace in the hearts of believers, and he will be cast at both. Nature is
both blind and dumb in the business; and if he plead the law of Grace (which is
rectifyed and refined nature) the whole Christian world will give in evidence
against him. A Sabbath, a day of holy rest, indeed it will own, and one day of
seven in proportion; but the particularity of the day, the seventh from the
Creation, it utterly disclaims. And where he will find advocates for it, but
either among the unbelieving Jews, or a few misbelieving Christians Judaizing,
I know not. Therefore surely it is no ingredient of Gods moral and immutable
Laws. The conclusion then is, that it was but a temporary precept by which it
was established, which some call ceremonial, others had rather term it
positive, but none perpetual, unless such as are more apt to say anything then
able to prove it when then have said it. We deny not the fourth Commandment to
be a perpetual precept; but we are now speaking of Genesis 2. which at most is but
a positive Law; and positive precepts are alterable at the lawgivers pleasure:
yea, though they were given in Paradise, as the precept concerning the
forbidden fruit, though it were given before the fall, and should undoubtedly
have bound Adam and all his posterity if he had not fallen; Genesis 2.17.
yet now it binds none, neither should it if the tree were known. So also that
positive law of keeping and dressing the Garden, Mr. ^^ Strange.
which to Adam was a binding precept, yet now it is wholly abrogated in the
letter of it, or else (as one says) we must all tag and rag turn gardeners.
True, there was something moral, and of the law of nature in that precept,
Yates Model of Divin. Haec lex naturalis est conjunctam habens designationem
diei ceremonialem, quia vero partim naturalis partimque (ut loquuntur Scholae)
positiva est. Propterea discrimen oportet in eo ordine adhiberi, quod enim
natural est, puta diem septimum quemque Deo sacrum esse illud permanet, quod
positivum, nempe illum diem qui septimus est creationis esse Diem Sabbathi hoc
mutatum est. Juni prae'ec. in Genesis 2. p. 27.
man must always be exercised and employed, the earth (his storehouse) must
also be his workhouse; Idleness and happiness could never consist together.
But that his employment must be limited to the culture of a Garden that was
merely positive. The like may be said for the Law of the Sabbath (supposing not
granting it had been given in paradise) that man should celebrate a Sabbath was
moral and perpetual, but that it must be on the seventh day from the Creation,
was merely positive, temporary, and alterable at the lawgivers pleasure.

And this may serve as a proper Engine to undermine that grand argument founded
on the institution of marriage. P. 155. The Sabbath is a precept (says he) as
ancient, as Universal as marriage, both were instituted in paradise for Adam
and all his posterity.

Ans. We grant that the institution of marriage was made in pure paradise,
which ever since has made it honorable amongst all men, Heb. 13.4. And thus far
we also grant the first institution is a perpetual obligation, viz. That one
man is bound to one woman; yet I hope no man is tied by that first institution
to make choice of this or that particular woman; but he is at liberty to marry
whom he lists (provided it be in the Lord;) so also admitting the Sabbath to be
instituted in paradise; yet I can see no reason why it should limit us to that
particular day, but (that notwithstanding) we may observe any other day that
shall appear to be of the Lords appointment, as the first day of the week
infallibly is, and therefore it bears the Lords name, being styled the Lords
Day by way of eminency. Indeed now the day is fixed, and we cannot choose
another, nor change it to another, Psa 118.29. Rev. 1.10.
for reasons hereafter to be rendered. But enough is said to prove the command
(whatever it was, whereby the old Sabbath was instituted) to be but temporary,
though it had been given in Innocence. A positive precept given in innocence
might suffer much alteration by man's apostasy: Mr. Sheph. These. 17.19.
For (to borrow the words of a reverend Author) the sin of man made the Lord
repent that ever he had made man, and consequently that ever he made the world
for man; which might be a sufficient ground of the Lawgivers pleasure to alter
and change the day stated upon the worlds Creation, to another day stated upon
the worlds Redemption, of which the Lord will never repent. Now if a precept or
institution given before the fall might be mutable at the Law givers pleasure,
how much more this of the seventh day which was rather imposed since the fall,
as the institution of Sacrifices, the prohibition of blood, etc. Genesis 9.4.


3. That the old seventh day was made alterable in the first institution of the
Sabbath, is most of all evident from the ground or occasion upon which it was
instituted; and this is hinted unto us in those words, Genesis 2.2. See Ainsworth
annot. in Genesis 2.2
On the seventh day God ended his works which he had made, and rested the
seventh day, wherefore he blessed and sanctified it. Now it much concerns us to
enquire in what sense the Lord is said to have ended his works on the seventh
day? since we must not imagine with Hierome and Catharinus that God made any
new creatures on the seventh day; for doubtless the creation was finished on
the sixth day. How then it is said, on the seventh day God ended his works?
Why, without resting and torturing the words, as some do, we may understand it
in one or both of these two respects; either 1. In respect of Providence: or,
2. In respect of the Promise.


1. In respect of Providence; So judicious Mr. White in Genesis 2.
and why may not this be the meaning of the holy Ghost, That on the seventh day
God was pleased by a signal hand of Providence to perfect his works of
Creations, either by establishing them to continue as they do this day, or at
least by manifesting their accomplishment in his rest and cessation from
Creating-work? Take the word (Ended) in this sense, and so it informs us, that
the ground of Gods sanctifying the seventh day, was not simply his rest upon
that day but also the reason of that rest, Heb. 4. v. 3.4.
namely the finishing of his works, witnessed by his resting, as the Author to
the Hebrews plainly intimates. And not only that, but also the result and
consequent of both, namely the dignifying and honoring of that day above all
other days for the time being, by crowning it with the accomplishment of the
greatest work then made, or manifested to be made perfect. Isa. 58.3.
Hence the seventh day was styled, The Honorable of the Lord; not that in it
self one day is more honorable and observable then another, but that which
differences the one from the other, and dignifies one above another, is Gods
casting honor upon it by some memorable work of Providence, either begun or
finished upon that day. Upon which account most of the Jews Festivals were
instituted; as their Passover in the 14th of Abib; Lev. 23.5. Esth. 9.21.
the Feast of Purim on the 14th of Adar; like our Gunpowder-treason-day, on the
5. of November: because the noble acts of God have been done upon these days.
And this was a main ground of their weekly Sabbath upon the seventh day; being
a day crowned with the greatest work then visible, a work manifested to be
finished on the seventh day, by Gods resting on that day. Yet this must be
noted, that the finishing of Gods work did not make the day more honorable then
others by any natural necessity, but only by positive right and equity. There
was no necessary and natural cause why the seventh day, on which the work was
declaratively ended, should be more honorable then the sixth day, on which it
was really ended and finished, only it was Gods will and pleasure to have it
so. Having premised this by the way; now let us see how the old Sabbath was
founded upon the finishing of his works: As thus; That day which God has
honored and crowned with the accomplishment of the greatest work, must be the
day of solemn worship or Sabbath Day: But the seventh day from the Creation was
thus honored and crowned in the Cradle or infancy of the world: Therefore that
day must be the Sabbath day, viz. till a greater work take place. And then the
argument will conclude as strongly for the change of the day, as ever it did
for the choice of it.

For we shall argue thus; If the ground of stating the Sabbath on the seventh
day were applicable to another day, then the Sabbath in the first groundwork
of it was alterable to another day: But the ground of stating it upon that old
seventh day was applicable to another day, therefore, etc.

The consequence is clear as the Sun; for as it is with duties, so with days
of worship; the grounds upon which they are settled being applicable to other
times and places, the days and duties themselves have always been moveable
and circumstantially mutable also; as that duty of reverencing of Gods
Sanctuary (which is mated and coupled with keeping his Sabbaths) the ground of
it being applicable to the Temple as well as the Tabernacle, Levit. 19.30.
the duty it self was also moveable from the Tabernacle to the Temple, although
the first were only in being when the precept was given. And the like must be
said of the Sabbath: The consequence has evidence enough in it self to every
vulgar eye. If the foundation be moveable, so is the building. If the
Assumption be questioned, viz. That the ground of fixing the Sabbath on the
seventh day was moveable and applicable to another day, we shall thus confirm
it; The ground of fixing the Sabbath on the old seventh day was Gods honoring
and advancing that day above all other days (for the time being) by his most
eminent work of Creation, manifested to be accomplished on that day; therefore
when another day shall be crowned with the accomplishment of a more eminent
Creation, the same ground and reason which cast the Sabbath on the old day will
unavoidably carry it to the new. Now the work of Redemption is a new Creation,
2 Cor. 5.17. and it was long ago prophesied, that as the Hag. 2.9.
glory of the second Temple should out shine that of the first, so the glory of
this new Creation should excel that of the old, and comparatively eat out the
memory of it. Isai. 65.17.
Behold, I create new heavens and a new earth, says the Lord, and the old
shall not be remembered nor come into mind. Not that the Lord would simply and
absolutely have the memory of the Creation to be lessened, but respectively and
in comparison of Redemption,; it must not be obliterated, but only
subordinated: retained and remembered it must be still, but as a lesser work
then Redemption, and as a lesser good to us, as the Law is to the Gospel, or
the Old Testament to the New. Redemption must be owned as the greater and
better work, in as much as Spiritual things are better then Natural, and Gods
last works are his best; the first being only preparative to the last, as Dr.
Sibbs excellently observes. Mat. 16.26. Mark 8.36.
And verily he that shall question whether Redemption be a greater and better
work then Creation, knows little what a Redeemer is, or what the ransom of an
immortal soul is worth. See Mr. Phil. Goodw. Dies Dominic. rediv. pa. 11.12, 13.
I should think, as man's gaining the world cannot recompense the loss of his
soul, so Gods creating of the world does not equalize Christ's redeeming the
soul. In creating the world indeed the Lord has done much for me; but in
shedding his precious blood, in conquering sin and death, he has done more
then if he had created another world for me. Let the redeemed of the Lord say
so; yea, the work is not only better to me, but greater in it self too. In
creation there was but a words speaking, and the work was presently done; 2
Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. See more in Dr. Gouge Heb. 9. S. 63.
but in Redemption there was doing and dying; God must come down from heaven,
God must be made man, yea, God-man must be made sin and a curse for me. Here
was a work exceeding wonder. Besides, in the work of Creation there was nothing
to with stand: But in the work of Redemption here was Justice against Mercy,
wrath against pity. In a word, in the Creation God brought something out of
nothing, but in redemption he has out of one contrary brought another, good
out of evil, life out of death. Is not thy soul ravished, Christian, at these
discoveries of wisdom, grace and power shining forth in thy souls Redemption?
Can thou see the like in the worlds Creation? Is there not more glory in one
Christ then in many worlds? What a sapless, unsavory question therefore to a
soul that knows any thing of Christ, Pa. 130.
is that which T. T. propounds; Who told thee the work of Redemption was the
greater work? A question more beseeming a Jew then a Christian. But the answer
is ready at hand; He that has told me the heavens are the works of his Psalm
8.3.
fingers, and Redemption the work of his Isal. 52.9, 10.
arm, his outstretched, unbared arm, has sufficiently taught me that
Redemption is the greater work, a work of greater might, I am sure of greater
mercy. And so for his next question, If it be the greater work, who told thee
that it deserves the honor of the day? I answer, a wiser and better man then
you or I, that man after Gods own heart, who was most likely to know the mind
of the Lord, he has foretold it in that 118th Psalm, when by a prophetic
spirit foreseeing the glory of the resurrection day as a day amongst the seven
days, like the Sun amongst the seven planets, he accordingly salutes it with a
magnificent Title, This is the day which the Lord has made, yea magnified; for
the word signifies not only to make, but to magnify and advance above all
others: 1 Samuel 12.6. And such was the power of God in raising Christ, hat the
Psalmist cries our, it is mavelous in our sight. Acts 4.10.11. (...) est vel
imus vel summus lapis. Arretius in 1 Pet. 2.7. Mat. 11.11.
As by the same word the Lord is said to advance Moses and Aaron, (...)
that is, to lift them up in dignity and preeminency above the rest of the
people. Thus he foresaw that the Lord would magnify and exalt the resurrection
day; and why? Because on this day the most glorious work of redemption was to
be accomplished, the stone which the builders resused being made the head of
the corner, i. e. to perfect and complete the fabric of the new Creation. And
thus is the resurrection-day prophetically crowned with honor above all other
days, Old Sabbath and all: For the work crowns the day, and the greater the
work the greater the day. And therefore although the last day of the week were
the greatest in dignity during the supereminency of the old Creation, yet when
a greater work was to be finished, the day on which it was to conclude must
without dispute be the greater day. As John Baptist being the last and greatest
of the prophets, yet was less then the least in the Kingdom of heaven; so I
may say of the Old Sabbath, the greatest day under the Old Testament, yet it
must vail and stoop when the Sun of righteousness shines forth in a new day
under the New Testament. Surely the second Creation must have a Sabbath of
commemoration as well as the first, or else God should magnify his lesser work
of Creation above his greater work of Redemption. And thus I suppose I have
made good my Position both Logically and Theologically, that the old seventh
day was alterable in its first institution, since the same ground of stating
the Sabbath at first upon that day might be a sufficient ground of translating
it to another day, as now it is; and that by Divine Authority, as shall be seen
hereafter.

The adversary has no considerable weapons to oppose this truth withal, but
what have been already beaten out of Mr. Brabourns hands, and are sufficiently
blunted by others; or if any new ones be added, we shall now try what metal
they are made of. T.T. p. 7.


The seventh day (says he) was set apart in memorial of the most glorious work
of Creation; the benefit whereof being extended to us, p. 69.
engages us to that day still. And again; The world being created not only for
Israel but for all people, I appeal to all conscientious Christians, whether
all mankind be not bound to that very day who enjoy the benefit of the
Creation. (By the way let me tell him, when I read his insulting challenge, I
expected Scripture-arguments, and not popular appeals.) But to let him swim in
his own element, the sum of his appealing (for arguing I cannot call it)
amounts but to this, that if the old seventh day were set apart in memory of
the Creation, which every Christian (as a creature) is bound to commemorate,
then the day is unchangeable, and perpetually to be observed.

But to this I answer; The consequence is sick and crasie, Genesis 17.11.
circumcision a sign betwixt God and the seed of Abraham? so was the Exodus
31.17.
old Sabbath betwixt God and the house of Israel. Was Genesis 17.7.
circumcision a perpetual Covenant with Abraham's seed in their generation? So
also was the Exodus 31.16.
Sabbath to be kept as a perpetual Covenant throughout their generations.

In a word, was Genesis 17.14.
circumcision so exacted, that whosoever was uncircumcised must be cut off from
the house of Israel? why, so also was the old Exodus 31.14.
Sabbath, whosoever does any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from
among the people. Again, let none tax me with incongruity in comparing the old
Sabbath and sacrifices together; for the Lord of the Sabbath himself has
taught me to lay them in an equal balance, who when the Pharisees clamoured
his Disciples for Sabbath breaking, stops their mouths with that Hos. 6.6. Mat.
12.7. Pluris apud De um salus mortalium quams crifi. iapecudum. Muscul. in Loc.
Scripture, The Lord will have merey and not socrifice: That is, the
necessities of men relieved, rather then the supposed letter of the Law
observed. In my poor judgment it is very considerable, that such a person, at
such a time, should match the Sabbath day and sacrifices together; for it was
not the Sabbath in general, but the Sabbath day which was then under dispute.
Surely there was some mystery in this Divinity of our Savior. But this may
suffice for a first answer; As the Covenant of grace is perpetually to be
commemorated, but not by circumcision and sacrifices, the old memorials of it;
so the work of creation is continually to be had in remembrace, but not by the
old Sabbaths celebration: For we say, as the new Covenant must have new signs,
so the new creation a new Sabbath. And

2. A new day might keep alive the memory of the old Creation, Meditatio and
celebratio operum Dei non minus alio die quam septimoficri potest. Ursin.
although it be primarily intended as a memorial of redemption. And this double
honor is put upon the Lords day, as the first day of the week, it commemorates
the worlds redemption, as the seventh day in weekly recourse it calls to mind
the worlds Creation. For in laboring six days, and resting the seventh
weekly, we recognize Gods working six days, and resting the seventh
originally. And here I may as rationally as T.T. appeal to any ingenuous
Christian, if the Old Sabbath served the Jews as a means to keep them mindful
both of the worlds Creation, and their redemption from Egypt; why may not our
Lords day Sabbath be the Christians memorandum, both of the worlds Creation,
Deuteronomy. 5.15.
and his Redemption from hell? Of the last most directly indeed, and that most
deservedly, being the greatest work and the richest mercy; For although it is
true, to have an earth to tread upon, an air to breath in, light to look upon,
creatures to live upon, are excellent mercies; yet to have an angry God
reconciled, a sinful nature repaired, Death and Hell vanquished, Heaven and
glory purchased and assured, is infinitely more blessed, more beneficial. To
conclude; If I must consecrate a weekly Sabbath to the Lord, what day more
proper, more suitable, more significant, then that which bears a lively
inscriptior of the Lord my Redeemer, not without some commemoration of God my
Creator?

But the old seventh day may still he retained in memory of the Creation, and
the Lords day be celebrated too in memory of Redemption (though not as a
Sabbath;) both days may lovingly live together among Christians redeemed from
the earth. T.T. p. 61, 62.


To this I may easily answer without any great study, Law requires, or the
Gospel allows. More then the law requires; for that calls but for one day in
seven; Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, not Sabbath-dayes. Exodus 20 8.
Again, six days shall thou labor, not five days. Chrysostomes descant upon
it is very pithy: Tom. 5. p. 5 23.
The week contains seven days (says he;) Now see how the Lord has
distributed these days; he has not taken the greatest part to himself, and
left us the least, neither has he taken half, and left half, requiring three
for himself, and leaving us but three; no, the Lord is more liberal, he has
given thee six, and taken but one for himself So he. And indeed the Law says
the same. I know it is disputed whether these words ( six days thou shall
labor) be preceptive or permissive only: but to me it is past dispute that
they carry a preceptive force; for the injunction of working six days is
delivered in the same commanding terms, v. 9. with the inhibition of work on
the seventh day, v. 10. T.Ts. gloss therefore falls to the ground, Exodus., 20.9.
(...) Exodus 10.10. (...)
Six days shall thou labor, that is, God gives thee leave (says he;) as if
it were but a bare permission. Or, six days thou will labor; pointing out the
creatures earthly inclination, as if there were a prediction in the words. But
let me advise him in the fear of God to read over the Commandment once more,
not as he would have it, but as it is in the Original (since he professes skill
in the language of Canaan;) and then I shall ask him, whether those words verse
10. ( On the seventh day thou shall do no work) be not imperative? If so, why
not also these ( Six days shall thou labor) since the form of speech is one
and the same? It nothing helps him, that the word is otherwise translated
Exodus 31.15. six days may work be done; for whatever the translation be, the
tense is the same; and it may as well be rendered ( shall) as ( may.) And so
learned Ainsworth reads it. And thus his Critical flourish proves but an empty
flash. For my part I look upon these words ( Six days shall thou labor) as
having the force and virtue of a precept and command in them; not directly
injoyning us to labor upon any day (for that belongs rather to the 8th
Commandment;) but injoyning us such a proportion of time, Ephesians. 4.28. Among the
Jews when holy days were so frequent, there was never any weekly holy day
ordained to go cheek by jole with the Sabbath: But their holy days were
either monthly or yearly. Mr. George Abbot. p 118.

Periculum mortis tollit Sabbathum, and necessitas non habet ferias.


(six days together) within the compass of which our labors must be confined.
It Is as if the Lord had said, Thou shall not ordinarily labor more nor less
then six days together, nor rest more or less then one in seven ordinarily.
That God was pleased to appoint the Jews a greater number of holy days, as
Passover, Pentecost, etc. and so a lesser number of working-dayes, was only in
extraordinary cases, as our fasting-dayes and thanksgiving-dayes are. The
fourth Commandment was to be the standing rule only for ordinary time both of
weekly work and weekly rest. And as those words ( on the seventh day thou shall
do no work) hinder not but soldiers in time of war may fight a battle, and
Citizens in case of fire breaking out may quench the flames upon the Sabbath
day; It was never the Apostles meaning, nor in their power, when God by a
perpetual Law had given us six days for labor, and destined a seventh for
rest, to turn it into five days labor, and two days rest. Idem ibid.
the precept interdicting only the servile works of our ordinary callings: In
like manner these words ( six days shall thou labor) hinder not but in case
of extraordinary judgments, or unusual mercies, we may set apart days of
prayer and of praise: but ordinarily and weekly to keep two days of rest, and
leave but five days for labor, is utterly inconsistent with the fourth
Commandment. And here a word with our new Sabbath-keepers at Colchester; you
are erroneously taught to think you are bound in conscience to rest from labor
two days every week, else you are woeful earth-wormes, miserable worldlings
dunghill drudges, and what not? Now I beseech you bring conscience to the rule;
has not God said, six days shall thou labor? and will you listen to man
contradicting God, and telling you, nay, thou shall labor but five days only?
What Antichristian usurpation and Tyrannical imposing upon men's consciences is
this, to tell them in Print, (as T.T. does) It is not one day in seven will
serve your turn when the books shall be opened? Why, p 3.
Why, what are those books? Shall not the book of the law be one of them? And
what is written there? How read thou? Is it not plain, six days shall thou
labor, and do all thy work? Blot this clause out of Gods book, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
or alter the figure, and write five instead of six. And be sure God will blot
out thy name out of the book of life. Consider this, you that suffer your
consciences to be mancipated and enslaved to the dictates of Man. Either you
must make the week longer by a day, or confess, in limiting conscience to five
days only for labor, you break the Law under a pretense of keeping it; yea,
you totally make void the Commandment of the living God, in subverting the
equity of it; this is one thing The letter of the Law will bear but one day in
seven for holy rest; yea, the liberty of the Gospel will allow no more
ordinarily. Romans 3.21.
For do we by faith make void the law? God forbid. Nay, rather we establish the
law: Yet if we allow but five days in the week for labor, we must unavoidably
make void the law in this particular. And besides, the observation of days,
legal days, is disputed against by the great Apostle, as contrary to Christian
liberty. It is but a poor evasion to say, Col. 2.16. Gal. 4.^0. compared with
Gal. 5.1.
The Apostle speaks only of festival days, Passover, Pentecost, and the like;
for if these were inconsistent with Gospel-liberty (as the adversary grants)
how much more two days every week? which amount to more at the years end then
all those Jewish festivals twice told. The Church in the Apostles time had no
other holy day besides the Lords day. And the fourth Commandment enjoins the
labor of six days. Mr. Perkins in Galat.
Let him therefore sadly consider the dangerous consequences of his error,
forcing him at once both to break the bonds of Christian unity, and the bounds
of Christian liberty; yea, to render the golden yoke of Christ's Gospel heavier
then the Iron yoke of Moses Law. But his wretched design is visible, in
pressing two days in a week he would suppress one. The old seventh day must
be kept as a Sabbath, the Lords day only as a Church holy day, or State
holy day rather, for he calls it man's Sabbath. But I beseech you, what has man
to do to appoint a weekly holy day, contrary to Gods express command of six
days for labor? If the Lords day be of man's making, you sin in keeping of it.
Psalm 118.24.
But if it be a day of Gods making (as the Scripture says) then you sin in
keeping any other weekly day besides it. And to close all, let me add this
which will not easily be answered; To keep the old seventh day as a Sabbath in
memory of the Creation, and the Lords day only as a lesser holy day in memory
of Redemption, is to place the greater honor upon the lesser work, and to
profess that we are less engaged to Christ for shedding his blood to redeem
the world, then to God the Father for speaking the word to create the world;
which how it can stand with that Gospel-precept of honoring the Son as we
honor the Father, John 5.23.
let any sober Christian judge. Thus we have considered the ground of the
Sabbaths institution in the first sense, as Gods ending his work may be
understood in respect of Providence. But

2. Secondly and chiefly, God may be said to have ended his work on the seventh
day, in respect of the promise then manifested to have been given by Christ's
actual undertaking the work of his Mediatorship, and the Fathers rest or
complacency in that blessed undertaking of the Son. And here I doubt not but we
shall make it appear by the light of Gods candle shining in the Scriptures,
that the first institution of the seventh day was founded not so much upon the
memory of the Creation, as upon the first publication of Christ in the promise;
and then it will undeniably follow, that the day was made mutable in the first
foundation of it. For a day fixed upon the making of a promise must needs be
changed upon the making good of that promise. To make way for the framing of my
argument, I shall premise these seven considerations:

1. That man sinned and fell the same day on which he was created, as has been
already argued, and shall be further proved in the close of this position:
neither should it seem improbable or incredible to any, that so goodly a
building should be raised and ruinated both in one day; considering the
foundation of it stood upon the tottering Sands of free will, not the
impregnable rock of free grace and Christ's righteousness.

2. As man fell suddenly, so Christ was promised seasonably and early. The
merciful Lord would not let the Sun go down upon his wrath; but in the cool of
the day, while the wound of man's fall was yet fresh and bleeding, he gave him
that sovereign plaster in the promise, Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head.

3. That the fall of man brought corruption and confusion upon the whole
Creation, Genesis 3.17, 18. Romans 8.21, 22.
subjecting it to the curse of God, the consequences whereof are misery and
vanity.

4. That therefore when it is said, Genesis 2.2. On the seventh day God ended or
perfected his work (for so the word may be rendered, and so it is, Ezekiel.
16.14.) it may well bear this construction, that upon the seventh day, (...)
by the actual undertaking of Christ (newly promised to bring about man's
redemption, So 2 Chronicles. 4 12.
and the worlds restoration, the creatures were brought into a better state
then they were in before, See more of this in that learned Treatise of Mr. G
Walker, entitled the Doctrine of the Sabbath.
as corrupted and defaced by the sin of man. This is certain, that upon the
sixth day the creation was dispatched and fully perfected, as to natural
perfection. Therefore when it is said, on the seventh day God perfected his
works, it may well be understood of a further and higher degree of perfection,
even that which was supernatural, showing a higher and more excellent end of
all things created then that which at first they were created unto. At least it
implies such a perfection as consisted in the creatures restoration by the
mediation of Christ, which made way for the setting of all to rights again. A
most blessed and seasonable transaction for a sin-shattered world, which had
certainly been demolished and lain buried in its own ruins, had not the
blessed Son of God put to his gracious helpinghand. These are no humane
fancies, for Colos. 1.17. Heb. 1.3. Psalm. 75.3.
the Scriptures do abundantly testify that the Lord Christ is the great
supporter and repairer of the Creation; without whom we have reason to think
that the Sun would not shine one day, nor the world stand one moment. Hence

5. It follows that God rested on the seventh day: That is, not only ceased
from his work, but found rest in his Son; he rested and was refreshed, Exodus
31.17 that is, with a rest full of sweetness and delight, such as he finds only
in Christ in whom his soul delights, Isai. 42.2. And hence again it is said,

6. That God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it; how did he bless it,
but by ordaining it as a day of Grace and spiritual blessings to the souls of
his people during the Old Testament? Now this kind of blessing was utterly
inconsistent with that covenant of works made with Adam in the state of
innocence; there was no Grace, no Christ in that Covenant: But all spiritual
blessings flow from Christ that fountain of the Gardens. Ephesians. 1.3. (...).
Therefore blessed be God says that blessed Apostle) who has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ Jesns. Did the Lord then
ordain the seventh day to be a day of spiritual blessings to the souls of his
people? Why still this strongly argues that Christ in the promise lay at the
bottom of that day in the first designation of it; for he was that blessed seed
in whom it was all along promised that the nations and families of the earth
should be blessed. I would ask T.T. and his followers whether the blessings
which they expect by virtue of the old Sabbaths Institution be new
Covenant-blessings? If so, then they cannot deny but the day thus blessed was
bottomed upon Christ, The foundation of the new Covenant. Isai. 42.6.
I say upon Christ in the promise, that renowned promise of blessed memory, the
seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head; which promise was first made
to Adam the father of men, Genesis 3.15 and afterward renewed to Genesis 12.3. and
c. 18.22. and c. 28.4.
Abraham the father of the faithful; then to David and others in after-ages,
till at last it was fully accomplished by the most glorious resurrection of
Christ from the dead, whereby he trod on the Serpents head, and all to-bruised
it. This consideration will out deep in the adversaries cause: and to set the
better edge upon it, let it be further considered.

7. And lastly, the Holy Ghost has fully assured us, that Christ in the promise
was of the same antiquity with the confessed ground of the seventh days
Sabbath. Heb. 3.3, 4.
The Apostle confesses that one ground or occasion of singling out that precise
seventh day was Gods ending his work, evidenced by his entering upon his rest.
And when this was done, the same Apostle in the same place informs us, the
works (says he) were finished from the foundation of the world. Now hear
another Apostle (guided by the same Spirit) speaking of Christ in the same
terms, not differing in a tittle, Revel. 13.8. (...). Observe the difference
between (...) and (...), the one signifies from, the other before, Joh. 17.24.
Ephesians. 1.4.
Thus he styles him the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world: he does
not say the Lomb slain before the foundation of the world, as if it intended
Christ in the eternal purpose of God; but from the foundation of the world,
which clearly speaks Christ in the promise of Godfrom the beginning.

Now by the footsteps of these two Texts compared, how visibly may we trace
the Antiquity of Christ in the promise, and find a Savior promised before a
Sabbath instituted? The seventh day-Sabbath was instituted upon Gods finishing
of his works; now as the works were finished from the foundation of the world,
so Christ was slain from the foundation of the world; slain, I say, in respect
of his Fathers promise, and his own personal beginning to undertake that work
which he was to perform in a way of suffering and dying; so that when the
Father ended his work of Creation, the Son entered upon his work of redemption,
and thereby added a further perfection to the first work, Whereupon God rested
the seventh day and blessed it: That is, appointed it for a day of spiritual
blessings, upon the account of Christ the promised and blessed seed. All which
particulars premised, it will be a truth of unquestionable evidence, that the
institution of the old seventh day, was founded and bottomed upon Christ in the
promise. And now a dim eye may easily discern mutability lying at the very
foundation of the day; and thus it may be demonstrated: A day founded upon
Christ in the promise must necessarily be changed when the promise shall be
fully accomplished: etc.

The proposition needs no confirmation; or if it does, take it thus: If the
greatest duty founded upon Christ in the promise was to vary and change with
the promise, how much more the day? For instance, the great duty of believing
in the Lord Jesus; It cannot be denied but one and the same Christ was the
object of saving faith in all ages, before the law, under the law, and under
the Gospel. Heb. 13.8. Rev. 1.8.
Christ Jesus the same yesterday, to day and for ever; being he which was, and
which is, and which is to come. And so the faith of Gods elect which was, and
is, and is to come, looks to the same object. But yet according to the
different state of the object, the eye of faith has had a different and various
aspect. Old Testament-believers who went before looked to him that should come
after; we that come after in the New Testament, look to him that is gone
before. As long as Christ was in the promise they believed in the Messiah to
come; now the promise is fulfilled, we believe and know that the Son of God is
come. And though still we look for his second coming to judge the world, 1 John
5.20.
yet his first coming to save the world by his blessed Incarnation, his bitter
Passion, and glorious resurrection, we no longer expect as to come, but look
upon as already come and gone. Well then, you see how this great duty of
believing circumstantially varies and changes with the promise; and why?
because it was founded upon Christ in the promise. And verily, if the old
Sabbath had the same foundation (as we have proved) then it must admit of the
same variation. As long as Christ continued in the promise, the seventh day
from the Creation was the Sabbath day; but now the promise is accomplished the
Note that well.
day must be altered; for the first foundation upon which it stood is removed.
And as we cannot now call that true faith which looks upon the Messiah as yet
to come, in the sense above mentioned; so neither can we count that the true
Sabbath which leans upon the promise of a Messiah to come. Look to it, if you
keep the old seventh day you must keep Christ still in the old promise, and
together with the Jews Sabbath profess the Jews faith, the twelfth Article of
whose cursed Creed is this; I believe with perfect faith that the Messiah is
yet to come. Buxtorf. Synag. c. 1. p. 4.
And thus deluded creatures may see what they have gotten by siding with
forlorn infidels against the principles and practices of the Christian world.
But I must here resolve a scruple or two, and then I shall put a period to this
first part.

You will say, if the old seventh day were founded upon Christ in the promise,
Scrup. 1.
then it must have been changed as soon as Christ was manifested in the flesh.

It follows not, Resol. 1.
for the promise was not fully accomplished when Christ was manifested in the
flesh, but when he was justified in the spirit by his resurrection from the
dead, then indeed it was completely fulfilled, as Paul and Barnabas do plainly
testify to the Jews at Antioch, Act. 13.32, 33.
Acts 13. The promise which was made unto our fathers, God has fulfilled the
same unto us their Children, (...) adimpleoit. Arius Mont.
in that he has raised up Jesus again. So that the day of Christ's resurrection
was infallibly the day of the old Sabbaths expiration; for then the promise
upon which it was founded was fully accomplished; of which more hereafter.

But will not this argument overthrow the duty as well as the day the Sabbath
it self as the old seventh day? Scrup. 2


Not in the least; Resol.
for a Sabbath or day of rest in general is moral-natural, and so perpetual;
but the fixing of it on that precise seventh day was merely positive, if not
ceremonial: Therefore the particular day may be and is cashiered, and yet the
duty (Sabbath or holy rest) still retained; as the duty of solemn fasting is
still in force, although the particular day in which the Jews were appointed
to fast is abolished, viz. Levit. 16.29. and chapter 23.27, 29. See Dr Downam
Christian Sanc. p. 8, 9.
the tenth day of the seventh month. And why may not the duty of solemn
resting, as well as the duty of fasting, stand in the fall of the day? That
which was circumstantial and shadowy is done away, but that which was
substantial and moral still remains. And thus we have by Scripture Light
found the old Sabbath (as to the day) alterable and changeable in the first
institution of it; and have added something by way of overplus, for the actual
change of the day: I shall now conclude this first position with the
accommodation of an Historical passage recorded by Ammianus Marcellinus
concerning Julian the Apostate; Ammian. Mar^^l Hist. lib. 23.
it is to this purpose: That he (the said Julian) out of enmity to the
Christians, projected the rearing up of the Jewish ceremonies, that he might
supplant the new religion by the old; and to that intent he encouraged them to
rebuild their Temple at Jerusalem, and sent one Alypius into those parts,
furnished with treasure to forward the work; Hocque modo elemento destinatius
repellente cessavit inceptum.
but no sooner had the workmen attempted to lay the foundation, then certain
balls of fire bursting out from beneath dissolved their work, and made them
desist from their enterprise. I shall personate none in the application of
this, only this I shall say in general, that as the Jews Temple was destroyed
on their Dion fol. 748.
Sabbath day; so their Sabbath, yea, their whole Civil and Church State was
dissolved together with their Temple. And this grounded confidence I have, that
whoever shall rear up that antiquated, seventh day, with a design to supplant
the new Sabbath by the old, he shall meet with such Sanctuary-fire, such
Scripture Light and evidence breaking out from under the foundation of the old
day, as shall either burn his fingers, or (which is all the hurt I wish him)
enlighten his conscience, that he shall see his error, and confess (as (...).
Chrysostom. quod Christus fit Deus.
he said of the Temple) that no power or policy of man is able to raise what
Christ has razed.

POSITION II. That the old Sabbath (as to the day) was further manifested to be
alterable in the second edition of the Sabbath.
I Am not ignorant that as the Sabbaths First Institution is much disputed, so
the Second Edition (as to time and place) may be much controverted also. But
taking it for granted (as I do) that the first institution lay near the worlds
foundation, then the second Edition of it will be found in the wilderness of
Sin at the falling of Mannah, or upon mount Sinai at the giving of the Law,
Nehem. 9.13. And here we meet with a double argument to make it further evident
that the old seventh day was alterable, or liable to change.

1. First, Because it was never propounded as the substance of any moral Law.
2. Secondly, It seems to be pointed at as a sign under the ceremonial Law.
1. First, That the old seventh day from the Creation was never propounded as
the substance of any moral law, that is, so as the day could not be changed,
but there must also of necessity be a change of the Law in the substantials of
it. For the clearing of which let it be premised, that whereas the fourth
Commandment is the only precept in the Decalogue which concerns the Sabbath:

First, I do most freely grant, that the fourth Commandment is a moral and
perpetual precept, yet not moral natural (unless it be in the first clause
concerning a day of rest in general) but rather moral positive, and in the
substance of it perpetual. I say in the substance of it, because it is the
judgment of some learned and godly, that the whole Decalogue, as well as the
fourth Commandment, was in some circumstances peculiar to the Jews by reason
of the time, place, and people to whom it was delivered: But the substance of
it is common to all, like as almost all Scripture is for substance common, and
for circumstance proper and peculiar, because much of it was written
occasionally, as Mr. Abbot observes. Now that which is circumstantiall and
occasional in a moral Law may be mutable and yet the substance of the Law be
perpetual; as the preface prefixed to the first Commandment, and the promise
annexed to the fifth, being both circumstantially peculiar to the Jews, were in
that respect mutable, yet the Commandments themselves remain immutable, and
belong to us as well as to them. So in this fourth Commandment, that which
indirectly and occasionally respected the Jews might admit of a circumstantial
alteration, and yet the Commandment it self in all the substantials of it be as
much in force to us as ever it was to them; that is, for such a numeral day,
though not the same individual day, for one day in seven though not the old
seventh, which might be, and (for ought I can see to the contrary) is changed
upon a double account; in respect of the promise upon which it was instituted,
as a ceremonial (at least) a temporary ordinance, and in respect of the precept
by which it was observed, as an occasional circumstance. In the substance of it.
And therefore we need not (as some do) make the Commandment partly moral and
partly ceremonial, but grant it wholly moral, and hold the day mutable, as
indirectly and occasionally pointed at as the Land of Canaan was in the fifth
commandment. And thus the change of the day is no prejudice at all to the
morality of the Commandment, as not being of the substance of it. Indeed to
have altered the number from one day of seven, to one day of ten, or from one
of seven to two of seven ordinarily, had been to wound the precept in the
substantials of it, and in plain terms to blot out one of Gods ten
Commandments; not so, to alter the day from one seventh to another seventh,
which was but a circumstantial variation. To those that affirm the fourth
Commandment to be temporary in reference to the proportion of one day in seven,
because in that point we grant it positive, I have only this to say, that we
judge it not to be merely positive, but moral positive, and so perpetual, as the
event has proved it. For although the particular day were changed by the
refurrection of Christ, yet the proportion of one day in seven has been still
preserved inviolable by the practice of the Apostles and Churches ever since.
And (as one well observes) no other solid reason can be rendered why the
Apostles and primitive Churches should weekly celebrate the day of Christ's
resurrection, if it had not been in reference to the fourth Commandment: had
not their consciences been under the binding power of this precept, why might
they not have done by the resurrection day, as after ages have by the
Incarnation, the Passion or the Assention day, have kept it once a year only,
not once a week, as they did, and we do? But this by the way, to illustrate my
concession, which is this, that the fourth Commandment for the substance of it,
that is for a Sabbath in general, yea, a seventh day Sabbath, and that of Gods
appointment, is a moral and perpetual precept, this I freely grant and firmly
believe. But

2. That the old seventh day is either in part or in the whole, De substautia
praecepti non est ut septimum diem precise quo etiam Deus cessavit ab operibus
sanctificemus, sed dicm quieti consecratum a Deo ipso mediate vel immediate.
Zanch. in praec. 4.
the moral substance of this Commandment, or that the morality of the law-lyes
in the particularity of the day, this I utterly deny. And I shall (with the
rest of my Brethren) affirm and maintain the contrary as an undoubted truth of
God: Namely, that the fourth Commandment does principally, and properly (and as
the moral substance of it) prescribe only such a proportion, one day in seven
at Gods appointment, to be spent in holy rest; not this or that particular
seventh day unless it be indirectly and occasionally. To explicate this, the
second commandment is usually and aptly alleged as a commentary upon the
fourth; the form of worship and the time of worship being nearly allied to each
other. Now as in the second Commandment, we have the rule of solemn worship in
general, without specifying the particular ordinances of worship, whether
sacrifices and offerings, as under the Law; or Prayer, Preaching, Baptism, and
breaking of bread, as under the Gospel; all which we re consequentially
enjoined in the second Commandment, but neither of them directly: in like
manner, in this fourth commandment we have a rule for the solemn time of
worship a seventh day, or one in seven at Gods appointment; But whether it
should be reckoned from the worlds Creation, or from Christ resurrection is not
here determined; particular duties of worship, and the particular day of
worship being to vary and change with the different age and state of the
Church. The wisdom of the Lawgiver has so contrived these two Commandments,
that both the day and the duties (as occasionals) might be changed without any
change of his moral and immutable Laws.

But there is native light and evidence enough in the fourth Commandment it
self to convince us of this truth. Prove. 6.23.
For (as Solomon says) the Commandment is a Lamp and the Law is light. Only we
must look to the sense, and not wholly liften to the sound of the letter; for
in all laws the meaning of the Lawgiver, Isai. 8.20 Non in verbis sed
insensu, non in superficie sed in medulla, non in foliis sed in radice
ratiouis. Hieron. in G^l. 2. and Tertull. de Carne Chrsti.
and the sense of the Law is to be respected, not the letter only as he says
well, the mind of God is not so much in letters and syllables, as the sense and
meaning: Not in the outside but in the pith and marrow; not in the leaves of
words, but in the root of reason, for which we must digg deep by serious study
and prayer, before we can discern it. Now if laying aside all prejudice, we
would thus look into this perfect Law of liberty, as those that look to be
judged by it another day, Jam. 2.12. I doubt not but we shall find one day in
seven (at Gods choice) not the old Seventh day, to be the soul and substance of
it; which that it may the better be demonstrated, I shall for methods sake
distribute this fourth Commandment into these four parts.

1. Exodus 20.8.
The preceptive part; Remember the Sabbath, or day of rest, to keep it holy. 2.
V. 9.10.
The directive part, Six days shall thou labor, but a seventh is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God, etc. 3. V. 11.
The argumentative part, For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and
rested the seventh. 4. The benedictive part, or the conclusion, Therefore the
Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and sanctified it.
Now if all these four parts of the Commandment be directly for a seventh day
in number or proportion, and but indirectly occasionally and consequentially,
for a seventh day in order, then the substance of the Commandment is for one
day of seven, not the last of seven. But the premises are true, and to
demonstrate their truth, let us come to trial.

1. We shall examine the Preceptive part, Remember the Sabbath day, or day of
rest, to keep it holy. This I hope is not be restrained to the old seventh day:
Sabbath and seventh day cannot be terms convertible here, for then there were a
tautology in the Commandment, as Mr. Cawdrey observes. It were as if God should
say, Remember the seventh day Sabbath, the seventh day is the Sabbath; which is
such a flat tautology, as the God of Wisdom will never own in so short a sum
of words; No, its evident that hitherto the precept is comprehensive and large,
not limited to one day more then another; for Sabbath day (if you will hear
the Hebrew word speak English) is no more but a day of rest, and that is any
day set apart for solemn worship by divine authority. It is applicable to the
first day of the week as much as ever it was to the last. A judicious Author
does piously and pithily illustrate it by that second table precept, Honor the
King; Mr. Bernard late of Batcomb. 1 Pet. 2.17.
If Saul be King, honor him, if he be dead or displaced, and David be King,
then honor King David. To neither of them directly, but successively, and
consequentially it might be accommodated to both. So, remember the day of rest
to sanctify it, while the old seventh day was the day of rest, the Jews were
bound to sanctify that; If that be changed, and the first day of the week be
chosen in its room, we are as much bound to sanctify that, and this by the
same law; for as the change of the person took not away the precept of
honoring the King, Hac enim ratione nos quoque proeceptum hoc servamus, dum
sanctificamus diem dominicum, quia hic quietis nobis est dies sicut Judaels
fuit septimus. Zanch. in praec. Col. 2. Syg.
so the change of the day made not void the command of sanctifying the Sabbath.
And thus, as learned Zanchy tells us; We Christians keep the Sabbath as much as
ever the Jews did in keeping holy the Lords day, which is a day of holy rest
as well as their was. For if it be a day of holy rejoicing, it must needs be a
day of holy rest, since it is both improper and impossible to keep a set or
solemn day as a day of holy rejoicing in Christ, and at the same time to follow
our worldly employments; worldly labor, and the sweat of the brow has too much
of the curse in it, to consist with a day of thanksgiving or holy rejoicing in
the Lord. The Scripture frequently calls festival days Sabbaths; and if
Sabbath be a sit name for other days of the same nature, Why not for this?
And therefore I cannot but wonder that T.T. who grants the Lords day to be a
day of rejoicing, according to that of the Psalmist, Let us rejoice and be glad
therein, should deny it to be a Sabbath or a day of holy rest, as he wickedly
and profanely does, calling a man's Sabbath; discovering his enmity against the
thing by carping at the name, yea condemning of it; why has he the face to call
the Jewish festivals, Sabbaths, or days of rest, as being either fasting
days, or feasting days, and yet deny the Lords day this titular honor?
Inenaem. Phil. p. 74.
Is it a day of less account then the Passover day, Pentecost day, Expiation
day, and other Ceremonial days which the Scripture terms Sabbaths? How
suitable is a name of rest to a day of rest as the Lords day is?
Nay, I have already proved, that it is greater then these, yea greater then
the old Sabbath it self; therefore sure its a day of rest, as shall be farther
proved in the close of this Treatise. And if this be a day of holy rest, it is
as much intended in these words, Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it, as
ever the Jews Sabbath was.

But the seventh day was Sabbath day when the Law was given, therefore it is to
be understood of that day and none but that.

You may as well say, Honor thy father and mother, is to be understood of such
particular parents as were then living, and none but them: And then the Quakers
will have a fine plea for their barbarous rudeness and unmannerly behavior
toward superiors. Tell them of honoring their parents; that is a
wilderness-duty, may they say, it intended only the Israelites parents, now it is
a dead letter and out of date. As simple and sottish a plea as this would be,
yet it is no better to say the fourth Commandment intended only the Jews
Sabbath, and the old seventh day, because that was only in being when the
precept was given. Alas! that was merely occasional and accidental to the
Commmandment, not at all of the essence or substance of it. True, that was the
only weekly Sabbath then, but it was not always so to be, as the event has
proved. But the truth is, this first clause, Remember the Sabath day to keep it
holy, did directly point at no peculiar day more then another; but being the
law of nature, it only requires a day of rest in general to be sanctified; to
wit, what day soever it fall upon. And this is very considerable, since in the
judgment of all the learned and godly, Deuteronomy. 5.12.
the prime morality and main substance of the Commandment lies in this clause.
And hence it is observed that Moses in the repetition of the Law inserts this
memorable parenthesis, when he had said, See Mr. Shepherd. These. 122 and Dr.
Twiss Sect. 6.
Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it, immediately he adds these words (as the
Lord thy God has commanded thee) between the preceptive and the following
parts; intimating, that the substance of the command lies mainly (though not
only) here. Well, a day of rest must be sanctified sometimes, Natura dictat
aliquan to vacuam quieti diem. Gerson.
the light of nature teaches it, and the law of God requires it. But the next
question will be in what proportion and number of days it must be stated, how
seldom or how often it must return? If this be left to man's determination,
there will be nothing but confusion, superstition, or irreligion. One man
perhaps will contend that one day in a As the eighth day of every month was
observed by the Grecians, and the ninth day by the Romans. Plutarch in vita
These. and Macrobius Saturn. lib. 1. c. 16.
month is sufficient; another a little more devout, will say, nay, it must be
once a fortnight at least, a third with T.T. will run into another Ebionitish
extreem, and exact two days in a week (though he bear little good will to one
of them.) Well, to end the strife, we must consult the Divine oracle, to the
law and to the testimony, have recourse to the Commandment in the second part
of it.

2. The Directive part, in these words (six days shall thou labor, but the
seventh day is the Sabbath to the Lord thy God) as if the Lord had said, Your
Sabbath shall be once a week, or one day in seven, at my appointment; this
agrees best with the order of the precept: The law of nature being settled in
the first clause, that a day of rest must sometimes be kept, and kept holy, the
very next scruple is about the number, how often it must be kept, whether once
a quarter, or once a month, or once a week? The order whether it shall be the
first or last day of such a number, is not the next inquiry; in all reason, the
number and proportion must first be stated. For the order presupposes the
number, the month must be agreed upon before the day of the month, and the
week before such a day of the week. And accordingly this positive directory is
given us, to point out the number principally: Six days shall thou labor but
a seventh day is the Sabbath; that is, your Sabbath shall be neither a daily,
nor a monthly, nor a yearly, but a weekly Sabbath. The Phrase is exclusive, as
one observes, implying thus much, thou art not to keep the sixth day or one of
six, Dies septimus and ipse unus est dierum qui omnes septem sunt. August. de
Oen. ad lit. l. 4. c. 18.
or the tenth day, or one of ten, but the seventh day, that is one of seven, or
one in a week. The term seventh is opposed to all other numbers, either ninth,
tenth, or twentieth; as also to the six working-dayes, which clearly intend
such a number, as six in seven, and so the seventh day is as much as one in
seven. Six days shall thou labor but a seventh day is the Sabbath; a seventh,
what seventh? pray note it, the Lord says not, the seventh from the Creation,
he names no day, if he had, the law had been limited to that day; but because
the lawgiver intended to choose a new day, and not to change his old law, you
see he has left it in large and general terms, neither can it be restrained to
one day more then to another. To make it plain by a similitude or two; Suppose
a rich man who has seven Lambs, in a way of unusual bounty make such a proposal
as this to his poor neighbor, I will freely give you six of them, upon
condition you keep the seventh for me, not naming which seventh, must he
necessarily intend one seventh more then another? I should rather think no, but
any one of the seven, being left to his own liberty to choose which he pleases.
Or thus, Suppose a liberal Master who has seven pounds to dispose of, indent
thus with his Servant, I freely give or lend thee six of them, provided thou
improve the seventh for me; What, must he needs intend this or that special
seventh, (supposing some piece of gold among the rest?) Certainly no, every man
may know his meaning, by the seventh pound he intends one pound of seven. The
accommodation is easy and apposite; the bountiful and blessed God freely
bestows six days in the week upon his creature man, reserving the seventh to
himself, that is one in seven at his own choice and appointment: This is the
direct and principal intendment of the Law. Though I deny not that the old
seventh day was indirectly and occasionally here pointed at, as a seventh day
then under Divine sanction, and the Jews were bound by this Commandment to
keep that day, as by the fifth commandment they were bound to honor their
particular parents then living, yet both these being but occasional
circumstances, might be and were altered without any impeachment to the
morality of these Commands. The altering of a mutable circumstance either of
time, place or person, is far from abolishing the substance of a law; indeed if
the Sabbath had been changed (as I said before) either to the sixth day, or the
tenth day, the whole frame of the Commandment had been broken and shattered;
but in the change of one seventh day to another, upon a sufficient ground, and
by a sufficient authority; the substance of the Law suffers not at all; the
substance of it is for one day in seven directly and no more; the seventh day
is the Sabbath. To those forementioned vulgar cases I will add some
Scripture-instances for the further clearing of it. As thus, why may not the
seventh part of man's time, and the tenth part of his temporals be understood in
a parallel sense? Levit. 27.30. Deuteronomy. 18.21.
Now one part of ten. is principally intended in the Law of tithes, surely when
God commands the tenth, any man will think he has more respect to the number
then the order; such a proportion, then such a particular in it: Although
indeed (as judicious Mr. Cawdrey notes) in one particular there was a law to
restrain it to the last of ten; of all their Cattle the tenth that came under
the rod was holy to the Lord; which law, as he says well, Levit. 27.23.
need not have been added, if the general law for tithes had intended the last
of ten. And this is the very case here, one day in seven is chiefly and
directly intended in this law of the Sabbath, The seventh day in every week
Christ has now limited by his Apostles to the Lords day. Mr. Perkins in Gal.
4.10.
neither can any more be well gathered from it, unless some other law be
produced to restrain it to the last of seven as once it was, or to the first of
seven as now it is restrained; some other law I say, for there is no such
particular restriction in theh fourth Commandment. For I pray observe this, the
Commandment does not point out the day by way of institution, but only
prescribe the observation of it; supposing it either as already instituted, or
to be instituted elsewhere, either in the Old Testament or the New. Again, to
that which others have gathered to my hand, let me add one Scripture-instance
more; why may not that tribute of time which God calls for, and that tribute of
their lands which Joseph compacted for with the Egyptians, be taken in a like
sense, since the things themselves are not much unlike? Genesis 47.24.
You shall give the fifth part of your increase to Pharaoh, and four parts
shall be your own. V. 27.
And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day that Pharaoh
should have the fifth part; that is, such a part in proportion, one part in
five, The Gram matical construction of the Commandment will bear this sense,
and enforce no more then a seventh in proportion, and if other arguments must
sway the sense, what better arguments then the analogy of other Scriptures and
the received Principles of religion, both which carry it for a seventh day in
proportion, not the old seventh day. Irenaeus Phil.
you shall have four, and Pharaoh shall have one. And truly varying but the
circumstances, me thinks the Lord speaks much to the same effect in this fourth
Commandment. Six days shall thou labor, but a seventh, or the seventh is the
Sabbath; that is, dividing the week into seven parts, thou shall have six of
them for thy common work, and I will have one in seven for my solemn worship:
He does not say the seventh day from Creation, that was ordered elsewhere Genesis
2. But a seventh in proportion directly, this or that seventh indirectly, and
by consequence only.

Yea to proceed to demonstration, that this is unquestionably the mind of God
may be thus made out.

This proportion is no where directly stated by a perpetual precept, unless it
be in this fourth Commandment: Therefore it must be so determined here.

That it must be somewhere determined, is evident, because it is substantially
profitable to Religion, the glory of God and the good of souls; (as Mr. Cawdrey
has invincibly argued) for if men were left to their own liberty to choose their
own proportion, in all probability, Religion would be substantially prejudiced
and damnified by it; either it would be starved with too little, or surfetted
with too much Sabbath-time; either Popery would create almost every day in the
week a holy day, or profaneness would be content with one day in a month: Let
sinful man have liberty to pluck up Gods bounds, and alter his proportion
either one way or other, and experience will soon show the inconvenience of it:
Let it be altered from one of seven to one of ten or twenty, and what a deadly
blow to Religion would that be? Yea, let the alteration be on the other hand,
from one of seven to two of seven, may we not justly suspect more prejudice
then profit by such an alteration? Would not one sabbath be able to justle out
another, and one day disturb the holy rest of another? Truly as our Savior
speaks in another case: Luke 19.30.
No man can serve two masters, but either he will have the one, and love the
other, or hold to the one and despise the other. So we may probably think in
this case, no man can ordinarily observe two Sabbaths in a week, but either he
will slight the one to keep the other, or it may be in a little time slight
both and keep neither. Whether the Sabbath should be kept once a week or once a
month cannot be gathered from any plain or perpetual precept, unless from the
fourth Commandment: Genesis 2. is not plain and direct; Exodus 16.15. no perpetual
precept. The Old Testament affords no other but the fourth Commandment for one
day in seven, as direct.
Alter Gods proportion which way you will, and religion will be substantially
damnified by it, but no such damage arises from the change of the particular
day for another and a better; since God and the soul have the same proportion
still (one day in seven) though the old seventh day be displaced. Therefore I
conclude, the proportion and not the particular day is directly determined in
this moral and perpetual law, for elsewhere it is not. As for the particular
day, whether first or last of seven it falls under the proportion, as having a
seventh part of time appointed falling upon it and no otherwise. But I might
have spared this argument, for the term, seventh day, is large enough in it
self, since it is not said, the seventh day from the Creation or any other
period or date of time, but seventh day in general. And what high presumption
is it in T.T. to restrain the word seventh, where no reason does constrain?
What Is this but to limit the holy one of Israel, Isalm 119.96.
to clip the wings of Gods Commandment, and narrow it up to his own notion,
when the Commandment in it self is exceeding broad? but to proceed,

3. Let us consult the argumentative part of the precept, viz. that which
contains the principal argument and reason to enforce the Sabbaths observation,
and that is Gods example in these words, (for in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, and rested the seventh day:) as if the Lord had said, the reason why
I would have you observe the forementioned proportion of weekly time, six days
for labor, and a seventh for rest, is this, because I my self kept this
proportion in the beginning of time, working six days and resting but one in
seven.

Note it well Gods example is not propounded as an argument for the seventh day
from Creation directly, but more generally for a seventh day in proportion, For
the example can intend no more then the foregoing clause, of which it is
brought as a reason, and that is no more but one day in seven directly, not
appropriated to any particular day, as we proved before.

But that special seventh day is intimated in Gods exampie, for God not only
rested one day in seven, but the last of seven and the seventh from Creation.

What then? or the last of seven? If you say, the last of seven is intended in
the argument of Gods example; I answer, every circumstance in an argument is
not argumentative; and although that day be intimated in the example, yet it is
not so much argumentatively as historically propounded? An example is not to be
necessarily imitated in every circumstance of it. I will make it plain by a
parallel and pertinent instance; I hope you will grant, that we are as much
bound to imitate the example of Christ in the celebration of the supper, as the
example of God the Father in the observation of the Sabbath; we have a plain
command for it, Do this in remembrance of me. What then? does it therefore
follow that we are tied to the same night in which Christ was betrayed? For
this is mentioned in the words of institution, and that expressly; 1 Cor. 11.23.
I have received of the Lord that which I also delivered unto you? that the
Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed tock bread, etc. Mark it,
here is Christ's institution and example recommended to us as a rule to guide
our practice; and in the proposal of his example, not only the season (in the
night) but also the punctual circumstance of it (the same night in which he was
betrayed) is set down; what follows from hence? Is this a good argument for
Easter-Communions, Haec verba historic am tantummodo relationem, nequaquam vero
determinatum de tempore mandatum continent Gerar. de S.C Loo. Com. p. 536.
ot after supper-Sacraments? No such matter, for these circumstances are but
historically in timated, not argumentatively propounded; yet this I must needs
say, we may as well argue for sacrament-celebration the same night in which
Christ was betrayed and no other, as for Sabbath-observation the same day, in
which God rested and no other. However, If any one ask why we continue the name
of the Lords supper, and not the time? we answer. 1. Because we keep it as the
Lords supper, not our own supper. It retains the name from the first
administration. 2. Because we celebrate it in the evening, though not of the
day.
this is argumentum ad hominem For T.T. is a great stickler for
night-celebration of the supper, and frequently tells us in his book, That
Antic hrist changed the Lords supper-time, as well as the Lords Sabbath-time:
And I think as much the one as the other. But by the way let me tell him that
in arguing for the night from Christ's example, See Mr. Phil, Goodwin Evening
Communicant ad finem.
he runs himself upon an inevitable necessity of concluding for the same night,
in which Christ was betrayed, or else his argument runs a ground, and concludes
just nothing; for the same night as well as the night is put into the words of
institution: Although I judge that neither the one nor the other is obligatory,
because both were occasional. Christ instituted the supper in the evening
indeed because it was immediately to succeed the Passover, which was an
evening ordinance, and the same evening or night in which he was betrayed,
because the next day he was to suffer. Both these were occasional, and
therefore neither of them perpetual; and besides, we may well conceive that our
Lord did this in the evening, and after the Passover, to signify the
abolishing both of the passover and the evening; and to leave the time free to
his Church ever after, as a late Writer has judiciously observed. Let not the
Reader call this a digression, Non est ociosum quia non infructuosum loqua
citas nulla in aedificatione turpis, Tertull. de patientia.
for there is properly no digression in that which may conduce to edification;
neither is it impertinent as long as it is not unprofitable. But to return to
our argument, suppose the old seventh day were indirectly and circumstantially
commended to the Jews by Gods example, yet it follows not that the same day is
still in force to us, because circumstantials in a moral law (as we said
before) are changeable without any change in the substance of the law: I do not
say they are abrogable as ceremonies, but alterable as circumstances; they may
be changed for better things, and not a tittle of the law annulled, but rather
fulfilled by it; according to that of our Savior, till heaven and earth pass
one jot, Mat. 5.18.
or one tittle shall not pass from the law till all be fulfilled. I say, the
law is not destroyed, but rather fulfilled by the varying of some
circumstances, as by changing their typical deliverance from Egypt, into our
spiritual deliverance from sin; and the land of Canaan meant in the fifth
Commandment into England where we dwell. And because the fourth Commandment and
the fifth are near neighbors, methinks the one may fairly expound the other.
It cannot be denied, Ephesians. 6.3. The Apostle in repeating that promise leaves
out the words (which the Lord thy God gives thee) because they were more
appropriate to the Jews, and to us the argument is entire without them, See
Weems. Chris, Syn.
that the promised land intended occasionally in the fifth Commandment was the
land of Canaan; neither do I deny, that the day on which God is said to rest in
the fourth Commandment was the seventh day from Creation; yet all will grant
that the argument or inducement of the fifth Commandment is not to be
restrained to that land only, for then it were no argument at all to us. Now I
would ask any rational man, why the argument of this fourth Commandment should
be limited to that particular day from Creation, more then the argument of the
fifth Commandment to that particular land of Canaan; since both the one and the
other are but occasionally insinuated? And to limit the inducement of a moral
law to an occasional circumstance, is the ready way to evacuate and make void
the whole law. But we shall put it out of all doubt, that Gods example here
propounded is only for one day in seven directly, substantially and properly;
for the old seventh only consequentially, indirectly or occasionally; and that
by a double consideration.

1. Because it is here urged as a reason of what went before. 2. Because the
reason of this reason is chiefly for one day in seven.
1. This example of God (in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and
rested the seventh day) is alleged as a reason of the forementioned clause (six
dayss shall thou labor, but the seventh is the Sabbath) so much is clearly
employed in the connexive or causal particle, For; six days shall thou labor
and rest a seventh, For so did Jehovah thy God: Now the reason annexed to any
rule must (if there be any amiguity in it) be expounded by the rule, the rule
must not be interpreted by the reason; for the rule is not brought for the
reason, but that for the rule: Therefore as the former receives strength by the
latter, so the latter must receive light from the fotmer. Now the standing rule
for the weekly Sabbath is this, Six days shall thou labor, but a seventh is
the Sabbath. Here the term seventh is general, (...) Indifferently signifies a
seventh or the seventh; a and the being particles proper to the English tongue
are defective in the Hebrew and Latin. To supply which defect the schools
distinguish of Diet septimus formaliter, and Dies septimus materialiter.
as was noted before. It Is not said, this or that seventh, but leftat large.
And where God has left a latitude, we may not dare to put a limitation, that
were to enclose Gods Common, and entrench upon his Royalty: Well, then the Rule
being only express for a seventh day in general, the reason or argument here
brought to persuade to the observation of such a general seventh, is taken from
Gods example, who also rested a seventh day; which although it were the last of
seven, yet being only alleged as a reason of the forementioned rule, it can
signify no more then the rule it self of which it is a reason: And so it is
clear, that the sense of this latter clause (in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, and rested the seventh) must be only according to the sense of the
former clause (six days shall thou labor, but a seventh is the Sabbath) that
is, a seventh in proportion directly. And thus the first day of the week is as
much the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment to Christians, as ever the last of
the week was to the Jews, being one day in seven as well as that. To dispute
for the same day on which God rested, and infer a necessity of observing that
day, because we must observe that proportion, is to argue a dicto secundum
quid, ad dictum simpliciter, a well known fallacy. For the argument is only
direct for such a proportion (six for labor and a seventh every week for rest)
not this or that seventh from any prefixed period.

2. Let us look into the reason of this reason, and then the case will be yet
more clear, the reason or equity of any law is the life and strength of the
law. And it is the design of Gods wisdom in imposing laws upon his creatures
to propose such reasons in those laws as shall make them appear congruous and
suitable to those common principles of right and equity, Psalm 119.18. Romans
7.12. Deus ideo leges suas judicia vocat quod aequiffima sunt quae praescribit.
impressed upon the creature. And hence Gods laws are so often styled,
Judgments, because in all things they are just and equal; and certainly that
sense of the argument which does most show the equity of the Commandment is the
best and truest sense. Now let us consider the equity that Gods example carries
with it in reference to the aforesaid proportion of six days for labor, and
one in seven for rest. As thus, if the great God who needs not a moment of time
either for work or rest, (as being neither subject to weakness nor weariness)
if he, I say, were pleased when he had work to do (even a world to make) to
take six days for his work, and one in seven for rest, how much more should we
men still hold to this proportion, who by reason of corporal weakness and
spiritual wants need such a competency of time, both for secular employments
and soul refreshments? Thus there is convincing strength of reason and equity
in it. But now to argue for the particular day; God wrought first six days,
and then rested the last of seven, therefore we must first work and then rest,
has no such argumentative force in it, especially to us Christians, who living
under a Covenant of pure grace do rather work by rest, then rest by works; and
therefoe (the Sabbath being suitable to the Covenant) we may rather judge it
equitable to begin the week with a day of rest, and work the six days after,
then to work the six first days, and then rest the last seventh. Even dim-eyed
nature judges it most equal to A Jove principium.
begin with God, Supervacua necessariis post-ponenda sunt. Senec. ep. 49.
and give the precedence to things most necessary; and grace both not gainsay
it but rather approve it; for is it not most reasonable that I should serve my
gracious Lord in the duties of his worship, because I serve my self in the
works of my calling? But the truth is, Gods example is neither directly for
first or last of seven, but for one in seven perpetually. The force of Gods
argument lies in this, that we should dedicate one day in seven to rest, for
six working days indulged to our selves. And herein we imitate Gods example in
laboring six days and resting one in seven weekly. For farther satisfaction
in this argument let the ingenuous Reader consult Mr. Cawdrey, and Mr. White of
Dorch. two burning and shining Lights, who have gone before me: if any little
spark be here added, let the Father of lights have all the glory.

4. And lastly let us come to that which for memories-sake I call the
benedictive part of the Commandment ( wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, etc.) observe the phrase, not seventh day but Sabbath day or day of rest
is blessed. The Commandment both opens and shuts, begins and ends with the term
Sabbath day, not seventh day.
Certainly, if the foregoing argument drawn from Gods example had intended only
the seventh day from Creation, this conclusion flowing from that argument had
fallen upon that day also; but we see the term is evidently changed, that we
may not mistake Gods meaning by a supposed strictness in the term seventh day;
see how the Lord condescends to our weakness writing Sabbath day or day of rest
instead of seventh day: The Word Abbath like a finger points both forward and
backward, directiug us how to expound the whole precept in a large, and not in
a limited sense. Doubtless if the Lord God had intended to tie up his Church in
all ages to the seventh day from the Creation, he would have fixed the command
upon that day only, especially in the conclusion of it; why should not that
precise day be mentioned here as well as in the Institution, Genesis 2. There he
is said to bless and sanctify the seventh day, here only the Sabbath day: a
more probable reason to me is not imaginable then this, the Commandment is of a
larger extent then the Institution. And besides, the Institution of the old
day, Genesis 2. was but temporary and mutable, whereas the precept it self is more
and perpetual; see then how wisely the Lord our Lawgiver has contrived it,
that it should not be restrained to that particular seventh day. To conclude
with this conclusion, the whole weight and stress of the Commandment you see
leans upon large and general terms; the Preceptive part is for a day of rest in
general, the Benedictive part is of the same latitude; and although the seventh
day be placed in the middle betwixt both, yet it is not fixed upon one day more
then another, unless it be occasionally, which indeed is no fixure at all; what
hinders therefore but the whole substance of the precept may stand in the fall
of the day, since it was never incorporated into the moral substance of this or
any other command. It is (I must needs say) a truth to me as evident as the
light it self, that the fourth Commandment in all the substantials of it makes
as much for the Lords day (being one in seven of Gods appointment) as ever it
did for the old Sabbath? And here I cannot sufficiently admire and adore the
depth of Divine wisdom that the ever glorious God foreseeing and
foreappointing the change of the day, took care to contrive and pen the
commandment in such expressions as might aptly suite the old day while it
lasted, and as equally sort with the new, now it is substituted in the room of
the old. That the Jews (upon the discovery of so happy a change) might not
loath their old Sabbath, the precept was occasionally and circumstantially
fitted to that, and that we Christians having a new, might not be limited to
the old it is substantially adapted to this. I shall need add no more, if men
did not wilfully wink, I should think here were light enough in this Lamp of
the Law to convince them. As for the adversaries objections scattered here and
there in his book, they vanish like so many vapors before the Sun being
brought forth and tried by the evidence of this truth.

To assert the whole Laws morality, T.T. Obj. 1. p. 14. Answ.
and yet plead the Sabbaths mutability, scarce savours of rationality.

These are fine words but feeble arguments, and indeed his book is full of
them. But to answer his Jingle; if by Sabbath he mean the seventh day from
Creation, what irrationality is it to plead the mutability of that day, and yet
hold the morality of the Law? Since that day was never a tittle of the Laws
morality? Neither can he affirm it without gross absurdity; prove it, I am sure
he cannot by all his sophistry.

If God by a positive moral law bind all men in all ages to such a particular
day as himself appointed, p. 119.
then either they must prove that God has made his moral law mutable by
appointing some other day, or else restore the seventh day-Sabbath.

What pitiful chopped Logic is this?

Some do assert (but not for want of ignorance) that it is not that special
seventh day, pa. 47.
but a seventh day that is enjoined; whereas we have not only the pattern in
the mount; namely, the precise time of Gods rest to point out the day, but (to
end all cavil) he points twice in the Commandment to that very day on which he
rested, by the Emphatical demonstrative particle (...); so that it is not a
seventh, but Hashebigni the seventh day; therefore they had need make sure of a
very clear word for the change of the day, for fear of being left speechless at
the day of Judgment.

And so he runs on to th end of the page, spinning a large web, but when all
comes to all, it is but a cobweb, we shall sweep it down by degrees. And

If by the assertours of the forementioned truth, fall, but upon all the
Learned, Zealous, and pious servants of God (called Puritans) who have
encountered the rigid prelatical party in this controversy? as p 73.
Dr. Bownd, Hexap in Gen p 43.
Dr. Willet, Sect. 6.
Dr. Twiss, Dies Domin. l. 1. c. 10
Dr. Young, Mosaic. Sab. p. 70.
Mr. Bernard of Batcomb, in Genesis 2. and moral. of the fourth Co.
Mr. White of Dorch. Doctr. of the Sab. vind. p. 236
Mr. Byfield, of the Sab. p. 78.
Mr. Fenner, Declar. the Sab. p. 101.
Mr. Cleaver, p. 6. and 36.
Mr. Sprint, part 2. c. 7. throughout.
Mr. Cawdrey and Mr. Palmer, and whom not of savory name in the Church of
Christ? do they not all affirm the same thing? That the Comandment is
substantially moral for one day in seven, not that old seventh day? and must
all these modern worthies be branded for mere ignoramus's? And not only these
but all the Ancients too, whose testimony they have all along cited? Surely
this man is very wise in his own conceit, that he can thus look upon the
greatest lights of these latter days as fools and dunces. But I shall not
answer him in his folly, therefore to proceed.

Whereas he objects that we have Gods pattern in the mount (the precise time of
his rest) to point out the day; As in the first Institution of the supper
Christ made use of unleavened bread, yet his example binds us only to the use
of bread, not that which is unleavened. So for the first Institution of the
Sabbath, God rested on the seventh day from Creation; yet his example binds us
only to a day of that number, not that particular day. See the new Annot. in
Exodus 20. and Attersolls new Cov.
I answer as before, that Gods pattern or example is directly propounded in the
Commandment, to point out the proportion not the particular day. The
proportion, I say, of one day in seven for rest in opposition to six working
days. And therefore the number of Gods working days is specified in the
example, as well as the day of his rest, (for in six days the Lord made
Heaven, Earth, and Sea, and rested the seventh day) plainly intimating, that
the main force of the example is to bind us to such a number of days, six for
labor and one in a week for rest, not such an order as first or last of seven.
Or admit there were some thing else in it; namely, that indirectly and
occasionally it did lead the Jews to that old seventh day, that is, during the
significancy of that day, and the supereminency of the first Creation; yet when
a new Creation is finished and a new rest from a greater work manifested upon
another day, that indirect and occasional force of the example for the old day,
must needs be out of force to us, being subordinated and swallowed up by the
glory of a greater work and a better rest upon another day. And that without
any violation of the precept at all, yea or the example either, in the direct
scope of it for one day in seven. A new day might be and is instituted, and yet
the main scope both of the precept and example still observed, in our laboring
six days and resting every seventh. Only that which was circumstantial and
occasional, is altered upon the account of the new Creatio or Redemption, which
comparatively was to put out the memory of the old Creation, as it is plain,
Isai. 65.17. And that thus it should be, that the occasional force of Gods
example (as to the old day) should be out of force to us, and yet a weekly
Sabbath to be still observed by the moral and direct force of the command, me
thinks it is not obscurely signified in the Commandment it self, if we do but
compare two places together, Exodus 20. with Deuteronomy. 5. at the first giving of the
Law in thunder and terror, Exodus 20.11. compared with Deuteronomy. 5.15.
the Sabbath is wholly enforced from the Creation, and Gods example in resting
from that work, as was said before; but in the repetition or second-giving of
the law by the hand of Moses, a typical mediator, Deuteronomy. 5. you see the reason
from the Creation is quite left out, and the Sabbath is altogether enforced by
a type of our Redemption, viz. their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage,
Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, Mr. G. Abbot Vindic.
Sabb. a most accurate Treatise never yet answered. So also see learned
Ainsworth in Exodus 20.
and the Lord brought thee thence by a mighty hand, therefore he commanded thee
to keep the Sabbath day; lively intimating, (as a learned Author observes) the
subsistence of the fourth Commandment under the Gospel, and the binding
authority of it by the incorporation of a new reason drawn from our Redemption
or spiritual deliverance by Christ, instead of the old reason drawn from the
Creation, which is here utterly omitted. And (as he says well) it is worthy to
be considere, whether such a repetition of the fourth Commandment (not Seorsim,
or by it self alone, but together with the whole decalogue in its proper place
and order) with such a material omission or alteration be not very significant?
and what can it more properly signify then this, that under the second and
best dispensation of the Law (that is under the Gospel) the main argument for
our weekly Sabbath should be the work of Redemption? Surely their deliverance
from Egypt literally considered, was not comparable to the work of Creation,
that it should here be propounded as the reason of the Sabbath, and the other
left out; but as a type of the most glorious and gracious work of Redemption
there was much weight in it. And if the type it self were thus significant, a
minori.
as to carry the force of a reason for the weekly Sabbath, setting aside the
Creation, how much more should the antitype, which excells all types in glory,
as much as the Su does the shadow?

It will perhaps be objected, That this argues the perpetuity of the old
seventh day under the Gospel.

I answer, No, it quite overthrowes it, for in as much as it signifies the
weekly celebration of a Sabbath in memory of Redemption, rather then of
Creation, it evidently implies, that when this greater work should be finished
the memory of the Creation upon which the old day was fixed, should be
swallowed up by the work of Redemption, and then the day it self must
unavoidably be changed. Its true, while the type lasted, and Redemption was
rather figured then fulfilled, the old day was still to be obseved; but when
the type should give place to the truth, the day also which went along with the
type must necessarily expire with it. At least our spiritual Redemption by
Christ being much more glorious then their typical and temporal deliverance
from Egypt, must needs eat out the memory of the Creation, and so translate
the day, by antiquating the argument of it, viz. the indirect force of Gods
example in resting upon that day. I do not say, the direct and principal force
of the example (for one day in seven) is evacuated. But rather that this number
and proportion being still observed by the Apostles in a new day, strongly
argues, that the inserting of the forementioned argument instead of Gods
example, does only make void the circumstantial force of the example (for the
old seventh day) not the substantial and moral equity of it for one day in
seven. Quod orat respondendum.

As for the Hebrew Article or Particle (...) with which he makes such a noise,
By the same rule we must in the next verse translate (...) Those heavens and
that earth as though there were some others, Number. 18.26. (...)
who knows not that it is more frequently a cipher then a figure, serving
rather for ornament, then for argument, and to fill up the sentence then to
form the sense? Mr. White of Dorch. has given many clear instances where (...)
prefixed to a numeral, notes nothing at all, and if need were I could add
twice as many more; let these two suffice, the tithes or tenth part has ha set
before it, yet it signifies indefinitely one part of ten. Ezekiel. 5. v. 2.12.
(...) Bp. White p. 183.
So Ezekiel. 5. it is no less then four times prophets hair without any Emphasis
at all, denoting only one part of three; and I see no reason why it might not
also signify one day of seven in the Commandment. I wonder T.T. will trouble
the world with such common cirtifismes; sure he cannot be ignorant that this
was Bp. Whites notion long before it was his. And the truth is, that unhappy
proverb may be written upon many of his arguments. The Bishops foot has
trodden here; yet this is the man that cyres down Bishops (as every coward will
draw his sword upon a conquered enemy) when there is no truth in me if the
weapons with which he fights against the truth be not the very same which they
formed against their Puritant adversaries. What shameful hypocrisy is this?
But suppose the Particle ha in this place be Emphatical, yet why must it needs
point out the day on which God rested? Why, not rather such a day in
proportion? Therefore instead of ending all cavils, this is but a mere cavil.

Oh but he blessed it and sanctified it, says the Objector.

Ans. This is either an ignorant or an impudent cavil; for there is but one it
in the clause, and that refers to the word Sabbath, and not the seventh day,
and so I make bold to retort his own words with a little addition. Take heed of
adding to the commandment of the living God to serve your own turn, or putting
seventh day instead of Sabbath day, for fear of being left speechless at the
day of Judgment.

As for those that suppose a seventh day is the morality of the fourth
Commandment, T. T. Obj. 4. p. 47.
they will never help themselves by it, for if it be a seventh it cannot be a
sixth or an eighth or any other number.

This shaft seems to be taken out of T. Bs. or James Ockfords Quiver, who
argued at the same rate, As 2 Pet. 2.5. compared with 1 Pet. 3.20. Noah is
styled the 8th person as one that made up the number of eight, although in
respect of dignity he was the first person.
and yet in another account the seventh day. And it is a pithy saying of Mr.
Shepherd: If the Lords day may be styled the first day of the week in one
respect, and yet the eighth day in another respect, why may it not in a third
respect put on the name sevent day? and so Mr. Cawdrey seconds him as Adam,
says he, (excepting but the first seventh day) might be said to work the first
six days and rest the seventh, so supposing Christ kept the first Lords day,
we may be said ever after to work six days and rest the seventh. And that thus
it was (says another) in the account of the primitive Christians, appears 1.
Cor. 16.2. upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay be him in
store as God has prospered him; to wit, So Mr. Sheph. Octavus dicitur quod cum
aliis septem servatus fuit. Beze in locum. So also Act. 20 6.7. where no day
but the first of the week is thus disposed of, to be the seventh day. G. A.
in the six foregoing work days. In a word, although our Christian Sabbath be
the first day of the week in order, yet it is still the seventh in number,
having six working days going before it in one week, and following it in
another continually, and this satisfies the Commandment.

The like may be said for that notion of a seventh part of time which they
confess to be purely moral. T.T. Ob. 5. p. 47.
If so, then no other but simply the seventh part must from week to week be
devoted to Gods worship; for when ever the seventh part of time is altered, p.
117.
the morality must needs be destroyed. Which is thus pieced up in another page.
The wisest Christian in the world cannot contrive a change of the day but he
must destroy the morality of the law; This Objection was long ago started by
Mr. Primrose in his zeal against the English Puritans. part 2. chapter 7. p. 162,
for let him change it to a sixth day, and that cannot be a seventh part of
time; let him translate it to the eighth day, and then seven days pass without
any one Sabbath; let him keep the seventh or the eighth or first, at his change
of the day, and then he keeps two Sabbaths within the compass of seven days.
-- This is his Gordian knot, but we need not cut it, it is easily untyed. For

A seventh part of time (which here he derides as a notion, p. 43.
little before it was his own concession) we grant indeed to be moral, yet not
moral natural, if he intend that by purely moral, but we say it is moral
positive. And to grant him as much as we can, If moral natural be taken for
that which is known by the light of nature without revelation, so one day in
seven is not purely moral. But if it be taken for that which nature informed by
a written word, judges most agreeable to moral and religious equity so we may
grant it.
we also affirm, that a seventh part of time must be perpetually devoted to
God from week to week, that is one part of seven. Neither did this proportion
receive any interruption by the change of the day; for the Jews Sabbath (being
in use while Christ lay in the grave) was the seventh part of time for the week
going before the resurrection, and the Lords day was the seventh part of time
for the week following the resurrection, what inconvenience in all this?

If by the seventh part of time simply considered he will needs understend the
last of seven in order, he must first convince us, that this is the morality of
the Commandment; which if (by working miracles in Logic and Divinity) he can
do, yet it will at no hand follow, that the altering or adjourning of this
proportion from the last to the first day of the week was any violation of the
precepts morality. In this case (as one says) alteration is no dissolution, no
more then to adjourn the Parliament to another time, is to dissolve the
Parliament. Besides, an extraordinary case can be no violation of an ordinary
rule. As the Suns standing still in Joshuahs, and going back in Hezekiahs time,
which did undoubtedly alter the settled course of time, for man had more then
six parts, and God had less then simply a seventh part of time for those two
weeks; yet being extroardinary cases they were no infringment of that ordinary
standing rule for a seventh part of time from week to week. So here supposing
some variation, in the ordinary course of time at the first change of the day,
yet being by a person extraordinary (the Lord of glory who made the law and is
above the law) as also upon an occasion extraordinary (his resurrection from
the dead) who would dare to say, as this objectour does, that the morality of
the law was hereby destroyed?

Whereas he further suggests, That if the Sabbath were translated to the eighth
or first day, This was T. Brabourns Objection. p. 178.
then seven days must pass without any one Sabbath; it is already answered,
there is not the least necessity of that; for as the Paschal supper was in use
till the Gospel-supper was instituted, so was the old Sabbath till the Lords
days was consecrated by the Lords resurrection. Hence the holy women are
commended for keeping it; Luke 23.56.
they were (as one says) commended for keeping the Jews Sabbath before Christ's
resurrection, Note that.
but never were any commended for keeping it after his resurrection. Hitherto
therefore it appears, what feeble, unjoynted, unsinnewed shadows of arguments
this Author pleases himself, and perverts the simple withal. Neither

Is there any strength in that which comes up in the rear, Levir. 23.15. Deuteronomy.
16.9. Luke 18.12.
Hence the Sabbath (being the boundary of weekly time) is sometimes termed
week, intimating, that as it was ever a seventh day Sabbath, so also a weekly
Sabbath; one day in a week, and but one in a week ordinarily. And this rule was
exactly kept in the change of the day; for as there were two Sabbaths, so two
distinct weeks in which the forementioned proportion of six days for work, and
one for rest was punctually observed. In a word, the supposed disorder objected
against the change of the day, is but a dart flung against heaven, a cavil
raised against Christ and his blessed Apostles, who were well enough able to
answer it, and so are we also, building upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.
and Jesus Christ the chief cornerstone; who when he was made the head of the
corner did crown the Resurrection-day above all other days; intimating as much
by an illustrious Prophet, Psalm 118.24. and expounding it by his inspired
Apostles both in their doctrine, Acts 4.11. and their practice, Acts 20.7. so
that the Lords day having Christ himself for its cornerstone, Prophets and
Apostles for its foundation, we may look upon all objections of this nature, as
groundless and graceless cavillations, which like proud waves dashing against
the rock dissipate themselves with their own fury. Mark 2.28.
Sure we are, that the Lord Jesus being Lord of the Sabbath, had power to
change it, and in the change it was fit the Sabbath should wait upon him who
was Lord of it, not he upon it. And if the order or constituted course of time
received some small interruption (for once) by the change of the day, yet it
was no more then what had happened twice before, viz. upon the standing still
and going back of the Sun, Joshu. 10.13. Isai. 38.8.
far less events then the glorious shining forth of the Sun of righteousness
after a three days, eclipse in the chambers of death.

He has but one discharge more against the truth; and then all his powder is
spent to no purpose. He charges our doctrine with a gross absurdity as thus, p.
116.
That we render Gods reason of Janctifiing-the Sabbath in this wise; for in six
days the Lord made heaven and earth, and rested the first day, Wherefore the
Lord blessed the first day for his Sabbath, and sanctified it.

But we answer, That unless we will cast this absurdity upon God, we must cast
off the fourth Commandment, at least the reason of it must be rejected, etc.
These are his own coined suppositions, our conclusions are nothing akin to
these wild inferences, as any man may see that has but half an eye in this
controversy. As for those popular passages up and down his book, That if the
day be changed more then a tittle of the Law is abrogated; I look upon them as
words' of course (which in a Controversy weigh no more then a feather) yea, as
beggarly fallacies, for they all along beg the question, taking that for
granted, which has been soundly whipped with a denial by sundry learned pens,
viz. that the seventh day from the Creation was ever an express tittle of the
Commandment; a seventh day in a week indeed is more then a tittle of the Law,
and this number is still continued in the observation of the Lords day all the
Christian world over: And I doubt not but it shall continue to the end of the
world, although the old day be changed; as in the celebration of the Passover
the precise order of time was sometimes altered; for whereas the fourteenth day
of the first month was the time appointed at first, Exodus 12.18.
yet Hezekiahs great passover was kept on the fourteenth day of the second
month. 2 Chronicles. 30.5.
Where you see the precise individual day altered upon occasion; yet the number
(the fourteenth day) still observed. See this illustration further cleared by
Mr. G. Abbot. p. 37. and Mr. Walker. p. 49.
So upon a greater and better occasion the Sabbath is altered (as to the day)
yet the seventh day in number still kept entire in this, as the fourteenth in
the other. And so the Sabbath now as well as the Passover then, for substance
preserved; notwithstanding the circumstantial and occasional change of the day.
And thus through the conduct of my gracious Guide leading me by Scripture
light, and the footsteps of my dear companions in the cause of Christ, I have
safely passed the pikes of opposition, and vindicated this royal law from the
false glosses and erroneous discants of the adversary, carrying this conclusion
all along before me as a truth triumphing over all contradiction, That the old
seventh day was never propounded as the substance or special subject of any
moral law. I shall but touch upon the second.

2. That it seems to be pointed at as a sign under the ceremonial law, yea it
does more then seem so, if the text be impartially viewed, Exodus 31. from v.
13. to v. 18. where we find a special charge imposed upon the Jews to observe
the Sabbath, and that upon sundry considerations.

1. From the end of it. Verily my Sabbath ye shall keep for it a sign between
me and you, V. 13.
throughout your generations to know that I am Jehovah that sanctifies you,
(...)
for so the words run in the Hebrew. And this is farther explicated. v. V. 14.
14. ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore, for it is holy, or holiness to you;
thereby expounding what was meant by his sanctifying of them in the verse
before: (...)
As if the Lord had said, the keeping of my Sabbaths shall be a distinctive
badge and cognizance of your Covenant-holiness, Sabbathum est signum quod Deus
Israclem sanctificat, ut Sabbathum sanctifionvit, scil. segregando eosex
Gentibns profanls in peculiarem sibi popnlum. Lavat in Exek. Hom. 26.
a sign that I do sanctify you and separate you to my self above all the
people of the earth, for an holy and peculiar people: for as the Lord is said
to sanctify the Sabbath, so also to sanctify Israel; that is, by separating
it from all other days, and them from all other nations to be holiness to
himfelf. And this is the first special reason why they should keep the Sabbath
throughout their generations, as a sign or mark of distinction to difference
them from the rest of the profane world.

2. From the peril of profaning it. v. 14.15. Every one that defiles it shall
surely be put to death, for whosoever does any work therein, that soul shall be
cut off from amongst his people, etc. A law shortly after executed in the
letter of it, by stoning to death one that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day;
Numb. 15.36.
which rigor (for ought I can find to the contrary) lasted no longer then the
Israelites peregrination in the wilderness, where (as one says) an
extraordinary strict rest was imposed upon them, because they were
extraordinarily accommodated for it. Being (as the Saints in heaven are)
immediately at Gods finding, having Mannah without means daily provided for
them; and hence it is said, Numb. 15.32. While the children of Israel were in
the wilderness, they found a man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, and
stoned him to death: Note the Phrase, while they wore in the wilderness, not
elsewhere; for when they were out of the wilderness we never read of the like
punishment inflicted. It seems then that this strict kind of rest and rigor
was restrained to that time and place only.

3. Another argument to enforce their observation of the Sabbath, is taken,
from the moral equity of it, verse 15. Six days may work be done, but the
seventhis the Sabbath: As if the Lord had said, ye may well afford me one day
in seven, since I have given you six in seven. And this again is reinforced by
Gods example in the latter part of v. 17. For in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, and rested the seventh day, Now it concerns us to inquire in this
context what was proper to the Jews, and what common with them to us? What is
moral and perpetual, what judicial or ceremonial and temporary? For that morals
and judicials are here mingled together none can deny; and the difficulty will
be, how to sever the one from the other, and to show in what sense the Sabbath
was made a sign; what the significancy of it was; and especially what kind of
sign, whether a permanent sign, as the Rain bow, or a transient sign, as the
cloudly pillar in the wilderness. There are sundry sorts of signs spoken of in
Scripture, I shall only instance in those that are of prime note, and
pertinency to resolve the case in hand.

1. (...) Josh. 4.6, 7. So also the Passover was and the Lords supper is a
sign being both memorative Exodus 12.26. Mat. 26.26. 1 Cor. 11.24.
There are remembrancing signs, as the twelve stones taken out of Jordan (for
every tribe one) were set up as a sign to after-ages, for a memorial to the
childen of Israel that the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark. And
such a kind of sign, it is commonly thought the Sabbath was a memorial of the
Creation. But that it is so propounded or intended here, cannot easily be
proved, since the Lord does not say, I have given you my Sabbaths as a sign
that I created the world, but for a sign that I the Lord do sanctify you. And
although it be added, v. 17. It is a sign betwixt me and the Children of Israel
for ever; Ainach majoris distinctionis and pausae est accentus. Buxtorf. These.
Gram.
for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth etc. Yet it is not said, it
shall be a sign, that in six days the Lord made heaven and earth. For there is
a notable pause in the middle, which divides the sentence and the sense also.
The seventeenth verse contains two distinct arguments, or reasons why they
should keep the Sabbath.

1. Because it was a sign. 2. Because it was set apart upon the occasion of
Gods work and rest in the beginning.

2. (...) 1 John 2.3. 1 John 3.18.
There are indicating or evidencing signs; such are the Characters of saving
grace. But neither can this be the sense of the word sign in this place. It is
a sign that I the Lord do sanctify you: What savingly? why then all were
Israel that were of Israel, for the Sabbath was given to all; neither was it so
much their keeping the Sabbath as Gods giving them a Sabbath to keep which is
here made a sign: Witness Ezekiel, Moses his interpretor. I have given them my
Sabbath for a sign, Ezekiel. 20.13.
to know that I the Lord do sanctify them. Therefore

3. There are distinguishing, or differencing signs, (...)
such as do visibly mark out a people for Gods peculiar, select and sanctified
ones, above all other people of the earth. And in this sense the Sabbath is
here given the Jews as a sign, a sign of his sanctifying them, that is in one
word (as Calvin speaks) a sign of his segregating and singling them out from
the rest of the nations, as his peculiar people. Siquis un^ verbo reddere
vellet sanctificare est segregare. Call. Praelec. in Ezekiel. 20. Ita Simler. in
Exo: Levit. 21.8. chapter 2.32.
So also Simlerus, and to the same effect is that of Lavater aforementioned.
The Sabbath was a sign of Gods sanctifying them, as the Sabbath it self was
sanctified; that is separated from other common days, and set a part for holy
ends and uses. And so the Word sanctify is usually, if not only taken in
Scripture, when it is applied to the whole bulk, or body of a people (as here
it is:) Well, the Sabbath was given to the people of Israel as a sign of Gods
sanctifying them; but how long, throughout their generations. That is, during
the Economy of the Law, as long as the people of Israel should be the only
peculiar people of God. Exodus 12.14.
The very same Phrase is used concerning the Passover, ye shall keep it a
feast to the Lord throughout your generations by an ordinance or ever; which
clearly speaks it a temporary ordinance. But

Secondly, We must distinguish of Sabbaths as well as of signs; very briefly,
the Word Sabbath signifies one of these three things; either 1. The moral duty;
holy rest, or 2. The penal rigor of that rest, or 3. The precise day of rest,
Now


1. It cannot be meant of the moral duty simply considered, since that extends
beyond their generations, for there remains a rest, Heb. 4.9, 10.
or keeping of a Sabbath, to the people of God still: neither

2. Can itwell be understood of that penal rigor, resting from all work upon
pain of corporal death; for this in all likelihood lasted not out half their
generations, being calculated chiefly for their wilderness estate as was
saidbefore. Therefore

3. It must be the precise day of rest (the old Seventh-day Sabbath) or
nothing, which is here set as a sign throughout their generations; and this I
take to be the true intent of the Holy Ghost both here and Ezekiel. 20. The case
seems clearly to me to be stated in this wise: The old seventh day was at first
given to Adam and his posterity as the only true Sabbath during the
pre-eminency of the Creation, and Christ in the promise; and that it was
conscientiously kept by the holy Patriarchs for some ages after I doubt not
(though some of the Ancients seem to deny it) but to be sure, in tract of time
the sinful race of Adam, forsaking the true God, did also forget the true
Sabbath. Now when it pleased God out of that degenerate lump of mankind to form
Israel, or the seed of Abraham a peculiar people to himself, he gave them his
old Sabbath again in a new Edition. That (among other ends) it might be a
visible sign to distinguish them from the rest of the world. Other nations, no
doubt, had their Sabbaths as well as their gods; but as Israel must serve the
only true God, so they must also observe the (then) only true Sabbath: Ezod.
31.13.
So much is employed in the text, Verily my Sabbath ye shall keep, says the
Lord. The Word my is Emphatical, (...)
it points at the precise day of Gods appointment, the seventh and last day of
the week; therefore this, and mainly this was made a sign of Gods sanctifying
the Jews throughout their generations; which being so, how evidently does it
follow, that the day was designed for change, and that now it is certainly
changed by the will and appointment of God? For if the Jews generation be
extinct, and they that were once the people of God, have now a Lo-ammi written
upon them, Ho. 11.20. 1 These. 2.15, 16.
Ye are none of my people, how shall that day any longer stand as a Sabbath,
which was given them as a sign of their being the peculiar people of God, and
that for a season only till their generations were expired. Maledic domine
Nazarais. Lord curse the Christians, is one of their daily imprecations, vid
Trapp. in Hosea.
Either let the adversay say, the blaspheming Jews (who power out daily curses
instead of prayers) are still the Vovenant People of God, in so much as still
they retain that Saturday-Sabbath, (And then he shall speak like a true Jew
indeed) or let him confess, their saturday-Sabbath (which was once the crown of
their glory) is now no better then the badge of their blasphemy, whereby they
would make the world believe, that they are still the sanctified people of God,
though they trample underfoot the blood of his Son whereby they should be
sanctified. I speak not this, as insulting over the misery of the Jews, but as
lamenting the sin of apostate Christians, who take up that day as a badge of
their Saintship, which the infidel Jews wear as a badge of their blasphemy and
enmity against Christ and Christians. Indeed it was once an illustrious sign of
their sanctification; but it was limited to their generations, as the Passover
was, and therefore if the one be expired, so is the other upon the same
account. And in this respect I dare boldly affirm, and I doubt not to maintain
it, that it is every whit as lawful for a Christian to celebrate that old
Sacrament, the Passover, as to observe the old Sabbath. For the one was as
well a sign as the other, and the one was ordained for a season as well as the
other. There are a few feeble objections to face this argument, but the bare
repetion (with the premises) will be sufficient refutation of them

1. The seventh day being a sign, makes it not a ceremony; T.T. Obj. 1. p. 18.
for Christ was a sign, Isai. 7.14. Luke 2.34. the Saints are set for signs,
Isai. 8.18. So is the holy Spirit, 1 John 4.13. yea, for the same sign as the
Sabbath is, etc.

He might have added that circumcision, Exodus 13.9. Romans 4.11.
and the Pass over also were signs; but then he had spoiled his argument; for
it is certain, that both these were ceremonial, yet doubtlesss it had been more
proper and pertinent to have compared the old Sabbath with other old Ordinances
then to have thus equalized it with Christ and his blessed spirit. But to
answer his instances, Christ was propounded as a sign of Confirmation, Isai. 7.
as a sign of Contradiction, or a sign to be spoken against, Luke 2. The Saints
were set for signs of Wonder, Isai. 8. The holy spirit for a Witness, and not
properly a sign; now what cognation and alliance is there betwixt these and the
old Sabbath? which (as to the day) was a distinguishing sign, and that for a
season only; therefore temporary, I will not say ceremonial.

The Sabbath is set for a sign of things past (as the worlds Creation) not of
good things to come, as the ceremonial Sabbaths.

So also are the annual Sabbaths, Deuteronomy. 16.1. etc.
Passover and Pentecost, ordained in memorial of things past, as their
deliverance from Egypt, and the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai; yet both are
abolished, although I grant the Sabbath was never abolished. or abrogated as to
the substance of it; only altered in respect of the circumstance.

If the morality of the Sabbath cease by being a sign, upon the same account
must the whole law cease to be moral, since Gods spirit has set it also for
such a sign, Deuteronomy. 8.6. Thou shall bind it as a sign upon thine hand. But

This is frivolous, for every child can distinguish between the book and the
binding of it. Numb. 15.38, 39, 40.
The law it self was not a sign, but the binding it on their hands, and that
for a remembrancing sign only, the proper use of their fringes and
Phylacteries. By the way (if I mistake not) here is a plain contradiction: for
a little before he had argued, that the Sabbath was such a sign as the holy
spirit is, and now he makes it such a sign as the wearing of the law upon their
hands was: If one of these be true, the other must needs be false; for the one
is internal, the other was external and visible only. And this is the Goliahs
sward he talks of, wherewith

He fights with his own fancy;

The term, seventh day, is not set for a sign, but the term, p. 19.
Sabbath.

The Word Sabbath is very often, Levit. 19.3. Isai. 1.13. Lam. 1.7. Mat.
12.5.11. Mark 1.21. Luke 4.31. Acts 13.14. Chap. 17.2.
(though not always) put for the old seventh day especially when it is used in
the plural number as here it is. Therefore I conclude, as before, that the day
and not the duty is he set for a temporary sign, the duty no otherwise then as
it is peculiarly related to the day. It Is not a Sabbath in general, much less
the Commandment concerning a weekly Sabbath, but the old Sabbath then in use
which was given the Jews as a sign, and so designed for change; for change, I
mean in respect of the time, not of the thing; according to that of Augustine,
who writing against Faustus the Manichee (who sought to overthrow the faith of
Christians, by maintaining that Moses and Christ were opposite in their
Doctrines, alleging among other things, that there was one tradition of Moses,
another of Christ concerning the Sabbath) answers him thus: Their doctrine was
not diverse, Non diversa doctrina, sed diversum tempus. August. contra Faust.
Man lib. 16. cap. 28.
only the time or day was different; intimating, that Moses and Christ were
both for a weekly Sabbath, but Moses for the last, Christ for the first day of
the week. And thus we have made good the second Position,

That the old Sabbath being made alterable in the first Institution, was
further manifested to be alterable in the second Edition of the Sabbath. A few
words shall suffice for the third.

POSITION III. That the Old Sabbath was yet further evidenced to be alterable
and changeable in the after Observation of it.
FOr proof whereof, I shall only cite the practice of our blessed Savior, in
which the Adversary glories most, as if it made only for him. It Is his ground
argument for the perpetuity of the old seventh day, that Christ did most of his
cures and famous miracles on that day. Now learned Chemnitius takes the same
argument, and turns the edge of it against him thus: De abrogatione Sabbathi
Mosaici and dictis docuit Christus and libertatem factis sapiuo testatam fecit
cum Sabbathis sanaret, etc. Chemn. Examen. Council. Trident. cap. de Festis
ubiplura.
The Lord Jesus both by word and deed has taught us, that the Mosaical Sabbath
was to be abrogated, not only in that he proclaimed himself Lord of the
Sabbath, but in that he often witnessed his liberty, and power over it by
sundry of his cures performed on that day. Some instance in the cure of the man
born blind, John 9.6, 7, 14. Others in the miraculous cure of that cripple or
impotent man, John 5 whereas Dr. Lightfoot learnedly observes, there was the
most apparent sign toward the shaking, and alteration of the Sabbath (as to
the day) that we meet withal in the New Testament till the alteration it self
came. To this purpose let the context be duly considered, and we shall find two
things observable in it.

1. What our Savior did on the Sabbath day, he healed a long languishing
malady, a disease of 38. years standing.

2, What he said upon this occasion: and that

1. To the man his patient.

2. To the Jews his persecutors, who call him in question about it. To the man
he said, Take up thy bed and walk. Now the question is, why our Lord should
enjoin this man to carry his bed on the Sabbath day, the express letter of the
law prohibiting the bearing of any burdens on that day? T. T. Supposes that it
was either for the confirmation of the miracle to show the perfectness of the
cure, Jerem. 17.21. p. 21.
or for the publication of Gods glory; but it is answered, that both these might
have been done as well by his walking upon his feet and leaping, as in the like
case we read elsewhere; or at least by bearing his bed the next day. Act. 3.8.
so chapter 14, 10.
There was therefore certainly more in this Command then what did barely refer,
either to the confirmation of the miracle or the publication of Gods glory, in
that sense supposed; and what it was the above mentioned Author does thus
resolve us, namely that it was. See Dr. Lightf. Harm. of the 4 Evang. p. 3. in
John 5.


Partly in respect of the man.

Partly in respect of the day.

In respect of the man, it was to try his faith and obedience, whether upon
the bare word of Christ he would venture upon so hazardous an action.

In respect of the day, it was to show Christ's power and authority over the old
Sabbath, that as elsewhere in restoring the man sick of the Palsy, he not only
showed his power over the disease in healing it, but also over sin in forgiving
it. So it pleased him here at one and the same time to show his Divine power
over the distemper in curing it, and his sovereignty over the Sabbath in
dispensing with it and disposing of it as he thought good. It Is objected
against this by T. T. (whose usual trick it is to clamor where he cannot
answer) That in argueing thus we join with the blasphemous Pharisees in
charging our Savior as a Sabbath-breakere.

But we easily clear opur blessed Savior, and quit our selves of this false
and injurious charge, affirming, That our Lord could be no more taxed for
Sabbath breaking in requiring this man to bear his bed on the Sabbath Day,
then God himself in Commanding Joshuah to march about Jericho seven times on
the same day. He did not hereby transgress the Law, but showed his sovereignty
over the day; which will the better appear if we consider.

What he says to the Jews in answer to their cavils about it.

In the sequel of the Chapter; where all along we may observe, how he justifies
his act by asserting his power; He tells tehm verse 17 that he had the same
authority over the Sabbath that the father had, The Father works hitherto and
I work. This answer refers chiefly to that part of the objection which lay
against his healing on the Sabbath day: and it is continued to verse 20. Then
he answers more directly to that other part of their accusation, his supposed
violation of the Sabbath, in giving the man a dispensation to carry his bed,
verse 20 The father loves the Son, and shows him all things that himself
does; yea he will show him greater things then these that ye may mervel.
Greater works then these; why, (as the forementioned Author speaks) they
were great things that our Savior had now done, in curing a desperate disease
and dispensing with the Sabbath, but he must do yet greater Works then these,
v. 16.
namely raise the dead, and change the Sabbath, that Jewish Spirits might
mervel. The Jews persecuted him because he had done these things on the
Sabbath day, that is, healed the man, and commanded him to carry his bed. So
the word judgment is used Psalm 9.11. Psalm 94.15. Isai 28.6. Jerem. 33.15.
John 8.16.
Now in answer to these two particulars, he tells them, that the Father would
show him greater works then these, for verse 21. As the Father raises the
dead, so the Son; And verse 22. The father judges no man, but has committed
all Judgment to the Son that is government, or Legislative power about the
affairs of men, and in particular about the disposal of the Sabbath, which
was now under dispute. They carped and cavill'd at his present carriage toward
the Sabbath; He tells them, that he had authority to do what he did, yea and
more then that came to, for all judgment was committed into his hands, to do
some greater things then barely to dispense with the Sabbath, and something at
which the Jews should marvel; and for which all should honor the Son as they
honor the Father; T. T. would have it;) for so the Son is not honored even as
the Father was honored. pa. 145.
For the Father was honored as the institutor of a Sabbath, therefore so,
(...), even so must the Son be honored. The argument is very ponderous, if we
consider the scope of our Saviors oration, which was to justify what he had
done on the Sabbath Day. To this purpose he pleades his designment to do
greater things then these, and some greater thing in reference to command and
disposal over the Sabbath; which was the thing in question. And this plea he
proves by his power to raise the dead, and to dispose of all things in a way of
judicature or government under the new Testament, as the Father had done under
the Old; and to this intent, that all men should honor the Son as they honor
the Father; which being spoken with reference to the Sabbath, and to his
present dispensing with it, does plainly speak his intention to alter and
change it.

Again, here is one thing more observable, namely, that Christ's power to raise
the dead, and his power to dispose of the Sabbath, are carried along both
together in this discourse. And the one is made an argument of the other;
plainly intimating the change of the day upon the resurrection, upon his own
resurrection in the first place, which is hinted at (verse 26.) and others with
himself at his resurrection; according to that ancient prophecy, Thy dead men
shall live, Isai. 26.19. Mat. 27.52, 53.
together with my dead body shall they arise; which was fulfilled when our
Savior rose from the dead.

So that all things considered, here is a most pregnant Scripture to prove that
it was our Redeemers purpose to alter the Sabbath: And therefore (as in Preface
to such a thing) he both gives the man a commission to carry his bed on that
day, and pleads for what he had done by his divine authority, as beginning to
shake the day, which within two years after was to be unhinged and actually
changed for another; at least it speaks his power to alter it. And he that
shall dare deny this, must make Christ Jesus the Lord inferior to David the
servant; for even David had power to alter a circumstance in the Law of Moses;
1 Chronicles. 23.24, 25, 26.
ordaining that the Levites should officiate at twenty years old, Numb. 4.3.
Numb. 8.24.
when as Moses had appointed that they should not officiate till 25. or 30. yet
when the reason of the Mosaical ordinance ceased, and the Ark had rest, you see
David changes that order. And if David, who was but a mere man (though a King
and a Prophet) might alter a circumstance about the Priesthood; Isai. 9.6.
Revel. 15.3. Mat. 28.18.
how much more might the Lord Jesus, (who is the mighty God, King of Saints,
and King of Nations, having all power in heaven and earth put into his hands)
alter a circumstance concerning the Sabbath, by translating it from the last to
the first day of the week?

Well, if he had power to alter it, then it was alterable; which was the thing
to be proved. If it be said, the question is not, what the Lord could do, but
what he did; whether he did indeed alter the Sabbath as to the day: I answer,
we shall put this question out of question in the next Position.

POSITION IV. That the Old Sabbath was actually altered and changed from the
last to the first day of the week, by the authority of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; and that upon the noble account of our Redemption, manifestly
accomplished by his most glorious resurrection from the dead on that day.
FOR the Confirmation whereof, I shall, First, propound some
Scripture-Arguments; Secondly, Produce some Authentic Records of antiquity:
both which we shall find harmoniously concurring in all the three branches of
this Position.

First, That the day is certainly changed.

Secondly, That this change was occasioned by our Saviors most glorious
Resurrection.

Thirdly, That this was done by the Sovereign authority of Christ himself,
either immediately in his own person, or mediately by the prescript and
practice of his inspired Apostles; either or which will be sufficient.

We shall begin with Scripture Proof and argument; in way of Preface whereunto
let it be premised, that this truth is not Syllabically, and totidem verbis, in
so many words at length set down in Scripture; neither needs it, considering,
the question in not about the change of the septenary number (one day in seven)
but the order only (the last for the first of seven:) and besides, it is not
the Lords method and manner of speaking in many other New Testament-cases (as
Church Government, Family Worship, and sundry others) which were plain enough
in the Old Testament) to express himself in full sentences, but very briefly,
in short hints and touches, here a little, and there a little, to exercise the
ingenuity of believers, not to fatisfie the curiosity of Cavillers. The
Scriptures were no more designed to answer all the cavilling questions of
wanton wits, then the Sun was made for them to see that shut their eyes: yet I
deny not the sufficiency of Scripture Light to make us wise unto salvation;
only we must not presume to give laws to Heaven, and teach the Lord how to
speak: But Hebr. 12.25.
see that ye refuse not him that speaks from heaven; that speaks, I say,
not only by express word, but by his V. 24.
blood, or death, and so also by his Joh. 2.19, 21. Romans 1.3, 4.
resurrection from the dead, by the John 15.26.
mission of his Spirit, by the unction and inspiration of his Apostles, whose
writings are his words, their counsels his commands, their pattern and practice
his 1 Cor. 14.37.
precept; Luke 10.16.
for he that hears them hears him; therefore let him that has an ear hear
the voice of Christ, yea, though he open his mouth in a parable to carnal
reason, Psalm 78.1. Mat. 13.9, 35.
as it seems he does even in some of his Gospel-law: yea, let us hear Christ
speaking by his Spirit (I mean the spirit of Prophecy breathing in the Old
Testament) for Rev. 19.10.
the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy; nay, let us learn to spell
his word out of his works, for his John 5 36. chapter 10. 25.
works do testify of him. In a word, consider it is Luke 11.49.
Wisdom it self that utters her voice in the written word; and she uses to
speak [(...)] much in a little; yea, to speak by Mat. 22.32. Acts 14.47.
arguments couched in Scripture, as well as express affirmations; and what
those Scripture-arguments are which speak the change of the Sabbath (as here
stated) we come now to show.

The first may be taken from the new Creation, Incongruum erat veteris
Creationis Sabbathum novae Creatimi. Ligh^f. Horae Hebr. p. 321. ubi plura.
The new Creation must have a new Sabbath, or set-day of Commemoration: now
this new Creation came in by Christ's resurrection: Therefore a new Sabbath. The
form of this argument, I grant is not found in Scripture, but the force of it
is; as shall be seen in the proof of each proposition.

1. That the new Creation must have a Sabbath of Commemoration. This may not
only be gathered from parity of reason, but plain Scripture prophecy: I might
recite that forementioned famous Text in Isai. chapter 65. 17. Behold I create new
heavens and a new earth, and the former shall no more be remembered, i. e. in
respect of solemnity (for otherwise remember the work of Creation we do and
must) but not as the greater work; for look as the Jews Isai. 43.18, 19. Jer.
16.15, 16. and chapter 23. 7, 8.
deliverance out of Egypt was subordinated by their after-deliverance out of
Babylon, so is the work of Creation by that of Redemption, whereby the world
(at least the Church) was put into a new frame and form; Anno Mundi changed for
Anno Domini.
upon the account whereof as the year of the world was worthily changed for the
year of our Lord, so was the old Sabbath for the Lords day. But that which I
would further argue from Isai. 65. is this: The old Sabbath cannot stand with
the new Creation, therefore it must have a new, or none: This was touched
before Posit. 1.
that there should be none at all, none but old Anabaptists, Familists and
Atheists will affirm. And that the old cannot stand is evident, because the
foundation on which it stood (the memory and celebrity of the worlds Creation)
is swallowed up by the glory of a greater work; Sicuti Sol exoriens stellis
eripit suum fulgorem. Calv. in Loc.
and we cannot possibly retain that old seventh day, but we must memorize our
Creation above our Redemption, our being above our well-being; which were
expressly to contradict this ancient promise and Prophecy.

If it be objected, that this Scripture is not yet fulfilled, because the
Apostle says, 2 Pet. 3.12.
we look for new heavens and a new earth, viz. at the end of the world:

I answer; Although it shall then receive a further accomplishment in the
latter, yet inchoatively and sufficiently (as to the thing in question) it was
fulfilled long ago, even before the name [Jew] was laid aside, and the name
[Christian] take up; Isai. 65.15. So chapter 62. 2.
for let the context be minded, verse. 15. the Prophet foretells the rejection of
the Jews, and the change of their name for the Christian name; Ye shall leave
your name for a curse to my people, Ac si Dominus diceret, non amplius nomen
Judaerum celebrabitur, amittetis regnum and Sacrdotium, and celebrabitur nomen
Christianorum. Luther.
for the Lord God will slay thee, and call his servants by another name; and
then v. 17. he intimates the coming in of this new name as a consequent of the
new Creation; For behold I make new heavens, etc. So that these new heavens
must be created before the Disciples were called Christians, Acts 11.26. and so
far accomplished then as to outshine the first Creation, the supereminency
whereof was the foundation on which theold seventh day stood, I may therefore
safely conclude, The old Sabbath cannot possibly stand with the new Creation,
unless some new device can be found out to make an old house stand without a
foundation.

But yet further; that the work of the new Creation must necessarily draw after
it a new Sabbath, will more evidently appear if we look to the next Chapter,
Isai. 66. opened
where this Evangelical prophet seems rather to write an history then a
prophecy of the new world under the Messiah; describing it

1. By its new inhabitants, or Church Members, namely the Verse 12.18, 19, 20.
Gentiles.

2. By its new Church Officers, under those old titles of V. 21.
Priests and Levites; I will also take of them (meaning the converted Gentiles)
for Priests and for Levites, says the Lord.

3. By its new seasons of solemn worship, under those old terms of new Moons
and Sabbaths; It shall come to pass that from one new Moon to another, New
Moons and Sabbaths by a figurative kind of phrase (two words used to express
one and the same thing) are here put for the ordinary stated seasons of solemn
worship in general. (...). 2 Kings 4.23. Ezekiel. 46.1.
or from month to month (as in the Hebrew) and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all
flesh shall come and worship before me, says the Lord; that is, all sorts of
men, without exception, exemption or exclusion of any. Now let us see what may
be argued from this Scripture: that the Prophet here points at Gospel Times is
plain enough, yea, the whole succession of Gospel Times: for the things here
prophesied of are such as run parallel with the Church state of the Gentiles,
and the constituting of a public Ministry chosen from among them. Again, that
new things are here intended by these old names, is without dispute; a
Gospel Ministry by Priests and Levites, (distinct from the Levitical
priesthood) and why not by Sabbaths and new Moons, select seasons of worship
under the Gospel, distinct from those under the Law? For that it cannot be
meant of the old Sabbath, and Old Testament-times of worship, may be thus
demonstrated: That interpretation which would render the Prophet Isaiah a false
Prophet cannot be true; But to interpret this prophecy (from month to month,
and from Sabbath to Sabbath all flesh shall come and worship before the Lord)
of the Jews Saturday-Sabbath, would render the Prophet Isaiah a false Prophet,
since the experience of these sixteen hundred years can testify, that no flesh
at all, (or none to speak of) have owned that day as a day of solemn worship,
but expound it of the Christian Sabbath, and so it holds true to a tittle; for
the first day of the week has been owned and observed by all Churches, in all
ages, ever since the Sun of righteousness arose on that day: and thus what the
Lord foretold by his Prophet he has fulfilled by his Providence, and this
spirit of Prophecy proves the testimony of Jesus. And so (I suppose) we have
found even Old Testament-proof of a New Testament-Sabbath; or (which comes all
to one) the ordinary stated season of solemn worship under the Gospel distinct
from that under the Law; and all this in close connection with the new Creation:
for verse 22. it is said, As the new heavens and new earth which I will make
shall remain before me, so shall your name and your seed remain; and then
presently it follows, from month to month, and Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh
shall come and worship before me, says the Lord. Thus the Major or first
Proposition is made good, that the new Creation must have a new Sabbath.

2. Now for the second, That Christ by his resurrection brought in the new
Creation, we may appeal to that of the Apostle, Hebr. 9.26. where our Saviors
death and suffering is stated upon the end of the world; and if the old world
ended with his death, the new must needs come in with his resurrection from the
dead, whereby he brought in a new generation, (the outcasts of the Gentiles)
and so a new creation of the same kind mentioned in Isal. 41.19, 20 Ephesians.
2.10, 11
Isaiah; That the in-come of the Gentiles was to take its rise from our Lords
resurrection, is not obscurely signified by himself, in that Mat. 12.39.40
sign which he gave the Jews, the sign of the Prophet Jonas (who was the
Prophet of the Gentiles; Fatentur ipsi Judaei regnum Messiae inchoandum a
resurrectionemortuorum and renovatione mundi. Lightf. Hor. Hebr.
) hereby he did not only point at his own resurrection (as one observes) but
also secretly gall the Jews with an intimation of the calling of the Gentiles,
(upon his resurrection) as the Ninivites were called upon Jonahs resurrection
from the grave of the Whalesbelly. And thus some expound that place, Thy Isal.
26.19.
dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise, as reserring
not only to the corporal resurrection of Mat. 27.53.
those that came out of their graves at Christ's resurrection, but also to the
calling and quickening of the poor dead Gentiles, who are said to be Ephesians. 2.5,
6.
quickened together with Christ, and raised up together with him. Again, that
the new creation (both as to persons and things) follows upon Christ's
resurrection, may be gathered from that 2 Cor. 5.17. (...)
known Text of Scripture; If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creation (as in
the Greek) old things are passed away, behold all things are become new; The
Apostle seems to argue from things to persons; A new name. Acts 11 26. A new
Jerusalem Rev. 3.12.2 new song, Isal. 42.10 a new Testament, Heb. 8.13 all
things new, Rev. 21.5 See Dr. Gouge Progress of providence p. 9.
All things in Christ are become new, a new Jerusalem, (a new Church) a new
Covenant, new Ordinances, new Heavens and a new earth; therefore all his
followers must be new creatures; and this he infers from verse 15 inasmuch as
Christ dyed for us and rose again: and we may place the accent upon his rising
again, as in another case the Apostle does, Romans 8.34.
It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again. There is a [rather]
put upon the resurrection of Christ, in comparison of his death and passion, so
there, in point of justification; and so it may be here in respect of this new
creation. As to persons it is plain, for how is any man a new creature but by
being in Christ? And how are we in Christ but by Gal. 2.20.
faith? And what is the object of this faith? Let the same Apostle resolve us;
Romans 10.9. chapter 4 24. See DeTwiss p. 97. S. 5.
If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Josus, and shall believe in thy heart
that God raised him from the dead. And so the Argument will hold good back
again from persons to things, still the resurrection of Christ carries the
maine stroke in the work of the new creation, which inevitably antiquates the
old, and introduces a new Sabbath.

Against this it is faintly objected, T. T. Obj. p. 134.
True, all old sins are passed away, and all old Ordinances, curses and
Covenants; but the old Sabbath still remains.

He has fairly granted what he would have denied,

For a conclusion of this argument, I shall refer the learned Reader to that
little (but pithy) Tractate of Athanasius, concerning the Sabbath and
circumcision; where he may find the same thing argued in the same form as here;
for alleging the Scriptures speaking of a double world, or a twofold Creation,
the first ending at our Saviors passion (when the Sun without any eclipse went
out of it self,) the second beginning with his resurrection, he reasons thus
about it; As the old Sabbath was appointed to be kept in memory of the first
Creation, (...)
so do we celebrate the Lords day as a monument of the second reparation; (...)
concerning which Paul speaks, If any man be in Christ he is a new Creation;
indeed cas long as the first Creation was in force (says he) the Sabbath was
observed, (...)
but a new generation succeeding (according to that of the psalmist, this shall
be written for the generation to come) it was now no longer necessary that this
new people should observe the end of the first Creation, but rather the
beginning of the second, he means the Lords day: and what opinion he had of the
Divine Authority of this day, appears by that which follows; (...)
For this cause Christ having repaired the Creation made in six days,
instituted or set apart that day to this reparation (that is, to the memory and
solemnity of it) concerning which the Holy Ghost forespake in the Psalm, This
is the day which the Lord has made. Thus good old Athanasius; whose word (I
suppose) will be of some weight with such as have but read his Creed.

And thus the first Argument concludes, having both the seal of
Scripture-Authority, and the stamp of venerable antiquity upon it, to warrant
it for sound and good. We proceed now to a second:

From the new Covenant it may be formed thus; The old Covenant in the special
(at least) in all the symbolical and shadowy branches of it, was changed by
Christ when the new Covenant was fully exhibited: But the old Sabbath (in
respect of the day) was a special, yea a symbolical and shadowy branch of the
old Covenant: Therefore it was unquestionably altered and changed by Christ,
when the new Covenant was fully exhibited, viz. at his resurrection from the
dead.

This Argument (how new soever it may seem at first) upon trial will be found
true (I doubt not) in every material term and tittle of it; for that our
blessed Lord Jesus has changed the old Covenant (I mean the Covenant of grace,
as to the Romans 7.6. ^ Cor. 3.6.
oldness of the letter and manner of dispensing it) and that by erecting and
exhibiting a new and a better Covenant, is plainly avouched in the New
Testament, Hebr. 8.13.
in that he says a new Covenant, he has antiquated, or made the first old,
etc. And that the old Sabbath was a special branch, or ordinance appertaining
to that antiquated Covenant, may be clearly gathered from the old Testament,
not only as it grew at first out of the root of that old promise, Genesis 3.15.
but in that afterward it symbolized with that old Covenant by the accession of
a Deuteronomy. 5.15.
type, and so visibly participated of the nature of it, that it had the very
Exodus 31.16.
name [Covenant] imparted to it, and that in a Genesis 17.13. (...) So in both
places.
like notion with circumcision; For thus says the Lord, the children of Israel
shall keep the Sabbath for a perpetual Covenant throughout their generations;
perpetual as circumcision was; throughout their generations, only in respect of
the particular sign and season, throughout all generations, in respect of the
general substance and thing, to wit, Sabbath and Sacrament: for so still we
have the Sacrament of circumcision in Baptism, and the Sabbath of the old
seventh day in the Lords day. But that which I chiefly take hold of in Exodus
31. the term [Covenant;] here the old Sabbath is called by the name of the old
Covenant, therefore sure it was near akin to it, a special branch, yea, a
shadowy branch of it, as we shall shortly see; and being so, how naturally will
it follow, that the Covenant being changed in respect of the form, there must
also of necessity be a change of the Sabbath in respect of the time or day, and
that by the same Authority? that as the old Covenant had the old seventh day
and old Sacrament-seals annexed to it, See Widley's Treatise of the Sabb. p. 34.
so the new Covenant might have new seals and a new day; even as in contracts
and Covenants renewed betwixt man and man, it is required, that as they be new
drawn, so also new dated, and new sealed.

To prevent mistakes (by the way) let this be hinted, that I do not here intend
any change of the Covenant in respect of the essence and substance of it; for I
grant that when the Holy Ghost speaks of the new Covenant as distinct from the
old, it is not to be understood in respect of the matter and substance, but
circumstance, and manner of expressure; as the same Commandment is said to be
both 1 John 2.7, 8.
old and new, and the same way to heaven both Hebr. 10.20.
new and Hebr. 13.8. Rev. 13.8.
old; or as the same moon for substance is said to be new or old in respect of
accidental changes: only this must be added, that the new Covenant 2 Cor. 3.10.
excels and out-shines the old in glory, as far as the Sun at midday out-shines
the moon at midnight; and consequently it darkens all the ordinances of the old
Covenant, yea necessitates a change in them correspondent to the change of the
Covenant it self; and accordingly such a change of the Sabbath I do here
assert, not in respect of the substance or duty [holy rest] but the
circumstance of time, the day upon which that duty was formerly fixed and
stated. And that such a change of the Covenant there is, and such a change of
the Sabbath by one and the same Christ, Hebr. 12.24.
mediator of the Covenant, and Mark 2.28.
Lord of the Sabbath, and both these occasioned by the exhibition of a new and
a better Covenant upon his glorious resurrection from the dead, we come now to
demonstrate. To this purpose we shall reflect upon the old Covenant in a
threefold Covenant-expressue of it, and show what a visible change Christ has
made in it, and how inseparably the change of the Sabbath is interwoven with it.

1. In the mandatory part of it, I mean the Decalogue, or law of the ten
Commandments; that this was a Jep. 31.31.32 Deuteronomy. 5.2. ch 29.1. 1 Kings 8, 9.21
2 Chronicles. 6.11. Psalm 105.11
piece of the old Covenant promulgated upon Mount Sinai I suppose none will
question: And that even this has undergone not only mitigation, but some kind
of mutation, by our glorious Gospel-law-giver none need to question; only we
must state it warily and soberly, not affirming with the blundring Antinomians
hand over head, that the law of Moses is outlawed and abrogated without any
distinction. This were to coin a lie to confirm the truth of God; for it is
certain that those lively Acts 7.38.
Oracles Ex. 20.1.
propounded by God himself upon Mount Sinai, and afterward expounded by Moses
and the Prophets in the Old Testament, by Mat. 5.21. to the end.
Christ and his Romans 7.12, 14 chapter 13.8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3. James 2.8, 9,
10 12. 1 John 2.9, 10
Apostles in the New, are still in force under the Gospel, not only as
declarative of the law of nature, but as positively preceptive also in the
matter and substance of them, yea as perpetually directive as a rule of life
and obedience, both in respect of duties to be performed, and sins to be
avoided. As to have the only true God and no other to be our God; to worship
this only true God with his own prescribed worship and no other; to use his
holy name most reverently and religiously; to sanctify his holy Sabbath; to
honor Father and Mother; to avoid Idolatry, Blasphemy, Murder, Adultery,
Theft, etc. These are as much duties and sins under the Gospel as ever they
were under the Law; and in this sense the Moral law is Romans 3.31. 1 Cor. 9.21.
established by Christ, and Mat 5.17, 18. Christus finisest legis Romans 10.4.
sed finis persiciens, non intersiciens. August in John tract. 55. Tom. 9.
ratified even to a tittle. You will ask me then wherein les the change? I
answer, not in the substance, but in some circumstantials peculiar to those
times, and appropriate to that people (the Church of the Jews) (for as I
hinted before, almost all Scripture had some circumstantial peculiarity and
propriety to those times and that people to whom it was immediately given, and
so had the Decalogue.) It Is true, in the substance and morality of it it was
equally calculated both for Jews and Christians, yet some particulars in it,
in regard of circumstance either direct or indirect, were proper to the Jews
only; as the preface to the first Commandment (I am the Lord which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt) which in the letter of it concerns not us; for
literally and properly we were never in Egypt, not in bondage there: so also
the promise annexed to the fifth commandment, which in the particularity of it
belonged to the Jews only, pointing at the land of Canaan. The like may be
said for the positive part of the second Commandment touching Gods worship (as
then) by ceremonial observances; as also the positive part of the fourth
Commandment, which occasionally and indirectly prescribed the celebration of
the Jews seventh day, and that with this additional circumstance (within thy
gates;) all these were adjuncts of the old Covenant, and appropriate to the
Jews. Now the new Covenant taking in Isai. 2.3. See Mr. Roberts on the
Covenant; and Mr. Abbot against Broad.
Gentiles as well as Jews, must necessarily vary these circumstantials in the
moral law, by construing them in a new Covenant-sense, to accommodate it to
these new confederates, as thus; by changing their temporal deliverance from
Egypts thraldom, into out spiritual deliverance from the thraldom of sin and
Satan; the land of Canaan, into any other part of the earth where the heirs of
the promise shall dwell; their legal worship, into our Gospel Worship; their
gates, into our jurisdictions; in a word, their seventh day into our seventh
day, which (analogically at least) is as much intended by [seventh day] in the
fourth Commandment, as England by Canaan in the fifth Commandment.

If it be demanded, when, and by whom this change was introduced? I answer, by
the blessed Mediator of the new Covenant, and that immediately upon his
resurrection from the dead; for then he was given both for a Isal. 42.6.
light and a Covenant to the Gentiles; (...). Mas. 28, 19, 20. Mark 16.15. Luke
24.47. John 20.23.
then was the Churches Charter (formerly confined among the Jews) graciously
extended to the Gentiles; then it was that our Lord was pleased to issue forth
that high commission (as one calls it) for the discipling of all the Gentiles
by Baptism, and so bringing them into Covenant; requiring his Apostles to
tender the whole Covenant to them both, in the promises and the precepts of it:
and the fore as the Prophet Jonah shortly after his resurrection went to
Nineveh, so Jesus Christ after his, to Galilee; where (according to
fore-appointment) he gave his disciples a solemn meeting, and laid a solemn
charge upon them, to teach the Gentiles to observe whatsoever he had commanded
them. Now if the precept of the Sabbath were included among the rest of those
commands (as it is like it was) it must be in such a sense as would comport with
their new Covenant-state; which must needs exclude the old seventh day, since
that was a branch of the old Covenant peculiar to the Jews, and urged upon them
by such a reason or inforcement as in the letter of it concerned not the
Gentiles at all, viz. their deliverance out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.15. Mystically
indeed it concerned us as well as them (as implying out Redemption by Christ)
but in that sense it quite carries away the Sabbath from their old seventh day,
in as much as the accomplishment of our Redemption fell upon the first day of
the week, viz. by the glorious resurrection of our Savior; but for which, we
had remained still in the Egypt of our 1 Cor. 15.17
sins, as the Apostle witnesses. And here I cannot but note, how emphatically
the truth answers the type; Deuteronomy. 5.15. c. 6.21. and 9.26. Exodus 24.8. chapter
15.1, 21.
for look as Israel was redeemed from Egypt with a mighty hand, not as
captives, but as conquerours, with the ruin and spoll of their enemies; so
were the elect redeemed by Christ, not barely in a way of ransom by the price
of his blood, but in a way of rescue and conquest by the hand of his power; as
in the day of his triumphant resurrection, concerning which the Prophet seems
to speak, Isai. 53.13.
I will divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil
with the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death. Thus in
substance there is an admirable similitude betwixt the type and the Antitype:
yea, the very circumstance of time is considerable; for upon search into
Scripture I believe it will be found, that their deliverance out of Egypt was
on the first day of the week, in memorial whereof they kept the feast of
unleavened bread Exodus 15.3, 4 5. with
because they came forth with their Exodus 12.6.
unleavened lumps, being thrust out in have; that it was upon the first day of
the week appears from the twelfth chap. where the Passover is fixed upon the
Exodus 12.6.
fourteenth day of the month, then it was first instituted and celebrated: now
the fourteenth day of the month must needs be the second Sabbath of the
month, even of the month Abib, answering to our March, which was here made
the beginning of months, or the first month in the year: From the Creation of
the world till now they began their year with the month Tisri or September;
See Dr. Lightfoots gleanings on Exodus p. 20.
but here, upon a work greater in figure (as representing our Redemption by
Christ about the same time of the year) the beginning of their year is changed
to Abib, and the Passover being killed the fourteenth day at even, the
midnight following the first born of Egypt were slain. But yet still Israel is
in Egypt, only their longs girt, V. 11.
and shoones on their feet ready to depart; and see how it follows: The
Egyptians being dreadfully alarmed by the death of the firstborn, resolve to
be troubled no longer with such fatal Guests, and therefore in a great hurry
they pack them away, entreat and importune them to be gone; Pharaoh did not
more force them to stay before, then now to depart. But Israel must not go
empty-handed, they must be well paid for their hard service; some time must be
spent in borrowing the Egyptians Jewels: by that time they were furnished for
their journey, we may suppose it was well toward the morning, and now all the
Armies of the Lord march out of Egypt in the Levit. 26.4, 5.
sight of all the Egyptians; this was on the Numb. 33.3.
fifteenth day of the first month, the morrow after the Passover; and the
fourteenth dcay being the Sabbath, this must needs be the first day of the
week, which was afterward kept as a solemn Festival, and called the Levit.
23.6, 7. Numb. 28.17. Deuteronomy. 16.3.
feast of unleavened bread, in which they were to have a holy convocation, and
to do no work. To this the Apostle plainly alludes, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us, wherefore let us keep the feast:
he points at the feast of unleavened bread: Paul was an excellent Critic, he
understood these sacred mysteries, he knew Christ's Passion and humiliation was
our Passover, which lasted as long as he lay in the grave, being under the
pains Acts 2.24.
or sorrows of death, and the day of his resurrection answering to the first
day of unleavened bread (which originally was on the first day of the week;)
here upon he concludes, let us keep the feast; I will not say here is a precept
for the Christian Sabbath, but drawing aside the veil from Moses face, this I
may safely say, here is a proof of it, and a plain argument for it; for Isreal's
Redemption from Egypt, and our Redemption from death and hell, being both on
the first day of the week completed; and the former of these (in the type)
being alleged as the reason of the fourth Commandment, with a total omission
of the Argument drawn from the creation, Deuteronomy. 5.15 and that in the repetition
or second promulgation of the Law, seems to speak plainly what I alledg it for,
that the accomplishment of that type states the Sabbath on the day of Christ's
resurrection, which all the four Evangelists tell us as the first day of the
week. But

2. Let us pass on to the promissory part of the Covenant, and see if some
change be not made there also, and whether the change of the Sabbath be not
necessitated by it. I shall only instancei n that fundamental and complexive
promise of Christ, who was indeed the sum and substance of all the rest, for 2
Cor. 1.20.
in him they are all; Yea, and in him, Amen. And therefore we must with Bphes.
2.12. Una fuit promissio, sed saepius sancita Beza. in Loc.
promise in the singular number, when mention is made of Covenants in the
plural; to intimate, that all the periods and promises of the old Covenant did
concenter and meet together in that grand promise of the Messiah. He was both
the Genesis 3.15.
seed of the Woman, the Genesis 22.18.
seed of Abraham, the seed Psalm 122.10, 11, 12.
of David, the seed of Mary, or son of the Isai. 7.14.
Virgin; and to say the truth, all these after-promises were but as so many
Commentaries upon that first promise, The seed of the woman shall bruise the
Serpents head. Now as long as Christ was tendered in that old promise, the old
Covenant was still in force, The old Covenant was a Covenant of promise, the
new Covenant is Covenant performance.
and together with it the old Sabbath in ue. But the promise being once
performed, Christ fully exhibited, and a new Covenant established, the old (as
to the expressure of it) was instantly changed, Hebr. 8.13. and together with
it the old Sabbath, which had neither birth before, nor being after it (unless
for a season, in condescension to the infirmity of the Jews, whose weak eyes
could not endure the bright Sun shine of the Gospel all at once:) Now if it be
demanded when and where we shall state the accomplishment of that old Covenant,
and the establishment of the new: I answer, both upon te resurrection of Jesus
Christ, the first day of the week. For,

First, Then and thereby was the grand Covenant-promise performed: As the
Apostle assures us in that forementioned Text; Act. 13.32, 33
We declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made to our
fathers, God has fulfilled the same to us their children, in that he has
raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second Psalmm, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. Christ in his resurrection was as it were
begotten Rev. 1.5.
from the dead, and brought forth of the womb of the earth. And here the very
particular day of his resurrection is specified, as the day on which the
promise was eminently fulfilled; what promise? Why, the term is comprehensive,
and so includes (at least) that original promise of Christ's bruiling the
Serpents head; which being an act of his Kingly Office, not of his Priesthood,
was most formally executed in his Resurrection; whereby he triumphed in his own
person over sin, death and the Devil, upon the account whereof the Apostle
cries 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. Romans 8.34, 37.
Victory. Some indeed to attribute Christ's victory and conquest to his death
upon the Cross, because it is said, Colos. 2.15. Having spoiled principalities
and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing ever them in it. Which
[it] say they, refers to the Cross, verse 14. but the Text seems to be
mistranslated: For according to the Not (...). In semertpso, so the Siryack, so
Yertul. de Trin. Origin ep. ad Romans co. 5. August. ep 59. Hier. in Co. Theodor.
ibid Promeruit in cruce, sed postca peregit. Zanch. in loc.
Greek it should rather be rendered He spoiled Principalities and powers, and
made a show of them, openly triumphing over them in himself. So the Ancients
universally read it; and so our worthy translators in the Margin; referring it
to Christ himself not to the Cross; for although he merited his victory by his
passion on the Cross, yet he did not execute it till his resurrection from the
dead, when God brought him forth from the prison of the grave, and Acts 10.39,
40.
showed him openly, though not to all: he died a sufferer, but rose a
conqueror, not only clothed with honor and immortality, but armed with Mar.
28.18. Philip. 2.9.
power and principality, he was 2 Cor. 13.4.
crucified through weakness, but he lives by the power of God; Having the
keys of death and hell resigned up to him as trophies of his Triumphant
resurrection: so himself speaks, Rev. 1.13.
I am he that lives and was dead, and am alive forevermore, and have the keys
of death and hell: And again, Ephesians. 4.8, 9.
When he ascended up on high, be led captivity captive. Note that; he ascended,
what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?
Christ then did not so much lead captivity captive when he descended into the
lower parts of the earth, as when he ascended thence, when he divided the
spoil with the mighty, as the Prophet; or when he spoiled principalities and
powers, as the Apostle speaks; at what time he was proclaimed Romans 14 9.
Lord of quick and dead; Namely at his resurrection from the dead. I write not
this to derogate in the least from the meritorious death of our dear Redeemer:
I can through the grace of God read infinite w love, and John 3.15.
eternal life in his death but the hope and assurance of both is built upon his
resurrection: and therefore when the Apostle would set the door of 1 Pet. 1.3,
4.
hope wide open to us, he shows us an empty sepulcher, and tells us with the
Angel, he is 1 Cor. 15.17, 18, 19.
risen; otherwise our faith and hope were vain. The promise is the ground and
anchr-hold of our hope, and that as performed by our Lords resurrection,
whereby he bruised the Serpents head, i.e. brake his power. Acts 26.6, 7, 8, 9.
Now I say that promise Genesis 3.15. was the ground of flating the Sabbath upon
the old seventh day, God blessed the day for Christ's sake; and (I doubt not)
this was the use which old Testament-believers ever made of that old Sabbath,
to look to Christ in it, and seek communion with God through Christ, and expect
the Spiritual blessings lodged in the institution by Christ the promised and
blessed seed. And as long as Christ was only promised, the Sabbath ran along
with him in the promise upon that day for many ages; but now the promise being
performed, See Mr. G. Walkerp. 35, 36
and Christ exhibited a perfect and complete Redeemer, and that upon the day of
his resurrection (which was the greatest day of his appearing in the nature of
man upon earth) how can it otherwise be but the Sabbath should also advance
forward together with the Lord of the Sabbath, See also more of this Posit. 1.
Branch 3.
from the last to the first day of the week? Especially considering that,

Secondly, Then also the new Covenant was erected and established, even the
Covenant pointed at by the Prophet, I will make an everlasting Covenant with
you, Isal. 55 3.
I will give you the sure mercies of David; which the Apostle applies exprosly
to Christsresurrection, and bottoms in there. As concerning that he raised him
from the dead, Acts 13.34.
now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wife, I will give you the
sure mercies of David, which if we take in the verse before, nominating the
very day, Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee, will amount to this
argument; That the new Covenant, in the last and best exhibition of it, was
ultimately established by Christ's resurrection on the first day of the week:
whence the inference is easy, That therefore then and thereby the old
Covenant, in the promissory part of it, was altered and changed (Christ freely
promised into Christ fully manifested,) and if so, who shall rob us of this
conclusion. That the Sabbath was actually changed from the last to the first
day of the week, upon the account of our blessed Lords resurrection? Mistake me
not, the Argument concludes not the dissolution, but the translation of the
Sabbath from one day to another; translated from the last day of the week it
must needs be, because the promise which settled it at first upon that day is
performed; and stated upon the first day of the week it is, because the
performance of the promise fell upon that day, not by chance, but by special
Providence, to fulfill that prophecy. Psalm 118.24
This is the day which the Lord has made.

3. And chiefly, this truth will be yet more obvious to every eye that shall
view the change of the Covenant in the shadowy part of it, Heb. 8.5. chapter 10.1.
I mean those ordinances and institutions appertaining to the old Covenant,
which were shadows of things to come; that these are antiquated and
extinguished by Christ, and that upon the account of a new Covenant
established, is unquestionably clear from that forecited Scripture, Heb. 8.13.
(...) James 4.14.
In that he says a new Covenant, he has made the first old: Now that which
decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away: Where among other things the
Holy Ghost seems to imsinuate the shadowy nature of the old Covenant, setting
forth the deficiency of it by a metaphorical expression of vanishing, or
disappearing, viz. as the shadow disappears when the substance or body comes in
place; so that if the old Sabbath were of a shadowy uature, it is clearly gone.
But here lies the knot of the question, which (yet) in the judgment of the most
and best interpreters is dexterously decided in that vulgar Text, Coloss. 2.16.
Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy
day, or new Moon, or Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to come; but
the body is of Christ. In the exposition of which Scripture I conceive there
have been two great extremes; for some in opposing Judaism from hence, have
opened a gap to Libertinism, by condemning all difference of days under the
Gospel: others in going about to stop that gap have made a Bridge to bring in
Judaism again. I shall equally shun both extremes, hoping to find truth in the
middle: And therefore,

First, I shall premise this as a sure foundation, That the Sabbath
indefinitely considered, as abstracted from the precise seventh day, Isai.
56.6, 7, 8. Is a plain prophecy of a Sabbath under the Gospel. So is Mat.
14.20. See both opened and vindicated by Mr. By field, p. 220, etc.
was never a shadowy ceremony, but was and is a moral and perpetual duty
incumbent upon all the people of God to the end of the world; for not only
Scripture, but even Nature it self teaches us that as there is a supreme God,
so this God must be worshipped with solemn worship, and that therefore there
must be some solemn time set apart for his worship, and this time not less then
a whole day together, yea a day of frequent return, and this day a day of rest
from worldly labor; (for worshipping-time and working time are utterly
inconsistent.) All this may be fairly deduced from the dictates of Nature:
Indeed as to the punctual proportion of time, whether it should be one day of
six, or one of seven, Nature (which does not so well discern of numbers) cannot
so positively determine: and therefore in this case where the instinct of
nature fails us, Praxis san^lorum interpres praeceptorum, had wont to pass for
a principle and maxim in Divinity.
the instruction of Discipline (as one calls it) relieves us. By which I
understand both the prescript of Gods law, and the practice of his Church
(especially Apostolical practice) which is the best and clearest commentary
upon the Divine precept: Now both these determine the proportion of one day in
seven for the ordinary season of solemn worship; and the last limits it to the
first of seven, as shall be seen hereafter. That the law of God, even the
fourth Commandment (which was the tenth part of Jehovahs will published at
Mount Sinai) is directly for one day of seven, not the last of seven, or the
seventh from Creation, I have proved before; and that in this point it is moral
and perpetual (although not moral-natural) may be briefly hinted here. I shall
offer but one Argument for it, Romans 7.12. Morale est mandatum quatenus
praecipit ut e septem diebus unum consecremus cultui divino; and proinde
quatenustale mandatum est nunquam fuit abrogatum, nec abrogari patest. Z^^ch.
in praecept. 4. p. 595.

Ut aelique dies in septimana fit deo dedicata, praetum est stabile and
aeternum. Jac. de Valen. adv. Judaeos. q. 2. Nobis cum veteri populo quoad hanc
partem communis est necessius Cal^. in praec. 4. Item Luther. Quoad
observationem unius dieiiu singulis hebdomadis, Sabbatum nonest legis
Ceremonialis, sed moralis, qua immota ao perpetua est. Ravanel. Bibl.


grounded upon that Scripture-aphorism, That Commandments is holy, just and
good; these are the uudeniable Characters of a moral and immutable law. Now if
the proportion of one day in seven for holy rest be holy, just, and good, it
must needs be moral and perpetual, and so must the precept it self that
prescribes it. But this proportion is holy, just, and good. Grant it to be
just, and you cannot deny it to be holy; grant it good, and you cannot deny it
to be just. Now let me reason the case with any religious soul, yea, with any
rational man; Is it not a point of moral equity to pay tribute out of all our
times to the Lord of time, who holds our souls in life, and in whose hands both
our times and our breath are? do we owe him a piece of every day, and shall we
grudg him a day of every week? when he has given us six, can we in equity deny
him one? Not that I take upon me to demonstrate the equity of this number by
the light of Nature, or to the light of Nature; for as I said before, Nature is
blind in these things; but I presuppose Nature and Reason informed by divine
discovery, and acquainted with the written word. Surely such as have read and
pondered Gods liberal grant of six days to man, cannot but yield his demand to
be very reasonable, requiring but one in seven for himself. Thus in respect of
God. Again, in respect of Man; Is it not just and meet, that since Man's life
upon earth is a pilgrimage, and he has no abiding City here, but looks for one
above, therefore he should not spend all his time, and thoughts and studies
about the trifles of the world, but (as some time every day) so also some one
day every week, retire from the world, and draw near to God, to seek communion
with him, with whom he looks to live for ever? Again, in respect of servants
and cattle; is there not grand equity and reason that one day in a week they
should enjoy some relaxation from their painsul servitude and bondage? that thy
poor drudging servant especially (who bears God image as well as thy self)
should have a breathing-time, a day of weekly rest for his wearied body, and
one holy day in a week for his precious soul? Can we in equity afford them
less? when we have had six days service from them, can we find in our wretched
hearts to grudge the Lord one? True, you will say there is much equity in this,
that some time in general should be set apart for holy rest; but what necessity
of such an exact proportion? why one day of seven more then one of ten, or two
of seven? I answer as before; A natural necessity we do not pretend; but a
Scriptural necessity there is why we should be tied to this proportion, and not
to any other: and herein lies the moral and religious equity of it, as thus;
The written word informs me that there are but four main divisions of time, and
these of Gods own making, viz. days, weeks, months, years, and I am convinced
that Man cannot make perfecter distributions of time then God himself has
made: since therefore there must be a time or season of solemn worship, it must
of necessity be taken out of one of these; it must be either a day out of a
week, or a day or week out of a month, or a month out of a year; less then a
day out of a week I cannot yield, since I cannot so much as pretend that lest
is sufficient for God and my soul, when more may conveniently be had. Again, a
week out of a month, or a month out of a year, I cannot subscribe unto as
either convenient or equal, See Iren. philal. u^^ plur.
since experience tells me that the necessities both of civil and soul-affaires
require a mutual interchange of speedier dispatches, and quicker returns:
therefore I must conclude, Gods proportion is most just and equal when all is
done, viz. one day of seven, and but one of seven ordinarily; two days in a
week, or out day in two weeks, I find no rule for in the written word. Gods
first division of time was into days, and his first multiplication of days
into weeks; and ever since his select portion has been one day in the circle of
every week. This was the constant tribute paid him under the Old Testament on
the last day, and under the New Testament on the first day of the week: this
therefore is moral and perpetual, being of Gods own assignation, of the
Churches constant observation, and in it self the most exact proportion;
consequently the Commandment in this respect must needs be moral: the rather,
because in all this there can beno ceremony; the number of seven is generally
taken for a number of perfection, but who ere fancied it to be of a ceremonlous
signification? What type or ceremony can there be imagined in seven more then
in six? to make types of mere figures is such a kind of Cabalism, as I suppose
never came into any sober mind. But here I must resolve a scruple or two:

The Jews seventh day was ceremonious, Scrup. 1. See Dr. Wills on Exodus ^o and
Dr. Twiss. p. 74.
as the learned generally assert; and if so, why not one day in seven also? If
the particular day were shadowy, why not the proportion also?

It follows not at all, unless you will say, Resol.
that those particular Sacraments under the law [ Circumcision and the
Passeover] being ceremonial; make the like number of Sacraments under the
Gospel, viz. [ Baptism and the Lords Supper] ceremonial too; the reason is
alike in both, for the Ceremony stood not in the proportion or number, but in
the particularity, or nature of that day and those duties.

But you have formerly granted, Scrup. 2.
that the fourth Commandment did point at that particular seventh day under the
term [seventh day] therefore the fourth Commandment was in that respect
ceremonial.

I have indeed granted, Res.
that the Commandment did indirectly and occasionally point at that precise
seventh day, but not particularly, only within the general scope of it, or as a
general rule equally communicable to that day (as being elsewhere appointed of
God) while it stood; and to our day now it is substituted in the room of that
by the same Divine appointment. And if this were heedfully observed, the
scruple were soon answered. But here lies the mistake, men would fain scrue in
the seventh day from that presixed period of creation into the heart of the
Commandment, and make that seventh day and a seventh day of equal dimensions,
which can never be, unless they will render the Commandment ceremonial; whereas
to affirm, as I do, that the Commandment indirectly pointed at that day (as
being then under Divine Sanction) does no more place a ceremony in the fourth
Commandment, then it does in the fifth, to say, that by Father and Mother were
meant not only natural, but civil and Ecclesiastical parents, and occasionally
such as were Typical; as not only the Priests and Levites, but Moses and Aaron
also who were to be honored by virtue of the fifth Commandment and that as
Fathers in a figutative sense: From which instance thus much is manifest, that
a moral precept may occasionally point at something ceremonial and yet retain
its own morality. So that neither a Sabbath, nor a weekly Sabbath were ever
shadows of things to come. But

Secondly, That Sabbath and particular seventh day which the Jews observed was
certainly of a shadowy nature, Dr. Tailour observes in his Christ revealed p. 4.

1. That as the body is the cause of the shadow, so was Christ of the
ceremonies. 2. As the shadow represents the shape, motions and actions of the
body, so did the legal shadows resemble Christ in his actions and passions,
and I add, why may not both these be affirmed of the old Sabbath. For 1. It was
occasioned at first by Christ, as the shadow is by the body. B. Christ I say in
the promise. 2. It shadowed out something of Christ and the ancients generally
understood it as a shadow of his rest that day in the grave.


being instituted at first with reference to Christ, as all other shadows
were, and having an accessory type afterward affixed to it: And of this we may
safely expound that forementioned Text, Colos. 2.16. Let no man judge you in
meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or now moon, or Sabbaths, which
were shadown of things to come but the body is of Christ. The only question is,
whether their weekly Sabbath were here intended? Some are jealous lest in
pressing it so far, it should prove prejudicial to our weekly Christian
Sabbath; but this is meet causless jealously. For let us but ponder the scope
of the place, and it will appear, that the Apostles design is not to level
Christian days and duties, but such as the Jews observed, and would have
intruded together with circumcision and other legal rites into the Church of
Christ. This is evident, [for he writes both against distinctions of meats and
days:] Now under that clause of [meats and drink] shall we say he condemns all
distinctions of meats and drinks in matters of religion? What of bread and Wine
in the Lords Supper too? or in disputing against the Jews Sacraments,
especially circumcumcision, does Paul strike at all Sacraments, what baptism
and all? no, it is aparent that in all those three Texts usually alleged Romans
10.5, 6 Gal. 4.10. Colos. 2.16. He cries down the Ordinances of the Law, or old
Testament not the institutions of the Gospel. Look what the Jewish
fals-teachers cried up, St. Paul cries down i. e. their Sabbaths and their
Sacraments. It Is not likely that they ever pleaded for the Christian Sabbath,
(the first day of the week) and therefore it is most improbable that the Apostle
in opposing them should implead that. In a word, Dies Dominicus non est umbrae
rerum futurarum sed rei praeterita, viz. gloriosae Christi resurrectionis grata
Recordatio. Brochmand. Syst. Theol.
the Sabbaths here specified were a shadow of things to come, whereas the Lords
day (as one well observes) is only a memorial of something past, to wit, the
glorious resurrection of Jesus Christ. So that to argue from hence against all
difference of days under the Gospel (as the old Anabaptists and Familists do)
is evidently to stretch the Text beyond the stapse; But to urge it against all
the Jews Holy Days, (their weekly Sabbath and all) is not at all to force it.
For

First, The Apostle seems to speak distinctly, and distributively, enumerating
the several sorts of days in observation among the Jews, Holy Day, New moons,
Sabbaths, and the gradation from yearly holy days, to monthly new Moons, and
from them to weekly Sabbaths is visible enough to such as are not blinded with
prejudice. See Mr. Shepherd, These. 20. part 2.

Secondly, The plural term [Sabbaths] is usually put for the singular, the
Sabbath or seventh day now under dispute. Yea I cannot find any one Text in all
the new Testament, where it is applied in the same number to any other day or
Sabbath, but the old Seventh-day Sabbath. Math. 12.1.5.10.12. Mark 1.21. chapter 2
24. chapter 3. v. 2. Lu. 4.31. chapter 13 v. 10. Acts 13, 14. in all these Texts it is
(...) or (...).
Seven or eight times the same word (as it is here set down in the plural
number) is used for that old weekly Sabbath; and not so much as once for any
yearly Sabbath, therefore inall reason that precise weekly Sabbath must be here
(I willnot say in cluded only) but principally intended.

Thirdly, 2 Kin. 4.23.
even in the old Testament, where ever New Moons and Sabbaths go coupled
together (unless the phrase be figurative, 1 Chro. 23.31. 2 Cron. 1.4. chapter
8.13. and chapter 31 v. 3. Nehem. 10.33. Ezekiel. 45.17. Hos. 2.11. Amos 8.5. (...).
as in Isai. 66.23.) the Jews weekly Sabbath is denoted by it, as appears by
those several Scriptures cited in the margin, in most of which their annual
Sabbaths are excepted, and distinguished by another name scil. [Feasts,] to
which answers the words holy day in this place, Colos. 2.16. For indeed the
word in the original fignifies a feast, or festival day. Thus let Scripture
expound Scripture, and truth will be truth, in spite of error: take the whole
sentence together, holy day, new Moon, Sabhaths, and (if it be an Old
Testament-phrase) it always implies the old seventh day-Sabbath; or take the
words [Sabbaths] singly by it self, and (if it be a New Testament-term) as it is
like it is) it ever (I think I may truly say ever) signifies the same seventh
day, unless when it is put for the week, which here it cannot be. The
conclusion then is undeniable, that the Jews seventh day Sabbath was a shadowy
Sabbath, and therefore it cannot be our Christian Sabbath, for what have we to
do with shadows under the Sunshine of the Gospel? under the clear and bright
discoveries of Christ, 2 Cor. 3.18.
when we may with open face, as in a glass, behold the glory of the Lord. Oh,
that the spirit of truth would take away that vail that lies upon the hearts of
men, that vail of error and darkness which keeps out the light of this truth;
for a truth it is, a plain truth, as plain as Scripture can make it, that the
Sabbaths here mentioned were a shadow of things to come; and I have made it
evident, that the old Sabbath (as to the day) is here chiefly intended: it is
not necessary that I should trouble the Reader to tell him my judgment what
kind of shadow it was, or what was shadowed by it in particular, whether
Christ's rest that day full and whole in the grave, or his rest the next day
from the grave, or a believers rest in Christ a complete Savior: But this is
certain, a shadow it was, of which something in Christ was the body; and the
body being come the shadow must be gone. And so I might proceed to another
argument, but I must first remove some objections wherewith the Adversary has
endeavored to block up our way, But all in vain:

First he tells us, T.T. Obj. 1. p. 23.24, 25.
it is evident at first sight, that only such Sabbaths are ceased as were
shadows of good things to come; but the seventh day was never such a Sabbath: A
sign indeed of good things past and present it was, but never termed a shadow
of things to come.

This proceeds upon his accustomed fallacy, petitio principij) a begging of the
thing in question; for he would make us believe, that the old seventh day was
none of the Sabbaths here intended, which if we deny (as we do) then he has
lost his conclusion, for in this very Text it is termed a shadow of things to
come; what if we grant it a sign of something past? so were the annual Sabbaths
(as he calls them) Passover, Pentecost, etc. the one of their preservation in
Egypt, the other of the giving of Gods law; yet both shadows of things to
come, or else the Apostle was much mistaken.

The blessed Spirit by two other terms declares clearly what Sabbaths are
ceased: Such as were against us. 2. Contrary to us; and such were those annual
Sabbaths, requiring great labor and travel, in coming three times a year from
all parts to Jerusalem; the seventh day-Sabbath was never in the least against
us, nor contrary to us, unless so far as we are against God, and contrary to
him, as it is elsewhere added.

It Is very questionable, Levit. 25.8. etc. 26.34, 35, 43.
Sabbaths; 2 Chronicles. 36.21.
but the Jews themselves could never say these were against them or contrary
tot hem, the one being a year of rest to their lands, the other a year of
release to their servants.

The weekly Sabbath or seventh day directly intended in the fourth Commandment
(I grant) is nto againt us,

The Seventh-day Sabbath imposed upon the Jews (or rather the handwriting of
Ordinances (not Gods handwriting but Moses hand writing) was in some sense
against us Gentiles, and contrary to us) as it was a piece of that old
partition wall which separated the Jews from the Gentiles, and occasioned
(...) Compare Col. 2.14. with Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. See the Dutch Annot.
enmity between them; that such a division or partition wall there was we read
in Ephesians. 2. whereby the Jews and Gentiles were parted, and shut up as it were
one from another, that there was no correspondency between them; and the
symboll of this separation was the old Sabbath, whereby the Jewish Nation was
distinguished from all other people in the world, as we showed before out of
Exodus 31. Now the Lord Jesus came to take down this separation wall, and to
make up a Union betwixt Jew and Gentile; and this he did, partly by his death,
(blotting out the hand writing of Ordinances, or law of Commandments contained
in Ordinances) and partly by his Acts 4.11. Ephesians. 2.20.
resurrection, where he was made the cornerstone of his Fathers house, to
unite both parts of he building together, that all might be Gal. 3.28.
one in Christ Jesus: This I take to be the sense of the place.

But the Prelates have perverted the Text, T. T.
for unto the Greek (...) (which only signifies Sabbaths) they have deceitfully
added days, as though there were no Sabbathe but Sabbath: days; they have
destroyed the Apostles scope by their addition of days.

The pious and judicious Translatours have rightly rendered it [Sabbath-dayes]
for so the word is used in all those other texts above mentioned, p. 136. Answ.
yea, when there is no (...) joined with it; and the like I have observed in
Dialogue with Trypho.
Justine Martyr, Hom. de semente.
Athanasius and other expert Grecians, who do generally dispute against the
Jews weekly Sabbath under the term which is here used; therefore this Author
does most unworthily and wrongfully charge those worthy instruments (who made
the Scriputres speak true English) with fraud and deceit; God will one day
require an account of these hard speeches, yea, scoffs and impious slanders.
But he has not done yet.

Whereas by this bold and absurd addition some would cast off the seventh day
as Ceremonial, who yet plead strongly for the morality of the Sabbath; it is
very considerable, that this Text touches not the day at al, but the duty,
that is, the Sabbath; for the Apostle mentions not the day or time as a shadow,
but [Sabbaths.]

None but a bold and absurd Anabaptist would call this an absurd addition, let
no man judge you in meat or drink, or in respect of a festival day, or a new
Moon, or the Sabbath day; it were no wrong to the Text, for so we read the same
word, Mat. 12.1. Understanding it of the old Sabbath day.

The duty of holy rest in general is not here intended at all; for that is
usually intimated in a word of the singular number, and stands firm in the
fourth Commandment, as also (...).
Mat. 24.20. It Is only the particular day!, or the respective limitation of the
duty to that day that is here reckoned among the shadows of things to come:
look how their festival days are called shadows, so is their Sabbath; not the
moral duties required on those days (as solemn 2 Chronicles. 30, 21, 22. Neh. 8.6.
worship, praise, and thanksgiving) for then it were a sin to keep a day of
thanksgiving) but the set days, together with the ceremonial duties which they
were accustomed to, a re here discharged, and the like I may say of their
weekly Sabbath. And therefore his conclusion will not hold, That we may as
warrantably reject the moral law, upon that expression of the law being
changed, as the seventh day upon this word of Sabbaths being a shadow: The
distinction of moral and ceremonial may as well be applied to Sabbaths, as
laws; and till he can prove that the old seventh day is excepted from these
shadowy Sabbaths, as we can prove the moral law to be from that which was
mutable, he must confess it was but a shadow, and so either abrogated or
altered, or both; as the ceremonial H. br. 7.12.
law and the priest-hoods were; and if so, let him judge whether the Apostles
rule ought not to be regarded, Let no man judge you in respect of shadowy
Sabbaths; and let T. T. timely bethink himself how he will answer the breach of
this rule at the Bar of Christ, when his own book shall (without repentance)
be brought in as a bill of indictment against him, for judging, censuring,
condemning, not only faithful Ministers and Christian-people, but Magistrates,
Princes, Parliaments, (charging them with little less then the sin against the
Holy Ghost) because forsooth they disown the brat of his brain, p. 50.
and reject the Saturday-Sabbath: let this unjust judge take heed he be not
judged with a witness: I shall ere long read him a sharp sentence out of Justin
Martyr. But first I shall endeavor to convince him by two or three Arguments
more, That the Sabbath is certainly changed from the last to the first of the
week, and that by Divine Authority.

Christ ending his work, ad hominem.
and entering into his rest, lays the foundation of a new Sabbath, upon the day
of his rest; But he ended his work and entered into his rest upon the first day
of the week (by his resurrection from the dead) Therefore then, and thereby he
laid the foundation of a new Sabbath upon that day of his rest.

Both feet of this argument stand upon Scriputre-ground, or the grant of the
adversary, as shall appear in the prosecution of it.

First, That our blessed Redeemers ending his work and entering into his rest
laid the foundation of a new Sabbath seems to be the Apostles conclusion,
Hebr. 4.9.10. There remains therefore the keeping of a Sabbath (as the
Tranlators render it in the Margin) to the people of God, (...)
, for he that has entered into his rest, (that is Christ) has ceafed from his
works, as God did from his own works. That it is spoken of Christ, T. T.
plainly grants, p. 141.
yea peremptorily determines in these words, It is Christ only whose intrance
into rest is here intended, and therefore there remains the keeping of the
Sabbath to the people of God: A Sabbath I should rather say. I may lawfully
proceed upon his own grant, and so wound him with his own weapon. For however
he wrests this Scripture, and uses it as a shield to defend his,
Saturday-Sabbath, I believe upon trial it will be found a sword to destroy it.
Which will the better appear, if we look into the contents of the third and
fourth Chapters and withal have an eye to the scope of the whole Epistle,
which will be an excellent key to unlock this intricate Text. Briefly to touch
upon the general scope; it is very probable that these Christian Hebrews were
about casting off the Ordinances and worship of the New Testament, and
revolting from Christ to Moses; for the prevention and cure of which Apostasy,
St. For if the cloth may be known by the l^st (as M. Ward was wont to say) the
Epistle is most likely to be his, the phrase and style being very agreeable to
his other Epistles.
Paul is inspired by the Holy Ghost to write this Epistle, wherein his main
design is to dissuade them from this sin, as appears by several passages
sparsed here and there; as chapter 4.14. Where he exhorts them to hold fast their
profession and observe it well, chapter 7, 8, 9. When he had argued, that upon the
coming of Christ there was to be change of the Priesthood and Law of
Old Testament, worship-hereupon he concludes, chapter 10. Let us hold fast the
professio of our faith without wavering; and verse 38. If any man draw back my
soul shall have no pleasure in him; That is, if any man draw back from
Gospel Ordinances, to abrogated Legal rites: therefore again chapter 12. v. 25. 26,
27. See that ye refuse not him that speaks, whose voice shakes not only earth
but Heaven also: Which shaking signifies the removing of things that are made
(that is, Old-Testament-Ordinances, such as were alterable) that the things
which cannot be shaken may remain, that is, Gospel-institutions. Having found
out his main mark which he aims at (namely to dissuade them from Apostatizing
to legal worship, and persuade them to persevere in Gospel Worship) let us
consider in the next place, See Mr. Carter on Heb. 6.
what arguments he uses to prevail with them herein.

First, Inasmuch as the Ordinances of the Old Testament were given by Angels,
and by the hand of Moses, a Typical Mediator; therefore in the two first chapter he
sets forth the excellency and dignity of Christ above Angels, proving him to be
the very Son of God; and then chapter 3. he prefers him before Moses; inasmuch as
Moses was but a Servant in Gods house, but Christ a Son, yea, the ownet and
builder of the house; and such a builder as made not only the little house) the
Church,) but the great house (the world) also, chapter 3. v. 4. therefore they had
little reason to return from Christ to Moses.

Secondly, Having thusprepared them, he falls upon his intended subject viz. A
serious disswasive from Apostasy: And because they were about to cast off the
Solemn worship of the new Testament (for it is expressly said chapter 10. v. 25. That
the manner of some was to forsake the assembling of themselves together) (which
assemblies in the Churches of Christ were always upon the first day of the
week;) therefore to Preach down this sin, among others, the Apostle takes a
Text out of Psalm 95. and spends the best part of two chapters in the opening
and applying of it. The words you have at large, chapter 3. v. 7, 8, 9. Wherefore
as the Holy Ghost says, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, etc. His voice, that is, the voice of Christ our great Prophet spoken
of before; and that upon his own day, his day of grace in general, and his day
of Solemn worship in particular; for so it follows in that Psalm, Let us how
down and worship before him. And let it be noted, the words cited out of the
Psalm are not so much David's exhortation to the people of his time, as a
prophetical prediction of Gospel Times; Plalm 95. 6, 7. Isaiah 2.3.
wherein he brings in the people of God (as also the Prophet Isaiah does)
mutually inviing and calling upon one another to hear the voice of Christ, yea
to come and worship before him; else how could the Apostle apply it to these
Christians? Further, oh. 3. v. 12. he advises them to take heed of an evil
heart of unbelief in departing from the living God, i. e. by forsaking his
Ordinances and worship, and in particular his day of solemn worship, of which
David here seems to spea; lest they should provoke God by their Apostasy, as
Israel did by their infidelity; till he swear against them in his wrath that
they should not enter into his rest; whose sin and punishment is further
exemplified to the end of that chapter.

Now because it might be thought that Gods oath did only concern the Israelites
exclusion out of Canaan, the Holy Ghost informs us, that there was a Prophecy
in that History, and a promise in that Threatening. Therefore we are admonished,
chapter 4.1. To fear lest a promise being left us of entering into rest any of us
should seem to come short of it. But how does the Apostle ground his
admonition? What need Christians fear? Yes good reason, for v. 2. To us was the
Gospel preached as well as unto them. Therefore having the like privileges we
may expect the like punishment, if we pervert those privileges, or Apostatize
from them through unbelief; for that was Isreal's undoing, the word Preached did
not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it, v. 2. hence
they fell short of Gods rest in Canaan, which was a type of our eternal rest in
Heaven, into which none but believers do enter, v. 3. For unbelievers are out
off by Gods oath; as it follows, I have sworn in my wrath (...) Nota jurantis.
1 Samuel 14.45. Psalm 89.35. Jer. 38.16.
if they shall enter; that is, they shall not enter; the sense must be supplied
thus, if ere they come there, let me not be reputed a God of truth.

Thus far we have traced the Apostles argument, and found it mainly tending to
this, to caution these Hebrews against Apostasy, and against infidelity as the
root of that Apostasy; against Apostasy I say, not from Moses (fot they were
Acts. 21.20. They were all zealous of the law.
tenacious enough that way) but from Christ and his institutions, and probably
from the Christian Sabbath, which some conceive to be the day pointed at by
David.

But because they were apt to think that the day, and the rest of which David
spoke, was the old seventh day, and the rest of Canaan, (which they were but
too much devoted to;) to root out this conceit, in the following verses the
Apostle removes these two supposed rests, and plainly shows that neither the
one nor the other could be intended either by David or himself.

First, It could not be Exodus 35 2.
meant of the old seventh day (which is sometimes styled a Sabbath of rest;)
For although the works were finished from the foundation of the world, and God
did rest the seventh day from all his works; yet in this place again he says,
if they shall enter into my rest, v. 4, 5. His argument stands thus; David
expressly mentions a day and a rest to some (so much the word shall implies) [if
they shall enter] but the rest of the old seventh day was already entered into,
three thousand years before David's time, even from the foundation of the world;
See dr. Gouge Comment. on the Hebr.
Therefore that could not be this. The force of the argument lies in this; that
things spoken of different times, whereof the one is of time past, the other of
time to come, cannot be the same: for instance, that Ezekiel. 34.24. and chapter 37.25.
David who dyed many hundred years before Christ cannot be the same David who
is promised to be a Prince amongst Christians. So here, the day, or rest of
which David speaks being to come, and not then entered into, could not be the
rest of the old seventh day, since that was entered into long before, even from
the foundation of the world. This is the true and genuine sense of those words
[although] and [again.]

Although is a discretive term, (...)
, or a note of distinction, importing thus much; that albeit there is mention
made of a day of rest in the beginning of the world, yet it is as another
distinct day and rest that is here intended. So also this Adverb [again] is to
be taken of another restday then that which is mentioned in the former verse;
for although the old seveuth day were spoken of by Moses as the first and most
famons rest in the beginning, yet now [again] so many thousand years after that
David speaks of another rest, if not another rest-day; and if any Sabbath or
day of rest be here intended either by David or Paul, it will certainly prove
fatal to the old Sabbath: for I would humbly propose this quere to the
consideration of the learned, Whether the Psalmists intimation that there
should be a day of solemn worship under the Gospel; and the Apostles
assumption, that it could not be meant of the old seventh day, will not amount
to this conclusion, that the old Seventh-day Sabbath is to be no day of rest or
solemn worship under the Gospel. If T.T. quarrel at this conclusion, let him
thank himself for the premises (one of them at least;) for he grants a moral
rest or Sabbath to be here meant) and I will thank the Holy Ghost and S. Paul
for the other, for they have assured me that the seventh day from the Creation
could not be meant by David; no nor

Secondly, The rest of Canaan neither in the sense above mentioned: for
although that be sometimes termed the Deuteronomy. 12.9. Josh. 1.15.
rest which God gave Israel under the conduct of Jesus or Joshua; yet says the
Apostle, v. 8. If Jesus had given them rest, (that is, if he had given them the
rest of which David here speaks,) then would he not afterward have spoken of
another day: where note by the way, it is a day of rest which the Psalmist seems
to scope at, else why should the Apostle thus interweave the one with the
other, If Joshuah or Jesus had given them rest then would he not afterward
have spoken of another day?

Note again, the same Argument is here used against the supposed place of rest
that was urged before against their conceived time of rest (the old seventh
day;) both these were entered into long before David's time, whereas he spoke by
the spirit of prophecy concerning things to come a long time after: and
hereupon the Apostle concludes, There remains therefore a rest, or the
keeping of a Sabbath to the people of God, distinct and different from the old
Sabbath, yet not much unlike it in respect of the ground of it; for he that
has entered into his rest has ceased from his works, as God did from his own
works. And this is spoken only of Christ, says T.T. Be it so, then I hope our
proposition will not offend him, that when our blessed Lord Jesus ended his
work, and entered into his rest, he laid the foundation of a new Sabbath on that
day of his rest: only it is like this word [new Sabbath] will stick in his
stomach; yet it needs not, for we cannot put (the old Sabbath) into the
Apostles conclusion, because he himself puts it out of the premises. But we
shall not wrangle about words; by new Sabbath I mean only a new Sabbath Day;
and for peace-sake I am content the proposition should pass in these terms; The
day on which Christ ended his works, and entered into his rest, must be our
Christian Sabbath day. The assumption follows:

Secondly, That Christ ended his work, and entered into his rest, by his
resurrection from the dead on the first day of the week: for proof whereof we
may proceed upon another of the Adversaries Principles; for thus he argue;
Christ's entering into his rest on the seventh day: T.T. p. 144, 145.
Our dear Redeemers soul was no sooner separated from his body, but his better
part immediately entered into glory, and soon after his blessed body was laid to
rest in the grave. Where although I cannot but mind him of his gross mistake
about the cricumstance of time (for it is evident that as our blessed Redeemers
soul entered into Paradise on the sixth day, (the same day that he dyed) witness
his words to the dying thief; this day thou shall be with me in Paradise;) so
also his sacred body was interred the same day, even Mark 16.42. Luke 23.53, 54.
the day before the Sabbath, not on the seventh day, as this sophister would
make silly people believ: e) yet I shall take him at his word in the main of
his argument, namely, that when our Savior entered into his glory, he entered
into his rest: But I assume, By his resurrection from the dead on the first day
of the week our Lord entered into his glory; and for this I have his own word
more then once or twice; in the 24 of Luke he overtakes the two Disciples going
to Emmaus, and as they were talking together with sad hearts about the
sufferings and the death of Christ, and also relating what they had heard (but
could hardly believe) concerning his resurrection, he takes them up with a
sharp rebuke, Luke 24.25, 26.
O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken: Ought
not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? to enter
into his glory, you will say, that is to be understood of his ascension into
Heaven; nay, verily he spoke it of his resurrection from the dead, where their
chief doubt lay; and so himself expounds it, for the same day at night he
appears to the rest of his Disciples, and these among them, preaching the same
Doctrine, and saying, V. 46.
Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the
dead the third day; this was that he had so often inculcated before his death,
Math. 16.21. chapter 17. 23. Mark. 9.31. chapter 10. 34. Luke 9.22. chapter 18. 31, 32, 33.
That he must go up to Jerusalem, and suffer and die; that all things which
were written in the prophets concerning him should be accomplished, that he
should be delivered up to the gentiles, that they should crucify and kill him,
and that the third day he should rise again according to the Scriptures: so
that what one Text speaks of his suffering and entering into glory, others
interpret of his dying and rising again the third day; and that Christ by his
resurrection entered into his glory, cannot with any color of reason be denied:
surely when he entered into his Kingdom he entered into his glory; but by his
resurrection from the dead he entered into his Kingdom, being solemnly invested
with Kingly power and sovereignty, Math. 28.18.
Having all power in Heaven and earth put into his hands, and Rev. 3.7.
the keys of David, the Government of the Kingdom laid upon his shoulders, to
dispense laws, pronounce pardons, pass sentence of life and death, John 20.23.
to bind and loose at his princely pleasure. In a word, it was by his glorious
resurrection from the dead, that God Psalm 2.6, 7.
set him as King upon his holy hill of Sion, saying, thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee. Christ's resurrection-day was in a special manner his
Coronation-day; and as earthly Princes are wont on their Coronation-dayes to
show themselves to their subjects in all their royalty, casting about their
silver and gold; so the Lord Jesus delights on this day to manifest himself to
the souls of his people, scattering his precious gifts and graces in the
assemblies of his Saints: for as this is the day which the Lord has made, so
it is the day in which he himself was made Romans 14.9.
Lord of the living and the dead; Acts 2.36. chapter 3. 15. and chapter 5. 30, 31.
Lord and Christ Prince of life, King of Heaven and earth; a King indeed he was
in the Math. 2.2.
cradle, a King on the chapter 27. 37.
Cross; but never so much or so manifestly a King upon earth, as when he
conquered that King of terrors, and carried away 1 Timothy 6.16.
that incomparable Title, the blessed and only potentate, the King eternal and
immortal, Romans 6.9.
who dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. He that shall deny
Christ's entering into glory by his resurrection, will rob him of much of his
glory; it is true, he entered not into the place of glory (in his whole person)
till his ascension; but into the state of glory he entered by his resurrection:
if the bodies of the Saints shall be raised in 1 Cor. 15.43.
glory, how much more was the blessed body of Jesus Christ? If the glory of the
stars be such, what is the glory of the rising Sun? But I must not expatiate
here, a word more and I have done; He that has entered into his rest has
ceased from his works, as God did from his; whence I gather, that it is not
only Christ's rest, but the reason of that rest (the consummation of the work of
redemption) which occasions our Sabbath; as Gods finishing the work of Creation
did the old Sabbath, Hebr. 4.3 4. And this the word Rest implies, being a
demonstrative proof of the accomplishment of the work; for even a wise man, if
he undertake a work, will not rest till it be finished; or if he do, he is Luke
14.29.30.
laughed at for his lost labor: and therefore much more when the all-wise God
is said to rest, may we conclude, his work is perfected. To speak properly (if
rest imply only a cessation from work) we cannot say that God rested from his
work of Creation on the seventh day more then he has done ever since, or Christ
from his work of redemption: therefore we must take in the consummation of each
work, as the ground of each rest; otherwise all the time after should be of
equal account with the last day in respect of Creation, and with the first day
in respect of Redemption: Now the question will be, when the work of Redemption
was consummate and complete? Doubtless, not till the top-stone was laid, till
Christ was made the head of the corner; which the Act. 4.10, 11.
Apostle assures us was by his resurrection from the dead; for if this had not
been done, the work had been all to do again: If Christ had suffered, dyed, and
been swallowed up of death and corruption in the grave, and never risen again,
then had we remained still in our sins, and all our preaching of Christ, and
faith in Christ had been vain, 1 Cor. 15.17. It was by our Saviors joyful
resurrection, therefore that the work of our Redemption was manifestly
accomplished, and hereupon Christ rested from his work, as God did from his:
and as when God rested from the work of Creation, he appointed a Sabbath,
although he did not rest from works of Providence; in like manner Christ has
appointted a Sabbath upon his resting from the work of Redemption by price,
although he does not rest from the work of Redemption by power, till all his
enemies by vanquished, and all his elect saved, as a Dr. Cheynels Treatise of
the blessed Trinity. page 403.
learned Author speaks. And so much for this Argument on Hebr. 4. only some
objections Treatise of the must be removed; for T.T. takes this Text of
Scripture and woefully wrests it to his own and others misguidance, in
countenance of the Saturday-Sabbath; I shall briefly answer his several
Arguments, as objections against what has been spoken.

The polluting of Gods Seventh-day Sabbath was woefully Isreal's sin, T.T. p. 141.
for which the Lord destroyed them in the wilderness, as it is plain, Ezekiel.
20.13. And this being compared with the Apostles admonition to these
Christians, plainly points out the Sabbath which remains to the people of God:
he sets forth Isreal's sin and sorrow on this wise; although God finished his
work from the foundation of the world, and thereupon speaks, Genesis 2. Yet
neither the glory of his wonderful Creation, or authority of his institution
could engage them to follow his Example; but so highly did they provoke him,
especially in polluting his Sabbaths, that he swear in is wrath they should not
enter into his rest, etc. Wherefore the Apostle concludes in applying all to
believers, exhorting them (in the use of that means which Israel neglected) to
enter into the eternal rest, lest any should fall after the example of Isreal's
unbelief (or disobedience, as the Greek signifies:) and then he concludes
Magisterially, Christians believe it, this is the sum of the Apostles
admonition. But I must tell him, they had need of a very strong faith that can
believe such incongruous stuff as this is. For,

Although it be granted that Sabbath-breaking were one of I sraels sins in the
wilderness, chapter 3. v. 18.19. To whom swear he that they should not enter, into
his rest, but to them that believed not? So we see that they could not enter in
because of unbelief. So chapter 4. v. 2. v. 6. v. 11. And whereas T.T. tells his
Reader, that the word signifies disobedience; I must tell him, it is his
mistake to render it so in this place; for it agrees not with the scope of the
context, which is to dissuade them from unbelief as the root of Apostasy, chapter
3. 12. Take heed Brethren of an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the
living God: where the (...). v. 18.19.
word does properly and without all question signify unbelief. And the
Apostles rendering of the word ((...)) which signifies either unbelief or
disobedience, by another word ((...)) which signifies unbelief only, v. 18.19.
does evidently speak his meaning, namely, that we should take heed of falling
by Isreal's example of unbelief, which is the mother of all John 16.8, 9
vice, as faith is the mother of grace: And therefore chapter 4. v. 1. he cautions
us to fear lest a promise being left, any of us should seem to come short. Now
the promise is the ground of Faith, as the precept is of obedience. I conclude
therefore, it is not so much Isreal's disobedience as Isreal's unbelief upon
which the stress of the argument is laid.

To take the Apostles admonition as a caution against the neglect of the old
Sabbath, is utterly to mistake his main mark and scope: For his grand design is
to prevent their Apostasy from Christ and his Gospel, not from Moses and his
law: And I am persuaded, if any Sabbath-breaking be here intended, it is to
deter them from the breach of the Christian Sabbath.

To understand this Scripture ( there remains the keeping of a Sabbath to the
people of God) of the old Seventh-day Sabbath, See Mr. White of Dutch. in this
Tex. p. 230
the Apostle speaks of several and distinct rests, and insists most strongly
upon the opposition between Moses words, Genesis 2. and the words of David, Psalm
95. (not Psalm 45. as T.T. misquotes it) and makes it most manifest that David
could not mean the rest of the Sabbath, of which Moses speaks, Genesis 2. for
Hebr. 4.3. thus he reasons: David speaks of a rest to come, but Moses speaks
of a rest past, therefore David cannot mean the rest of the old Sabbath, of
which Moses speaks, which was entered into so long before. And verse 5. he takes
up the same opposition again, [ and in this place ( i. e. of David) again if
they shall enter] who sees not a manifest opposition betwixt these two [have
entred] and [shall enter?] That word [ although v. 3.] relates not to the sin
of Israel, but the saying of David. And thus this Authors first fancy is
battered: There remains therefore the keeping of a Sabbath to the people of
God; but no: the old Sabbath.

It Is set down in the Margin of our Bibles [the keeping of a Sabbath] whence
they would evade the seventh-day Sabbath, T.T.
although the Dictionaries and Lexicons render ib plainly the keeping of the
Sabbath.

The Greek word is (...), a nor the in any of them; for these are English
particles: and as for Latin Dictionaries, he may look long enough before he
will find the word in any of them, for it is a pure Grecism. And thus I think he
has showed his Scholarship with a witness: No wonder such an accurate Critic
casts odium upon the Translatours; it is much he does not give us a Bible of his
own making.

The Scripture gives full evidence, p. 144.
that Christ entered into his rest the true seventh day (he means the old
seventh day) when he had finished his great work of Redemption: and for this he
cites Acts 2.26. where it is said, his flesh did rest in hope.

The* word signifies only thus much, (...)
his flesh did remain in hope, and it may be as well rendered, remain, as rest.
It implies no such thing as Sabbatical rest. He cites Job 17.3. for Job 3.17 an
argument he is not infallable.
As for Job 3.17. which he misquotes again, it makes nothing for his purpose:
All that it speaks, is this, There the wicked cease from troubling, and there
the weary are at rest. Teaching us, that the grave is a place of rest from
external impressions of violence and cruelty, as also from trouble, labor and
sorrow to the people of God. They shall rest in their beds, says the Prophet:
Yet I hope he will grant the grave is a softer bed to Saints then it was to our
Savior; for as he took away the sting of death by dying and rising again, so
also the horror of the grave by being buried. Certain it is, that Christ's
burial was a part of his humiliation, and while he lay in the grave he lay
under the sorrows, pains or chains of death, as the Holy Ghost witnesses.
Acts 2.24.
And who ever doubted but our Saviors durance in the Sepulcher was penal, Even
the Lutherans (who attribute more then is meet to the burial of Christ, as
they do to his body) do confess that it was a part of his humiliation, and that
hereby he underwent that penalty, Genesis 3.19. vide Gerh. Supplem. ad Chem. Harm.
p. 230.
as well as his death upon the Cross? How then did he rest from the work of
Redemption, as long as he lay under the arrest of death in the prison of the
grave? Certainly all his humiliation work was Redemption-work from his Birth to
his burial: and (setting aside his Crucifixion) we have reason to think our
Redeemer was not so much humbled all the three and thirty years of his life, as
the three days and three nights after his death, while he lodged in the heart
of the earth: Before he was but as the Sun in a cloud, but now as the Sun under
a total Eclipse, as to the view of the world. And doubtless for the blessed Son
of God, and Lord of Glory, to lie down in the Psalm 22.15. Ephesians. 4 9.
dust of death, and suffer himself to be trampled under the feet of that
Tyrant, was no small degree of abasement. But to be sure, whatever our blessed
Redeemers rest were before his Resurrection, either that of his Soul in glory,
or the other of his body in the grave, it could make nothing for the
Saturday-Sabbath; for neither of these rests were entered into on the seventh
day, but both on the sixth day. The John 19. v. 14 31.42.
day before the Sabbath he was crucified, and the same day he was buried;
otherwise how is it said, That he rose again the third day 1 Cor. 15.4.
according to the Scriptures? Methinks this should make the Objector blush to
look back upon his anti-scriptural conclusion, That Christ entered into his rest
on the true Seventh-day Sabbath; expounding it of his rest in the grave. But a
word with you Sir; did the Lord Jesus indeed enter into that rest of the grave
the seventh day of the week? why then it seems he rose again from the dead the
second day, and rested but two days and two nights in the grave; and had he
not need be greater then an Angel that shall take upon him to coin such new
Creeds, and preach such new Gospels, for sear of the Apostles Gal. 1.7, 8.
Anathema? To salve this he tells us p. 145. that our Saviors body was laid to
rest in the Sepulcher in the close of the sixth day. Very good! Why then does
he say in the next page, that he entered into this rest on the seventh day? Thus
at once he contradicts both himself and the Scriptures. But to conclude; this
author has little reason to vaunt and glory (as he does) in this new invention:
For, to make Christ's rest in the grave a ground of the weekly Sabbath, is
neither proper in respect of the thing, nor proportionable in respect of the
time. For the thing it self, how altogether improper and incongruous is it, to
keep a weekly festival in memory of our Saviors Funeral? to make that day a
day of rejoicing which was rather a day of mourning? For so the Ancients held
it, and therefore kept it as a Fast, ergo not as a Sabbath; for the Sabbath was
ever reckoned among the solemn Ier. 23.2, 3.
Feasts of the Lord; which one consideration is sufficient to show the judgment
of antiquity in this controversy. For they kept the Diem Solis laetitiae
indulgemus. Tertul. Apol. c. 36. Sabbato usque ad galli cantum jejunium
producite, et illucescente uno Sabbatorum (qui est dominicus) desinite.
Constit. lib. 5. c. 16. (...) Epiphan. lib. ^3. and Tom. 3. Haeres. 75.
Lords day as a day of spiritual joy and gladness, and spent the whole Saturday
(the time of Christ's lying in the grave) in Fasting and mourning; alleging,
for their practice that speech of our Savior, When the Bridegroom is taken
from them then shall they fast, Luke 5.35. Again, it holds no proportion in
respect of the time, for our Savior lay three days and three nights in the
grave; therefore this can be no pattern for a weekly Sabbath. I doubt the best
of our new Sabbath-keepers would be weary of resting so long at a time. But the
stress of T.Ts. Argument is laid upon Christ's entering into rest, therefore
there remains the keeping of a Sabbath to the people of God; and here I shall
lay the stress of my answer, having manifestly proved that Christ's entrance
into rest was not on the seventh day, no not in this authors own new notion of
rest. And whereas he adds, that the taking down of our Saviors body from the
Cross, and laying it in the sepulcher in the close of the sixth day, was
providentially ordered: I answer, true, providentially indeed; for hereby the
Holy Ghost has admirably provided against this future error of raising the old
Seventh-day Sabbath from the dead, and building it up anew upon the grave of
Christ, where it rather lies buried never to rise again. For if the blessed
body of Christ were laid in the grave on the sixth day, then he entered not into
that rest, (nor indeed any rest at all) on the seventh day. But on the first
day of the week he entered into his true rest, and ceased from his work of
Redemption, as God the Father did the seventh day from his work of Creation;
therefore there remains the keeping of a Sabbath to the people of God upon
the day of Christ's resting from his work, the day of his rising from the dead.
And we have grand reason to think that Christ had a significant meaning in
prolonging his Resurrection to the third day, which was the first of the week;
as the Father had in lengthening out the Creation to the seventh day, which was
the last of the week. For as the Father could have created the world in a
moment, so could the Son have quickened and raised himself from the grave as soon
as he was in it, either the same day, or the seventh, if he had pleased: But he
purposely and providentially passed over that day, and crowned the first of the
week with the glory of his resurrection; which plainly speaks it his will and
pleasure to make that day the day of our weekly rest, in which our Lord himself
rested from his greatest work.

Oh! But Christ rested not on the day of his Resurrection, T. T. p. 120.
for he journeyed fifteen miles that very day, which was no fair president for
celebrating a Sabbath. And again, he traveled fifteen miles upon this supposed
new Sabbath; and this not to any Church-meeting, but from Jerusalem (where most
of his disciples were) purposely joining with the two disciples that were
journeying on foot seven miles and a half into the Country. He means the
disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 24.13, 14. This is his last refuge, and it is a
very sorry one. For

First, This travel was without labor; and if he had journeyed that day from
earth to Heaven, and back again from Heaven to earth, it had been no
impeachment to his holy rest, any more then the motion of an Angel sent upon
Gods errand would be a profanation of his Sabbath: certainly the body of Christ
at his resurrection was a glorious body, and able to move from earth to Heaven,
as some think, in a moment. And whether he did not locally (though not so
solemnly as afterward) ascend into Heaven, and descend again, the very day of
his resurrection, is disputed by some. I shall not positively assert it, but
modestly propound it to further inquiry, whether those words, John 20.17.
Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go and tell my
brethren I ascend; do not seem to imply that even now in the morning of the
resurrection-day he was about to ascend; and whether the same day at night
returning again, and bidding them touch or Luke 24.39
handle him do not argue that now he had ascended? Again, whether those words,
Ephesians. 4.8, 11.
When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men, some Apostles, some
Prophets, etc. must be necessarily limited to his last ascension; or whether
they may not be construed of some former ascension? Since it seems those gifts
were given upon the very day of his resurrection; for then ( John 20.
toward the evening or end of that day) the Gospel Ministry was constituted;
then the Apostles received their mission and commission, v. 19.
As my Father has sent me even so send I you: v. 21.
whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whose soever sins ye retain
they are retained. Yea, then they received the v. 22.
Holy Ghost, For he breathed on them, and says unto them, receive ye the Holy
Ghost. I shall not determine where our Savior had his usual residence during
those 40. days betwixt his resurrection and last ascension, whether in Heaven
or on earth; curiosity I abhor in the mysteries of Christ; and what I have
here offered is in humility, and sobriety of spirit, with submission to better
and riper judgments. Let not this digression be counted a transgression; or if
it be, pardon it. To return to my answer, this is most certain, that although
the body of Christ after his resurrection remained a real and true body, yet it
was a Luke 24.37.
spiritual, a splendid and glorious body, free from that corpulency, that
lumpishness, that subjection to weariness and other infirmities that these vile
bodies of ours are clogged and encumbered withal; this is manifest by his
mavelous apparitions upon earth, and his glorious Acts 1.9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.22.
assention into Heaven; when he mounted himself in the Chariot of that cloud,
in which he rode in Triumph into glory; now motion is no hindrance to the rest
of a glorified body, such as Christ's was when he arose from the dead; therefore
although he were in action and motion on the resurrection day, yet he did not
labor.

His joining with those two Disciples traveling to Emmaus, was a work of
Charity and Piety. Luke 24.17.
And this blessed Physician came to comfort them, and confirm them in the
belief and assurance of his resurrection: They were his poor distracted,
dejected, timorous disciples, and whom should he visit but such? Say they were
going from Jerusalem (that bloody City) suppose they were straying like sheep
without a Shepherd, yet the Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of the sheep being
now brought again from the dead, Hebr. 13.20.
would not leave them wandering in a wilderness, but fetch them home to their
fold again: And it was no secular employment, but a Sabbath days work, for he
spent the time in opening Scripture, preaching and proving his resurrection,
till their cold and dead hearts were so quickened and warmed, that they did even
burn within them; in a word, it was a Sabbath days journey. But leaving the
Adversary to solace himself with these sapless notions, and trifling
objections; we proceed to a fourth Argument.

From the designation of a new day upon the discharge of the old; The old
seventh day Sabbath is discharged from obligation or observation under the new
Testament, and a new day of the same number (the first of the week) designed,
deputed, and determined for the Christians weekly day of Solemn worship under
the Gospel, and that by the Lord of the Sabbath; Therefore the Sabbath is
altered and changed from the last to the first of the week, by no less then
Divine authority. The consequent cannot be denied, if the Antecedent be
granted; and granted it must be when proved by Scripture, as it shall be in
each particular (I hope) to full satisfaction.

1. That the old seventh day is discharged, disanulled, and abolished for ever
being a Sabbath more to the people of God in Gospel Times; this we have proved
in part already from Colos. 2.16 to which may be added, Gal. 4.10, 11. See the
new Annotations on this place.
Ye observe days, and months, and times, and yees, I am afraid of you, etc.
See how zealously this great Apostle and Doctor about days, decries all legal
distinctions of days? by four distinct phrases he enumerates all the solemn
Festivals in use among the Jews, and opposes the observation of them all in
Christian Churches. Read the words either backwards or forwards; the first
clause (Ye observe days) must in all reason referr to their observation of the
Jews weekly Sabbath day. For if by years we are to understand either their
Sabbaticall years, or rather their yearly Sabbath, called the day of atonement;
and by times or seasons their annual Feasts of Passover, Pentecost, and
Tabernacles; and by Months, their monthly Feasts called New Mons; what can
be meant by days in this retrograde order but their weekly seventh day? What
days were in request among the Jews of quicker return then their monthly
days, besides their weekly Sabbath day? That which persuades me that the
Apostle does here unquestionably intend the old seventh-day is:

1. The Correspondency of this Text with that Calendar or Chapter of days
Levit. 23. where Moses sets down all their solemn Feasts or holy days, eight
in number; reckoning the weekly Sabbath among the rest of those Ceremonial
Festivals, and putting that first as the Apostle does here, then proceeding to
speak of the rest, much after the same order here observed. This Text
comprehends all the days and times mentioned in that catalogue.

2. The plain parallel betwixt this place and Colos. 2. which may may be seen
in the scope of both Epistles compared together. These two Churches it seems
were sick of one and the same disease, as appears by the same Symptoms in
both, the disease was Judaism, wherewith they were dangerously infected by the
breath of false teachers crept in among them, who beguiled them with Colos. 2.4.
enticing words, and sought to Gal. 1.5.
pervert the Gospel; namely by persuading them to mingle Law and Gospel
together, by retaining the customs of Moses together with the commands of
Christ; Colos. 2.12.16 Gal. 4.10. chapter 5. 2, 3, 6, 12, 13.
and that especially in two points, viz. Circumcision, and Observation of legal
days, and among other days the old seventh-day, which (together with
circumcision) was cried up among the Colossians, as was showed above, and
therefore by good consequence among the Galatians also, since they were men of
the same gang that had bin tampering here as well as there; I mean Jewish false
teachers, the Doctors of circumcision; and their Doctrine was alike; yea the
days for which they contended were alike both here and there, days, or
Sabbaths sorted out by themselves, The old seventh day is here meant, though it
be not mentioned expressly.
and distinguished from new moons and other Festivals; therefore undoubtedly
the old seventh-day was the maine. This together with circumcision were those
legal and mosaical customs which the Jewish Zealots labored tooth and nayl to
propagate in all the primitive Churches, especially where there were any
convert Jews. But St. Paul like a resolute champion of Christ's cause opposes
himself against these growing errors wherever he came, insomuch that he began
to be voyc'd and cried up, or rather cried down as the great stickler against
Moses; Therefore when he came to Jerusalem St. James tells him, that the
Judaizing weak brethren were Acts 21.21.
informed of him, how that he taught the Jews who were among the Gentiles
(that is the Christian Churches) to forsake Moses, and not to walk after the
customs; and by and by when (to stay the Mouths of these weak Christians) he
goes into the Temple to purify himself, the Jews which were of Asia make a
loud out cry against him, Men of Israel, help: this is the man that teaches
all men every where against the people, and the law, and this place. By which
Testimonies it is evident, that St. Paul was a rigid Nonconformist, and that he
did mightily cry down the customs of Moses in all Christian Churches. If you
ask me, what customs? I answer they are not particularly mentioned; only
these two Epistles do witness that he had decryed circumcision, the old
Sabbath, and other days and rites of legal worship, therefore in all
likelihood these were some of those condemned customs. And hereupon it seems
the old Ebionites rejected Paul's writings, rating him as an Apostatam legis eum
dicentes. Iren. lib. 1. chapter 26.
Apostate because he wrote against the customs of Moses, chiefly circumcision
and the old Sabbath, both which the Ebionites eagerly contended for; and
therefore they were branded for Heretics to all succeeding generations, and
well they deserved it. But it may be demanded, by what warrant did St. Paul cry
down these Mosaical customs, and upon what ground? I answer, his warrant was
Gal. 1.1. he that raised Christ from the dead gave him his commission.
signed in Heaven, and his ground was good; For the Lord Jesus himself was
designed to change these customs; so much St. Steven does upon the matter
affirm, for he was accused for saying, That Acts 6.14.
Jesus of Nazareth should change the customs which Moses had delivered. Mark
the expression, the very word [change] is brought in as an Article against this
blessed Martyr. The only crime they had to lay to his charge was this, that he
should say Jesus of Nazareth should change the customs which Moses had
desivered. It Is true, they accused him for speaking blasphemy against Moses law
(and therefore they are called V. 13.
false witnesses, or false accusers) but like enough that which they called
blasphemy St. Steven had spoken; very like in his dispute with the V. 9, 10.
Libertines, Cyrenians, and Alexandrians he might speak something to this
effect; that Christ should destroy the Temple, and change the law and
ordinances which Moses had given them. Whether he did affirm it or no, the
thing it self is a certain truth; the Lord Jesus has changed the Traditions of
Moses; he has changed the Heb. 7.12.
law, and the Priesthood, the Covenant, and the Seals of the Covenant;
circumcision for Baptism, the Passover for the Lords Supper; the typical Mal.
1.11. John. 4.21.
place and times of worship; all things liable to change he has certainly
changed, and among the rest the old Sabbath, which was mutable from the
beginning, as we have showed elsewhere. But I conceive St. Steven had indeed
asserted this truth; for being charged with it, does he deny it? No, he rather
stands to maintain and justify it chapter 7. V. 47.
and accordingly God justifies him, by making his face to shine before the
Council like the face of an chapter 6. 15.
Angel; for indeed it was the Doctrine of an Dan 9.26.27
Angel which he had delivered: and, to come to some issue, that which I would
further observe is this; St. Paul (although at that time neither Saint nor
Paul) was present at the Martyrdom, if not the trial of Steven and did Acts
22.20. chapter 26. 10.
consent to his death, and doubtless he could not but know the cause for which
he suffered; which was partly this, Reader, note this as a convincing argument,
that a Sabbath or day joined with other Jewish holy days, yet distinguished
from them, can be no other then their seventh day Sabbath and this is often
condemned never commanded, in all the new Testament, therefore thou must make a
new Gospel if thou will maintain that old Sabbath.
for saying that Jesus of Nazareth should change the customs which Moses had
delivered; a truth sealed with the blood of this Protomartyr. Now I would offer
it to further consideration, whether this might not be one ground of this great
Apostles after zeal against the Ordinances, Rites, and Customs which Moses had
delivered, and in particular circumcision and the old Sabbath But I shall not
go by guess and conjectural probability. Thus much I infer from the premises,
as matter of certainty, The customs which Paul taught people to cast off were
the customs delivered by Moses, Acts 21.21. which were destinated to be
changed by Christ Acts 6.14. But Paul taught people to cast off circumcision
and the old Sabbath Colos. 2.12.16. Gal. 4.10. chapter 5. 2. Therefore these were
the customs delivered by Moses and destinated to change by Christ. That
circumcision was, none Question; but the scruple is about the Sabbath; for it
may be objected, the Sabbath was long before Moses time, as old as Adam,
Apostate Adam at least; I answer, so also circumcision was long before Moses
time, being given at first to Genesis 17.9, 10 Acts 7.8.
Abraham; yet circumcision is said to be given by John 7.22.
Moses, because he was the first that wrote of it; and the like may be said for
the old Sabbath, which was one of those customs delivered or made known by the
hand of Moses, Neh. 9.14. and ranked with the rest of those ceremonial
festivals Levit. 23. But to be sure, whatever St. Steven in his dispute with
the Libertines and Cyrenians asserted; St. Paul in his Epistles to the
Colossians and Galatians hasevidently concluded the discharge of the old
seventhday.

T. T. has little to say to Gal. 4. only this; p. 23.
That Paul does not here condemn the observation of all days etc. only
beggarly seasons and elements.

Neither do we say, that all days are here condemned or disallowed. The Lords
day (the first day of the week) we are sure is not, for this was established by
this very Apostle in these very Churches of 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
Galatia; and to condemn this had been to cross his own Ordinance. But we say,
all Judaicall days (for days, months, years do all referr to that specialty,
Jewish solemnities) are here discharged and condemned, and among the rest the
old seventh day. And as for the objectors Minatory charge, If any man be so
bold to call this a beggarly element, at his peril be it. Let the Holy Apostle
answer it: He had best tell St. Paul, at your peril be it Paul, if you dare
call the old Sabbath a shadow of things to come, or a (...).
poor Rudiment (for so he may qualify the terms if he please) but where lies
the peril? Why not the old Sabbath a poor rudiment? he hints this as his
reason, (Because God instituted and observed it) Observed it! how did God
observe it? Take heed of unbeseeming terms. When we speak of the glorious God,
we had need speak as the Oracles of God: Observation does imply obligation. And
how can this stand with the sovereignty of God? But I suppose his meaning is,
that God rested the seventh day; what then? Therefore it was no rudiment, had
nothing Typical, or ceremonial in it. It follows not. Psam 132.8. 2 Chronicles. 6
41.
How often is God said to rest in Types of Christ? is not the Tabernacle
styled, Gods rest? And the Temple, and the Temple Worship? are not Genesis 8.21.
Exodus 29.18. Numb. 15.3.
Sacrifices and oblations called a Savor of rest unto God? not that Gods soul
rested in any of these rests (properly) nor the people of God neither: But he
rested in Christ, and so did they; in these things only as Types or
prefigurations of Christ to come. And thus he is said to rest on the seventh
day: We have proved before that man sinned and fell the sixth day, and that
Christ was promised, and actually invested in the office of Mediatorship before
the Sabbath was instituted: And hereupon God rested the seventh day, not only
from the work of Creation, but from the weight and burden of Adams sin. For
God complains of sin as a heavy Isai 1.14. Amos 5.2.13.
burden, and as the sins of the old world are said to Genesis 6.6.
grieve him at his heart, so no doubt did the sin of Adam. But Christ
interposing to make reconcilation, God rested the seventh day and was
refreshed. Exodus 31.17. That the old Sabbath was instituted after the fall,
(besides what has bin formerly alleged) appears plainly from that of our
Savior. Mark 2.28.
The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath: For man; that is for
man in misery, (not man in innocence) for the context speaks of necessitous
indigent man; man subject to hunger, and thirst, and want. It Is spoken upon the
occasion of the hungry disciples plucking the ears of Corn, and eating out of
pure necessity on the Sabbath day. The Pharisees presently censure them as
Sabbath breakers, Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath day
having power to dispose of it at his pleasure.
but says the Lord of the Sabbath, you quarrel without cause, For the Sabbath
was made for man, not man for the Sabbath; That is, the Sabbath was made for
the good and benefit of man in misery; Principally for the good of his sick and
sinful soul, but partly for the support of his weak and frail body also, that
it might rest and be refreshed with convenient food, Physic and the like;
which clearly argues, that the Sabbath was made, ordained, and instituted after
man was in necessity and misery, namely after Adams fall; and therefore it is
said, That God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it. Genesis 2.3. Blessed it,
how, not with natural blessings, that the Sun should shine brighter, or the
weather be fairer that day then another; No, the blessings of the Sabbath were
of another nature spiritual blessings; such as were suitable to the state of
fain man; such as God has pronounced Fallen man blessed withal, otherwise the
institution had never concerned any one man since the fall. How could it, if
the blessings contained in it had bin nothing but Paradise blessings? But we
shall not inculcate former arguments; only add one consideration more to make
it further manifest, that Gods rest on the seventh day was partly (if not
chiefly) in relation to Christ the promised Messiah. It Is a saying of the Hebrew
Doctors, and it agrees well with the Heb. 2.10. Rev. 5.11, 12, 13.
Scriptures, that the world it self had not bin made but for the Messiah; For
all things were made by him and for him: and he is the Heb. 1.2.
heir of all things and that as Mediator; and we have reason to think, that
Gods heart were more set upon Christ when he set up this visible frame of
Heaven and earth, then upon all the world besides. How unlikely therefore is it
that the glorious Creator should set apart a day of rest, till the grand design
upon which his thoughts had run from all eternity, and which was chiefly in his
eye when he made the world, (the glorifying of himself in his Son, by investing
him with the government of the world, and putting him as heir of all things
into actual possession of his hereditary Dominions) had some actual inchoate
existence? It Is clear, that God did not rest from his other works of Creation
till he had made man; because till then he had not attained his subordinate end
of making the rest of his creatures: and it is credible, that he would not rest,
after he had made man, till he had made Christ Mediator, and put the
government of all upon his shoulders; because till then he had not attained his
ultimate end, for which he made man and all the rest of the world besides.
Certain it is, that the Creation was made but mutably perfect at first and
therefore it cannot be conceived how God could keep a settled rest the seventh
day, till he had settled and established the Creation on Christ the rock, Deuteronomy.
32.4.
whose work is perfect: And this I conceive to be the true and undoubted sense
of that saying, Genesis 22. On the seventh day God ended, Finished, or perfected,
his work; namely, by establishing it upon Christ that sure foundation; 1 Peter
4.18.
hence he is styled a faithful Creator, in that he did not leave his work of
Creation in a mutable estate (as Masons and Carpenters when they have built
their houses leave them without any further care what becomes of them) but as a
faithful Creator God was not the author or approver of man's falbut only the
orderer and over ruler of it to bring good out of evil.
he over ruled the Fall of Adam for a greater good, namely for the
establishment of his mutable work, by bringing in Christ the right heir,
setting him as Ps. 8.6. He. 2.8. 1 Cor. 15.24
Lord over all the works of his hands, putting all things under his feet, making
him Josh. 3.11. Neb. 9.6. Dan. 10.14, 15. Acts 10.36.
Lord of the whole world and of all things therein, to whom does appertain the
Dominion of the Heavens and the Heaven of Heavens, the earth and all that is
therein. Thus on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, or
perfected his work which he had made: That which he had made perfect at first
with mutable perfection, he now perfected again by a further degree of
supperadded perfection; namely by the promise of Christ and his personal
undertaking as Mediator, by whom all things Col. 1.16.
consist: And accordingly God rested the seventh day, (not in the changeable
Creature) but in Christ the rock, and so the Sabbath was stated on the seventh
day upon the account of Christ in the promise, upon the performance of which
promise the seventh day ceases to be any longer a day of rest. But enough is
said to show the discharge of the old seventh day from obligation under the new
Testament. We shall only remove some of the Adversaries chief objections, and
then lay down our grounds for the Christian Sabbath.

He objects, The Fathers institution of the seventh day, which makes it as
perpetual as the Ordinance of marriage. But

This is fully answered in the first Position;

From the Sons confirmation of the seventh day. Christ has confirmed it (says
he) 1. T. T. p. 72. to p. 79.
By his words. 2. By his works. By his words more generally, among the rest of
his royal Laws which he has ratified even to a point or Tittle, Math. 5.18.
Teaching his Apostles to do the like, Rom, 3. James 2.10. More particularly, by
proclaiming himself Lord of the Sabbath day Mark 2.28. As if he had said, the
Sabbath is mine, I am Lord of it, I made it for Man, and having given him a
precept and pattern to sanctify it, I shall not make my self a president to
profane it: Now that which Christ lays claim to as Lord, must needs be
confessed his: Therefore do we celebrate the holy Supper because it is the Lords
Supper. Again, Math. 24.20. He instructs his disciples to pray that their
flight might not be on the Sabbath day, namely forty years after his death, at
what time all Ceremonies were abolished by Apostolical proclamation. And as
thus he has owned the seventh day Sabbath by his words, so he has also crowned
it by his workt etc.] This is the main strength and force of his Argument; But
alas! it is to feeble to fetch life into a dead Sabbath that has lain sixteen
hundred years in the grave; we shall discuss every particular in it, and return
several answers to it.

We grant indeed that the Lord our Lawgiver has ratified his royal Moral Law
even to a point or a tittle, every tittle to be taken? Not strictly and
graphically for every vowel, point and prick of a letter in the Law; but for
the substance and least matter of it, the least Commandment in it; so our
Savior expounds himself, Matthew. 5.19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of
these least Commandments and teach men so, shall be least in the Kingdom of
God; teaching us, that by [ jot or tittle of the Law verse 18.] he meant the
least Commandment of the Moral Law v. 19. Thus also St. James chapter 2.10. He that
shall offend in one point is guilty of all. By one point he means any one
precept or Commandment in the Decalogue. He explains himself by the reason
rendered verse 11. For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not
kill: As if he had said, the same God that gave one Commandment gave all,
therefore when any one point or precept is violated, the contempt reflects upon
the whole Law, the least sin being an affront to Gods sovereignty. So then the
sense of both places is the same; the least point or precept of the Moral Law
is in force under the Gospel; and if the least, much more the fourth
Commandment, which indeed is none of the least. But what of all this? The
fourth Commandment is established by Christ, therefore the seventh day in
weekly succession from the Creation; the Consequence is infirm. For that day
was never directly stated in the Commandment; the fourth Commmandement says
not, Thou shall keep holy the last day of the week, and not the first, but a
seventh day Sabbath, or one in seven: the old seventh day may be and is
repealed; and yet the Commandment ratyfied to a tittle in the matter; yea in
the very letter of it evangelically considered; to wit, as it is explained by
Christ according to the will of God, though not the carnal reasonings of men.
But of this formerly.

That Text Mark 2.28. rightly interpreted makes nothing for the old Sabbath,
but much against it. For these words [The Son of man is Lord also of the
Sabbath day] do speak Christ's power to alter and change it, not his purpose to
establish and confirm it under the Gospel, it is a title much like that Math.
21. where he styles himself Lord of the vineyard; as having power to let and
lease it out to other Husbandmen, Mark 12.9. Dominus recte dicitur alicujus
rei, qui in illam jua and potestatem habet extollendi and immutandi Aretius in
Luc. 6. Christ was Lord of the Sabbath, that is had power to change the day:
Engl. Annot. in Mar. 2.
Luke 20.15.16. And thus he was Lord of the Sabbath, having authority to alter
and adjourn it to another day: the Sabbath was the vineyards Landmark, or the
Churches distinctive limit, and he that had power to transplant the vineyard,
had no less power to transpose the Sabbath. He was Lord of the vineyard and
Lord of the Sabbath in a like notion. Suppose it spoke, as the objector speaks,
[I am Lord of the Sabbath, the Sabbath is mine] yet still the same sense
recurres, is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? As our Lord
speaks in another case Math. 20.15. The Temple was his as well as the Sabbath,
Mal. 3.1. and styled his Ps. 132.14.
rest forever, and his Isai 56.7.
house of prayer for all people (more then I remember, was ever said of the
seventh day Sabbath) yet the Temple is destroyed: and as Christ never meant to
tie up his Gospel worshippers to that typical place of worship, so neither to
that typical time of worship. He was Lord of both while they lasted, that he
might dissolve both when their season was expired, that he might legally and ex
officio give his people a discharge from both. As for the Authors crafty
collation of these two expressions [Lord of the Sabbath day] and [Lords Supper]
whereby he would insinuate the equal authority and perpetuity of that Legal
Sabbath with this Evangelical Sacrament, it savours of more sophistry then
solidity of Argumentation: let the unlearned know, that as the terms are
different in the Greek, so the phrase in our English Dialect imports different
things; it is one thing to call Christ Lord of this or that, another thing to
say it is the Lords; to say he was Lord of the Sabbath, and that before his
death, is nothing so much as to to say, this is the Lords Supper, and that
after his resurrection; The former imports the office or authority of Christ,
the latter implies his Ordinance: And let the objector know, that this Epithet
[(...)] is never used but twice in the new Testament; namely for the Lords
Supper and the Lords day Rev. 1.10. The Holy Ghost never vouchsafed to honor
the Saturday Sabbath with this Evangelical title. But of that in convenient
time and place, we are now discussing Mark 2. where Christ (while the old
seventh day was in force) professes himself Lord of it; which plainly intimated
his Lordship, Dominion and sovereignty over it, that he had authority to
displace it, and dispose of it, as himself thought good; the Coherence carries
it clearly this way. The disciples through the Pharisaical carping and
misprision of their adversaries, were condemned for Sabbath-breaking, because
they had plucked a few ears of corn and dressed them for their dinner on the
Sabbath day, which was a work of mercy and pure necessity (hunger and emptiness
constraining them to it) and so no breach of the Sabbath. Hospin. de orig.
Fest. cap. de Sab.
But the malicious Pharisees (whose traditions had taught them, that to crop an
herb, to pill an onyon, to roast an apple, to kill a flea, Metens vel tantillum
reus est, and vellere spicas est species Messionis. Maim. Ichabb. vide Lightf.
Horae Hebraic. in Math. 12.
much more to pluck ears of corn and rub them in their hand (which they looked
upon as a kind of reaping and threshing) were unlawful and sinful actions on
the Sabbath day) presently take occasion to condemn the disciples for
Sabbath-violation: Well; our Savior justifies his disciples and wipes off the
charge of their accusers by this argument ver. 27. The Sabbath was made for man
(that is miserable fallen man) not man for the Sabbath. Therefore the Son of
man ( the Messiah) is also Lord of the Sabbath day; as if he had said, Cum post
lapsum institutum fuit Sabbaturn lege and condition quae Christum jam
promissum hominisque lapsum respexerit; non potuit Sabbatum non sub potestate
and domini; filii hominis, id est, seminis promiss^ subjici, ab co ordinandum
and disponendum prout ip si visum ac provisum fuerit. Idm. Ibid.
it is your error to think that all works of mercy and necessity are unlawful
on the Sabbath day, for the Sabbath was made and instituted at first for man,
subject to necessity and misery, namely by such a law as related to the fall of
man and the promise of the Messiah; therefore the Son of man is also Lord of
the Sabbath day; That is, it falls under my dominion and disposal as the Son of
man: The phrase is observable, he says not The Son of David, but, The Son of
man; the Mediator pointed out in the promise made to Adam the first man; even
he is Lord of the Sabbath day, or has dominion over it, being at first the
foundation of it. This is the most probable interpretation, if we take the Son
of man here for Christ. But very many Learned Writers take it for man or
mankind in general, as it is sometimes used, Filliue hominis i.e. homo. Zanch
in praec. 4.
Psalm. 8.5. Isai. 65.2. And then the meaning may be this, that in case of
urgent and pungent necessity, (as extreme hunger, peril of life, health or the
like) every, or any son of man is Lord of the Sabbath day, having liberty to
dress or prepare food, to take physic, to refresh and repair nature; Filliue
hominis tam de Christo quam de quovis Christiuno homine intelligi potest.
Gualter. in Loc. item Ravanel. in verb. dominus.
necessity (as we use to say) knows no law, that is, no positive Law; provided
it be not a necessity contracted by idleness or improvidence. This is the
exposition of some very learned and godly; and it seems to suit well with the
case of the disciples, as also the context v. 27. The Sabbath was made for man,
not man for the Sabbath: Therefore ( viz. in case of pure necessity) the Son of
man, or mankind, is Lord of the Sabbath day. Take it in which sense we will, it
makes nothing for the Saturday Sabbath. The objectors notion is altogether
incoherent both with the sense of the Text, and scope of the context: but to
proceed.

Touching that Text Math. 24.20. Pray that your flight be not in the Winter,
nor on the Sabbath day. I have two things to answer.

1. By way of supposition: supposing it were meant of the Jews Sabbath, it
would signify no more but this, that it would be superstitiously kept among
the unbeleeving Jews forty years after our Saviors death, (as it is to this
day) and therefore pray that your flight may not be either in the winter, when
it will be doleful dirty; or on the Sabbath, when it will be dangerous
traveling through the coasts of Judea, and bring you into peril of persecution
by your own contrymen, which was one of Paul's perils 2 Cor. 11.26. For
although by that time the disciples were sufficiently instructed in their
Christian liberty, that their flight was as lawful on that day as another, and
therefore they could not fly with scruple of conscience, yet the superstitious
Jews (to whom such flight might be offensive) in all reason would Shimei-like,
bark at such harmless passengers, if not bite and snap them. And whereas it is
objected, T.T. p. 78.
That it cannot be rationally conceived, that the Jews instead of securing
themselves should trifle away their time in persecuting the Christians. This
objection is answered by himself in the very next words almost: For, says he,
the Jews were so superstitious that they durst not fight for their life; Then
I may well infer, that it is most likely they were also so zealous that they
would persecute any who should fly for their life, if they themselves would
rather dye then fly, or fight for their lives (as he suggests) much more would
they hinder the flight of others. So that if the old Sabbath were intended by
our Savior, it was rather with a note of dislike then approbation; as
foreseeing that through the superstition of the Jews it would be an occasion
of persecution to his servants, as it had often been to himself. Supposing I
say (for I grant it not) that the Jews Sabbath was here meant, it must be
construed in such a sense; namely, that they are counseled to deprecate their
flight on that day for the better avoiding of bodily calamities; for in
reference to that day we cannot so much as suppose any soul distress incident
to the disciples by reason of such flight; we cannot conceive how they should
be straightned in conscience out of any religious respect to that day at the
siege or sacking of Jerusalem, since the adversary himself confesses, That all
ceremonies were then abolished by Apostolical proclamation; For which he cites
Colos. 2.16, 17. Which Text does irrefragably prove the repeal of the old
Sabbath, as was said before. And thus he is caught in his own trap. But

2. By way of affirmation, I assert, That these words of our blessed Savior
(pray that your flight be not on the Sabbath) are to be understood of our
Christian Sabbath, the first day of the week; not directly indeed, but by very
good consequence, as Mr. Cawdrey and Mr. Byfield do convincingly argue it. For
(says the one) our Savior does here speak of a Sabbath indefinitely, and a
Sabbath to be observed long after his death, even at the destruction of
Jerusalem; and this was spoken to his disciples apart from the multitude, says
the other v. 3. and the period of time here pointed at was forty years after
his death, when the Jewish Sabbath was gone, and the Gospel sufficiently
published, whereby the ceremonial Law was evacuated, and become not only dead
but deadly. Not that the old Law of a Sabbath (the fourth Commandment) was then
out of force, but the Law of the old Sabbath. And then the conclusion is this,
Christ shows a Sabbath to continue and a religious respect due to a Sabbath
still after his death; yet not the Jews Sabbath, therefore he intended the
Christian Sabbath to be observed according to the fourth Commandment. As for
the Jews Sabbath it is certain, that it was void at this point of time; yea long
before this forewarned flight, the Apostles and Christians had their assemblies
apart from the other Jews, and kept the Lords day, the first day of the week;
as on the Great day of Pentecost, Acts 2. and at Troas Acts 20.7. And although
sometimes the Apostles did preach on the seventh day, yet as Mr. C. notes, it
was only before the time mentioned Acts 20 never after, and only in other
Cities abroad, not at Jerusalem; for there we never read a word of the Sabbath
in all the story of the Acts. I conclude therefore, with that reverend Author,
that no reason can be given why our Savior in this prophetical caution should
regard the Jewish Sabbath, but altogether the contrary, in regard the
Christians inhabiting in Jerusalem and the Coasts about Judea preferred the
Lords day before it; and it would be grievous to gracious hearts to have their
holy rest interrupted with the noise of warlike tumults, and the hurry of a
tumultuous flight; well might the disciples be taught to pray, Lord, when ever
we be driven from the place of our Residence, let it not be on a day of holy
rest, for that would be as uncomfortable to our souls as a winters flight would
be cumbersome to our bodies? Not that it would be sinful or unlawful (when life
lay at stake) to fly on the Sabbath; for to save a man's life is a
Sabbath-dayes duty, and a matter of far greater moment then to lead a beast to
the water, or pull an ox out of a pit, both which are allowable: it may
therefore be scored down among the rest of T.T's. errors and oversights, that
he makes it a sin to fly on the Sabbath day, when peril of life puts a man
upon it, for h^ terms it, a dishonor to God and profaning his sacred season;
p. 77.
and yet he says in the next page, That had their flight bin on the Sabbath,
as long as they carried nothing, they could not be counted Transgressors; Which
may pass for another of his contradictions. But for a closure to this answer,
we have deliberately weighed our Saviors words and sayings concerning the
Sabbath, but cannot find that ever he spoke one word or one syllable, in
countenance of the old seventh day, as the Sabbath of Christians; his words
prove no such thing. And lastly

Whereas his works are pleaded as the crown of that day, p. 78.
and it is a truth; now let him have but a little patience, and we shall prove
by undeniable Arguments, that in this respect the first day of the week carries
away the Crown from all other days, old Sabbath and all. If Christ's
resurrection, his often apparitions, the mission of his Spirit, the inspiration
of his Apostles, the conversion of three thousand souls ot once, be worthy the
name of wonders, surely the first day of the week is a day of wonder, a day of
honor and renown above all the days that ever the Sun shone upon: The most
glorious day that ever God created, the most solemn day that ever the Church
celebrated; a day that has crowned Christ, and a day that Christ himself has
crowned with the greatest glory of any day that ever dawned upon the world.
Romans 1.4.
I speak but the words of truth and soberness; Luke 13.32. Psalm 118.24. Joh.
20.22, 23. Cant. 3.11.
the Lords day is no day of small things; it is the day of the Lords power, the
day of his perfection, the day of his praise and glory, the day of his bounty
and blessing, the day of his espousals and of the gladness of his heart, which
can be understood so properly of no day as of this (the Resurrection day). Let
profane Esaus despise it, and proud Notionists oppose it at their peril;
Behold King Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day
of his espousals and in the day of the gladness of his heart; never was Christ
more visibly Crowned by his Church then on the Lords day, which also was the
day of his espousals when he was made sure to his Church by a sure Covenant,
even the sure mercies of David Hos. 2.19, 20. Acts 13.34.
but let neither of them blame me, if I honor and esteem it above all days,
till they can show me another day which the Savior of the world has honored
and exalted above it. Never tell me of one or two miracles wrought on the
seventh day (yet I desire to adore Christ in all his miracles) but show me such
a confluence of wonders and wonderful transactions wrought by him whose name is
wonderful on that day, as on this, and I will confess I have lost the day.
Alas! It cannot be, that one transcendent act (the Resurrection of the Lord
Jesus from the dead, the finishing act of our Redemption) weighs down all the
honor of the seventh day, with advantage; It Is objected, that our Savior was
pleased to put forth his Divine virtue on the seventh day in sundry miracles,
miracles of healing and the like; I answer, It Is very true, and to him be all
the glory. But if it were an honor to that day that our Heavenly physician
healed the sick, what a Crown of glory was it to his own day, that he raised
the dead? Yea that being dead he raised himself from the dead? so also if he
dignified the seventh day by casting out unclean Spirits; how much more the
first day by sending his holy Spirit? If his preaching in the Synagogues were
an honor to the seventh day; how much more his presenting himself, in that
great Assembly of Divines twice (at least) on the first day of the week? Did
Christ ever rise from the dead on the seventh day? Did he ever appear to his
disciples on that day? Did he breath forth the blessed Spirit on that day? Did
he ever preach a Sermon (after his Resurrection) on that day? But I need go no
further; here is light enough if men had but eyes; I hope by this time the
Objector sees the invalidity of his second Argument; that which he calls the
Sons confirmation. He proceeds to a third, from the Spirits approbation of the
seventh day.

What ever the blessed Spirit shall approve of, we may rest upon it as an
infallible truth: T. T. p. 81. to 94.
But he has highly approved of the seventh day; witness, first his high
applause of the pious women's resting on the seventh day according to the
Commandment, Luke 23. ult. Which although it were after Christ's crucifixion,
yet St Luke was not inspired to write his Gospel till after his ascension.
Secondly, The Spirits glorious manifestation, and mighty operation on the day
of Pentecost Acts 2. Which he would fain persuade us to be the seventh day.
Thirdly, The Spirits constant appellation, calling the seventh day, and none
but that, the Sabbath day etc.] Here is a great show of Argument, but it
signifies little and concludes nothing, when it comes to scanning. For

Although it seem to be spoken in praise of these holy women, Gal. 4.10. O but
St. Luke wrote not his Gospel till after the ascension: Answer. What then? was
the old Sabbath therefore in force at that time? by the same rule he may
conclude the Passover (mentioned by the same Evangelist in the chapter 22, v. 7.
foregoing Chapter) was then in force too: We are to judge of these women's
practice according to the date of their act, not according to the date of the
Evangelists book. Besides some take these words to be no commendation, but a
bare historical narration: And if the particular day be here intended, as
referring to the Commandment they conceive it may be spoken signanter, and
(according to the original) the Text may be rendered thus; they returned and
prepared spices and ointments (...).
and rested that Sabbath day indeed according to the Commandment; that is, they
rested indeed that Sabbath day, but never after (upon that day) according to
the Commandment. Again, others expound it thus, it was not the particular day
on which the Sabbath was then kept, so much as their Mr. Collier against Fisher
p. 13, 14.
manner of keeping it which is look at in referring to the Commandment; and so
the commendation pitches rather upon the quomodo then the quando; therefore it
is not said, they rested the seventh day (as T.T. prints it) but they rested
the Sabbath day, or day of rest according to the Commandment, the most that can
be made of it is this, that it is a commendable thing to dedicate a day of rest
to religious and holy rest.

The Spirits appellation argues not his divine approbation; Colos. 2.16. No
matter though it be sometimes called Sabbath after it was discharged, for so is
circumcision called circumcision, and the other Festivals of the Jews
(Pentecost especially) called 1 Cor. 16.8.
Pentecost, long after it was degraded from the dignity of a solemn Festival;
as a man may be called by his proper name afer he is dead and buried. And so I
might proceed to the refutation of his next notion about the feast of
Pentecost; viz. That it fell that year on the Saturday or seventh day; but this
shall receive a more full answer in a more fit and proper place. His fourth and
last Argument for the seventh day, is from the Saints observation; which runs
chiefly upon the practice of Paul; it would be too tedious to transcribe his
whole story. Take the strength of it as it follower in this plausible Objection.

As it was Christ's constant custom to celebrate the seventh day Sabbath Luke
4.18. So it was Paul's Acts 172. and such as his custom was, such was his
commission: and we must be followers of Paul as he was of Christ 1 Cor. 11.1.
it is his own rule, Philip. 4.9. Those things which ye have both learned, and
received, and heard, and seen in me, do; Only it must be understood with these
limitations, that Paul's practice be plain, possible, peaceable, Evangelicall
and unrepealed; for we may not follow Paul in his compliance with the Jews in
ceremonials, no not to gain the Jews. But his practice in observing the
seventh day was truly Evangelical, and never in the least tittle repealed, nor
altered; neither was it his single practice, but the custom of all his
companions and associates Acts 13.13, 14. chapter 15.40.16, 13, 17, 24. And that
not only among the Jews but the Gentiles also Acts 13.42. chapter 18.4. Therefore
he did it not to please the Jews, but purposely for a pattern to the Gentiles:
Hence he exhorts the Corinthians (Gentile Churches) to follow him as he
followed Christ; and it was at Corinth that he kept the Sabbath Acts 18.
Therefore this was the pattern wherein he would have them be his followers, and
us also, for the Epistle is written to us as well as to them, 1 Cor. 1.2. Thus
he pleads Paul's custom, and adds, It was his constant custom; and whereas
(says he) it is made a great Argument for the observation of the first day,
that Paul preached once that day Acts 20.7. it is as clear Paul preached every
Sabbath Day Acts 18.4. Only the Translators have not dealt so clearly (upon
which account among others he charges them with sin yea with inexcuseable sin,
p. 139.) because Acts 20.7. they render the word (preaching) for the greater
advancement of the first day, whereas Acts 18.4. they call it (reasoning) to
obscure the seventh day, although the Greek word be the same in both places.
Then he frames an objection against himself (which he can never an swer)

Obj. Paul only took that opportunity to preach to the people. To which he
answers, 1. They that object thus speak without book, 2. They make the Apostle
a constant dissembler. 3. They may as warrantably lay this crime to Christ
himself, (that he took such opportunities, and not in conscience of the
Sabbath). Thus he words it out, and casts seducing glosses upon the sacred
Scriptures, to beguile unstable souls; but I shall endeavor to undeceive him
and others by sundry answers to his specious Argument.

The proposition upon which he argues ( that we must follow Paul as he followed
Christ) is true in a Scripture sense, Paul's following of Christ materially, for
his doing the same things that Christ did (as it seems he does) and then argue
universally from it (as he must if he will make any thing of it) his conclusion
will contradict himself; for he has granted some exempt cases wherein Paul's
practice does not bind us, and yet his practice therein was materially the same
with Christ's; and I will give him some instances to put it out of question,
that in some cases Paul did what Christ did, and yet we are not bound to do as
Paul did. Luke 2.42. John 2.13 chapter 5.1. chapter 7.10.
For example, our Savior Christ used at the solemn festivals of the Jews to
go up to Jerusalem (as at the feast of Passover, Pentecost and the rest) and
Paul did the like; He hasted to be at Jerusalem at the Feast of Pentecost, Acts
18.21. chapter 20.16.
and I must by all means (says he) keep this feast that comes in Jerusalem.
So that, if to practice the same things in any kind that Christ did, be to
follow Christ, herein Paul was a follower of Christ; yet I hope it follows not
that herein we must be followers of Paul, unless he would have us all turn
Jews. The like I may say concerning the Jews Sabbath: if he object against
the parallel, and say it will not hold, because those other Festivals are
repealed, but so is not the seventh day: I reply, let him show me a repeal for
the one, and I suppose I can show him as good a repeal for the other. His grand
objection is, That the seventh day was never expressly repealed; I answer no
more was Pentecost: Where does the Holy Ghost say in express terms, Pentecost
is abrogated: if he say it is included among the rest of those holidayes Gal.
4. Colos. 2. I will ask him, how can he tell that, as long as it is not
expressly named? If he say it is employed, I answer so is the seventh day, and
then we are agreed. Nothing can be objected against this answer, for the
instance I have given is plain and pertinent. And although I am fully convinced
that Pentecost is abrogated as well as the Saturday Sabbath (and that as well
as this) yet I am persuaded if a man listed to be contentious, he might make as
much ado about the Feast of Pentecost, and have as much to say for it from the
practice of the Apostle, as can be said for the Saturday Sabbath, yea more; for
whoever heard St. Paul say of the Sabbath, as he says of Pentecost, I must
needs keep the Feast? If he had said as much of the seventh day I should have
thought he had made conscience of keeping it, which doubtless he did not, or he
would never have omitted it at Troas, as it seems he did Acts 20.7. where he
tarried seven days, and not a syllable of keeping the seventh day; but the
first day of the week.

But says the Objector, it was Christ's custom to celebrate the seventh day
Sabbath, and so it was Paul's. Christ as his custom was went into the Synagogue
on the Sabbath day Luke 4.16. And Paul as his manner was did the same thing.
Christ's custom herein was the very same with Paul's. Answer, It Is not said that
Paul observed their Sabbaths; but he went into their Synagogues, and reasoned
with them three Sabbaths.
If we should grant him his Argument he would get nothing by it. For it makes
as much for the Jews Synagogues as the Jews Sabbath. And what would follow
from hence? Suppose there were a Synagogue of the Jews in Colchester, as there
is at Amsterdam; will he say that Christians are bound in conscience to
frequent it because Christ as his custom, and Paul as his manner was
frequented their Synagogues? If Paul did it from a principle of conscience, or
obedience to the Law, as Christ did, I see not how he can avoid it; but if Paul
did it only in a way of Christian prudence, to win the Jews, he has lost his
Argument; for the like I say of the Sabbath.

Whereas he further dictates, That it was both Christ's and Paul's constant
custom to observe the seventh day; I answer, if by constant he mean continual,
I deny both, for however our blessed Savior during his state of humiliation,
observed that day while he lived, yet he never owned it after his resurrection
from the dead, no not once (that we can find) during all those forty days
between his Resurrection and Ascension, which made up almost six weeks. In
which space he often appeared to his disciples on the first day of the week,
instructing them in the things pertaining to the kingdom of God. But not once
did he show his blessed face, or ever open his mouth all that while on the
seventh day that we read of; which doubtless he would have done, and we should
have heard of it, had it bin his pleasure to have the Sabbath continued on that
day after his resurrection, as it was before. And as for St. Paul, (whatever
his custom was among the Jews) it is certain that among the Christian Gentiles
separated from the Jews he kept the first day of the week, Acts 20. and taught
others to keep it 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. But not a word of keeping the seventh day in
all his Epistles.

It Is as falsely as boldly asserted, That Paul did constantly observe the seventh
day both among Jews and Gentiles. The places alleged prove no such thing; it is
said indeed Acts 13.42. that the Gentiles besought Paul to preach the next
Sabbath day, when almost the whole City came together to hear the word of God;
and Acts 18.4. He reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded the
Jews and the Greeks: But what Gentiles were these? Not Gentile-Churches
distinguished from the Jews, but either Jewish proselytes Acts 13.43. Or Pagan
Gentiles mingled among the Jews; and admitting some Christian converts among
them, yet still they were such as had no Church Assemblies by themselves, but
frequented the Synagogue-assemblies, where the Jews observed no other Sabbath
but the seventh day Acts 13. chapter 17. chapter 18. And therefore as long as the Jews
were tractable Paul and others frequented their Synagogues on their Sabbaths,
not out of any religious respect (on his part at least) to the Jews Sabbath
but merely for the opportunity of their assemblies; upon which account he also
went up to Jerusalem at their other Festivals; as it is said, chapter 18. He hasted
to be at Jerusalem at the Feast of Pentecost: What meant Paul's hasting thither,
says Chrysostom? Why, (...) Hom. 43. in Act. (...). Idem.
it was not for the Feasts sake, but for the multitudes sake, then met
together; he hasted thither to preach the word. So here it was not out of any
devotion either to the Jews Sabbath or their Synagogue, that he reasoned with
them everly Sabbath Day (as long as they would hear reason) but because of the
concourse of people then and there assembled: As, if there were a Synagogue of
the Jews in London, a Minister of Christ might occasionally visit it on their
Saturday-Sabbath to dispute with those infidels and convince them that Jesus is
the Christ; yet be far enough from owning either their Synagogue, or their
Sabbath; and that Paul's practice among the Jews and such Gentiles as the Text
speaks of, amounts to no more then this; 1 Cor. 9.20.
namely an occasional act or at most a prudentiall act (Whereby to the Jews he
became as a Jew, that he might win the Jews, and to them under the law, as
though he were under the Law) is evident, because when he saw no hope of
winning them to the faith of Christ, but they grew obstinate and refractory,
contradicting, blaspheming, and openly opposing the Gospel, yea persecuting
those that embraced it, Paul and his converts, now no longer frequent their
Synagogues, but separate themselves and join in Christian assemblies by
themselves. Acts 17.4, 5. Acts 19 9. chapter 18.17.
Thus the believing Jews and Proselytes of Thessalonica, so also those at
Ephesus, and at Corinth when they opposed themselves and blasphemed, Paul shook
his raiment against them, to signify that God had now shaken them off, and he
would have no more to do with them; and after this, Acts 18.6. we hear no more
of his preaching on the Jews Sabbath. For when the Churches of Christ were
separated from the Synagogues, they kept the first day of the week, passing by
the Jewish Sabbath. The converted Gentiles we are sure did so Acts 20.7. And
whereas it is objected, That this was but once, whereas it is clear that Paul
preached every Sabbath day. I answer, if this were true, yet the consequence
(that therefore the Jews Sabbath was more respected by Paul then the Lords
day) is utterly false. For one single instance of Apostolical practice in a
Gentile Church, will weigh down a hundred in a Jewish Synagogue, since among
the Jews the Apostle became all to all that he might win some. Whereas among
the Gentiles his practice was purely Evangelical. And to turn the point of the
Argument against the Objector; we must be followers of Paul as he was of
Christ. Now Christ celebrated the first day of the week in a pure Gospel
Church, John. 20.26. And never the seventh day (after his resurrection) and as
Christ did, so did Paul, Acts 20. and as he did, so must we. Himself grants
that we must follow Paul only in such practices as were Evangelical and
unrepealed. Now the first day of the week is such. Purely Evangelical, and
never yet repealed, therefore he must eat his words or yield his cause. As for
the old seventh day it was both legal (according to his principles, it must be
an appendix to the Covenant of works being instituted before the fall, when
there was no Gospel, therefore purely legal) and according to my principles,
partly legal (as circumcision was) therefore repealed among the rest of those
legal days of worship: Colos. 2. for though he cannot read the repeal there,
yet through mercy I and others can. Or if it be not repealed, it is expired,
and was never revived by Apostolical practice or precept in any one Christian
Church. I have given him one instance of a Christian Church meeting on the
first day of the week to worship Christ, let him show me but such another for
the Jews Sabbath among the Gentiles, and erit mihi magnus Apollo.

Paul's practice among the Jews (in things temporary) is no pattern for the
Gentiles. Acts 21.25
St. James tells him, that whatever they did among the Jews in respect of
legal customs, (to win upon their weakness). yet as toucking the Gentiles
which believed they had written and concluded that they should observe no such
thing. And what if Paul did observe the seventh day among the Jews; must this
needs conclude against the change of the Sabbath, from the last to the first
day of the week? he may as well say, the Apostles Acts 16.3.
circumcising of Timothy to gratify the Jews, disproves the changing of
circumcision into baptism. If it be Objected, that the consequence is not good
because however Paul circumcised Timothy the better to win upon the Synagogue
Jews (who Acts 10 28.
would have no familiar converse with uncircumcised Gentiles) yet he would by
no means yield to have Gal. 2.3, 4, 5.
Titus circumcised in compliance with the Jews in Christian Churches. I
answer, the very same may I affirm touching the Jews Sabbath, which however it
might be tolerated for a while in the Synagogues, yet it was never allowed in
the Churches of Christ among the Gentiles, nor ever practiced without reproof,
as in Gal. 4. or if it were, I desire to see the place, and the proof, which I
confess I am yet to seek.

It Is no less notorious an untruth, that not only Paul, Troas, Acts 20.5. Where
he celebrated the Lords day and Lords Supper among the disciples. As for the
women which on the Sabbath day resorted to the rivers side, where prayer was
wont to be made, they were Jewish proselytesses (witness their meeting on the
Jewish Sabbath) Lydia to be sure was so, for she was a worshipper of God before
Paul came there, but unbaptized if not unconverted till then. What he would
make of this meeting by the rivers side, I know not, unless it be to furnish
his Sabbath-keepers with meditations, as he seems to speak in the close of his
book p. 144. which shows his high esteem of Rivers, and ponds and such like
watery places. De bello Jud. lib. 7. chapter 24.
It Is a wonder he forgot Josephus his story concerning that River in Palestina,
called the Sabbatical River, which being dry six days, used to fill up its
channel, and run very swiftly the seventh day; from whence the Jewish Rabbis
plead stoutly for their Saturday Sabbath: But as one answers them wittily out
of Galatinus; in case that River whiles it was in being was a good Argument
that the Jews Sabbath was to be observed; now, since there is no such River to
be found, it is a better Argument that their Sabbath is not any where to be
regarded. Mr. Brabourn and he had best go on Pilgrimage to find out that famous
river; I dare say it would be a more taking Argument among simple people for
the Saturday Sabbath then any they have yet alleged.

For his quarrel with the reverend Translators, preaching, Acts 20.7. and
reasoning, Acts 18.4. or, disputing, as it is rendered, Acts 19.9. Sure they saw
good ground for this variation: Though the word be the same, yet the scope of
the Texts is not the same; for Acts 20. Paul was among Christians, and
Christians that came together to communicate at the Lords table, and that is no
time to dispute, but to believe, to act faith, and not reason, therefore well
is it said there; Paul preached to them; some quickening Sermon doubtless to
excite their Sacramental graces. But Acts 18. he was among a company of
unbeleeving, wrangling Jews, and there they do well to render it reasoning;
Mark 9.34. Acts 17.17.
which (unless the context carry it another way) is the most apt and usual
signification of the word. (...).
The very art of reasoning [Logick] has its name from this compound. What
rashness therefore and sinful saucy boldness is it in this Author, to throw
dirt in the faces of those eminent instruments (the Translators of the Bible)
charging them with inexcuseable sin because they cross his humors and
erroneous conceits?

To say, Paul took the opportunity of the old Sabbath to preach to the people,
is not to render him a constant dissembler, as he reproachfully accuses us;
but to commend him as a diligent dispenser of the word of truth, who for the
quicker progress of the Gospel, was willing to embrace all opportunities; to
preach in season and out of season wherever he came. Neither is it to speak
without book, as we showed above; nor does it charge Christ with any criminal
imputation; he kept the Sabbath (while it was in force) from a principle of
conscience, in obedience to the Law, Paul from a principle of Christian
prudence and indulgence, the better to promote the Gospel; and so his custom
was not formally the same with Christ's, neither does his custom argue his
commission, unless it be in things Moral and Evangelical, and among the
Gentiles, To. 11.13. chapter 15.16. Gal. 2.7. 1 Timothy 2.7.
to whom he was chiefly sent as a commission-officer of Christ, to preach the
Gospel of the uncircumcision. Lastly, Paul's reasoning in the Jews Synagogue at
Corinth, and that every Sabbath (till he were persecuted) and his general
precept to the Corinthians, and other Christians to be followers of him, is as
good a plea for the Synagogue, as the seventh day; and indeed a Jews Sabbath,
and a Jews Synagogue would do well together. So that (all objections to the
contrary notwithstanding) it remains a firm and immovable truth of God, that
the old seventh day is discharged, from being a Sabbath, or day of weekly
solemn worship to the people of God.

Now by way of Transition to the second branch of my Argument [that the first
day of the week is designed for a day of weekly solemn worship under the
Gospell] I would remind the Reader of what was premised and proved before; viz.
That the Law of the fourth Commandment (for the proportion, of six working
days, and a seventh every week for solemn worship, ordinarily) is still in
force under the Gospel. Which being made good, and the old seventh day
manifested to be void, one Argument will put it out of all question, that the
first day of the week, is the only day of weekly worship to be observed under
the Gospel. As thus:

That day of the week upon which above all others (in the vacancy of the old
seventh day) God has set his mind in the Law; and upon which, above all other
days Christ has set his mark in the Gospel, must needs be the Christians
weekly day of solemn worship, or Sabbath day.

But the first day of the week (the old seventh day being void) is the day
above all others in the week upon which God has set his mind in the Law; and
upon which above all other days, Christ has set his mark in the Gospel:
Therefore, The first day of the week must needs be the Christians weekly day of
solemn worship or Sabbath day.

The proposition is undeniable; for what better warrant can be pretended for a
weekly Sabbath, then Gods mind or will in the Law and Christ Mark in the Gospel?

The Assumption is all that requires proof, namely, [That the seventh day being
void, the first day of the week is the day above all others upon which God has
set his mind in the Law, and Christ his mark, his signal mark in the Gospel]
Both which shall be distinctly and demonstratively proved, by
Scripture-consequence and evidence.

1. That (the seventh or last day of the week being void, as we have proved)
the first day of the week is the only day, upon which it appears that God has
set his mind in the Law; I mean, the Law of the fourth Commandment, which may
be thus made out. It was the mind and pleasure of God, that the proportion
stated in the Commandment, ( six days in the week for civil employment, and
one for sacred and religious rest) should be observed in all ages, Exodus 35.2.
Ezekiel. 46.1. See Mr. Gawdrey p. 1. chapter 9. S. 53. and part 3. chapter 3.
both under the Law, and under the Gospel. Now the seventh day which was
observed under the Law, being discharged; there is no other day but the first
day of the week on which Gods proportion can be preserved and perpetuated
without intermission and interruption. [For take any other day, as the second,
or third, or fifth, or sixth, and there would be loss of time; it would not be
(for once at least) one day in seven, but one of some other number; and
besides, the six working days would not come all together, but some of them
would go before the day of rest, and others would come after it, in one and the
same week. Both which would offer violence to the Holy Commandment, which as it
requires but one day in a week for religion, to six for worldly business, and
allots six for worldly business to one for religion ordinarily; so it takes
order that the six working days must go together, and the day of rest not come
between them in the same week, but either go before, or follow them. Now in
pitching upon the first day of the week both these were punctually observed at
the first change of the day; for in the revolution of twice seven days there
were two days for religion, the last of the first seven, and the first of the
latter seven; and in each revolution the six working days are all together].
And thus it is still successively week after week; and thus it shall be
perpetually (I question not) to the last week of the world; for I am assured
that the old seventh day is void, and I am fully convinced that (whatever the
Lord Christ could have done) we cannot make choice of any other weekly day of
worship, but the first of the week, to hold up the morality of the fourth
Commandment; which as the above mentioned Author (at whose torch I have lighted
my candle) observes, is a thing worthy of special note, any may afford a
satisfying reason, why there is no express institution of the first day of the
week in the new Testament viz. Because the virtue of the fourth Commandment
does of it self fall upon that day, the former being void, being the only day
capable of keeping up Gods proportion perpetually determined in the
Commandment; yet I confess (as formerly) that the Commandment does not directly
institute the day, but falls upon the observation of it, and supposes the
institution; neither do I urge it directly for the designation of the day; for
the first day of the week is not expressly mentioned in the fourth Commandment,
(no more is the last day of the week neither) (but a seventh day is; which
although (as I said before) it could not be restrained to one day more then
another; yet my meaning was, and is, that it could not be so tied to the last
of seven, as not to be applied to the first of seven, if God so pleased.
Briefly, this argument concludes rather for the observation, than the
designation of the first day day of the week, as the only day upon which (in
the vacancy of the old Sabbath) God has set his mind in the Law. And good
reason. For

2. This is the day, upon which, above all other days Christ has set his mark,
his special, signal, characteristical mark in the Gospel, to mark it out for a
day of weekly solemn worship under the new Testament. A sevenfold mark he has
set upon it, which the malice of men and devils shall never be able to
obliterate. As

1. His glorious Resurrection upon this day. 2dly. His several veral
Apparitions. 3dly His gracious actions and speeches at those apparitions 4th
The Mission of his Holy Spirit on this day. 5th The inscription of his own
blessed name upon it. 6th His Apostles and Apostolical Churches observation of
it. 7th Their prescription about it. Of which I shall treat in order, as they
lie, answering all objections that oppose themselves against this conquering
truth of Christ.

1. What a mark of honor, yea, what a crown of glory is it to this day, that
it had the favor above all the days of the week to be Christ's
resurrection-day? The Sun in the firmament arises and shines upon other days
as well as this, but the Sun of righteousness never arose upon any day but
this, and if we will believe the Holy Ghost, the institution of the day had its
foundation here. Psalm 118.22, 23, 24.
For the discovery whereof I shall once more desire the Reader to turn to that
Text, Psam 118. The stone which the builders refused is become the head-stone
of the corner, So 1 Pet. 2.7.
this is the Lords doing and it is mavelous in our eyes. This is the day
which the Lord has made, etc. The Apostle Peter expounds this Text and applies
it to Christ Acts 4.11. where, (speak. to Caiaphas and the rest of the Council
who went for builders) he boldly tells them, This is the stone which ye
builders refused; which is become the head of the corner; he speaks it of
Christ and of Christ's resurrection; for v. 10. he had spoken of their refusing
him in his Crucifixion, and Gods exalting him in his resurrection. Whom ye
crucified and whom God raised from the dead. Thereby making him both a
cornerstone, and head of the corner; Head of all principality and power.
Coloss. 2.10. head (or Lord) of the living and the dead, yeas, head of Heaven
and earth, having all power in Heaven and earth then given to him. Matthew.
28.18. Thus of David's prophetical prediction. Next let us consider his
application of it; 1. In respect of the deed done; 2. In respect of the day on
which it was done. 3. In respect of the duty of that day.

1. The deed or work done (the raising of Christ from the dead) he magnifies as
the Lords own act, his marvelous stupendous act; This is the Lords doing and
it is mavelous in our eyes, v. 23. No wonder, for indeed this was the
greatest wonder the ever was wrought in the world, concerning which we may say
as Moses in another case, Ask now of the days that are past, which were before
thee, Deuteronomy. 4.32.
since God created man upon the earth, and ask from the one side of Heaven to
the other, whet her there has been any such things as this great thing is or
has been heard like it? That one by his own power should raise himself from
the dead, no history no chronicle can parallel it. So wonderful was our Saviors
resurrection, that it challenges wonder even from his enemies. behold ye
despisers and wonder, Acts 13.41.
Says the Apostle; wonder, at what? Why at Gods raising Christ from the dead,
of which he had treated before, verse 36, 37.

2. The Psalmist applies it further to the day on which this work of wonder was
wrought. This is the day which the Lord has made; and mark the connection, the
day depends upon the deed or work done. Factum domini (as one says) facit diem
domini. The Lords deed makes it the Lords day: Here the institution of the day
is undeniably founded upon the resurrection of Christ; upon this account it is
styled the day which the Lord has made, because the stone, cast aside of the
builders (Christ crucified) was made the head of the corner; that is, raised
from the dead, as St. Peter expounds, and as Christ's resurrection was the Lords
own doing, so the Psalmist foresaw that the resurrection-day would be a day of
the Lords own making. If it be objected, So is every day. I answer but not
every day alike. For look as it was in the works of Creation, all were Gods
works, all of his making; but man (the masterpiece) more especially, of whom
it may be said with an accent, this is the creature which God had made; so
here, all the days in the week are of Gods making, but this in the Text above
all; the Holy Ghost sets an Emphasis upon it, This is the day which the Lord
has made: Made 1 How made? not by was of Creation, so 'twas made before, Genesis
1. But by way of institution; The day which the Lord has made. What has he
made it? A working-day, so it was before, if therefore he has made it any
thing, it must be a holy solemn day, a day more solemn and sacred then all the
days that God ever made before. And so the word signifies, not only to makes
but to magnify, it is equivalent to sanctify.

3. The Psalmist proceeds to the prophetical delineation of the duties of this
day, Let us be glad and rejoice therein; Yea he brings in the Church shouting
and singing Hosanna's to Christ on this day, v. 26. Math. 21.9.
Blessed is he that comes to us in the Name of the Lord: As when the Zech. 4.7.
Temple was finished, the head-stone was brought forth with shouting, crying
grace, grace, thereunto. So here, when the work of our redemption should be
finished, and Christ exalted as head and cornerstone of his Church by his
triumphant Resurrection, the Holy Ghost intimates the solemn gratulation, and
public praise that the Church should offer on that day. So we are to
understand the next words, were (as Isal 56.7. Mal. 1.11.
usually) New Testament-worship is set forth in an old Testament-dress, v. 27.
God is the Lord which has she wed us light, (light indeed when the Sun of
righteousness arises) he has made it a day of light and gladness to poor
self-condemned sinners; therefore bind ye the sacrifice with cords to the horns
of the altar: That is, offer to the Lord the sacrifice of public praise and
thanksgiving, verse 29. Oh give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, his mercy
endures for ever! So that, it is evident, a day of solemn worship is here
intended, and Christ's resurrection day is principally pointed at, as a day
which the Lord would institute and a day which the Church should celebrate;
Saying, This is the day which the Lord has made, let us be gland and rejoice
therein. What a plain Scripture Proof is this of Divine authority of the Lords
day? So plain that the adversary is forced to grant it. page 61.
It must needs be meant of Christ's resurrection-day, says he; and when he
wrote his first book, he excited Christians to the weekly celebration of it:
Whereas in a late railing pamphlet since he seeks to smother the light and
evidence of this Text by a silly evasion, that the Psalmist speaks not of every
first day of the week, but Easter Day, as may be conjectured. But I shall
easily shake off this slight exception. Away with conjectures, let us search
the Scriptures; what day does the Holy Ghost in Scripture call Christ's
resurrection-day? Ask Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John they will tell you, Math.
28.1. Mark 6.2. Luke 24.1. John 20.1, 19.
it is the first day of the week; the day of the year is never mentioned, nor the
day of the month on which Christ arose, but the day of the week only, to teach
us doubtless that Christ's resurrection-day must be no yearly, or monthly, but a
weekly solemnity. Good reason, that the work of Redemption should have as
frequent a commemoration, as the work of Creation had. Now ponder this, good
Reader; and the Lord print it upon thy heart; the day of the Saviors
Resurrection prophetically extolled in the old Testament, as the day which the
Lord has made, is historically noted down in the New Testament as the first
day of the week; and now we shall draw an argument which I hope will be an
arrow of conviction to the contrary-minded, the rather because it comes out of
Gods own quiver; thus the day of Christ's resurrection is the day which he Lord
has made for duties of solemn worship; but the first day of the week is the
day of Christ's Resurrection; therefore the first day of the week is the day,
which the Lord has made for duties of solemn worship. The proposition is
warranted by the Testimony of the Psalmist, the assumption is confirmed by the
harmony of all the four Evangelists, the conclusion therefore will stand, as
long as the world stands; namely, that the first day of the week is a day of
divine institution; marked out by the finger of God, the spirit of Christ for a
day of solemn weekly worship under the Gospel. For, as I hinted before, the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. Acts 1.16. 2 Timothy 3.16. 1 Pet.
1.11. and chapter 3.19. Romans 15.4.
It was by the spirit of our great Prophet, that all the Prophets of old did
speak: Like stars they all borrowed their light from this Sun; they were
irradiated and inspired by Christ; and when a holy Prophet foretells, such a
thing shall be, we may as confidently build upon it, as if Christ himself had
said, I will have it so. For indeed it is the voice of Christ that speaks in
the old Testament, as well as in the new: And possibly this may be one reason
why the Lord Christ has spoken so little in the Gospel concerning some new
Testament-ordinances (as the Lords day for one) namely, because the Prophets
had spoken so much before; and Christ would not take off his people from the
study of the old Testament, upon which the authority of the new does so much
depend. Me thinks, as to the controversy of the Christian Sabbath, this should
abundantly satisfy any sober Christian; that the day of Christ's resurrection
was prophesied of by David and others, as a day which the Lord would make and
institute, and accordingly practiced by the inspired Apostles upon the first
day of the week, and this practice perpetuated by the Church of Christ, the
Catholic Church in all ages since for above sixteen hundred years. What can be
objected with any color of reason against so clear a truth?

Christ has not left one syllable for the institution or celebration of this
day. T.T. p. 120. Answ.


Not one syllable? Why did he not grant before, that Psalm 118. compared with
Acts 4. Must needs be meant of the resurrection-day; and does not the spirit
speak expressly, Mr. Perkins in his cases of conscience argues for the Christian
Sabbath from this text. Cyprian, Austin and Ambrose, and all the ancients who
have ever cited or saluted this place, Psalm 118. do expound it and understand
it of the Lords day. See Mr. L. strange.
This is the day which the Lord has made? Is it a day of the Lords making and
will he make nothing of that? What else can be made of it, but a prediction of
a Divine institution which is equivalent to a precept especially when expounded
by Apostolical practice, as this has been. Let it be seriously considered, in
what other sense can a day (made long before in respect of Creation) be styled
the day which the Lord has made, than in respect to a divine institution? An
institution then it is, and the occasion of it Christ's resurrection which was
the concluding act of our Redemption; and what an impression of glory does this
stamp upon the day, above all the days that God ever made, the seventh day and
all? As some * years are crowned with Gods goodness above others, so days
also. The work crowns the day, as I have often said; and the greater the work,
the greater the day, now that work in which God is most glorified in all his
attributes must needs be the greatest work; such is the work of Redemption;
Quasi hactenus nullus fuerit in orb dies. Mollerus in Loc.
therefore the day set apart in commemoration of it, must wear away the crown
from all other days. Such is Christ's resurrection-day, therefore Emphatically
styled, The day which the Lord has made; as if there had never been a day in
the world till this day dawned at the rising of the Sun of righteousness,
never such a day. It Is worthy to be noted, what a wonderful concurrence of
remarkable periods of time met together at our Saviors resurrection, both in
respect of the year and the day. Is. 61.2. chapter 63.34. John 4.34, 35. Heb. 2.14,
15.


1. The year was a Sabbatical year, the year of Jubilee, as may be gathered
from scripture; which if it make nothing for the Christian Sabbath, yet it
makes much against the Jews Sabbath, themselves being witnesses. For the
Hebrew Doctors have spoken rarely to this purpose, even to the admiration of
considerate Christians. The Divine Majesty, say they, will be to Israel in a
Jubilee Freedom, Redemption and finisher of Sabbaths. H. Broughtons Sinai-sight.

2. The day of our Lords Resurrection was a remarkable day in many respects. As

1. It was the eighth day in a continued reckoning of days, and eight was a
number of greater prefection then seven in some respect; witness Circumcision,
which was so strictly tied to the eighth day, John 7.22. Sacramentum hoc suit
diei illius octavi, quo dominus resurrexit ad justificationem nostram. Ep. ad
Fid. ita Aug. de Gelebr. Pasch.
that if it had fallen on the weekly Sabbath it must not be omitted for the
Sabbaths sake. The ancients insist much on this. Circumcision on the eighth day
was a type of that eighth day on which our Lord rose again for our
justification, says Cyprian.

2. Christ's resurrection was also on the third day after his passion, which
himself foretold as the day of his perfection. For so some expound that saying
of his, The third day I shall be perfected, Luke 13.32. Besides, this third day
was a day of Ho. 6.2. Lu. 24.46.
note in the Law and the Prophets, a day appointed, and appropriated to the
Messiah, signally marked out in the Calendar of the Prophets and figured by many
famous Types; as that of Isaac, who was virtually James 2.21.
offered and restored again the Genesis 22.4.
third day (as it may be computed) and that in a kind of Heb. 11.19.
figure, as the Apostle intimates. So also Hezskiah who was in account a dead
man, and on the 2 Kings 20.5.
third day miraculously revived again. So Jonah 2.10. Math. 12 40. See Ainsw.
in Genesis 22.
Jonah and others: from which instances the Rabbis it serms could conclude
Christ's Resurrection on the third day; There be many a three days, say they,
in Scripture, of which one is the Resurrection of the Messiah.

3. Christ's Resurrection was on the first day of the week, as the Evangelists
unanimously testify. Which although it be termed by the blaspemous Jews (...)
the Nazarens day (in a way of reproach) yet in Scripture-account, it is a day
of greatest renown, being the first in order in the Creation, and the first in
dignity by our Saviors resurrection. The first fruits of time, and the
firstborn of days; and accordingly the only day in which our Lord became the 1
Cor. 15.20.
first fruits of them that slept, and the Col. 1.18.
first born from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.

4. To all these may be added what some have probably argued; that this first
day of the week was our blessed Redeemers Birthday, as well as his
Resurrection day, yea the day of his Ascension into Heaven, as well as the
mission of his Spirit; but this I leave to Mr. Aspinwal to make good: Only thus
much I dare assert, that the day of our Saviors resurrection, the first day of
the week is the fittest for the commemoration of his Nativitie, Passion,
Ascension, and all other blessed transactions in the work of our Salvation. For
the Resurrection of Christ implies all the rest, but is not necessarily of
them: And if the Lord Jesus had not risen from the dead; what benefit had we
had, either by his birth, life, death or burial? or being dead and buried, how
had he ascended, and the Spirit (the Comforter) descended, unless he had first
bin raised from the dead? Besides his Resurrection and Ascension are computed
Luke 24.26. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10. See Dr. Twisse p. 117. Sect. 5. 1 John 20.17.
in Scripture as one complete motion. As his dying and continuing under the
power of death for a time, were but one entire work of Redemption: For however
after his resurrection he stayed a sew days here upon earth to confirm the
faith of his followers, and settle the affairs of his Kingdom, yet he was no
sooner risen but presently he speaks of his ascending; and indeed his rising
was in reference to his ascending partly, if not a part of it: It was the first
step of his triumphant passage into his kingdom and glory. So that in a right
sense very Lords day is our Christmass-day, Easter Day, Ascension-day,
Whitsunday, and all; my meaning, that in a right celebration of our Christian
Sabbath, we solemnize the memorial of all these blessed ingredients in the work
of our Redemption. We need not contend for an annual Solemnization of our
Saviors birthday, resurrection-day, ascension-day; neither need we fear
oblivion of these gracious and glorious mysteries, if the Lords day were duly
observed. We cannot better keep alive the memory of these mercies, than by
keeping a day in commemoration of them once a week; and no day so fit as the
Lords day, in which we have the sum of all: A day that brought forth the
greatest good to fallen man of any day, even a complete Redeemer; who on this day
redeemed us with triumph from the tyranny of Satan, the dominion of death and
hell; and John 10.25. chapter 14. 19.
restored us to life and Salvation, yea, assured it unto us. Therefore I
conclude with that renowned father; the Lords day was declared by the Lords
Resurrection to be the Christians day; Dies Dominicus Christi resurrectione
declaratus est, and ex illo caepit habere festivitatem suam. August Ep. 119. ad
Jan. item de Civitate Dei. lib. 22. cap. ult. and Sermon. 15. de verb. Apost.
and from that very time it began to be celebrated as the Christian man's
Festival: or rather with that of the Psalmist, This is the day which the Lord
has made. It Is no day of man's making, if the God of truth may be believed.
It Is a plant of the Lords own planting, therefore the Devil and all his
instruments shall never be able to pluck it up. Neither can all the men, nor
all the Churches in the world alter it to another day. And how remarkable is it
that the Church for sixteen hundred years should no where offer or attempt to
alter it, but in all places, and all ages observe it? What does this speak, but
the Divine authority of it, by which men's Spirits have been awed, and their
hands tied from such presumptuous undertakings; the truth is (as I noted
before) it is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ (by his resurrection) being the chief cornerstone. And because nothing
can ever fall out in this world comparable to Christ's Resurrection in glory and
power, therefore no day can be set up like unto this, neither can it be changed
for any other. See Dr. Bownd lib. 1. p. 47.
No man can translate the work, therefore no man can translate the day: The
like cause can never be offered to change this day which at first occasioned
the choice of it. Therefore it must and shall remain, till the end of all
things; men do but kick against the pricks in opposing the Lords day; they that
would raze out the remembrance of this day, must first pick out Christ's mark
which he has wrought into it by the work of Redemption, and so blot out the
testimony of all the four Evangelists concerning Christ's Resurrection the first
day of the week, together with the prophecy of the Psalmist; which if they dare
do, Yet

2. We have another conspicuous mark to note it by above all other days in the
week, namely our Saviors frequent apparitions on this day; after his
Resurrection from the dead. Here let it be observed,

First, That these glorious apparitions of our now glorified Redeemer, were no
common favors, but choice and special evidences of his owning providence,
both as to persons and times. For as he appeared not to all sorts of persons,
but to some select Acts 10.41.
chosen witnesses, who were either eminently devoted to his service, or
designed to teach others; so neither did he make his appearance to those
persons every day, but principally and most usually upon the day designed by
the Prophets to his worship and service, and now consecrated by his blessed
Resurrection; mostly vouchsafing his gracious visits to holy men in holy time;
such (at least) as were so, or should be so.

Secondly, Although it be Acts 1.20.
said, that he was seen of his Apostles forty days between his Resurrection
and ascension; yet it cannot be construed thus, (...). Theophyl.
that he was seen every day during those forty days; but only thus, that
there were so many days between his Resurrection and Ascension, in which he
was sometimes seen. And this is all that the Greek will bear, for it is not [in
forty dayes] but [by forty dayes] that is, by the space of forty days at
times; for sometimes he disappeared.

Thirdly, However it may be supposed that our Savior did appear on other days
(as once he did upon a working day) yet no other day of the week has the
honor to be denominated, as the day of his appearing, but the first day of the
week only: It Is never said, he appeared on the second or third day, much less
the last day of the week or the seventh day; but the first day of the week is
expressly and emphatically noted by name. John 20.19. (...) it is not barely said,
[the same day] but [the same day being the first of the week.
That same day, that first day of the week came Jesus and stood in the midst of
his disciples, as if he would have it specially noted.

Fourthly, It Is evident that our Lord appeared often on this day gracing it with
his beatifical presence above all days. In the Joh. 20.14, 15.16.
morning to Mary Magdalen, and the rest of the holy Math. 28.9.
women, who, when they saw him, fell at his feet and worshipped him; and in the
evening of the same day to the eleven disciples, and Lu. 24.33.36.
them that were with them gathered together in a way of Church. John 20.19.
(...).
assembly, and this assembly convened it seems by our Saviors own means, who
appearing to Mary commanded her to carry tidings to his disciples of his joyful
Resurrection. However a Christian assembly it was, and the first that enjoyed
the presence of Christ after his death and Resurrection; then it follows, John
20.26.
After eight days the disciples were within again, and Thomas with them, then
came Jesus and stood in the midst [after eight dayes] that is, as some would
have it, after the daylight of the eighth day was past, or as the
Geneva-translation reads it, eight days after; or, after eight days were
come; that is on the eighth day: Which reckoning the Resurrection-day
inclusively, was just that day seven-night, or the next first day of the week,
there are six working-dayes in the week, and Sabbath and Sabbath make eight,
now Christ appeared the first; See Mr. L'strange p. 73.
and the next succeeding, which was the eighth day so the ancients generally
expound it: It is necessary that this should be the Lords day says Cyrill, and
Nazianzen made an oration on purpose for it, stiling it (...) the new Lords
day, because it was the first Lords day solemnized in the weekly revolution
after the Resurrection-day. We shall clear it by Scripture, when we come to
answer the Objections; mean while let it be noted, that this was the second
solemn apparition of our blessed Savior, after he rose from the dead; for the
next mentioned by this Evangelist is said to be the third time that he showed
himself; which what else can it signify to us, John 21.14.
but that he appeared not between those two first days? not on the seventh
day, nor on any of the other six; he was absent all the week and appeared to
none (except to some single persons as Peter) he made no public apparitions at
solemn assemblies but upon his own day.

Now methinks ingenous Christians should thus reason within themselves;
certainly it is written for our instruction, that the Lord Jesus rose from the
dead on this day, that in the morning of the day he showed himself to the holy
women; that the same day at evening [being the first day of the week] the
disciples were assembled, and Jesus came and stood in the midst, and after
eight days again i.e. that day senven-night (for though part of the former and
part of the latter day made it eight days, yet could it be but seven nights if
we count it by nights, according to the account of natural days, such as the
days of the week are) surely these things are not written in vain; that our
Savior should solemnly show himself in a Christian assembly on the very day of
his Resurrection, and that there was no other apparition till that day seven
night; this no doubt was of purposed providence, to give original to that
Ordinance of the Lords day which accordingly has been observed ever since. St.
Paul makes it one Argument (in conjunction with others) of his Apostleship,
that Christ had appeared to him. 1 Cor. 9.1. chapter 15. 8, 9.
Am not I an Apostle, have not I seen Christ Jesus our Lord? And may not I in
consociation with other arguments (as prophetical prediction Psalm 118. and
Apostolical practice Acts 20. allege this as one proof of our Christian
Sabbath? That Christ Jesus our Lord was often seen upon it, seen in assemblies
of his Saints, seen in his royal robes, in his state of immortality, and not
only seen but heard, preaching peace to poor sinners; opening Scriptures,
cheering, quickening warming cold, dead, sad hearts; for when the disciples saw
him they were Luke 24.32. John 20.21.
glad, and their hearts did burn within them, while he opened the Scriptures to
them; and all this on the first day of the week. It Is true after this double
apparition, our Savior appeared on a working day, as the disciples were a
fishing, and that was the third time of showing himself or the third day of his
appearing. John 21.3.14.
But what of this, The disciples were sufficiently confirmed in the authority
and solemnity of the Lords day by the two former apparitions; therefore well
might Christ appear the third time upon a working day and countenance
worki-day-business by his presence, to teach his disciples and us that every
day is not a Sabbath day. But this fishing-day is not named; it might as well
be on the Jews Sabbath as any other day of the week, for ought appears to the
contrary in the Text; yet I do not say, it was; I will not speak, where the
Scripture is silent.

How often the first day of the week was celebrated by our Savior between his
Resurrection and ascension, is not punctually set down in Scripture. Junius is
confident for every week. But there is good evidence for the two first, and
none against the three last. Much may be said for that famous apparition on a
Mountain in Galilee; which learned Lightfoot, Math. 28.16, 17, 19, 20.
Fenner and others conclude without doubt to have been on the first day of the
week. Mar. 16.15, 16.


Now the ascension-day draws on, and Christ withdrawes his Corporal presence
from his disciples, but on the day of Pentecost he visits them again by his
spiritual presence. Acts 2. And that this also was on the first day of the week
shall be fully cleared, when we come to the fourth mark:

Lastly, Rev. 1.10.
Some years after all these it pleased the Lord Jesus to appear again on this
day: Namely, to his servant John in the Isle of Patmos, (little paradise we may
call it; for the presence of Christ makes a wilderness a paradise, especially
so much of his presence as this blessed Apostle now enjoyed; more than ever was
vouchsafed to any man upon earth, since Christ went up to Heaven) I was in the
spirit, says he, upon the Lords day; what then? Why v. 12. I saw seven Golden
Candle-sticks; and v. 13. In the midst of them one like the son of man; So like
him that indeed it was the son of man, the man Christ Jesus; on the Lords day
then John saw Jesus Christ in the midst of his Churches, filling them with his
blessed presence, that day above all others; and holding the stars in his right
hand; that is, holding forth Heavenly light, by the Ministry of the word on
that day especially; this John saw, and this he is commanded to set down in
writing verse 19. and accordingly written it is, and written for our learning,
upon whom the ends of the world are come. And what may we learn from it? Surely
this at first view. viz. That in St. John's time the Golden Churches of Christ
were wont to meet, Gospel Ministers to preach, and Christ himself to be present
with them by his spirit on the Lords day. And this is written for a pattern to
after-ages, and there is a Verse 3.
blessing pronounced on those that read and keep the things that are written in
this book. Blessed be Christ for this blessed book; here we have another
glorious appearance of Christ on the Lords day (not to one man only, or one
Church only, but seven Churches, in which no doubt there were more then seven
thousand souls) and that this Lords day was also the first day of the week
none but peevish spirits ever questioned. Ignatius who was trained up in the
School of this great Apostle (and in all reason was most likely to know his
terms) Epist. ad Magnes.
clearly makes it a weekly holy day observed by Christians in the room of the
abrogated Sabbath of the Jews. Yea, the Lords day was never taken for other,
than the first day of the week by any Christian writer in any age, since the
days of St. John till this last age of liberty and lies, that ever I could see
or learn. Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, ancient, modern writers, (two or three
of this generation excepted) do constantly understand it of Christ's
Resurrection-day, the first day of the week; and one would think the constant
Dialect of the Church of Christ a sufficient Dictionary to interpret a word or
phrase in Scripture, especially in such a sense as does not cross but
correspond with Scripture. So does this, for how agreeable to Scripture is it
to take the Lords day for that day which the Lord has made? Besides it is
observable, that this same beloved disciple, who was so exact in penning the
first apparition John 20. is a spectator of the last Rev. 1. and just as he had
related, that he sees this; the circumstances are remarkable. John 26.19, 26.
Christ appears in the midst of the disciples; and Rev. 1.13. in the midst of
the Candle-sticks, or Churches; John 20.19. he appears upon the
Resurrection-day arguing his Resurrection; and Rev. 1.18. repeating the same
argument, Saying, I am he that lives and was dead, and have the keys of death
and hell: To say no more, John 20. he appeared on the first day of the week,
and here again upon the day under a new name (the Lords day) because it
appeared by his Resurrection and former apparitions to be the day which the
Lord had owned above other days, yea the day which the Lord had made and
instituted. Thus we see how Christ's often appearing on this day tends to the
further marking out of the day. But this mark is sorely shot at; objections
come thick: but short answers will serve, when nothing is objected, but what
has been answered by others; or nothing to any purpose.

He is not ashamed to say, T. T. Obj. 1. p. 121.
I believe it will be found upon inquiry that Christ never appeared to any
assembly, no not any one first day; for it is most certain, that the day upon
the Scripture-account begins with the evening. Now upon the Resurrection-day we
find Christ at the village seven miles from Jerusalem, when it was toward
evening and the day far spent Luke 24.29, 30. after which he supped with the
two, which took up some time, then they returned that seven miles and a half to
Jerusalem on foot; so that by that time they came there, the day must be quite
spent; and though it is said he appeared the first day at evening, yet the first
day was then as fully ended as the Sabbath at sunset when they brought their
sick, which was forbidden on the Sabbath Day; Mark 1.32.

Christ appeared in the morning of the Resurrection-day as well as at evening;
very early, as well as very late; Math. 28.9. Mark 16.9. Discourse of the
instic. dignity and end of the Lords day. p. 33
to teach us that the whole day is his; it is the day which the Lord has made,
not a piece of the day. Thus I remember Dr. Hakewil long ago stopped the mouth of
this objection, Christ appeared to his Apostles at night (says he) to instruct
them and teach us, that even then it cease not to be the Lords day.

It Is so far from certain, that the day in Scripture-account begins in the
evening, that it is certainly false, Emmaus to Jerusalem, and that late, makes
much against himself. For, as late as it was in the evening before they got
home (the later the better, as to the case in hand) yet the Holy Ghost does not
call it the second, but the first day of the week. John 20.19. the same day at
evening being the first day of the week, note it well: First, The Evangelist
calls this time of evening the same day in which Christ arose from the dead.
Secondly, He calls it the first day of the week; by which two expressions he
puts the matter out of all doubt, that this evening was a part of the first day
of the week. Thus the Holy Ghost provides against future errors. Let the
objector now blush to consider, how shamefully he has given the lie to the
spirit of truth 1. In affirming that Christ never appeared to any assembly, any
one first day of the week. 2 That the first day was then fully ended, fully
ended? then the Evangelist was much mistaken to tells us it was the same day;
he should rather have said the second day, or the next day:] Mark 1.32. does
(at most) but speak the opinion and practice of the degenerate Jews; who, if
they stated the end of the Sabbath at the sunset evening by a traditional
account (and therefore brought not their sick to be healed till the Sun was
down) yet their superstitious opinion proves not that according to the true
Scripturall account the Sabbath began and ended at evening. Besides it is but a
bare conjecture, that they brought their sick to be healed no sooner, out of
respect to the Sabbath; See Tremel. his Annot. in Math. 12.8. and Ainsworth in
Ex. 20.10.
for they held that peril of life does drive away the Sabbath. Some think the
only reason why they came no sooner was, because they had no sooner
intelligence of our Saviors Miraculous healing power; But to end the
controversy, however the Jews Sabbath might be supposed to begin and end at
evening, yet it is apparent that the first day of the week ended not with the
Sun-set-evening; because it is expressly said in this very chapter Mark. 1.35.
That the morning of it was a great while before day. Thus it is said of Christ,
that in the morning rising up a great while before day, (or (...).
greatly in the night as the Greek has it) he departed into a solitary place
to pray. And this was on the morrow of the Sabbath as the context shows. So
that if it were the morning of the day while it was yet night, long before
sunrising, then it could not be the evening or end of the day till long after
the Sunsetting; so Math. 28.1. John 20.1.

As for Christ's second apparition, it is expressly said it was after eight days
and therefore could not be on the first day of the week. John 20.26.

Why, Mark 8.31. (...). Vide Bez. Calv. Rollock, Piscat. Jansen. upon the
places. See Mr. Cawdry p. 4. chapter 1. The reckoning of these eight days is
inclusive, see the like Lu. 9.28. compared wi^h Mat. 17.1. See Dr. Gouge Sabb.
Sanct. p. 21.
Scripture, That the son of man must suffer and after three days rise again?
After three days, therefore it could not be the third day, does that follow?
As much as this; after eight days therefore it could not be the eighth day, or
the first day of the week Mr. Sprint p. 138. Observes that it is as if the
Evangelist had said, the eighth day after by an Hebraism; quoting the like
speech Luke 1.59. chapter 2.21. or after the eighth day was come. Thus the like
expression is used Jer. 25.12. When seventy years are fulfilled the people
shall return; that is on the seventieth year; so Acts 2.1. When the day of
Pentecost was fulfilled, i. e. Fully come. This appears to me to be the vulgar
acceptance of the phrase, as in a like case, Math. 27.63. the chief Priests
and Pharisees told Pilate that Christ should say while he was yet alive, after
three days I will rise again; wherefore they entreat him of all loves, that he
would command the sepulcher to be made sure till the third day. Whence it is
evident, that by this phrase [after three dayes] they understood Christ's
purpose of rising [on the third day] otherwise they would have desired a guard
for a longer space than three days.

Christ was ever seen of some or other of his disciples forty days. Acts 1,
2, 3.

That Christ was seen by the space of forty days implies not that he was seen
every day of the forty; only that he stayed forty days before he ascended
and appeared at times, as was said before; besides we are not now arguing his
apparitions to single persons only, but assemblies.

Oh! But the disciples were assembled only for fear of the Jews, not to
celebrate the Sabbath in honor of Christ's Resurrection, for they believed not
that he was risen, the women's tidings therefore seemed idle tales to them.

The privacy of their meeting and shutting the doors was indeed for fear of the
Jews.

It Is probable; Luke 24. for fear of the Jews too it may be, Math. 28.13, 14,
15.
because the lying soldiers had given it out that the disciples came by night
and had stolen away the body of Jesus) yet on Gods part in assembling them, and
on Christ's part in appearing to them, there was doubtless some special respect
to the day which they understood afterward, and therefore the Evangelist is so
precise in the notation of it; for John 20.1. having spoken of the first day of
the week verse. 19. he reduplicates it most emphatically, saying, the same day
then in the evening, that day being the first day of the week (as if he would
be loath to be mistaken in that point of time) and though for the present the
Apostles might be ignorant of their own practice, what it tended to (as Mary
was when she poured the box of ointment on our Saviors head, that she did it
for his burying) yet afterward, by Christ's second apparition that day
seven-night, they were better instructed, witness their after-assembling on
that day Acts 2. and Acts 20. to conclude this; why our blessed Savior should
neglect the Jews Sabbath and afford his-glorious presence in Christian
assemblies on the first day of the week thus often and thus eminently, but to
establish the day for sacred assemblies, and to teach us on what day especially
we may expect his presence and blessing, I confess I am to seek: And although
this mark may seem obscure to persons possessed with prejudice, yet the objectors
attempts to deface it are utterly invalid: he has indeed trampled upon it with
the Prelates old shoes (for his objections are the very same which the
Prelatical party (so much defied by himself) urged long ago) but he cannot
tread out the divine impression which Christ has stamped upon it. The
apparitions of Christ on this day do further tend to mark out the day
especially in a joint consideration with the next scripture-mark viz.

3. The gracious speeches, actions, and transactions of Christ at his several
appearings, tending partly to prove his Resurrection, the ground of our hope
and the hinge of the day, to this purpose we may observe how sweetly our
gracious Redeemer condescended to his poor doubting staggering disciples,
manifesting himself even to all their senses, to their hearing by his heavenly
voice, to their seeing by his visible presence, yea, to their feeling by
offering his sacred body to be touched and handled by them; and partly to
dignify his Resurrection-day; distinguishing it from all other days by
Sabbath-exercises; As

1. By his heavenly instructions; opening the Scriptures, Luke 24.46.
and preaching peace to his disciples; and to us as well as them; having slain
the enmity by his Cross, Ephesians. 2.16, 17.
he came and preached peace; and this day he came with his Olive branch in his
mouth, saying; peace be unto you.

2. By giving forth commissions to his Apostles John 20, 19. As my father has
sent me, so send I you; whose sins ye remit they are remitted, etc. And then
breathing upon them the Holy Ghost.

3. By convincing demonstrations of his Resurrection, to strengthen the faith
of Thomas; John 20.26. to which some add.

4. His celebration of the sacred supper according to that promise, I will no
more drink of the fruit of the vine, Mark 14.25.
until that day I drink it new in the kingdom of God. That is, after I rise
from the dead, which therefore it is like, that then he did. Yea, then he brake
bread, and was known of the disciples in breaking of bread as he sat with
them, Luke 24.30. (...).
(not at meat as we read it) the word only implies his gesture of siting.
However, his first and second apparition together with the forementioned great
transactions of instructing, inspiring blessing, sending his Apostles on this
day, and performing most of these at their solemn meetings, do argue more for
this day than any other; that it is the day which Christ has selected and
sealed for the religious assemblies and Sabbath-exercises of his Church in all
future ages to the end of the world. But I must contract.

4 Another indeleble mark of honor fixed upon the first day of the week, is
The mission of the Holy Ghost, or sending the promise of the father, as a
princely largess, or royal gift of Christ upon his Coronation-day; Luke 24.40.
John 15.26. Acts 1.4. chapter 2. 33.
such a gift as was never given before, but when God gave his Son Jesus Christ.
God so loved the world that he gave his son; and Christ so loved the world that
he gave his spirit. And as Christ was given according to the fullness of the
promise upon the day of his Resurrection; so was the blessed spirit of promise
upon the day of Pentecost. And the same wonderful providence that ordered the
Resurrection of Christ to fall upon the first day of the week, did also take
order for the sending of the spirit on the same day. For that the day of
Pentecost Acts 2.1. was the first day of the week, as it is generally taken for
granted by Christian writers, so it may be evidently proved by the Scriptures.
I shall not puzle the Reader with perplexing intricacies, nor lead men into
labyrinths to find out the truth: Let plain Scripture determine the matter, look
to the statute-lawes of Moses concerning the feast of Pentecost Exodus 34.21,
22. Six days shall thou work but on the seventh day thou shall rest both in
earing-time and in barvest, and thou shall observe the feast of weeks, of the
first fruits of Wheat-harvest Levit. 23.10, 11, 12, 15, 16. When ye be come
into the land which I give you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye
shall bring a sheaf of your first fruits of your harvest unto the Priest, and
he shall wave it together with the offering of a lamb without blemish; on the
morrow after the Sabbath he shall wave it; and ye shall count unto you from the
morrow after the Sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf, seven
Sabbaths shall be complete even unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath ye
shall number fifty days, So Numb. 28.26. and more fully Deuteronomy. 16.9. Seven
weeks shall thou number unto thee, begin to number the seven weeks from such
time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the Corn. From the harmony of which
four texts it appears, that this feast had three significant names which were
all made good at that solemn Pentecost Acts. 2.

1. Deuteronomy. 16.10.
It was called the feast of weeks, or of sevens; because from the waving of
the sheaf, thehy reckoned as many weeks to this feast, as there be days in
the week; namely seven weeks. Which evidently shadowed out some weekly
Festival under the Gospel; the day whereof was denoted by that dya of
Pentecost, Acts 2.

2. Exodus 23.16. Levit. 23.10.
It was called the feast of first fruits, and of harvest, because as they began
their harvest upon the first of the fifty days when they offered the sheaf of
first fruits, so they had ended it upon the fiftieth day (which was properly
the Feast Day) upon which they offered the wave-loaves. and indeed these fifty
days, or seven weeks, Levit. 23.17.
were the appointed weeks of their harvest, by the offering of the sheaf at
the beginning of their harvest there after fruits were sanctified, and the
offering of the loaves on the fiftieth day was not only an eucharistical
oblation, but also a token of the harvest's being finished and ended.

3. It is called the Feast of Pentecost, because it was ever kept the fiftieth
day; the fiftieth day, how reckoned? From the morrow after the Sabbath (that
is, the first day of the week) but what mark had they to know this morrow by?
Moses tells them; When you shall reap the harvest of yur land; or, when you
begin to reap it, for so it is expounded in Deuteronomie. Deuteronomy. 16.9. (...)
Begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the
sickel to the corn: In the Hebrew it runs thus, from beginning to put the
sickle into the standing corn, thou shall begin to number the seven weeks: So
that when they began their harvest, they must begin their account of the fifty
days, and the first of the fifty was the morrow of the Sabbath, or the day
following the Sabbath (namely, the first day of the week) and as they began, so
they must end the account on the same day; as the first, so the fiftieth day
(or day of Pentecost) must be on the morrow of the Sabbath, Levit. 23.15, 16.
and this is enjoined by the express command of God to be observed as a statute
forever throughout their generations, this is the plain Scripture-account, and
who can but observe the wisdom of God in it, in ordering the matter thus, that
this Feast of weeks should never fall upon the seventh day, but ever upon the
first of the week; (the morrow after the Sabbath, or the day immediately
following it) if at least his statute law had been observed?) What else could
this presignifie (as learned Dr. Usher speaks) but that under the state of the
Gospel the solemnity of the weekly service should be celebrated upon that day?

Now I hope that famous Pentecost Acts 2.1. will be no Parable, although we
state it (according to the Divine oracle) upon the first day of the week, the
morrow after the Jews Sabbath, we need no Almanacks to help us here, the Bible
is sufficient.

And because the Sabbatrians stand so much upon supposed mysteryes in the Feast
of Pentecost, according to their traditional account; I shall acquaint them
with the real mysteries of Christ accomplished exactly according to this true
scripturall account, See Dr. Usher
there they may see the type and the truth admirably concurring. For as at the
time of the Passover 1 Cor. 5.7.
Christ our Passover was Sacrificed for us, and lay in his grave the whole
Sabbath following; so on the morrow after the Sabbath (when the sheaf of
first fruits was offered to God) Christ rose from the dead, and became the 1
Cor. 15.20.
first fruits of them that slept, Math. 27.52, 53.
many dead bodies of Saints that slept arising likewise after him. From thence
was the count taken of the seven Sabbaths or fifty days, Numb. 28.26. Exodus
34.22.
and upon the morrow after the seventh Sabbath (which was our Lords day) was
that famous feast of weeks that day of Pentecost Acts 2.1. upon which day the
Apostles having themselves received the first fruits of the spirit, Acts 2.1.4,
5, 41.
begat three thousand souls with the word of truth, and presented them as the
first fruits of the Christian Church unto God, James 1.18. Rev. 4.14.
and unto the Lamb; and from that time forward does Waldensis note, that the
Lords day was observed in the Christian Church in the place of the Sabbath. In
his learned letter to Dr. Twisse p. 91.92.
Thus Dr. Usher that Library of learning. If it be objected, that in this
discourse he states Christ suffering at the feast of the Passover, and so
falls in which the vulgar opinion which takes the morrow after the Sabbath
Levit. 23. For the morrow after the Passeover-Sabbath; I answer that cannot be,
for he had declared before, that the Sabbath there intended is the ordinary
weekly Sabbath and the morrow after it the first day of the week and he cites
Isychius and Rupertus as interpreting it so before him to whom I shall mae bold
to add [Nazianzen] who was before them all; (...). Orat. in Sanct. Pentecost
and in his 44th oration (speaking of the Feast of Pentecost) [This nation
says he (meaning the Jewish nation) uses to consecrate to God, not only the
first of their fruits, and firstborn; but the first fruits of their days and
years also. Thus the illustrious number of seven has carried the honor of
Pentecost; for seven being composed upon its self makes fifty, wanting but one
day which we have taken from this future age, being both the eighth and the
first day.] His phrase is something dark, but his argument is clearly this,
that the Jews Pentecost was fain to be beholding to the Christians eighth day,
or first day of the week to make up the complete number of fity days. (And the
like he says a little before concerning their Jubilee every fiftieth year) for
seven times seven, makes but forty nine; to perfect the number therefore they
borrowed the first day of the week and so consecrated to God the first fruits
of their days, as well as of their land. So that this computation of the
fifty-dayes to Pentecost from the morrow of the weekly Sabbath wants no
authority to back it, neither humane nor Divine. But the plain word of God is
our best warrnat and methinks that should satisfy. Dr. Twiss was no child at
argument, nor one that would be satisfied upon slight grounds; but upon Bp.
Vshers discovery of this truth by the forementioned Scripture-evidence, he
professes that he had received great In his printed letter to Bp. Usher.
satisfaction; and acknowledges that the mystery of the feast of first fruits
was opened to the singular advantage of the honor of the Lords day.

The only material objection against this interpretation, is the judgment of
Mr. Ainsworth, and the English Annotatours, who take the Sabbath Levit. 23. For
the Passe-over-Sabbath; it is true, they do so; but herein they are led by the
common opinion of the Hebrew Doctors, who indeed are excellent guides, when
they keep the beaten rode of Scripture (and sometimes to direct us at a
doubtful turning) but here it may be proved, that they themselves are out of
the way, I do not say, our Christian writers, but the Hebrew Doctors, who in
many things did make void the Commandments of God by their own traditions, and
if there be any mistake, let it lie at their doors. And cerainly a mistake
there is in this point. For that the morrow after the Sabbath could not be
meant of the Passeover-Sabbath is clear; For

First, It must be such a morrow after the Sabbath as must never fall upon the
weekly Sabbath; the reason is plain, because it was the beginning of their
harvest, when they put their sickle to the corn, or harvested their harvest Le.
23.10. which they are expressly forbidden to do upon their weekly Sabbath. Ex.
34.21, 22. Six days shall thou labor, but on the seventh thoushalt rest both
in earing-time and harvest. And see how this is coupled with the feast of
first fruits in the very same place, Thou shall observe the feast of weeks,
etc. Now observe it, if the morrow after the Sabbath Levit. 23. had been the
morrow after the Passeover-Sabbath, this would often have fallen upon the
weekly Sabbath. For the Passe-over-Sabbath being fixed upon a certain day of
the month viz. the 15th of Nisan, when ever this 15th of Nisan fell upon the
Friday, the morrow after it must needs be on the Saturday, and so they must
begin to reap their harvest upon the weekly Sabbath against an express command
of God. The Hebrew Doctors foresaw this inconvenience, and had no other way to
salve it, but by affirming, See Ainsworth in Levit. 23.
that this reaping did drive away the Sabbath, and that it was lawful on the
Sabbath Day: A most impious opinion. For it crosses the very letter of Gods
Law; In earing-time and in harvest thou shall rest.

Secondly, The morrow after the Sabbath at the beginning of their account, must
be such a morrow as concludes it, Levit. 13.15, 16. therefore it could not be
the morrow of the Passeover-Sabbath, or any Festival-Sabbath; for there was no
such Sabbath at the end of the account, whatever there was at the beginning of
it.

Thirdly, The Passeover-Sabbath was fixed to a certain day of the month, Numb.
28.17.
namely the fifteenth day of the first month; and thus all their other
Festivals, they had their fixed days. But this feast of Pentecost is no where
affixed in all the books of Moses to any one certain day of the month (nor
indeed could it be, unless God should make a ceremonial Law to cross the Law of
nature, or rather to limit the course of divine Providence, to ripen their corn
just against such a day of the month) which (as Dr Usher observes) is a very
great presumption that the Feast of Pentecost was a moveable Feast, (namely as
to the day of the month) but immovable as to the day of the week; so varying
that it might always fall upon the day immediately following the ordinary
Sabbath.

Fourthly, The Antitype is the best key to unlock the type. And this is clear
in the new Testament; for that Christ was our first fruits in reference to his
Resurrection, St. Paul assures us, 1 Cor. 15.20. and that he rose from the dead
on the morrow after the weekly Sabbath, all the 4 Evangelists do inform us. And
T. T. has granted us, that these things must be punctually fulfilled by
Christ, as well in the time as in the type. From his own grant therefore I
conclude; That the day of first fruits was the first day of the week, therefore
so was the day of Pentecost, to the everlasting honor of that Lords day and
the glory of God the Holy Ghost who sanctified it by his presence and power;
sending down a new supply of tongues from Heaven (as if all the tongues upon
earth were not sufficient) to sound forth the praises of our Redeemer, and
spread his Gospel all the world over upon the first day of the week, as an
earnest whereof there was a glorious beginning made this day, the Gospel being
now published to some of all nations; for there was now a great concourse, even
of every nation under Heaven, met at Jerusalem, Acts 2.5. and at this meeting
three thousand souls converted, and baptized v. 41. a double baptism was
indeed dispensed this day, the Apostles were now baptized with fire, and three
thousand converts with water. Which was such a solemnity as the Church of God
never saw the like from that day to this.

I need say no more, T. T. p. 81.
the adversary confesses that this was the most glorious Sabbath that ever
Church enjoyed. Only he would fain persuade himself and others that it was the
Saturday-Sabbath; but herein he befooles himself, and deceives others. His
Grammar, Logic, and Arithmetic never falled him more than in this point. See
what a Grammarian he is! Mr. Aspinwal had objected that the word [(...)]
translated [fully come] should rather be rendered [fully past] to which T. T.
learnedly replies, that the Greek ( being a Gerund in do) signifies
[fulfilling] now I confess it is the first time that ever I heard of a Greek
Gerund in do; it may be this author learnt some Latin-Greek-Grammar, while he
was a Roman Catholic. I wish he do not stick too much in the Gerund in do
still. One passage in his book renders it a little suspicious, as p. 146 [Let
us, says he, celebrate the Seventh-day Sabbath, a day of delights to the Lord,
and so obtain meercy for the Sabbath-pollution of our days of ignorance] What
does he hope to obtain mercy by doing? Nay, then I do not much wonder at his
zeal for the Saturday-Sabbath, I rather wonder he does not cry up the old
Covenant again. To trace him yet further; he is a little out in his Arithmetic
too. For in beginning the count of the fifty days on a Saturday he begins at
the wrong end, making the last day of the week to be the first of the week, the
seventh day the eighth day, the first day the second day, the sixth day the
last day against his own professed principles; and is not here strange
confusion? Let me ask him in good earnest if the seventh day were the first day
in all those seven weeks, Deuteronomy. 16. how was the fourth Commandment kept all
that while, which according to his opinion, will brook no other weekly Sabbath
but the last of the week? Thus for his Arithmetic. Now for his Logic: But
here he is quite lost; his Conclusions are flat Contradictions, and his his
best Arguments Barbarous absurdities: I do him no wrong, let the Reader judge.

I Affirm, says he, Page 22. of his last book.
(with the most Learned of this Age) That the Sabbath from whence our Reckoning
arises (Levit. 23.11, 15.) was not the weekly Sabbath, but the first day of the
Passeover-Feasts. And a little before he calls it, The Passover, on the morrow
of which Sabbath the waving of the Sheaf was exactly accomplished in Christ by
the Crucifying Priests, who waved him between Heaven and Earth upon the sixth
day of the week, from which day began the Count of the Apostles Pentecost,
punctually beginning and ending upon the Seventh-day Sabbath.

Here are strange mysteries indeed! First, Good Friday, says he, was our
First Fruits waved by the Priests upon the Cross: And what day that was, he
tell us, namely, The fifteenth of Nisan, which was the first day of the
Passeover-Feast, say his Learned Authors. And I affirm with them, says the
Objector, That this was the Sabbath, Lev. 23. So that to make good his cross
conceits, he would have Christ Crucified two days together, namely, on the
Passover Sabbath, and the morrow after it, that is, Friday and Saturday; which
exceeds the cruelty of the crucifying Priests themselves.

Secondly, To salve this sore the coyns another conceit, namely, that the
Passeover-day, and the Passeover-Sabbath were all one: Page 83.84
For thus he argues in his first book [The Israelites were appointed to bring
(on the morrow after their Passeover-Sabbath) a Sheaf of their First Fruits to
be waved by the Priests before the Lord, and from that day to count seven
weeks: And here let the believer (who sees all Types ended in Christ) with
confidence behold his dying Redeemer, as the undoubted Sheaf of First Fruits
waved upon the Cross by the Crucifying Priests the very morrow after he had
eaten the Passover.] As if the morrow after the Passeover-Sabbath were all one
with the morrow after the Passover. Whereas the Learned Authors, whom he
cites, will tell him, That the Passeover-day was no Sabbath, but a
half-holiday, Ainsw. Lev. 23.5. But here again he is at odds with himself, for
in his last book he boasts of his concurrence with the most Learned of this
Age, saying, I affirm with them, That the Sabbath ( Lev. 23.) is not the weekly
Sabbath, but the first day of the Passeover-feast, that is the fifteenth day,
as they affirm; therefore it could not be the fourteenth day. And if he wikll
contradict himself, who can help it?

Thirdly, Another gross Error is this, That he makes Christ the Antitype of
the First Fruits in reference to his Death, and quotes 1 Cor. 15.23. to prove
it; which speaks expressly of his Resurrection. What shameful abuse of
Scripture is this?

The morrow after the Sabbath on which the account began, Deuteronomy. 16 9. Secondly,
by the waving of the First Fruits, Lev. 23.11. Thirdly, by offering the same
day a Lamb without Spot, Lev. 23.12. Now all these were punctually fulfilled in
Christ on the day caleld Good Friday: Then the Sickle was put to him to cut him
down, then he was Waved on the Cross, then this Lamb without spot was offered;
from which day the holy Sabbath is the first of the account, and at the end of
seven full weeks the same day that began did end the account.

All this may be answered in a word. The Type and the time (to use his own
language) hold no proportion. For the Sickle must be put to the Corn, the
First Fruits Waved, and the Lamb offered the morrow after the Sabbath, Lev.
23.10.12. Whereas Christ suffered and dyed the day before the Sabbath, and not
upon that day which he counts the morrow after the passeover-Sabbath (for then
he must have been Crucified upon the Saturday) but upon that which he calls the
Passeover-Sabbath it self, namely, the fifteenth day of the Month. And here
let him see how he has lost his Cause, and his Credit too: For, I hope, he
will stand to the judgment of Mr. Ainsworth and the English Annotators (else
why does he cite them;) now they both affirm, That the Passover Sabbath must
be the fifteenth of Nisan, and the morrow after it (from which they began to
reckon) must needs be the sixteenth day. From which they reckoned Exclusively
(from the night of the sixteenth day, says Mr. Ainsworth Law. 23.15) Now
Christ suffered upon the Friday, which was the fifteenth day, and the supposed
Passeover-Sabbath. The next day (being the Sabbath) was the sixteenth of Nisan,
from which day (namely when the day was ended) they must begin to reckon the
fifty days to Pentecost, and so it falls pat upon the first day of the week;
and thus T. T. reckons in his first book, excluding the morrow after the
Passeover-Sabbath from being one of the fifty days. And so against his will he
must be forced to begin upon the first day of the week, and that day that
begins the account must needs end it; and so his confidence is utterly
dismounted. Indeed in his last book he begins to reckon the sixteenth day
Inclusively; but in the very next page he contradicts himself again, (leaving
out the morrow after the Passeover-Sabbath as none of the number) a just
jugment of God to make men fight with themselves, when they would fight against
his Truth.

The Waving of the First Fruits, Matthew. 13.39. The Harvest is the end of the
world, and the Reapers are the Angels. Now Christ by virtue of his Resurrection
was the First Fruits of that harvest, The First Fruits of them that sleep, 1
Cor. 15. The waving of the First Fruits under the Law did Typifie Christ's
rising from the dead, and presenting himself alive before God upon the day of
his Resurrection. Again, the offering of the Lamb without Blemish, Lev. 23.12.
makes not that day a Type of our Saviors dying day; for it was their daily
offering, and upon the last of the fifty days they were to offer seven Lambs
without blemish, Levit. 23.20. Yet Christ dyed but once, and by that one
offering has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb 9.28. chapter 10 14.

But Mr. Jemison has prevented me in this Argument, and to give him his due he
has done worthily in it, as to the substance of what he has written. To
conclude, after all attempts to the contrary, the glory of the Spirit's Mission
rests upon the First day of the week: This day the Church of Christ was visited
from on high, the promise of the Father was sent, Acts 1.4. The blessed Spirit
came, the Disciples were assembled, Peter preached, thousands converted and
Baptized, Acts 2. and all this is written for our instruction. Why the Church
assembled (as Mr. Sprint argues) why on that day? Why the holy Ghost? Why
Preaching? Why Conversion, and administration of Sacraments? Why the Promise of
Christ accomplished, all on this day? but still to declare the will and
Ordinance of Christ in blessing and sanctifying this day to his Church; and so
marking it out for a day of public solemn worship, as a day in all its
Prerogatives superlative above other days, the day of our Saviors
Resurrection, by which we are Justified; the day of the holy Spirits
Descension, by whom we are Sanctified.

Fifthly, (...). Andr. Caesar.
Another signal mark, is the inscription of his royal name upon it whose day it
is, Rev. 1.10. it is styled the Lords day. Surely it is some additionall honor to
this illustrious day, that as it was the first day of time mentioned the
beginning of the first book of the Bible, so it is the last day of same noted
in the beginning of this last book of the Bible, to the praise of him who is
our Alpha and Omega; the very name speaks Christ the Author of it, if not his
Resurrection (whereby he was declared both Lord and Christ) the occasion of it.
The ancients had it in singular esteem for the very name sake. it is an elegant
and pious poem which I find written upon it by Sedlius, an ancient Christian
Poet who was but a few years Vid. Sixti Senesis Biblioth. sanct. p. 308.
Jerome's Junior.

Caeperat interea post tristia Sabbata felix
Irradiare dies, Libr. 5. Carm.
Culmen qui nominis alti
A domino dominante trahit, primusque videri
Promeruit nasci mundum, atque resurgere Christum.
In English thus,

After sad Sabbaths th'happy day'gan dawn,
Whose lofty name from Lord of Lords is drawn;
A blessed day, that first was graced to see
Christ's Rising and the worlds Nativity!
But we have more ancient Records than this, appropriating the title of Lords
day to our Christian Sabbath. Omnes fere sacrae Scripturae interp etes, tam
veteres quam Recentiores de primo die hebdomadis intelligunt. Wallaeus dissert.
de 4. prae: cap. 6. p 150.
Ignatius (who lived in St. John's time) makes it a weekly holy day of the
Christians observed in the room of the Jews Sabbath: So Tertullian,
Atharasius, Hierom, Austin, who not? By this title we may trace it down from
the Apostles times through the Ocean of the Fathers, Councills, Schoolmen to
this present age, wherein we live. And to come to Scripture; there seems to be
much in that which Beza observes out of an ancient Greek manu-script, wherein
that first day of the week 1 Cor. 16.2. is expressly called the Lords day; and
the Syriack translation tells us, Institut. Theol. loc. 48. de cana. Dom.
that the Christians meeting together to receive the Lords Supper 1 Cor. 11.20.
was upon the Lords day: And Bucanus says, this Sacrament is called the Lords
Supper, as in respect of the institutor and the end of it, I had rather
interpret the Lords day by the Lords Supper than as Bucan. does the Lords
Supper by the Lords day.
so also in respect of the day on which it was wont to be administ; viz. The
Lords day, citeing that Text Acts 20.7. and hence also the ancients styled it,
Dies panis, the day of bread, because the Churches of Christ ever used to break
bread on this day. But to end all disputes, if Scripture may be safely
interpreted by Scripture, and dark places by plain ones, then let us expound
the Lords day Rev. 1.10. by the Lords Supper 1 Cor. 11.20, Here let the reader
take notice, that the blessed Spirit of God (who had his choice of words, and
never spoke any thing but upon admirable reason) never vouchsafed this title of
honor in the new Testament, but only to the Supper and the day; the Lords
Supper and the Lords day. (...), 1 Cor. 11.20. (...). Rev. 1.10.
Neither can any third Text be produced, where this Epithet is applied to any
thing else. Now the phrase being the same (and thus singular) the sense must
needs be the same. Look therefore in what notion the Supper is the Lords
Supper, in the same sense is the day (styled the Lords day. The supper is the
Lords, because the Lord Christ instituted it, yea and substituted it in the
room of the Passover; and why not the day His, So Mr. Perkins in his cases of
conscience.
because he instituted, and substituted it in the room of the old Sabbath? It Is
evidently a day of Christ's institution, a day of the Lords own making, and with
reference to his Resurrection, he made it such a day of the week, not such a
day of the year as we proved before in a word, let any other day be set up in
constitution with the first day of the week, for the title of Lords day, and we
shall easily nonsuit it, Our Saviors birthday bids fair for it. T.T.


Then it must be a day of divine institution, which I hope he will not say.

But I answer further, if the day of Christ's nativity, or any other day besides
the first day of the week had been devoted to Christ, and intended by John in
this place, he had spoken very obscurely to say, I was in the spirit on the
Lords day; he would rather have said, I was in the spirit on one of the Lords
days. Annot. ad loc.
But to put this fancy to flight, observe the day here dignified with this
magnificet title must needs be some noted day, the circumstances of time,
place, and person are set down (as Beza observes) the better to conciliate
credit to the truth of these heavenly visions; therefore all (but that of the
place) have an eminent badge of cognizance upon them; John was a known person;
and the Lords day (with an emphatical Article, (...) a well-known day
doubtless, he that relates to others such a thing done such a day, presupposes
the day sufficiently and certainly known; for a doubtful circumstance darkens
a story, and draws a curtain in stead of opening a casement to give light to
the matter; now let us put it to the question; what day was more eminently and
unquestionably known in all the Churches of Christ than the first day of the
week? Which the Secretaries of Christ (all the four Evangelists) had so exactly
noted, and the Psalmist so prophetically extolled, as a day of the Lords
making? St. John could not but know that these seven Churches knew the first
day of the week to be Christ's Resurrection-day, and neither he nor they could
be ignorant that Christ's Resurrection-day was the day which the Lord had made,
and what is that but the Lords day? As for our Saviors Birthday (although it
were a day of wonderful mercy) yet it is left in great obscurity, not one of
the Evangelists marking it out by name; neither can it be so clearly resolved,
either what day of the Unless the adversary will grant Mr. A. that it was the
first day of the week.
week, or what day of the month, or what month of the year, nor hardly what
year of the world our Savior was born in, but it may be matter of
controversy. See diverse disputes about it in Dr. Willets Hexapl. on Dan.
chapter 11.

If John intends any single day, it is most likely to be the seventh day which
was anciently styled the Lords holy day, and is declared by Christ to be his
day, Mark 2. last. and no other day throughout the Gospel does he declare to be
his. This he and Mr. Braburn in contradiction to the whole Christian world)
would fain persuade us that the Lords day which St. John speaks was the old
Sabbath. But

He may as well say that the Lords Supper which St. Paul speaks of was the old
Passover, Exodus 12.11. Luke 22.20.
Lords Supper in the old Testament, as much as the seventh day was the Lords
Sabbath.

Christ never declared the seventh day to be the Lords day, Heb. 4.4. therefore
(let it be well considered) the Lords day ( Rev. 1.10) for this very reason
cannot possibly be understood of the Jews Sabbath, because it is such a Lords
day as relates peculiarly to the Lord Christ; not as the Lord our Creator; but
the Lord our Redeemer; to Christ actually exalted to be Lord over all; relates
to him, I say, as the Lords Supper does; not only as his by possession, but his
by institution: for these two (and these only) the Supper and the day are
called [the Lords] in Scripture. The Greek word is used but twice in all the
new Testament, only these two have the honor to be matched in this glorious
appellation; and we must interpret the one by the other, therefore, if the
Lords Supper be a Gospel-ordinance and institution of Jesus Christ, so is the
Lords day; This parallel will pinch the adversary, he cannot so much as pretend
that the seventh day, (nor indeed any other day but the first of the week) was
instituted by Christ, so as to be equalized in phrase with that pure
Evangelicall ordinance the Lords Supper. There is a vulgar objection abroad,
that every day is the Lords day; therefore this Text makes as much for an
every-day-Sabbath as the weekly Lords day Sabbath. But the answer is easy,
they may as well say every Table is the Lords table, and every Supper the Lords
Supper, and so turn levellers of days and duties together. Well, we have
brought it to this issue, that there is a day, a special day under Gospel (but
not Jews seventh day) which the Lord Jess has instituted and owned above all
days by stamping his own most blessed name upon it, (as upon his sacred
Supper) and this we are sure can be no other than the first day of the week.

The objector (fearing belike that the former shift would fail him) has
another evasion to second it, old thread bare Notion of Gomarus. I rather think
(says he) that the Lords day which S. John spoke of was the Lords
Judgment-day, which the Lord himself calls his day, Luke 17. Phil. 1.16. And so
he dreams that the day on which S. John dated his Epistles to the seven
Churches, was the day of Judgment.

But,

This (as one says0 is void of all judgment: See Mr. Ley Sund. Sab.
For in the readiest construction of the words S. John spoke of a day that was
in being before the Vision came, and so known that the Reader might take notice
when it came. But the day of Judgment is not yet come (unless it be to such
dreamers) and so utterly unknown to man, that our Savior has taught us, Mat.
24.36 Mark. 13.32
Of that day and hour knows no man: no, not the Angels in heaven, but my
Father only. The prooses he alleges are impertinent; for although the day of
Judgment be styled the day of the Lord (appellatively.) yet is it never termed
the Lords day (denominatively) as Mr. Cawdrey might have taught him, if he had
not thought himself too wise to learn of his betters. Thus all his cloudy
notions are scattered, and the Lords day ( Rev. 1.10.) discovered by evidence
of Scripture and Antiquity to be the first day of the week.

Now as the blessed Martyr Ignatius exhorts, Let every one that loves the
Lord Jesus Christ keep holy the Lords day. Let the zeal of Primitive
Christians herein provoke us to holy emulation. (...). Ignat. ad Magnes.
Plinius sub Trajano scripsit, Solitos hoc stato die convenire Christianos ante
lucem, carmenque Christo quasi Deo Communi voce dicere; postea Sacramento se
obstringere ne scelus aliquid, ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria
committerent. Magdeb. Cent. 2. c. 6.
Even a Heathen could observe how those precious morning stars used to meet
early on this day and sing Hymns to Christ: an not only to sing his praises,
but to celebrate his holy Supper (the Lords Supper upon the Lords day
doubtless) binding themselves in a holy Covenant to hate and fly sin. And it is
known to have been the common question put to Christians by Pagan persecuing
Governors [Dost thou observe the Lords day?] the usual answer was [I am a
Christian, I dare not intermit it.] This was wont to be the distinguishing
Shibboleth, the cognizance of Christians in the purest times of Christinity. O
blessed souls! because they were Christians they durst not intermit the Lords
day; no, though they lost their dearest lives for keeping of it. How ill do
they deserve the Name of Christians in these days, who make no Conscience of
this day; yea, who have the impudence to Preach against it, Write against it,
Work upon it as if it were a common day. I remember what the holy Apostle spoke
in a like case to those that polluted the Lords Table, using it as if it were
their own table, What, have ye not houses of your own ot eat and drink in? 1
Cor. 11.22
or despise ye the Church of God? The like may I say to all prophaners of the
Lords day, Have ye not days enough of your own to work and to play in? or
despise ye the Lords day? Is it a sin, a prooking sin, to use the Lords Table
as if it were your own table, to eat Sacramental Bread as if it were common
bread? and is it no sin to use the Lords day as a common day, as if it were
your own day? Why, is it not parallel in phrase with the Lords Supper? Is not
the Lords Name and Superscrition found upon the one as well as the other? I
charge thee therefore (Reader) in the Name of the Lord Jesus so visibly graven
upon this day, render to Christ the things that are Christ's: Be assured the Lord
will not hold thee guiltless for taking his Name in vain, and spending his time
in vain; his time (I mean) upon which he has stamped his noble and royal Name.
This is the fifth Mark or Seal of the day, The Inscription of Christ's glorious
Name upon it.

6. The sixth is, The Apostles and Apostolical Churches observation of it. The
holy Apostles were men intimately acquainted with the Secrets of Christ (being
most of them trained up in his School) and personally conversant with him by
the space of Acts 1.3
forty days between his Resurrection and Ascension; as Drut. 9.11
Moses was forty days with god upon the Mount. Besides, they had immediate
Inspiration, and authoritative Mission from Christ himself to manage the
public affairs of his Kingdom. Our Savior made them a kind of Letter of
Attorney (as one speaks) to speak and act in his Name, as if he himself had
been personally present, John 20.21.
As my Father sent me so send I you: and Luke 10.16. Non minus ratum est quod
Apostoli dictante S.S. P. tradiderunt, quam quod ipse Christus tradidit.
Cyprian.
he that hears you hears me. Neither does this extend only to their Verbal
preaching, but to their visible preaching also, their practice I mean (at least
in things Evangelical and of moral, general, perpetual concernment to the
Churches of Christ) otherwise why is their practice propounded as our Pattern?
Philip. 3.17,
Walk as ye have us for an ensample. And, Philip. 4.19.
Those things which ye have seen in me do. And again, Be 1 Cor. 11.2.
followers of me as I am of Christ, says the great Apostle. Yea, not only the
Apostles themselves, but the first Churches planted by them are imitable
paterns to other Churches, especially in things apperteining to the public
exercise of Gospel Worship: 1 These. 2.14.
we may exemplify both together in the observation of the Lords day; not once,
but often; not by single persons only, but by sundry Churches and
Church Assemblies met on this day. That general Assembly, Acts 2.1. when they
were all together with one accord, we have already proved to have been upon
this high and holy day: and how they keep it we have seen, and how God crowned
it with the effusion of his holy Spirit, as also the Conversion of souls is
further considerable. For it is very probable, that not only the three thousand
( Acts 2.41.) but the other five thousand also ( Acts 4.3.) were all converted
upon this day of Pentencost. (...) Acts 3.1. notes identity of time as 2 Samuel
21.9. Deuteronomy. 25.5. and the ninth hour chapter 3. has reference to the third hour,
chapter 2. See. Dr. Lightfoots Harm. in Acts.
For it was but the third hour of the day, or nine a Clock in the morning when
the first Sermon was preached which brought in the three thousand ( Acts 2.15.)
and at the ninth hour, that is about three a clock in the afternoon, Peter and
John went into the Temple, Acts 3.1. wrought a glorious miracle, preached
another powerful Sermon, which gained five thousand more (Chapter 4.) such a Spirit
of Conversion was never poured out upon any day, as this. Well might the Holy
Ghost call it Psalm 120.3.
the day of the Lords power; the adversary acknowledges, it was spoken of this
very day.

Again, As this Church at Jerusalem, so the Churches of Corinth and Galatia
kept this day too, as shall presently appear from 1 Cor. 16.2. and so the
Church of Troas in Phrygia, ( Acts 20.7.) which was a neighbor Church to them
of Galatia: And the like may be said for the seven Churches of Asia; for upon
the Lords day St. John saw them all in a vision, and saw Christ in the midst of
them; saw him, as the Saints have been wont to see him in his glorious goings
in the sanctuary, walking amidst his golden Candlesticks, Psalm 68.14. Isai.
30.20.
with stars in his hand, that is, Gospel Ministers, shining like stars in the
Firmament of the Church and diffusing the light of the glorious Gospel in the
actual exercise of their Ministry on this day especially. Yea upon this day
John himself was ravished in spirit, which made the place of his exile like
Paul's third Heaven to him, now I demand how this could come to pass, that so
many several Churches, as the Church at Jerusalem, Corinth, Galatia, Troas,
Ephesus Thyatira and the rest (many of which were at a great distance one from
another) should so unanimously consent and concur in keeping this day, if the
Apostles by the authority of Christ had not settled it, as an Ordinance in all
Christian Churches. Let any rational man tell me how all these Apostolical
Churches should so early, and in the beginning of their plantation consent
together to keep the same day, unless they had been directed by their first
founders the holy Apostles themselves. Add to this, the joint and uniform
practice of all Christian Churches in all succeeding ages since; and he has
hardly the faith of a Christian, if the reason of a man, that dares so much as
question the divine authority of the Lords day; for whence came this universal
agreement all the Christian world over, that all the Churches of Christ should
so early, so Even Herericks themselves and such as were for the Jews Sabbath
(as Ebion and his followers) did always observe the Lords day also; Eusebius.
lib. 3. and so do the Ethiorick Churches to this day as Dr. Heiten testifies.
universally, so constantly observe this day, (not one Church ever attempting
to alter it) but from some authority superior to the Churches themselves?
Certainly such customs as were never ordained by Christ, or his Apostles were
never observed by all Christian Churches throughout the world, as the Lords day
has been. Such unity of custom, in universality of place, with perpetuity of
practice, all meeting together in that which has some footing in Scripture
must needs argue a divine institution; yea, if there had been no express
Scripture testimony of the Apostles practice and observation of it; as our
Divines do solidly argue for the baptism of infants, although there be no
express precept, nor express example of it found in Scripture, yet the grounds
and reasons of it being found in Scripture, with the general practice of the
Church concurring we dare not but own it and maintain it. How much more the
Lords day? yea, if there had been neither precept nor practice of it in
Scripture; as long as the grounds of it are laid in Scripture; namely a Moral
law for the substance of it (as one day in seven) and a prophecy for the
particularity of the Church, without any contradiction till these last
disputing days, wherein men are grown so bold as to deny principles. I do the
rather instance this, because I have to deal with an Anabaptist, who
confidently calls the baptiseing of grown persons Let him show me one Scripture
for that, if he can either precept or president for the baptiseing of such at
years of diferetion as were born of Christian parents; To tell us of the
Apostles baptiseing men and women is no news; but were they such men and such
women as are plunged now adays, no verily, they were not born of baptized
Christian parents as blessed be God we are.
born of Christian parents a flourishing truth after it has been convicted and
condemned by the learnedest pens in Christendom for a foolish error. But to
come to that I aim at; let me advise this man in cool blood to ask his own
conscience this question; namely, whether or no, if he could find in Scripture
express Apostolical practice (consequential proof satisfies me and others) for
Infant Baptism, he would not own it, as an Ordinance of Christ? Or thus,
whether (if the Holy Ghost had expressly affirmed in Scripture that in the
Apostles times baptism was (once at least) administered to infants in a solemn
assembly of Christians. Paul himself being present and actually assisting in
the administration) his own conscience would not tell him, nay then surely
infant baptism is an Ordinance of Christ? Let him say the same concerning the
celebration of the first day of the week. For the Holy Ghost has expressly
declared, that this day was solemnly kept at Troas, Paul himself being present
and principally engaged in the work of the day. For let the Text be consulted;
Acts 20.6, 7, 8. We came to Troas in five days, where we abode seven days,
and upon the first day of the week when the disciples came together (or were
gathered together in a Church-assemblie) to break bread, Paul preached unto
them, ready to depart on the morrow, and there were many lights in the upper
room where they were assembled together; and there sat in a window a certain
young man named Eutychus etc. Here note

1. Una Sabbati, id est, Die domini^^, and dies dominica recordatio dominicae
resurrectionis, Ven. Beda. In Acts 20. Tom 5.
When this solemn assembly met together; on the first day of the week, says
the Text. The day which all the Evangelists witness to be Christ's
Resurrection-day. This day then the disciples were congregated: But why the
first day of the week? Why not th elast day of the week, which was the Jews
Sabbath: strange, if that had been the Christian Sabbath, that these primitive
Christians had not have met on that day, especially since it was but the day
before! yet more strange, that we read not a word of Paul's keeping it, since he
tarried at Troas seven days. But most of all, that we read not one word in all
the New Testament of his owning that day in any Christian Church at all; only
the first day of the week; a fair argument that the day was changed upon the
account of our Saviors Resurrection.

2. The Church is assembled on the first day of the week, but how? Privately,
it may be: No, publicly and openly (as those times would bear) yea, probably
the company was very numerous; for it seems the room below would not hold
them, but they were fain to get up into the windows three stories high, as
Eutychus did, Acts 20.8. doubtless it was no small appearance. Well

3. Here is a full assembly met upon the first day of the week, but why then?
To break bread, says the Text, to receive the Eucharist, says the Syriack
translation; that is, to Math. 26.26, Acts 2.46. 1 Cor. 11.24.
receive the Lords Supper upon the Lords day. The Lords Supper? What without
preparatory prayer and other Sabbath-exercises; that had been but a faint
devotion, will some say, Mr. Shepard answers it well. Breaking of bread is here
put Thus prayer is put for the whole worship of God.

Genesis 4.26. chapter 12.8. Acts 2.21. Romans 10.12, 13.


Synecdochically, the part for the whole; there is no more reason to exclude
prayer, preaching, singing of Psalms, because these are not mentioned, than to
exclude drinking of wine in the Sacrament (as the blind Papists do) because
neither is that expressed, but breaking of bread only. So that the first day of
the week in effect is called the day of meeting to break bread, which was ever
accompanied with prayer, preaching and other holy exercises. Now (as the
forementioned These. 35.
Author observes) if ever the Saints used to break bread on any other day, yet
the day is never mentioned as a special time for such a purpose; nor do we
find in all the Scriptures a day distinctly mentioned for holy duties (as this
first day of the week is) wherein a whole Church meet together for such ends,
but that day was holy: The nameing of the particular day for such ends, implies
the holiness of it. Well, the Saints at Troas meet on this day to receive the
Sacrament.

But,

4. Have they no Sermon? yes, and Paul himself preaches it v. 7. And continued
his speech till midnight, and about break of day he departed: Which yields
us two notes, one, that the first day of the week is no traveling day. St.
Paul would not, we are sure he did not travel this day, but the day after;
another, that the first day of the week is a solemn holy day, to be spent in
spiritual exercises and Sabbath Day duties, as preaching, hearing, praying,
conferring, breaking of bread, in commemoration of Christ, his death and
Resurrection. Why else does the Holy Ghost story this down so exactly and
precisely? Is it not written for our learning upon whom the ends of the world
are come? Yea doubtless for our learning; that we might forecast our journeyes
and other affairs in such sort, as to keep holy the Lords day, and not entrench
upon it by traveling or the like; thus we have plain Apostolical practice for
the observation of this day. But see how this clear Text and truth is cavill'd
at.

This meeting of the Saints at Troas was occasional; T.T. p. 123.
viz. Paul's departing by Sea.

This is a sorry shift, for the Text says not, that the disciples were
assembled by reason of Paul's departure the next day; but they were assembled
this day to break bread without the least reference to Paul's journey the day
following. So that this Church-meeting was not occasional, but a thing usual
upon the first day of the week. And the context clearly implies, that the
putting off of Paul's journey till the next day was occasioned by the Church's
meeting this day, not this meeting by his departure the next day; for the
Apostle seems to stay purposely and wait seven days among them; that he might
have a public opportunity of preaching and communicating with them upon the
usual day of their public assemblies; which appears by this convention to have
been the first day of the week, here was therefore nothing occasional in all
this solemnity; neither the assembly, (...).
nor Sacrament, no nor the Sermon neither; but only the length and continuance
of the Sermon till midnight; this indeed was occasional, by reason of St.
Paul's departure on the morrow, so the Text it self imports; Paul being to
depart on the morrow preached and continued his Sermon till midnight; he
preached a long Sermon, because it was his last Sermon, he was like to preach
among them.

The Saints assembled and brake bread every day, therefore they may as well
plead for an every day Sabbath as for the first day Sabbath from Acts 20.7.

It cannot be proved by Scripture that the Lords Supper is an every days
Supper, Acts 2.26. is misquoted; I perceive this Author uses to quote Scripture
at a venture; but I suppose he means ( Acts 2.46.) and there indeed we read of
the Saints continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and Domi frangebant
portionem. Syriack verse.
breaking bread from house to house; but to take this for Sacramental bread,
and make it their daily bread, is to mistake the matter quite. For although
verse 42. speak of bread Sacramentally broken, yet verse 46. the phrase is
quite altered, and the (...).
word signifies ordinary bread, or common food; Piscator understands it of
bread broken in a way of Charity, or dealing their bread to the hungry, as it
is Isai 58.7.
elsewhere expressed.

If breaking of bread had been a service peculiarly designed for the honor of
the first day, the Apostle would not have deferred it till the second day, till
after midnight. verse II.

Neither does it appear that he did defer it till after midnight. For
Eutychus dropped asleep in Sermon-time, verse 9. and the Sermon lasted but till
midnight verse 7. and as soon as Eutychus caught his fall (no doubt) Paul
hasted to raise him again, And when he was come up again, he brake bread verse
11. Part 3: These. 63.
all this while it might not be midnight, for after all this he talked a long
while, even till break of day. Besides (as Mr. Shephard observes) the Lords
Supper might be administered before Paul's Sermon. And that breaking of bread
verse 11. might be common bread; some ordinary repast for Paul after his long
preaching, and before his long journey. And the word ((...)) implies as much,
and hence also it is spoken of one man principally; When he had broken bread,
and eaten etc. however it is expressly said v. 7. that the disciples were
assembled together ( ex more says Ad locum.
Pelican) after their wonted manner) to break bread upon the first day of the
week; and their purpose shows, what was their usual practice.

The disciples came not together till toward evening, for as soon they are
met, we read of lights in the upper room, and this is no fair president for
keeping a Sabbath

They must needs be come together before Candle-lighti ng,

The text says not, Paul ended his Sermon. Besides, supposing they came not
together till toward the close of the day (remembering still what perilous
persecuteing times those were) yet out of question the former part of the day
was spent in religious exercises, otherwise the disciples had rusht very rudely
upon that sacred and solemn ordinance of the Lords Supper. We should count them
but sorry Christians that should dare to come reaking out of the world, from
their Merchandise, or shops, or fields, or farms to sit down, as guests at the
Lords table.

The Saints example at Troas does no more oblige us to their time, than their
meeting in an upper chamber does tie us to the like place.

If time and place be equal circumstances in religion, See Mr. Wowe of the Sab.
then the old Prelatical Argument were good; as, the true worshippers of God
are not tied to worship him either in Jerusalem or any other peculiar place,
but must worship him in spirit and in truth in all places; so neither are they
tied to any time of worship, but may pray continually. But this principle is
out of plea now, and I am persuaded in urging of it the objector fights against
conscience and struggles against his own convictions. For he has elsewhere
maintained time and place to be unequal circumstances, and if not equal, why
does he argue from the one to the other? But the truth is, he has no game to
play but what the Anti-Sabbatarian Prelatists have played and lost before him.
Only one card more, which was none of their pack.

Examples do only allow us a liberty; page 13. of his Pamphlet.
nothing but a clear command can oblige us to a duty. For instance, community
of goods is the Saints liberty, because it was practiced; but liberality of our
proper substance is a duty; because it is commanded. Saints may freely seast
before Communion because we have Apostolical president, but all true disciples
must break bread, because we have Evangelical precept; so we have liberty to
meet the first day, because we find the Saints at Troas then (occasionally)
assembled: but we are tied in duty to celebrate the seventh day Sabbath,
because it is commanded

If this rule were as true as it is false, Paul's preaching on the first day of
the week, yet I hope we had had free liberty to meet and worship on that day
nevertheless; what follows now? Why, by this Doctors new divinity (absit
blasphemia verbo) the Holy Ghost has inserted this story in vain. This leaf
(yea and twenty more) might have been left out of the Bible without loss. See
the poison of a rotten error!

It Is no less false, Israel? must he deliver his mind and will, only by way of
precept? May he not do it as well by promise, or prophecy or proportion or
consequence? Must we teach the Lord how to teach us our duty? pray what
express command was there to sanctify the Sabbath, or what example of any one
man that did sanctify it, for 2000. years after the Creation? I mean in
express terms. Was it never a duty therefore till the Commandment came, and is
not Apostolical example with a consequential command, a sufficient rule for
the observation of the Lords day? He argued before for the Jews Sabbath; that
we must be followers of Paul as he was of Christ, how much better may we urge
the same argument for the Lords day? As thus, Christ was present upon this day
in the assembly of his disciples, and kept it like a Sabbath, John 20.19.26.
and so Paul, Acts 20.7. and we must follow Paul, as he did Christ; therefore we
must keep holy the Lords day, the first day of the week; here the practice
being Evangelical, the consequence is the more Logical. But to the objection;
is nothing to be esteemed of divine institution, and so of obligation to
conscience, but what has a clear command in Scripture? Mat. 21.25, 26. with
verse 32. Mark 11.30, 31. Luke 20.5, 6.
what then will he say to Sacrificing before the Law? Where do we find any
Commandment to sacrifice, before we find Abel sacrificing? Or to look to the
Gospel in the first dawning of it. What express command was there for the
baptism of John? Yet the poor Publicans and the people generally held it to be
from Heaven (although the chief Priests and Elders believed him not) because
they held John as a Prophet; yet (which is remarkable) they had no precept but
only John's practice to warrant it; and which is yet more remarkable, our
blessed Savior approves this their belief of John, and his baptism, and
condemns those that rejected it as a human institution. In like manner we may
safely imitate those contemned Publicans in believing the Lords day to be from
Heaven by divine institution, and not of men by human ordination, suffering
Paul's practice as an Apostle to overruled us herein, See Mr. Abbot p. 66. Math.
11.11.
as John Baptist as a Prophet did them (the least Apostle of Christ being
greater than John the Baptist) and in so doing we need not question Christ's
approbation. Express precept indeed we have none in the new Testament; but that
which is better than a precept, says Dr. T wiss, viz. the practice of the
Apostles and Churches: For had the Apostles commanded it, and the Churches not
practiced it, their Commandment had been obnoxious to various interpretations,
whereas their establishing it de facto in practice among the Churches is less
liable to contradiction, if men were not given up to a Spirit of contradiction.
Yet this must be added, and cannot well be denied; Divino Spiritu: agebantur
Apostoli non minus in sacris institutionibus quam in ipsa Doctrina Evangelij.
Ames. Medul. p. 359. Acts 1.2. so the Prophets were commanded. Zech. 1.6. Joh.
10.22.
that the Apostles and Apostolical Churches practice (other arguments
concurring) supposes and argues that there was a command, although there be no
specification of it in Scripture; for the Apostles did nothing in ordering the
Church, but from and by Christ, either by precept or example, or divine
inspiration; and their very inspiration was virtually preceptive. For it is
said, That through the Holy Ghost Christ gave Commandments to his Apostles whom
he had chosen; That is, he gave them Commandments by inspiring, and breathing
the Holy Ghost upon them; which was upon the day of his Resurrection. Yea it is
more than probable that they had a special warrant from Christ in express
charge concerning the celebration of this day. For, Acts 1.3.
of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God Christ spoke unto them (namely
by way of Commandment) after his Resurrection; but the Lords day and the
worship therein performed, as it was in the Apostles days and ever since, is
one of those things which appertain to the kingdom of God; therefore of this
Christ spoke by way of Commandment to his Apostles. If it be said, that the
Lords day is not there expressed; I answer, no more are any other of those
particulars appertaining to the kingdom of God which he spoke, See Mr. Bernard
of the Christian Sab. p. 134.
therefore it cannot be excluded, till it can be proved, that the keeping of
this day to the honor of Christ is none of the things which pertain to the
kingdom of God.

Again, The Commandments, Acts 1.2. are such as Christ would have his disciples
teach his people to observe, Math. 28.18, 20. now we find the Churches of
Christ observing this day. Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. and the Apostle observing it
with them, yea, prescribing duties to them on this day. 1 Cor. 5.4, 11, 20.
which was on the Lords day, according to the Syriack; but 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. is
express: and the Apostle tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14.37.
That the things he wrote unto them were the Commandments of God; therefore the
practice of the Apostles and Churches planted by them implies a command, Yea

All Scripture-examples in moral or religious actions fall under the Government
of the Ten Commandments: Paul tarrying a whole week at Troas, and observing the
first day of the week only for solemn worship, it cannot be imagined but this
observance was in obedience to the fourth Commandment; and so of the exigency
of the Apostles Commission, not of the Liberty; consequently it is the Saints
duty, not their liberty.

The remainders of the Objection about community of goods and Love Feasts are
mere impertinencies, to plead for these in the peace and settlement of the
Church, is to put a plea in the mouths of Levellers, Libertines and Epicures.
Community of goods was never the Saints Liberty, but in the Church's Act. 4.34,
35 36, 37 compared with Act. 8.3, 4.
extreme poverty and persecution, and then it was rather duty than liberty: and
if ever the Church of God should be in the like state of extremity, she is
bound to follow that Original Copy; but this can hardly be supposed.

And as for Love Feasts. I suppose the Author is to seek for Apostolical
president to warrant them, whatever he says: It Is true, they were practiced in
the Apostles times, but never approved, nay they were sharply 1 Cor. 11.21.
Jude ver. 12.
reproved, as also the Jews Sabbath and observation of other Legal days were,
Gal. 4.10.

Thus we have made good the sixth Mark for the Lords day; namely, the Apostles
and Apostolical Churches observation of it.

7. Seventhly and lastly, we shall add this to all the rest, The Apostles
Prescription about it.

Et quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant. Though either or these particulars
singly considered may be thought too weak, yet I am assured, that all of them
jointly combined will be too strong for the gates of hell to prevail against;
this last will add some strength to all the rest. I shall ground it upon that
noted Text, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I
have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye; Upon the first day
of the week let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him,
that there be no gatherings when I come. Here we have to observe,

1. An Apostolical Ordinance, (...), As I have ordained, so do ye. He does not
counsel them to do it, but commands them, and by his power Apostolical he
enjoins them to do it; and if Paul ordained it, certainly he had it from
Christ, for he tells them, 1 Cor. 11.23.
That what he delivered to them, he received from the Lord; and the things that
he wrote to them were the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37.

2. The thing enacted by this Ordinance, and that is, (...), collecta. See Dr.
Day his Sermons on this Text.
Collection for the Saints. The word seems to be a metaphor taken from
gathering of fruits, or gleanings in harvest or rather (as Beza notes) from
gathering of a shot at a banquet or friendly meeting; as men invited to a Feast
or Banquet use to make a purse, and cast in every one his shot to gratify the
poor servants that belong to the house; So the Apostle requires these
Corinthians when they meet together at the Feast of the Gospel, especially that
heavenly Banquet of the Lords Supper, the Feast of the great King, that then
they cast in something to make a purse for the poor servants of Christ, in
testimony of their thankfulness to the Master of the Feast, This some take to
be the sense of the word; it signifies such a Collection or Contribution as men
use to make when they meet at a Feast, and it suites well with the next
Particular.

3. The time stated for such Collection; The first day of the work, Diem caetus
designat. P. Matt. ad loc. Tum solitos fuisse convenire apparet. Act. 20 7.
Beza.
the day designed for their solemn Assemblies, and that solemn Ordinance of the
Lords Supper, as was proved before Acts 20.7. Hence in Justin Martyr's time,
and ever since the Churches of Christ have walked according to this rule,
annexing their charitable contributions to the celebration of the Lords Supper.
But still the great Question is unresolved, will some say, namely, Why the
Apostle should limit this duty or work of mercy to the first day of the week?
Some answer it thus; The Apostle therefore mentions the day, S. M. Cawdrey
because there is a special motive in it to stir up their charity; being a day
wherein they had received such inestimable bounties from the hands of God, as
the resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ, and the like. Now I confess
there is much weight in this answer. It Is the fittest time to express our
thankfulness to God, wherein we commemorate his greatest loving kindness to
us. Chrysostom is very clear in his Commentary upon this Scripture. [ Upon the
first day of the week let every one lay by him in store, (...). Chrysostom. Orat.
43. in 1 Cor. 11.
etc.] See how he exhorts from the very time, (says he) for that very day were
sufficient to induce them to charity; for call to mind (says he) what you got
on that day; for unutterable good things, even the root and rise of our life
arose on that day: Nor in that respect only is the time proper to quicken
charity, but because it has rest also, and relaxation from labor or abruption
of business; for the soul being discharged from labors becomes in a better
frame and preparation to take pity; and more than all this, the communicating
on this day in the Sacraments, so dreadful and immortal puts the mind in great
forwardness, etc.

This exposition of Chrysostoms as it may deservedly challenge respect for the
antiquity of it, (being above twelve hundred years old) so much more for the
truth of it, being so agreeable to the Text it self. For observe it well.
(...). Ibid.


First, He calls the first day of the week Christ's Resurrection day, and a
little before [the Lords day].

Secondly, He concludes it was a Sabbath day or day of rest from labor and
worki-day business. And to my apprehension this is clearly employed in the
Text. For upon this day the Apostle would have them contribute to the poor
members of Christ as God had prospered them; to wit, in the six foregoing
work-dayes which argues a recollection and thankful calling to mind the
blessing of God upon their weekday labors, and what can be more Sabbath like?
Besides the Greek word is emphatical, [as God has prospered] so we read it,
but it may be rendered thus, [as God has given a good journey] or [a good
voyage] plainly intimating that upon every first day of the week they had rest
and respit from their worldly employments, (...). Romans 1.10.
something like that of a travellour at his journey's end, or a mariner when
his voyage is over, and he is at rest in his harbor.

Thirdly, He counts the first day of the week their Sacrament-day; as indeed it
was; and the collection here injoined, speaks as much: And doubtless this was a
powerful argument to prompt them to liberality: It were sordid ingratitude to
spare a penny from the poor, when a man considers that God has not spared the
precious blood of his Son. Besides all this, the first day of the week was the
day of their solemn assemblies, for prayer, preaching prophesying, singing of
Psalms and other religious exercises; all which were as fire to kindle their
compassions toward their distressed brethren; every word of God, every Sermon,
every prayer, every Psalm that was sung might add some fuel to that Heavenly
flame of their brotherly love and Charity; and for these causes the Apostle
chose that time as the most select and choice opportunity to put them upon the
practice of that duty. But here we are waylaid with Objections.

If any can discern the Sts. assembling (1 Cor. 16.) it must be by some other
light than Gods word. T. T.


I hope he will grant this text to be Gods word, Paul prescribe here?
Collections or contibutions to the poor Saints. But who must contribute? every
one. how must they contribute? by way of casting into the common treasury; so
much the Bucan concludes from hence that the Apostle gave order, there should
be commune aerarium a common treasury in the Church. Loc. 42. de Ministerio.
word [(...)] implies verse 2. and why so? That there might be no gatherings,
when Paul came. Which there must needs have been, if every man had kept his
contribution at home in his own Coffer. So that it must be both a general and a
public contribution. Therefore it must be in a public congregation. And why
all this upon the first day of the week? Why not upon some other day but to
mark out this day above others for the weekly season of solemn assemblies, as
also to move them by the day to the duty, What need there any mention of the
first day of the week, if they had not held their meetings on that day, and if
there had not been some special argument in the day to persuade them to the
duty?

Paul does not enjoin them to lay it before the Deacons, That is, at his own
house in the poores box etc.

At his own house? Paul's coming? Which the Text forbids. The Apostles care
was to have their collections ready i. e. in a public stock or bank against
his coming, lest happily they of Macedonid coming along with him (to whom it
seems he had boasted of the Corinthians forwardness) should find them
unprepared; 2 Cor. 9.3, 4.
and so both he and they should be ashamed of his boasting.

That phrase (...) which is translated [by himself] may as well be rendered [of
himself] that is, sponte sua, of his own accord: And so Musculus interprets it;
when it is said, Puta illud in Graco (...) non esse positum pro apud se seponat,
sed hoc sensu quisque vestrum suapta sponte. i. e. in caetu sacro thesaurizans
cui proposito nonsatisfecisset si quisque aqud se domi reposuisset, etjusmodi
namque reposita tum demum collidenda essent cum ipse ad eos venisset, quod
vitari volehat. Wolph. Museul. ad Lo.
let every one lay by, treasuring up in store, it is not meant let every one lay
by himself apart and privately, but at your public meetings casting it into
the public treasury of the Church and that freely of his own good will; [That
there may be no gatherings when I come] whereas if every one had laid by in
private only at his own house, there would have been need of gatherings at his
coming; the thing which he takes special care to prevent; it seems the Apostle
came but seldom, and could not tarry long when he came, for he had the care of
all the Churches upon him, especially the Gentiles the world through 2 Cor.
11.28. His work was to gather and govern Churches, he must not therefore spend
his time in gathering moneys, or going from house to house to call for every
man's weekly contribution; this had been a leaving the word of God to serve
tables, as the other Apostles said in a like case, Acts 6.2.

The survey the Apostle exhorts every man to take of his own estate that he
might give thereafter, does notably overthrow the conceit of a
first-day-Sabbath, for he orders every man to lay by in store as God has
prospered him; that is according as his yearly revenue increases or his weekly
trade proves more or less gainful. If the first day had been a Sabbath, the
Apostle (knowing the proneness of our nature to mind earthly things) would
never have put them upon the consideration of their outward estates,

That the first day of the week is a Sabbath,

2. That upon this day they must take a survey of their estates, because they
must give according to their estates and incomes, is a conceit indeed; there is
no color of consequence in it; for I hope they might take their survey on the
Saturday night; no necessity of deferring it to the Lords day. Suppose a
Minister of Christ should urge this Apostolical ordinance still (as I am
informed Mr. White of Dorchester did) pressing his people to contribute and lay
up something in a common stock every first day of the week for the releif of
the poor; and that according as God should bless and prosper them in their
callings the week before? Does it follow that therefore when the people are
assembled together on the Lords day they must make the Church their
Counting House, or (before they come there) turn over their shop-bookes in
stead of their Bibles? What a ridiculous inference were this? Good hu^^ands (I
should think) would end the week and their work together; good Christians (to
be sure) will do so and not make the Lords day their counting-day, a
recounting-day indeed they may and must make it; to recount the blessings of
providence in a way of praise and thankfulness and this is a Sabbath Day duty,
as appears by that Psalm 92.
Psalm for the Sabbath. But further, to dash this dream of the adversary, let
him consider that (in effect) as much is Ez. 46.5, 6.
said of the Sabbath in the old Testament, as (here) of the Lords day; and it
may be it is meant of the Lords day-Sabbath.

It Is further objected, That Paul's Epistle was read in these Churches on the
Sabbath Day, Saturday he means, and then the Apostle exhorted them to Charity,
and would have it to be their first work the next day while the sweet sense of
the Epistle was upon their Spirits, etc. But,

This is frivolous; For Gal. 4.10. The Apostle had utterly condemned the
Saturday-Sabbath among the rest of those legal days; and that he should build
again the things he had destroyed, we are not so much as to suppose.

Now take the sum of all: On the first day of the week our Savior was raised
from the dead; on this day he often appeared after his resurrection; sent his
holy Spirit on this day after his ascension, and stamped his own blessed name
upon it; on this day the Saints assembled, the Apostles preached, the
Sacraments were administered, Charities Collected; and concerning this day the
Holy Prophets prophesied; what day was ever marked out with more shining and
illustrious Characters?

The Best Antiquity for the Change of the day.
TO this Scripture-evidence for the change of the day, we shall now add
something by way of Testimony from the Records of Antiquity. I may truly say,
it is the glory of this truth, that besides Scripture authority, it has the
most luculent Testimony in the writings of the Ancients of any paralel-truth
controverted in these disputeing times, we may trace it all along from age to
age ever since the Apostles times; and with much contentment behold, how
providentially it has pleased the Lord to guide the pens of his faithful
Martyrs and Ministers in their witness-bearing to this sacred truth; especially
in the first five hundred years after Christ, wherein we shall find enough to
silence the vain glorious vapourings of the adversary; who affirms, That the
spotless spouse of Christ in her primitive purity and while she was decked with
the Diadem of infallibility, T. T. p. 62. and 106.
(namely during the first three Centuries) did constantly observe both the
seventh day and the first day of the week; yea for the first 400. years, if he
may be believed. By the way, let the reader take notice of two considerable
grants here.

First, That the Church was decked with the Diadem of infallibility (as he
calls it) for the first three hundred years.

Secondly, That the Lords day was constantly observed during this state of the
Church's infabllility. For both days were observed, says he. The Lords day
was indeed; besides his bare word I will bring sufficient witness for it. But
the Jews Sabbath was not, (at least) not as a Sabbath, nor with equal
solemnity as the Lords day, nor as of necessity (so it was ever condemned) and
the Lords day was ever preferred before it, if not observed without it in the
purest Churches, for the first two hundred years after Christ to say no more.
Let us examine witnesses in order as they come.

First, Ignatius.
Let us hear what Ignatius says, who lived some thirty years in the Apostles
times, and in his Epistle to the Magnesians (in the Vulgar Edition) is brought
in speaking to this purpose (...).
Let us therefore no longer keep the Jewish Sabbath as rejoicing in idleness (
for it is written, He that will not labor, let him not eat; and in the sweat
of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread) But let every of us keep Sabbath
spiritually, not in bodily ease but in the meditation of the Law; not eating
meat dressed yesterday, or drinking lukewarm drinks, or walking out a limited
space, nor in dancings and senseless sportings, but in admiration of the works
of God; And setting aside the Sabbath, let every one that loves Christ keep
holy the Lords day; the Queen of days, the Resurrection day, the highest of all
days. I do the rather insert this Testimony (though Dr. Usher except against
this Edition of Ignatius his Epistles) because T. T. cites it also for the
Saturday-Sabbath; only he mangles and misinterprets it; dealing with Ignatius
as men use to deal with Mag-pyes slitting their tongues to make them speak what
they would have them. Just thus he deals with this renowned father, severing
the last clause from the rest of the sentence, and singling out a little piece
of it to serve his own turn, for he insists only upon the last branch, and
mistranslates it too, his words are these, Next after the Sabbath Day let every
friend of Christ make the Lords day a Solemn festival. As if Ignatius had
preferred the Jews Sabbath before the Lords day but by his favor, this
clashes with the context; for in the foregoing words Christians are counseled
no longer to keep the Jews Sabbath but to work upon it; for it is written, He
that will not labor, let him not eat. Whereas on the contrary, all that love
Christ are charged to keep the Lords day a solemn Festival; Exam. Council. Trid.
de dieb. Fest. p. 257.
being the Queen and princess of days. Besides, these words [(...)] are well
rendered by, setting aside the Sabbath. So learned Chemnitius and others
translate them. If any desire further satisfaction, I referr them to judicious
Mr. Cawdrey, who has dexterously discussed this Testimony.

The more Approved by Dr. Twiss after it had been compared with a latin
translation found in Caius Col. library in Cambrig and two other Manuscripts in
Oxon the one in Magdal. the other in Balliot Coll. Library.
correct copy of Ignatius' Epistle to the Magnesians presented by Dr. Usher as
agreeable to the citations of Eusebius, Athanasius, and Theodoret has this
material and remarkable passage in it. The Blessed Martyr speaking of the Jews
converted to the Faith of Christ in his days, gives this most Christian
Character of them. (...). Ad Magnesian.
That they did no longer keep the Sabbath, but led their life according to the
Lords day, in which our life arose, in which words.

First, He expounds what St. John meant by the Lords day, Rev. 1.10. namely,
the day of our Saviors Resurrection, and that not as an anniversary, but a
weekly holy day contradistinct to the Jews Sabbath.

Seconly, He acquaints us with the practice of the Church in those Apostolic
times, which was, to observe the Lords day in stead of the old Sabbath. If the
converted Jews did thus, how much more the Christian Gentiles? Therefore
blessed Ignatius his preface to this discourse shall be my conclusion, by way
of caution to my Christian brethren, (...). Idem
Suffer not your selves to be carried about with diverse and strange doctrines;
for if we shall still live according to the Jewish Law, we deny that we have
received grace. And a little after, (...), etc. ibid.
Since we are become the disciples of Christ, let us learn to live according to
Christianity. For it is absurd to profess Christ and Judaize. For Christianity
has not believed into Judaism, but Judaism into Christianity As for Ignatius's
Epistle to the Philippians (which the adversary glories it is rejected as
spurious and counterfeit; and indeed there is nothing of an Apostolical spirit
breathing in it. See Mr. Perkins Praep. to the them. of the problem.

Our next witness is Justin Martyr; who lived in the very prime of the
primitive times; about a hundred and fifty years after Christ's Nativity;
Justin Martyr.
at Vide Alfied. Chron. Patr. p. 450.
what time he wrote a learned Apology for the poor persecuted Christians to
Antoninus pius the Emperor; wherein (among other things) he mentions the
manner of their public meetings on the Lords day; which he calls Sunday,
because he had to do with a Pagan Emperor, his words are these.

Upon the day called Sunday, (...), etc. Apol 2. ad Cal^.
all that abide within the cities or the villages do meet together in some
place where the Records of the Apostles and the writings of the Prophets, as
much as is appointed are read unto us. The reader having done, the Priest or
President ministers a word of Exhortation, that we do imitate those good
things which are there rehearsed; then standing up together, we send up our
prayers to Heaven; which being ended, there is delivered unto us bread and wine
with water. [Water to mingle with their Wine in those hot countries] of which
(as he says a little before) none are allowed to partake but baptized persons,
Believers, and [(...)] such as live according to the rule of Christ, After
this, the Priest or President offers up (as much as in him is) our prayers and
thanksgivings to God, and all the people say, Amen: then those of the richer
sort every one as his good will is, contribute something toward the relief of
the poorer Brethren, etc.

What an excellent pattern is here for after-ages? and how agreeable to the
practice of the Apostles themselves? here we have public assemblies, prayer,
preaching, reading the Scriptures, breaking of Bread, distributing to the poor,
and all this upon the day called Sunday; that is, the Lords day; and why upon
this day rather than any other? let Justin himself resolve this, as he does in
the next words. (...). Ib.
On the Sunday (says he) we all make a public Assembly; in as much as it is
the first day, in which God who changed the darkness and the first matter, made
the world: and because on this day Jesus Christ our Savior arose from the
dead. For, on the day before Saturday they crucified him, and on the day
following Saturday, which is Sunday appearing to his Apostles and Disciples, he
taught these things. Here we have both the Doctrine and practice of the Lord's
day in the purest times attested by this holy Man and Martyr; First, he informs
us how they kept the day; and secondly, why they kept it; namely, because it
was the first day, Christ's Resur, rection-day, and the day of his apparition to
his Disciples, whom he taught and instructed so to do: it seems the holy
Martyrs in the Primitive times were satisfied with these Scripture-Arguments
for the Lords day, which now the wrangling wits and lusts of men do nothing,
but storm against.

But here it may be objected; it is true, here is plain and positive testimony
for the observation of the Lords day; but here is nothing for the Negative;
nothing against the old Sabbath. Why mightn ot both days be kept in Justin
Martyrs time? does he ever deny that the Churches of Christ then kept the
Saturday-Sabbath?

I answer yes, his Testimony is as full against the Jews Sabbath, as for the
Lords day, witness his Dialogue or dispute with Trypho that obstinate Jew. I
shall recite a few passages of it verypregnant to this purpose: Trypho's grand
Objection was this, (...). p. 175. number. 30.
That the Christians did neither observe the Festival days, nor Sabbaths, nor
Circumcision, and mereover that they placed their hope in a crucified man. Now
see how the blessed Martyr answers him, partly by granting his Objection: For
he tells him, (...). p. 182. n. 10.
we also should verily observe your Circumcision, and Sabbaths, and all your
Festival days, did we not know the reason for which these things were imposed
upon you. And again, (...).
If (says he) we patiently endure the most horrible torments that men and
devils can devise to inflict upon us, why is it that we do not also observe
your carnal Circumcision, and Sabbaths, and Holydays which hurt us not? In
which words he freely grants that the Christians in his time did not observe
the Jews Sabbath; and although the Jews condemned them for it, yet he justifies
them in it, and uses many Arguments to vindicate their non-observance of it.

As, 1. Because since the coming of Christ there is no need of it; no need of
the shadow when the substance is come; yea there is no place left for it, it is
done away by Christ; for in this sense (I take it) the Father here speaks; that
(...)
as the Sabbath together with Sacrifices, Oblations and Festival days began
with Moses (he means, I suppose in the second Edition not the first Institution
of them) so they were appointed by the Council of God the Father to cease and
end with Christ: Where (by the way) observe, he uses the word ((...)) in the
singular number, to show that it was the old seventh day Sabbath which he
chiefly contested against, and indeed this was the string that Trypho chiefly
harp't upon; persuading Justin and his fellow Christians thus: (...), first to
be circumcised then to keep the Sabbath, and so he might obtain mercy; still it
must be restrained to the Jewish Saturday-Sabbath matched with Circumcision, and
orher Legal Ordinances; the Christian Sabbath is not the subject of this
dispute, this then is his first Argument, the Christians neither did, nor could
observe that old Sabbath, because it ended with Christ; And

2. (...) p. 187.
Because now there is a new Covenant, and a new Law gone out of Zion.

3. (...). p. 118.
Because the believing Gentiles may attain Gods heavenly inheritance without
the observation of it.

After the proposeal of these, and sundry other Arguments Trypho moves a
Captious Query. viz. whether if a man that knew Christ and believed in him,
still observed these legal customs, he could be saved? To which our zealous
and pious Martyr returns this Christable, yet for midable answer. (...).
In my Judgment ( O Tripho) such a one shall or may be saved, provided he do
not industriously labor to persuade others (especially those among the
Gentiles that are converted to Christ) to observe the same things with himself,
telling them that otherwise they cannot be saved. For such it seems he had but
little Charity. Now to sum up all however the opinion and judgment of this
ancient and eminent Father may be despised by scorners. Yet I hope his
Testimony will be embraced by all soberminded Christians. And this we have both
fully and faithfully transcribed. The conclusion is this, that the Churches of
Christ in Justin Martyr's time had renounced the Saturday-Sabbath and
celebrated the Sunday or Lords day for the day of weekly solemn worship, and
this was long before Antichrist came to his throne; Which I the rather note as
a seasonable check to that blasphemous, sacrilegious position of the adversary,
viz. that the change of the Sabbath was an invention of Antichrist. Oh
impudence! Was Justin Martyr (who shed his blood for Christ) a limb of
Antichrist? Did he plead for Baal in asserting the observation of the Lords
day, and rejection of the Jews Sabbath by all the Churches of Christ? Were the
precious Saints and glorious Martyrs in those early days devoted to the
inventions of Antichrist? Yea, in those bloody days, when for Christ's sake
they were killed all the day long, and led like sheep to the slaughter? Yea, in
those extraordinary apostolical days, while the Spirit of prophecy was yet
breathing, and the power of miracles yet working in the Churches of Christ;
witness Justin Martyr himself, who testifies (...). Dial. cum Trypho. 191. See
Mr. Baxter Spirits witness to the truth of Christianity. p. 21.
That even in his time the Devils did tremble at the name of Christ, and that
being adjured by that sacred name, they became subject unto them. Yea, for some
years after t his; for Tertullian, and after him Cyprian made public
challenges to the Pagan persecuting rulers, to bring their possessed with
Devils into the Christian assemblies, and if they did not cast them out, and
make them confess themselves to be Devils and Christ to be the Son of God, they
were content to suffer. Which may conciliate credit to the testimony (at least)
of these renowned ancients, well, the change of the Sabbath is confirmed by the
practice of the Church in Justin Martyrs time. And now we are upon the year of
our Lord 160. Dionysius. 3. (...). Eusebius. l. 4. c. 22.
or thereabout. And here we meet with another testimony. Of

Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, who in an Epistle of his Soter Bishop of Rome
writes thus; we have spent, (or passed through to the end of it) the Lords day,
to day an holy day. Now to spend the Lords day throughout an holy day is not to
spend any part of it in servilework, but to sanctify it as a Sabbath. But in
regard this Testimony touches but one half of the question. I only touch upon
it by the way, and proceed to a fourth, who speaks the truth and the whole
truth.

Tertullian by name, Tertullian. 4.
who flourished in the year of grace 200. or two hundred and four. His African
phrase is somewhat dark, yet some light it affords us as to this controversy. In
his book of the soldiers Crown, he speaks thus. On Die dominico jejunare nefas
ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare. De Colon. Mil.
the Lords day we hold it unlawful, either to fast or to pray, kneeling. And
elsewhere he seems to intimate the reason of it; viz. Diem solis laetitiae
indulgemus; alia long ratione quam religione solis; seeundo loco ab eis sumus,
qui diem Saturni otio and viotui decernunt, exorbitantes and ipsi a Judaico
more quem ignorant Apol. adv. Gent. c. 16. ^And chapter 3. de anima he speaks of
the Lords days solemnities, namely, Scripturarum lectio, Psalmi cantus,
adlocutiones and petitiones. reading the scriptures, singing of Psams,
conference and prayer. Dominica solennia.
Because it was a day of joy and gladness. For upon the Sunday (says he) we
give our selves to joy, or gladness. Where note that in Tertullian's time also
the title of Lords day ( Rev. 1.10.) was appropriate to Sunday, which the
primitive Christians so universally observed, that the Heathens began to
calumniate them, as worshippers of the Sun. But Tertullian in this place clears
them; For (says he) although upon the Sunday we give our selves to gladness,
yet it is for another far wide reason, than in honor of the Sun. And again,
in the second place are we from them (meaning the Jews) who appoint the
Saturday to idleness and eating, wandering from the Jewish custom which they
know not. In which words he gives us to understand that although the Christians
(then) devoted the Lords day to joy and gladness yet they made it not a
playday, or a day of pampering their bodies and riotous feastings (as the
degenerate Jews did their Sabbath) but they spent it in the spiritual
exercises of prayer and praise, they kept it as a solemn holy day; but how
often? What once a year? Nay once a week as he testifies in the 14. chapter of his
book concerning Idolatry where he speaks Ethnicis sentel annuus dies quisque
festus est; tibi vero octavus. Excerpe fingulas solennitates nationum and in
ordinem texe, Pentecostem implere non poterunt. de Idol. p. 736. Edit. Basil.^O
melior fides nationum in suam sectam, quae nullam Christianorum seleuitatem
fibi vendicat non dominicam, non Pentecostem; etiam si nossent, nobiscunt non
communicassent, ne Christiani viaerentur, nos ne Ethnici pronunciemur non
veremur. Ibid.
thus to the Christian (who observed 52. Lords days every year, whereas all
the Annual festivities of Pagans came short of Pentecost or 50) To the Heathens
every Festival is some annual day, but to thee every eighth day, etc. and here
he takes up a sad complaint against some Apostatizing Christians who kept
heathenish holy days, as if there were not Lords days enough in the year. O
the Faith of the nations, better than ours to Wards their own sect; as who
challenge not to themselves any Christian solemnity, not that of the Lords day,
nor that of Pentecost. Did they know it, they would not communicate with us,
lest they should seem Christians we Christians are not afraid to be accounted
Heathens. Where two things are worthy of note. First that he styles the Lords
day the Christians solemnity, or solemn day. Secondly, that he makes it the
Christians livery or badge of cognizance. Therefore the Heathens would not keep
it lest they should be taken for Christians, and indeed so it was the keeping
holy of the Lords day was ever the distinguishing Character of a true
Christian. Hence (as we noted before) the persecuting Pagans used to question
the primitive Christians upon this interrogatory, have thou kept the Lords day?
Anno 303.
(Just as the bloody Papists in Queen Mary's time examined the Protestants
about the Lords (Supper) and the common answer was, I am a Christian, I date
not intermit it, for the Law admonishes me of it, Lex eos de eo agendo
admonuisset seil. lex dei ut ipfi. martyrs exponunt number. 51. non ecclesia ut
in Margin a Baronio annotatur. Number. 48. vide Theoph. Philokur. lib. chapter 4.
Namely, The law of God, of Christ and Christianity, which answer cost many a
Christian his life, never were two truths more deeply dyed with the blood of
Martyrs, than the Lords Supper and the Lords day have been; the one, under
Popish, the other under Pagan persecution. But to return to our Author,
Tertullian's Testimony is clear for the Christians keeping of the Lord's day:
But did they not keep the Saturday-Sabbath too in his time? No, he denies that,
once and again, as in the forementioned Book concerning Idolatry: Nobis quibus
Sabbata extranea Sunt and Neomenia and seriae aliquando a Deo dilectae,
Saturnalia and Januriae frequentantur? etc.
Shall we (says he) frequent Heathenish Festivals, to whom the Sabbaths, new
Moons and Holy days (sometimes so dearly beloved of God) are strange: Strange
through dis-use doubtless, not through ignorance, therefore it is clear they did
not keep them. But more clear is that which he writes in his Apologetick
against theGentiles, where he acknowledges, Neque de victus exceptionibus,
neque de solennitatibus dierum, neque de ipso signaculo corporis, neque de
consortio nominis cum Judaeis agimus. p. 848.
That the Christians had no correspondence with the Jews, neither in difference
of meants, nor solemnities of days, nor in signature of body (meaning
Circumcision) nor in society of name: Mark it, they had nothing to do with the
Jews in solemnities of days, i e. Jewish days; therefore not in the
solemnization of the seventh day; which Tertullian expressly calls [ Lib.
advers. Iudaeos. p. 125.
Sabbatum temporale, a temporary Sabbath] thus we have the practice of the
Church in his time, adding further proof to the change of the day.

Our next Author is Origin, whose testimony concerning the Lords day is not to
be contemned, however his judgment in all things-cannot be approved: We are
not now pleading his Orthodoxy, but his veracity; he might err, but sure he
would not lie; being so ready to die for Christ; let us hear what he has to
say to this Christian cause, treating upon the story of the Israelites
gathering a double portion of Manna on the sixth day, (because none was to be
found on the seventh day;) Quare ergo qua die caeperit Manna caelitus dari and
volo comparare Dominicam nostram cum Sabbato Judaeorum. Ex divinis namque
apparet Scripturis, quod in die Dominica primo in terris datum est Manna.
Sienim (ut Scriptura dicit) sex diebus continuis collectum est, septima autem
die quae est Sabbati cessatum est, sine dubid initium ejus a die prima quae est
dies Dominica fuit, quod si ex divinis Scripturis boc constat quod Die Dominica
Deus pluit Manna de Coelo, and in Sabbato non pluit, intelligant Judaei jam
tunc praelatam esse Dominicam nostram Judaico Sabbato, etc.
I demand (says he) when the Manna began to fall from heaven; and it is
apparent from the Holy scriptures, that Manna was first given upon the Lord's
day. For if (as the Scripture says) they gathered it six days together, and
ceased the seventh, being the Sabbath day; without controversy, it began to
fall on the first day, which is is the Lord's day; which being manifest from
the Divine Scriptures, that upon the Lords day God rained Manna from Heaven,
and upon the Sabbath none; let the Jews understand that even then our Lords day
was preferred before the Jewish Sabbath. And presently after he adds, Upon our
Lords day, the Lord always rains Manna from heaven; and what he means by Manna,
he tells them; Viz. The heavenly Oracles, the Word read, and preached to the
people; Where note, First, That he calls the seventh day the Jews Sabbath, In
nostra enim Dominica die semper pluit Domnius Manua de coelo. Caelestia namque
sunt eloquia ista, etc. Orlg. in Exodus 16. Hom. 7.
not the the Christians Sabbath. Secondly, He titles the first day of the week,
the Lords day, and our Lords day. Thirdly, he testifies that on this day the
Church in his time had always Manna from Heaven in the public Ministry of the
Word; and all this in opposition to the Jews Sabbath; which, what else can it
signify but the change of the day? I might also allege that 23. Homily upon
Humbers, where this Ancient Father calls the Lords day our Christian Sabbath,
and that in a literal sense, as being a day of rest or cessation [ab omnibus
secularibus operibus] from all secular works, 6. Cyptian. Hier. Cat. log. Nam
quia octavus dies, i. e. post Sabbatum primus dies futurus erat quo Dominus
resurgeret, and nos vivificaret and spiritualem nobis daret circumcisionem, hic
dies octavus, i.e. post Sabbatum primus and Dominicus praecessit in imagine.
C^pr. ep. 59. ad Fid.
which could not be meant of an every days Sabbath. But I pass on to the next
Witness, namely;

Cyprian who flourished about the year of Christ 250 or 54. and received the
crown of Martyrdom under Valerianus. His words (to our purpose) are these. For
because the eighth day; that is, the first after the Sabbath, was to be the day
in which the Lord should arise, and quicken us, and give us the spiritual
Circumcision, this eighth day, that is the first after the Sabbath, and the
Lords day went before in the shadow, etc. Where observe, That he calls the
first day of the week the Lords day, and that in reference to Christ's
resurrection, secretly hinting the change of the day prefigured by
Circumcision, which was tied to the eighth day, upon which the Infant being
circumcised was accounted as a new creature, as if it were risen again from
death to life; and this did typifie our first Resurrection from the death of
sin to the life of grace, by virtue of Christ's Refurrection, whose
Resurrection-day is called the eighth day, John 20.26. Justin Martyr also
insists upon this in his Dialogue with Trypho, and it was the judgment of the
Fathers generally, that the change of the Sabbath was lapped up in that
Sacrament of Circumcision.

About the year of our Lord 326. Anhanasius shone like a star in the eastern
Church. And his Testimony is clear as the light. (...). Homil. de Sement. ad
init.
Of old (says he) the Sabbath was in great esteem among the anients, but the
Lord has changed the Sabbath Day into the Lord's day. The Lord himself did it,
says Athanasius, And again, Not we by our authority have slighted the old
Sabbath, but in regard it did belong to the Pedagogy of the Law, when Christ
the great master came in place, it became useless (...), as the candle is put
out, when the Sun shines. What can be more plain? It Is true, he seems to
intimate that they did (then) occasionally meet upon the Jews Sabbath; but he
gives a good account of it. (...).
Not (says he) as if we were infected with Judaism, but therefore we meet upon
the Sabbath, that we may worship the Lord of the Sabbath, not out of any
religious respect to that false Sabbath (as he calls it) but merely in Devotion
to Christ. whereas on the contrary they celebrated the Lord's day with an
honorable esteem of the day, as it follows; (...) Ibid. p. 839.
Therefore we honony the Lord's day because of the Lord's Resurrection. Thus
far famous Athanasius; whose next neighbor was.

Hilary a French divine; who livedi n the year 355. Hilarious. 8.
and left a most memorable record behind him of the Church's practice in his
time, Nos ectava die quae and ipsa prima est per fecti Sabbati festivi. tate
laetamur plolog in Isalm. explan. p. 335.
Upon the eighth day (says he,) which also is the first day, we rejoice in the
Festivity of a perfect Sabbath. Where we have enough to answer the imputation
of Novelty for calling the Lord's day Sabbath, however it was called, it seem
it was kept as a Sabbath in Hilarie's time; yea, long before it is true, he calls
it the 8th day also (though it have a weekly return in the number of seven)
because counting on beyond the Jewish tale of weekly days, coming next after
their seventh, it made the eighth. See Mr. Ley. Sunday a Sabbath.

About the year 374. Ambrose 9,
Ambrose was Bishop of Millain and he also has set his hand and seal to this
sacred truth in sundry of his writings in his commentary upon the Colossians,
Or 377. acord to Chytraeus Chronol.
he expounds Chapter 2.17. Of the weekly Sabbath of the Jews; and paralels that
place with Math. 12. The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath day. And indeed the
change of the Sabbath does most powerfully preach Christ's Lordship and
dominion over it. Again, to show the high esteem that he and other Saints in
his time had of the Lords day, he Rhetoricates thus upon it. Dominica nobis
ideo venerabilis atque solennis, quia in co Salvator velut Sol exoriens,
discussis infernorum tenebris, luce Resurrectionis emicuit. de rat. Fest. Pent.
Tom. 5.
To us the Lords day is therefore venerable and solemn, because thereon our
Savior as the rising Sun, having dispellea the darkness of death, shone forth
by the light of his resurrection. And elsewhere Dies Sabbati evat dierum Ordine
posterior, sanctificatione legis anierior, sea ubi finis legis advenit (qui est
Christus Jesus, Romans 10.4.) and resurrectione sua octavam sanctificavit, caepit
eadem prima esse quae octava est; habens ex numeriordine praerogativam, and ex
resurrectione Domini sanctitatem.
The Sabbath day was the last in order of days but the first in sanctification
under the Law; but when the end of the Law was come, to wit, Jesus Christ (Romans
10.4.) and by his Resurrection had consecrated the eighth day, that which is
the eighth, began to be the first, being dignified by the precedence of the
number, and sanctified by the Resurrection of the Lord. Then speaking further
by way of allusion to Luke 6. he adds; Vbi Dies Dominica ^aepit praecellere
qua Dominus Resurrexerit, Sabbatum quod primum erat, secundum haberi caepit a
primo; prima enim requies Cessavit, secunda successit unde and ad Hebr.
scribens Apostolus ait (post hac die) restat ergo requies populo Deim, requies
ergo vera non in operis cessatione, sed in Kesurrectionis est tempore. Ambr.
Enar. in Tit. Psalm. 47.
When the Lords day (on which our Lord arose) began to excel, the Sabbath which
was the first began to be accounted the Second from the first. For the first
rest ceased and the second succeeded. Whence, the Apostle writing to the
Hebrews (Chapter 4.) speaks of another day; there remains therefore a rest to
the people of God. Therefore the true rest is not now in the cessation of the
work (meaning the work of Creation) but in the time of the Resurrection. It Is
as much, as if he had said; the true Sabbath is not now the seventh day or last
day of the week, but the first day of the week; this is that other day
mentioned, Heb. 4. this is the rest or Sabbatism that remains to the people
of God. I do the rather cite these sayings of the two worthy Father Ambrose,
because T.T. quotes him also for the Saturday-Sabbath; which he was a zealous
disputer against. And although he preached on that day, it was but in
preparation to the Lords day. Hierom 10. Anno 385.


Hierom is the next writer of note and eminency in the Church of God, and he
also speaks very honorably of the of the Lords day. In his book against
Vigilantius, Per unam Sabbati hoc est in die Dominico omnes confer quae
Hierosolymam in solatium dirigerentur, praecipit Paulus. Item ad Hedib.
quaestio. 4.
the Apostle Paul (says he) commanded almost all Churches that there should be
collections for the poor upon the first day of the week which is the Lords day.
And elsewhere he informs us. how it was observed by the religious in his time.
Dominicos dies orationi tantum and lectioni vacant. Ad Eustoch.
namely, That they designed the Lords day wholly unto prayer and reading of the
holy Scriptures, For which he commends them, and by commending approves their
practice. But of observing the Jews Sabbath he speaks not a word only he
interprets Gal. 4.10. as a repeal of the Saturday Sabbath; and so does
Tertullian also, Libr. 1. Contr. Marc. Chapter 20.

After Hierom comes Chrysostom, Chrysostom 11. Anno 398.
a painful and powerful preacher in his time; and her how he thunders against
Judaizing Christians: (...), etc. (...).
I will close my Sermon (says he) with the words of Moses I call heaven and
earth to witness against you, that if any of us present or those that are
absent shall go to look upon the Trumpets or meet in the Synagogues, or go up
to Matrona. (a Synagogue of the Jews two or three miles from Antiochia, in
Daphne a pleasant village, as himself describes it elsewhere) or joy in their
Fasts or partake of their Sabbaths, or perform any other Jewish custom, great
or small: I am clear from the blood of you all; these words shall stand up in
the day of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and you, and if you obey, they
shall give you great boldness; but if you disobey, or conceal any of them, that
presume to commit such like things, they shall rife up as vehement witnesses
against you, etc. See how zealous this holy man was against. Jewish rites and
customs, and amongst the rest, against their Sabbaths. Neither was it blind
zeal, but zeal according to knowledge, for he knew, and has told us, (...).
That Paul persuaded the Churches of Christ to leave off Circumcision, to
slight the Sabbaths and days (legal days he means) and all other ceremonials.
And again, (...).
Christ has freed us from these Jewish observances; neither was his practice
in these things intended for ouru pattern, for as he kept the passover with
the Jews, not that we should keep it with them, but that he might introduce
the truth in stead of the shadow; in like manner he also endured Circumcision,
and observed Sabbaths, and celebrated their Festivals, and did all these things
at Jerusalem, but to none of these are we subject. Yet lest we should think
Chrysostom an enemy to the Christian, as well as the Jews Sabbath; consider
what he says in another place, treating of alms; where he occasionally
touches that Text 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. concerning the collection for the Saints on
the first day of the week and asks this question, what reason the Apostle had
to command this day for the oblation of their alms? And answers it thus, Hom.
2. (...). Item (...). ubi supre.
Because this day they did abstain from all works, and the Soul was more
cheerful by the rest of the day, besides the good things received this day; for
on this day death was destroyed, the curse was dissolved, sin vanquished, the
gates of Hell broken in pieces, therefore (says he) if we so honor our
Birth-dayes, how much more ought we to honor this day, which may well be
called the Birthday of all Mankind? and how often does this Father call the
First day of the week the (...). In John 20. 1 Cor. 16.2.
Lords day? a royal day, a day of rest, and the like? so others extol it;
Ignatius calls it, the Queen of days; the first day of the week, and the first
day of the world; as truly the chiefest, as it is undoubtedly the first of
days, says Eusebius a most Holy day, says Athanasius, higher than the
highest, says Nazianzen. So sincerely were the Ancients devoted to the
solemnity of this day, that in honor of Christ the Author of it, they thought
they could never sufficiently grace and garnish it with titles of pre-eminence.

To perfect this Catalogue, Let us take in the Testimony of that renowned
Austin, yea his judgment too, Augustine 12.
it is worth the while to take a view of each; his testimony touching the Lords
day is plain. Vos in dic quem dicunt Solis, solemn colitis; ficut autem nos
cundem diom Dominicum dicimus, in eo quod non solemn sed Resurrectionem Domini
veneramur. Contra Faust. Manich. lib. 18. cap. 5.
You says he, (speaking to the Manichees) on the day called Sunday worship the
Sun; but we call the same day the Lords day, because therein we honor not the
Sun, but the Lords Resurrection, and how sound his judgment was in the
Doctrine of the Christian Sabbath, appears by that which he speaks of the
divine Authority of it; he assigns this as the reason, why it is called the
Lords day, Per Christum Factus est Dies Dominicus, Ep. 86.
because (as it is in the Psalm) the Lord has made it; and it was made the
Lords day by Christ Jesus the Lord: And that upon the occasion of his
Resurrection, as he tells us twice over; Dies Dominicus Christi Resurrectione
sacratus est. De Cir. Dei and Ep. 119. ad Januar.
The Lords day was consecrated (says he) by the Lords Resurrection; and
concerning the Jews Sabbath he is as plain and peremptory, quisque illus diem
observat tanquam litera sonat, carnaliter sapit; who ever keeps that day as the
letter sounds, he savoureth of the flesh: And again, Christ's doctrine is the
same with Moses's concerning the Sabbath, but the time or day is different: It
were easy, if it were not needless to add any more, here is a complete Jury
already, yet let it not be thought superfluous, if one Witness more be called
in.

Eusebius by name, Eusebius 13.
whose Testimony concerning the universal observation of the Lords day all the
Christian world over is worthy to be filed. We have it toward the end of his
Oration of the praises of Constantine where magnifying Christ above all the
gods and grandees of the Heathens, he speaks thus; (...).
Who (of all the gods or Heroes of the Gentiles) has prescribed to all the
Inhabitants of the world by sea and land, that coming together into one place,
every week they should celebrate as Festival the Lords day; and appointed that
as they feed their bodies with food, so they should refresh their souls with
divine instruction? Thus he testifies the Observation of the Lords day all the
world over, and that by theh appointment of Christ. But does he not also tell
us of some (as the Ebionites) who had a religious esteem of the
Saturday-Sabbath still, and accordingly kept both days? Yes, but he writes them
down in the black Book, among the Heretics of that age, and so does Epiphanius
too. Haeres. 30. Let us a little attend Eusebius in his Historical description
of these Heretics, he observes, that their name was given them from the Hebrew
word (...) which signifies poor, Lib 3. c. (...).
because of the poverty of their understandings; (...).
the men being very silly, and their Heresy very senceless; for they did
(says he) entertain very mean and poor thoughts and opinions of Christ,
holding that he was but a mere (...).
and a common man. Observe it well, The high opinion they had of the
Saturday-Sabbath, was founded upon a low opinion of Jesus Christ, I wish the
new Ebionites of this age do not still build upon the same foundation. Could
men but see the Godhead and glory of Christ through the veil of his flesh, me
thinks the change of the Sabbath should be no such paradox to them; especially
to such as have felt his divine power in the change of their hearts. But to
close all, let us briefly examine the opposite authorities produced in favor
of this Ebionitish error.

The first is Clemens Romanus, or he that writ the constitutions called
Apostolical, who is thus presented in great pomp by our Antagonist. That
blessed Clement (says he) whose name is written in the book of life, that
elect vessel speaks thus; Let us keep holy the Sabbath in memory of the
Creation, and the Lords day in memory of Christ's Resurrection. lib. 7. c. 24.

The Author of those Constitutions was not that blessed Clement mentioned by
Paul, but some bastard Clement of a later extraction, as our learned Dr. Fulk
tells the Remish Annotators. It Is true, the Epistle of Clement to the
Corinthians is generally repoted the Legitimate issue of that elect vessel. But
let not this Author be angry, if I let the reader see his Legal-demain in
ascribing the book of Constitutions to the same Clement, which none but Papists
do, our Vide Chmenis de lectione patrum and Perkins to Demont. Praep. of the
ptobl.
Protestant writers I am sure are of another mind. It Is a pitiful forlorn
cause that flies so often for sanctuary to the Bulwarks of Popery. But,

If he will needs build upon the authority of these constitutions; let him take
what follows in the same book, Hebdomas una est insignis and annus septimus,
and mensis septimus and Sabbatum etc. iis omnibus praestat Dies Dominious
Constable. lib. 7 c. 36.
and much good may it do him. Por chapter 36. this elect vessel (as he calls him)
prefers the Lords day before the Jews Sabbath, and all other Jewish
Festivities whatsoever, and herein he concurred with the rest of the ancients;
whereas his Doctrine about the seventh day was but one Doctors opinion.

The next Testimony objected against us, is that of Eusebius; who reports a
decree of Constantine the Emperor to establish the Lords day as the great
holy day; presumptuous decree. Year Antichrist prevailed with Constamine (as
he would make silly people believe) to change the Sabbath time into the first
day. Page 113.

The Lord rebuke thee thou false tongue! Constantine even Christ himself, and
his holy Apostles, we have I think made good by Scripture-Argument, and that
this change was visible in the Church's practice long before Constuntine was
born, we have manifestly proved by the testimony of the most ancient Fathers
and eminent Martyrs. What if the renowned Emperor Constantine made a decree to
establish the Lords day? Was he therefore the Author of the day or of the
change? Sozomen tells us, that this Christian Emperor (as a tender Nursing
Father to the Church of Christ) did also by a public Edict establish the
Christian religion in all his dominions. Sozomen ib. 1. chapter 7.
But will any man (in his right wits) draw such a crack-braind Conclusion from
hence; viz. That therefore Constantine was the Author of the Christian
Religion? Understand (presumptuous man) that as the Christian religion was
professed, so the Christian Sabbath was practiced when there was no Christian
Magistrate in the world, and that all the Christian world over, long before
Constantines time. Which one would think were enough to put to silence lying
lips.

O, and Dr. Hen in tell us, that in the Aethiopick Churches both days are
still observed.

True, Heylin I am sure does) that both days are observed as Sabbaths, and
accordingly called. For they call the Saturday the Jews Sabbath, and the Lords
day the Christian Sabbath; so that what ever their practice be, It Is none of
their pinciples, that the Saturday-Sabbath is the Christian Sabbath And as for
their practice; it is little to be regarded, considering their corruption: For,
together with the Saturday-Sabbath, they observe Mr. Breerwoods inquiries
circumcision too on the eighth day, with many other Jewish and Antichristian
customs. Blessed be God, for that better light which shines in the Churches of
Europe. The testimonies taken out of Socrates do only prove, that in his time
(namely 400 years after Christ) some Churches did meet together and break bread
on the old Sabbath. Which we deny not; only we say, that the Lords day had still
the pre-eminence and that in four things, as learned Dr. Young has observed.

1. That the Saturday-Sabbath was never the day of solemn assemblies in all
Churches; for the constom of holding assemblies on that day never obtained in
the Churches of Rome and Alexandria, as Sozomon testifies. lib. 7. c. 19.
Whereas all Churches had their Church-meetings on the Lords day, not one
excepted.

2. The Saturday or old Sabbath was never kept as a solemn Festival; for in
many Churches it was a weekly Fasting-day, and once a year in all Churches
namely Easter-Eve, Constit. lib. 7. c. 24. and lib. 5. c. 15.
being the day of Christ's greatest abasement, while he lay in the grave, and
under the sorrows of death; whereas every Lords day throughout the year was
held a solemn Festival, Constit. lib. 7. c. 31.

3. All Ordinances were never administered with that uniformity on the old
Sabbath as on the Lords day, August. ep. 118. Socrates lib 5. c. 22.
as the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, which in the purest Churches was
appropriate to the Lords day, which was therefore called the day of bread, as
we noted before. Athan. Apol. 2.
Hence that memorable passage of Athanasius, who being accused for Breaking a
Communion-cup clears himself thus, That time instanced by his accusers was no
Communion-time, for it was not the Lords day.

4. Their conventions on the old Sabbath were ever arbitrary, not urged as of
necessity; unless by Ebion and his followers, who were therefore condemned, as
Heretics. But the observation of the Lords day was ever held a Christian duty;
and never were any stigmatized with that black brand of Heresy for observing
of it; nay, it was the badge of Christianity, I am a Christian, I dare not
intermit it, to all these I may add.

5. The old Sabbath was never the Christian Sabbath or day of rest, but a
working-day. So in Ignatius's time, Anno 314.
he counseled Christians to work upon it, and the Council of Laodicea made a
decree to this purpose, That Christians ought not to Judaize and to rest from
work on the Sabbath Day, but to prefer the Lords day before it, and to rest
thereon from labor. In which words as Mr. Cawdrey well observes, this Synod
did but expound the sentence of of holy Ignatius. I might instance also the
Council at Eliberis, Carthage, Arragon, Mascon, Chalons and other both Fathers,
Councills and Christian Emperors; but others have prevented me in this kind of
Antiquity. So much for the fourth Position.

POSITION V. That the Lords day or first day of the week (commonly called
Sunday) is the Christian Sabbath, or day of holy rest.
THis does naturally result from the premises. For the day being changed, and
yet the law concerning the Sabbath continued and established, the new day must
needs be a day of rest, as it rests on the authority and morality of the fourth
Commandment, and as it succeeds the old day in Sabbath-solemnity. Yet it is not
so much the name as the thing that I contend for; For although I am fully
convinced, that as our spiritual exercises are called Sacrifices, because they
succeed in the place of the Jews Sacrifices, so, and much more significantly,
may our Lords day be termed Sabbath, because it Succeeds I mean not in any
ceremonious respect, but in relation to the fourth Commandment.
succeeds in the place of the Jews Sabbath; yet I had rather insist upon the
thing than the name, because the one being proved the other cannot well be
denied. No rational man will stick at nominal respect where there is a real
right to it. A name of rest will be easily granted due to a day of rest, now
that the Lords day is without dispute a day of rest, appears thus. Cum de re
constat propier quam vorba dicuntur, de verbis non debore contendi, etc.
August. cont. Acad. l. 3. c. 13.


First, As it is the day of our Redeemers rest from his painful work of
Redemption, his rising from the dead was his resting from his work. By his
Resurrection this day he entered into his rest; for hereby (as was said before)
he entered into his glory; which will further appear by comparing two texts
together; viz. John 7.39. with John 20.22. The first tells us, That the spirit
was not yet given because Jesus was not yet glorified; therefore when the
Spirit was given surely then Christ was glorified. Now the other Text informs
us, That upon the day of Christ's Resurrection the Spirit was given, For he
breathed on them and said, Receive the Holy Ghost. Now therefore undoubtedly
the Lord of glory was crowned with glory; not that he entered into the place of
rest and glory upon the day of his Resurrection, but into the state of rest and
glory; the place is but accidental to the state; that which I modestly
propounded to further inquiry, page 128. Namely, Whether Christ did not locally
ascend into Heaven on the very day of his Resurrection; has been since
concluded, and resolved in the Negative by a Reverend Brother from that Text of
Scripture, Hebr. 9 12. by his own blood he entered once into the Holy place.
Which seems to a gue strongly, that our blessed High Priest entered once; and
but once into Heaven. To which I do now freely subscribe, Errare possum,
Haereticus esse nolo.

Secondly, The Lords day is a day of Religious Assemblies for solemn weekly
worship, therefore also a day of religious rest from civil and secular
employments. Since it is impossible for men to meet together about solemn
Worship, and at the same time to follow their worldly occasions. observed as
Sabbaths; as the Feast of unleavened bread. Deuteronomy. 16.8.
On the seventh day shall be a solemn Assembly to the Lord thy God: thou sahlt
do not work therein. And as the seventh or last, so also the first day of that
Feast was to be a day of rest, because a day of Convocation; On the first day
shall be a holy convocation, ye shall do no servile work therein, says the
Lord. Numb. 28.17, 18.
Now that first day of unleavened bread (being a memorial of their Redemption
from Egypt) was typical of our Christian Sabbath, as was noted before. And
besides, there being a moral equity in Gods argument, that a day of holy
Worship and holy Convocations must be a day of rest, it is as applicable to the
Lords day as ever it was to any day, for we have abundantly proved, that this
is a holy Convocation-day, and it is a good note that of Mr. Ainsworth on Deuteronomy.
16.8. That the Hebrew word Gnat-sereth, which we translate, solemn Assemblies,
does also signify restraint from labor, whereby the Holy Ghost would teach
us, that Holy days set apart for solemn assemblies must be days of holy rest
and restraint from work. Such is the Lords day to us Christians, and no other
day but that, a day of solemn Assembly it is, and has bin from the Apostles
days till now, yea a day of solemn Worship, therefore a day of rest or Sabbath
day, yea a day of solemn weekly worship, therefore the undoubted Sabbath of the
fourth Commandment, which is the standing rule for a day of weekly worship, and
but a day ordinarily; for the Commandment numbers out six days in the week for
worldly business, As when a man makes two Wills, the last does ipso facto make
void the first, although there be no express clause to signify the repeal or
revocation.
and one for religious exercises, neither more nor less. So that supposing
there were no repeal of the last day of the week, yet the first day being
instituted by Divine Authority, makes void the last, and takes possession of
its place by the warrant of the Divine Precept it self.

Again, as the Ministry and the Sacraments appointed by Christ are used by
virtue of the second Commandment; so the day appointed by Christ must be
observed by virtue of the fourth Commandment: because this is the general scope
both of the second and fourth Commandment, that we must observe all the
Institutions of God from time to time.

I might argue further from that prophetical speech of our Savior, Matthew.
24.20. where he presignifies to his Disciples, that there should be a Sabbath
in force long after his death, at such time as the old Seventh-day Sabbath was
either quite out of doors, or out of date at least: therefore he spoke of the
Christian Sabbath which we are obliged both by Law and Gospel to observe.

The Ancients indeed do seldom apply the title of Sabbath to the Lords day, yet
sometimes they do. They were but too jealous of Judaizing in this particular.
Orat. in Christi Resurrect. Ex illo Sabbato praesens hoc Sabbatum agnosce, etc.
Sic qu^ que rite sanctificamus Sabbatum Domini Dicente Domino omne ^pus etc.
Tract. de tempore, 152.
Gregory Nyssen is express, for having spoken of the old Sabbath, he presently
adds, from that Sabbath acknowledge thou this present Sabbath (the Lords day)
this day of rest, which God has blessed above other days: For in this the only
begotten Son of God did truly rest from all his works. So also Austin (or he
that writ the Book De tempore) having pleaded the due celebration of the Lords
day, he concludes (with respect to the fourth Commandment concerning the
Sabbath) so do we rightly sanctify the Sabbath of the Lord, as the Lord has
said, In it thou shall do no work. Hence that Royal Edict of Charles the Great
published in the year 789. We ordain (says he) according as it is commanded in
the Law of God, that no man do servile work on the Lords day; To which may be
added the decree of King Edgar, expressly stiling the Lords day the Sabbath day;
Diem Sabbati ab ipsa Die Saturni hora pomeridiara tertia usque in Lunaris diei
dilaculum. festum agitari.
taking order that the Sabbath should be celebrated from Saturday three a clock
in the afternoon till Monday morning at break of day; and this was in the year
of Christ 959. seven hundred years ago, better Antiquity than any can be
produced, or so much as pretended against this appellation: If it be objected,
That this was in times of Popery: I answer, That even since the Reformation,
the Lords day has been frequently called by the name Sabbath: Those precious
but persecuted Saints, To all these might be added the Church of England, Can.
70. So Hom. of time and place of prayer.
the Waldenses in a Catechism of theirs teach their children to call it by this
name: And the holy Martyr Bp Hooper in his treatise on the ten Commandments
uses the same Dialect, some scores more might be reckoned, if need were. But
leaving these Authors, I return to the Objector, who sets all his wits a work
to prove the Lords day a working day, most sinfully and shamefully abusing the
Scriptures to this purpose. I am loath to stain my Paper with his profane
Sophisms, yet lest his ignorant and erroneous Proselites should take them for
unanswerable Arguments. I shall briefly sum up all into one Objection and
return several answers to it.

Object. T.T. p. 14. of his Pamphlet.
In stead of that honor put upon the first day of the week: First, The Father
wrought upon it, Genesis 1. and therefore we should be his followers as dear
children, Ephesians. 5.1.

Secondly, The son traveled upon it, Luke 24.13, 15. And he has given us an
example that we should do as he has done, John 13.15.

Thirdly, The Saints cast their accounts upon it, 1 Cor. 16.2. And so may we.

Thus he quotes Scripture to as good purpose as that Arch Sophister did, Matthew.
4 But we shall answer him soberly though he deserve it not.

Answ. 1. That which was the Fathers working-day at the Worlds Creation, was
the Sons Rest day from the work of Redemption, and we must not be sollowers of
God in contradiction to Christ; or oppose the works of God against the Word of
God, lest in stead of followers, as dear children, we be found fighters against
him, as desperate enemies; the first day of the week was a common day when it
was made at first ( Genesis 1.) but since it is made again, and made a solemn day,
a day of holy worship ( Psalm. 118.24) therefore no working day now, but to such
as have no God to worship, or no hearts to worship him. God the Father wrought
upon the first day of the week, yet Israel must not work on this day, once a
year at least; Viz. on the day of unleavened bread, as often as it fell on this
day, Numb. 23.18. why? because it was a day of holy Convocation, and so is
every first day of the week to us; which (as some conceive) the Holy Ghost
foretold long since by the Prophet Ezekiel saying, Ezekiel. 43.27.
It shall be that upon the eight day and so forward, the Priests shall make
your burnt offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings, or thank
offerings; and I will accept you, says the Lord; it is a clear prophecy of
Gospel Times, if not the special time of Gospelworship, upon the eighth day,
i.e. the first day of the week.

Answ. 2. Touching our Saviors traveling this day, I have answered before:
That it was without labor (such as is the motion of immortal and glorified
bodies) and therefore no President for us, who dwell in these corruptible
houses of clay: And I add moreover, That Christ's walking with his Disciples
that day was no more an impeachment to the holy rest of the first day, than the
Fathers working every day to the Sabbatical rest of the seventh day: It Is our
Saviors own Argument, (in answer to a like objection) My Father works
hitherto and I work: John 5.17.
That I termed this journey to Emmaus [a Sabbath Days journey] was in reference
to the discourse by the way, not the length of the way: To which upon second
thoughts I add this further answer, That it is very uncertain, whether Christ
traveled all the way on foot to Emmaus, and back again: The Scripture is
silent, and therefore we may not speak. The Objector indeed has it often up,
That Christ traveled fifteen miles on his Resurrection-day: but he speaks
without Book, and can never prove it by Scripture, for he might overtake the
two Disciples near Emmaus, and how he came there we read not, neither can we
tell how he conveyed himself back again to Jerusalem. Guesses and conjectures
are no arguments.

Answ. 3. That the Saints cast their accounts on this day, I utterly deny, we
have nothing but the bold and bare word of the Objector to prove it, and let
him not blame us, if we look not upon him, as such a Pythagoras, that his Ipse
dixit should carry it.

More might be added in pursuance and prosecution of this Thesis (that the
Lords day is the Christian Sabbath) but Mr. Cawdrey, Mr. Bernard, Mr. Ley, and
sundry others have spared me this labor.

POSITION VI. That the Sabbath begins in the Morning.
THis Position has been also handled and proved abundantly by others, chiefly
by Mr. Cawdrey, and Mr. Pynchon, whose Arguments I judge unanswerable. It Is to
me an unquestionable conclusion, That the Sabbath being a natural day
consisting of 24 hours, it must begin and end as the natural day it self does.
Now in Scripture-account the natural day begins and ends at or about midnight,
that it begins in the dark night, is evident from that forementioned place,
Mark 1.35. Where we read of our Saviors rising in the morning a great while
before day; or while it was deep in the night. Hence also the evening of the
natural day is reckoned from about noon or midday, Matthew. 14.13. When the
evening was come the Disciples came to Christ, The Scripture speaks of two
evenings. Exodus 30.8. Chap. 16.12.
about sending away the multitude to seek their dinner in the Villages, and
that this was not the sun-set-evening is clear; for after the multitude had
dined and were dismissed, we read of another evening, v. 23. so that the former
evening (all circumstances considered) must needs be about midday, therefore
it must have a morning answerable to it, which must necessarily begin about
midnight, when the Jonah 4.7.
morning-Sun begins to ascend; as it does from midnight till midday, or Prove.
4.18.
perfect day, and then it declines again, and the Jer. 6.4.
shadows begin to be stretched out (called the shadows of the evening) till
they fall into the darkness of the night, which is deepest at midnight.

Against those that begin the natural day, and so the Sabbath at Sunset
evening, we may object this, (which they can never answer) That by their
reckoning, Christ must rise from the dead the second, not the third day after
his burial. For it is clear that he was not buried or enclosed in the heart of
the earth, till after the sunset evening. Matthew. 27.57. Mark 15.42.
For Joseph went not to Pilate to beg the body, till the even was come; namely,
the later evening which begins at Sunset, and after this, there were many
things to be done before the blessed body of Christ was laid in the Sepulcher.
As the Mark 15.46.
buying of fine linen to wrap it in, besides the imbalming or perfuming it
with John 19.40.
spices and odours, as the manner of the Jews was to bury. This (together with
other Funeral rites) took up some time, so that it must needs be after Sunset
before this sad Funeral was finished. Now if the Sabbath had begun with the
Sunset evening, Christ's Resurrection-day being the morrow after the Sabbath,
could be but the second day; whereas it is a great Article of our faith,
grounded upon the 1 Cor. 15.4.
Scriptures, That Christ rose from the dead the third day, to fulfill the type
of Jonas.

Further, however the Jews in later times begun their Sabbath at evening (as we
grant they did) superstitiously reckoning their preparation-time part of their
Sabbath-time, yet it is very considerable, that the Holy Ghost keeps a contrary
account, stating the end of the Sabbath toward the dawning of the day
following: as Matthew. 28.1. in the end of the Sabbath which dawned toward the
first day of the week: Now if the Sabbath ended at the dawning toward the next
day, then it must needs begin about the same time the day before, and as the
old Sabbath began and ended in Gods account, so must the Lords day.

In a word, how preposterous is it and incongruous both to Scripture and nature
to begin the day at evening? how ill does this agree with those Texts of
Scripture, that make the morning the first part of the day, and evening the
last? The Angels we know are called Job 38.7.
morning stars, not evening start, because they were created in the beginning
of the Creation, and the days of the Gospel are called Zech. 14.7.
evening (in the evening it shall be light) because they are the last days;
according to the common Dialect of Scripture, Psalm. 5.3. Psalm. 143.8 Genesis 49.27.
morning time is first, evening last, and evening never signifies early but
late, because it is the later part of the day. But others have sufficiently
cleared this truth already, to add any more were but to light a candle to the
Sun. A word or two in answer to the Objections, and we have done.

First, T. T. p. 56.
We are told that Genesis 1. the day began at evening, for the darkness went
before the light, and this darkness with the ensuing light (says the Objector)
made the first day, and so the second, third, fourth, etc.

This is a mere mistake; Genesis 1. was the evening or night of the first day,
that darkness upon the face of the deep (for ought appears to the contrary)
lasted not longer than a moment; the night of the first day was that which
followed the light, after God had separated the light which he called day, from
the darkness which he called night; to object the order of the words is vain,
Moses himself takes off that Objection by inverting that order in the following
words, for v. 4. he puts light before darkness, and day before night.

The Ceremonial Sabbaths (because honored as Sabbaths) were to begin at even,
as it is said, From even to even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath.

This law concerned only the day of atonement, Joel 1.13. and 2.16.
sleep as well as food; and this is so far from proving that their weekly
Sabbath began at even, that to me it is a good Argument to prove the contrary,
for it looks like a particular exception from a general rule; and to specify
the beginning of this extraordinary Sabbath at Even had been needless, if their
ordinary Sabbaths had begun at the same time.

Nehemiah caused Jerusalems gates to be shut before the Sabbath, even while the
declining Sun cast some obscurity on the city gates. Neh. 13.^9.


This was to prevent the profanation of the Sabbath the next day, Nebemiahs
time, the Sabbath did not begin in the evening; otherwise (as Mr. C. notes) he
had done it not before, but in the Sabbath.

The precious women having attended our Savior to his Sepulcher, returned and
prepared spices and ointments, and rested the Sabbath according to the
Commandment.

This (as we said before) was after the sunset evening besides the holy Women
did not forbear to anoint the body of Christ that evening, because of the
weekly Sabbath, John 19.31.
or rather the Jews preparation to it; of which we read John 19.42. We are
sure, Mark 16.2.
they came not to anoint him till the morning of the Resurrection-day; and it
may be they stayed so long in conscience of the Sabbath, which was not ended
till the morning after midnight; therefore it is most likely our Lord had
taught them that the Sabbath begins and ends in the morning; if it had ended at
Sunset, we may rationally think, they had visited the Sepulcher before they
slept that night, and not have put it off till the next morning. As for those
multiplied Scriptures that call for evening-sacrifices, Psalm. 92 1. Isai.
30.29, they make as much for us, as for him; if not more: Since as we count the
after-evening from sunset till midnight a part of the Sabbath, and spend it
(our waking hours at least) in Sabbath-duties, repetition, meditation, prayer
and praise; so we hold a preparation necessary the evening before. Of which in
the next Position.

POSITION VII. The Lords Day must be kept holy to the Lord.
THe very appellation of it together with the Observation of the Apostles and
Primitive Christians is sufficient proof of this. It Is a pious and ponderous
speech of a late worthy Writer, Dr. Cheynels Treatise of the Blessed Trinity,
p. 402.
The approved practice of the primitive Christians declares the doctrine of the
Apostles, and the doctrine of the Apostles shows what was the command of Christ
the Lord of the Sabbath concerning the sanctification of the first day of the
week, which is therefore called the Lords day, and the Christian Sabbath. If it
be the Lords day (as we have proved) then let it be consecrated to the Lord as
holy and honorable, Isai. 58.13.
even to that Lord whose name it bears, to him, I say, who has on his vesture
and on his thigh a name written, Rev. 19.16.
King of kings, and Lord of Lords; even the Lord of glory, a Lord as far above
the greatest lords on earth, as they are above their meanest Subjects. It Is the
Lords day and therefore the Lords due; let us render to Christ the things that
are Christ's: Why did the Lord make this day, but that all his faithful subjects
and servants should keep it, and keep it holy to him that made it? O let the
law of the living God overawe our Consciences, which is still in force for a
day of weekly worship at his appointment, and such we have proved the Lords day
to be. More Arguments might be produced, But those already urged are sufficient
to secure this truth from the dread of that downfall threatened by the
Adversary. The Devil and his agents may puff at the Christian Sabbath, but
confident I am, they shall as soon blow out the Sun with a pair of bellows, as
totally extinguish this Ordinance of Christ: the chief ground of my confidence
is the Word of God, upon which it is founded; and next to that the writings of
the ancients, so many in several Countries, and several ages bearing witness as
one man to this Christian cause, with whom although I would be loath to err in
any thing, yet do I the less mistrust my self to err, while I keep them
company, and do with more confidence look an adversary in the face, when my
quiver is full of their Testimonies, as a late Author speaks on another
occasion. To draw to a Conclusion, from Doctrinal Positions about the Christian
Sabbath, we shall descend to some practical Directions; I cannot stand to speak
fully and largely to the duties of the day, neither need I; other Treatises
have done it already as Mr. Sprints, Mr. Shepherds, Dr. Gouges, but especially
Mr. Philip Goodwins; only for the help of those that want those excellent
helps, I shall hint a few things, and commit all to the blessing of him whose
day and honor I have argued and contended for.

Briefly, the practice of the Christian-Sabbath stands chiefly in two things,
viz. In preparation to it, and sanctification of it.

1. There must be solemn and serious preparation the evening before, to get our
hearts into a Sabbath frame, this the Lord calls for in the very front of the
Commandment, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy, remember it before it
comes, that you may keep it holy when it comes; this word [Remember] should be
as a bell to toll us in from our Shops and Farms, to our Chambers and Closets,
there to commune with our own hearts, to cast up our spiritual accounts, to
call over our wants, and (if we have hearts) to weep over our week day sins,
and stir up our selves to take hold of Christ, that we may make peace with God,
they that have any acquaintance with heartwork, find it hard to have to do with
a dusty world, full of sins and snares, and not be defiled or entangled with
it; earthly things are apt to leave a tincture upon the most holy and heavenly
hearts: There must therefore be a rubbing off this rust of the world, a washing
these dirty hearts and hands before we are fit to draw nigh to God in solemn
Worship; Exodus 19.14.
What were those Ceremonial washings of old, but emblematical predictions and
documents of preparation to Gospel Worship? and (if I mistake not) something to
this purpose is prophesied concerning the purest times and Churches in these
later days. Rev. 15.2, 3.
Revel. 15. We read of those that had gotten the victory over the Beast and his
Image, i. e. those that had shaken off the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny and
Superstition, standing upon a sea of glass with the harps of God in their
hands; those harps in their hands speak them in a posture of public worship.
But what means their standing upon a sea of glass? Why among other things, I
conceive, it alludes to that Laver or 1 Kings 7.23.
sea in Solomon's Temple, in which the the Priests were wont to 2 Chronicles. 4.6.
wash when they went to worship, and it may teach us thus much, that the people
of God under the Gospel, as well as they under the Law, must wash before they
worship, there must be some preparation.

Secondly, the sanctification of the Sabbath follows, and this also consists in
two things. Holy rest, and holy work. First, we must keep it as a day of holy
rest to the Lord, resting from our own works, our own words, and our own
thoughts.

1. We are bound upon the Lords day to rest and cease from our own works,
whether works of labor, or works of pleasure, if I may so distinguish. The
Lords day must neither be our working-day, nor our play-day; both these are
prohibited by the letter of the fourth Commandment, and the analogy of that
Text which seems to be written as a Commentary upon the Commandment, Isai.
58.13, 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure
on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honorable, and shall honor him; not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine
own pleasure, nor speaking thy own words, etc. In which words we have the
lively Picture and Pourtraiture of a true Sabbath, in both parts of it; it must
be celebrated with rest from our own ways, works, words, pleasures, and this
rest must be accompanied, with a spiritual rejoicing in God, and delight in his
Sabbath, arising from an honorable esteem of the day, considering whose day it
is, namely, the Lords. Now the scope of this Text is as applicable to our
Christian Sabbath as ever it was to the Jews Sabbath, ours being first, a day
of holy rejoicing in the Lord as well as theirs, Psalm. 118.24. Secondly, a day
which has the Lord for its author as well as theirs. Thirdly, a day every whit
as honorable as theirs, yea a degree above it, being instituted upon a more
noble account, Viz. The most gracious and glorious work of Redemption.
Fourthly, a day in all respects as holy as theirs, holy I mean, in respect of
separation and dedication to holy duties, as prayer, preaching, breaking of
bread, praise and thanksgiving, Acts 2.1. and 20.7. Psalm. 118.27, 28. Therefore
it must be kept with rest from accustomed labor and pleasure, as well as
theirs, and that by virtue of the fourth Commandment, which requires the
sanctifying of one day in seven of divine appointment as a Sabbath, with rest
from servile works, and secular employments. And let it be further considered,
both the fourth Commandment and the Prophet Isaiah in commenting upon it, do
first and chiefly call for sanctity; Secondarily, for rest: First, Remember the
Sabbath to sanctify it, then, Thou shall do no work. Sanctification is
required as the end, cessation from labor as the means; the one as principal,
the other as accessory. Now both Prophets and Apostles have marked out the Lords
day as a holy day, to be spent in holy duties of solemn worship, and that
weekly; therefore by the Law of God and nature we are bound to keep it as a day
of weekly rest, otherwise we separate the end from the means, which cannot be;
rest from servile work being an inseparable adjunct to a day of solemn worship:
What then shall we say to those that afterwarning make the Lords day either a
common working-day, or a sporting day? the former I may fitly call the Devils
workmen, who will one day pay them their wages; the other the flesh's Bondmen
whose pleasure in the end will prove torment without end. The Lord awaken both
to repentance better then that of Esau, whose sin (of the two) is greater then
his, Hebr. 12.16.
there are profane Esau's under the Gospel, and they are the worst of Esau's;
there is also a sin called Romans 2.22.
Sacrilege condemned in the Gospel, and Sabbath-breaking is very like it; when
sinners lay sacrilegious hands upon that which is consecrated to the Lord, for
a sin much like to which Ananias and his wife were once stricken with sudden
death, and how many such dreadful strokes have been felt and heard in these
later days? I shall not repeat what has been already committed to record by
others. Mr. Bernard, Mr. Byfield and sundry others have been serious observers
of Gods heavy hand in this kind. I could say something of what I have seen with
my own eyes, and heard with my own ears. But I shall forbear, Numb. 10.1, 2.
when men are struck dead in the very act of their sin, as Vzzah in touching
the Ark, Nadab and Abihu in offering strange fire, when the sin and the
judgment meet together, and do one point at the other, surely Gods hand is not
to be slighted. Mr. Byfield has related many such tremendous strokes upon those
that have presumed to work on the Lords day, and ended their lives and their
work together; having no more respit between their sin and their execution [or
expiration] then with trembling lips to tell others the secret reflections of
their own guilty Consciences, and how many Malefactors have we heard at their
execution, bewailing their profanation of the Lords day, as the leading-cause
of all their mischiefs and miseries? Now the Conscience of the sinner smarting
under Gods revengeful rod is many times like a finger to point out the sin for
which God smites, as we see in the case of Judges 1.7, 8.
Adonibezek. To be short, the exemplary judgments of God against this sin of
Sabbath-breaking, falling in so great variety, and happening so thick together
in many places, do call aloud to the inhabitants of the earth to Isai. 26.9, 10.
learn righteousness; and it is doubtless our duty with humble reverence, and
holy awfulness of the divine Majesty soberly to observe and improve them,
inadvertency of Gods judiciary proceedings is a Psalm. 28.5. and 10.4, 5. Isai.
5.12.
sin frequently condemned in Scripture, and severely threatened. Reader, if
neither Scripture-Arguments, nor exemplary judgments will reclaim thee from
violation of the Lords day, proceed on in thy profaneness still; it may be the
Lord will make thee the next example, to teach others what thou will not learn
thy self.

Something might also be added from Christian experience, it is observable, that
when the Spirit comes effectually to convince of sin, commonly one of the first
sins which the eye of enlightened Conscience fixes upon, is the neglect of the
Lords day, and (conviction ending in conversion) one of the first duties which
the soul comes seriously to close withal is the strict observing of the Lords
day, grace works much this way, and does exceedingly dispose the heart to this
duty; for which I dare appeal to the Consciences of many thousand living
Witnesses.

Add to this the spiritual profit and sensible growth of grace, with the sweet
comfort and final peace experienced this way. Tell me, where does true Religion
thrive better, and the power of godliness flourish and prosper more than in
Families, Cities Countries and Kingdoms where the Lords day is duly observed?
on the contrary, where does superstition, irreligion, Atheism and profaneness
abound more than where this day is neglected and vilified? it is a serious
Observation of a learned Dr. Hakewils discourse of the Institution, dignity,
and end of the Lords day.
Author, concerning the ingress and progress of Popery in former times: Namely,
That after-ages much degenerating from the simplicity of the Primitive times,
so infinitely multiplied and magnified their holy days beyond all measure and
reason, that the Lords day began to be slighted, and accounted with many a
common Holy Day, perchance inferior to some of their Saints days; which no
doubt was a special occasion of that thick cloud of Superstition, which
afterward overshadowed the face of the Church; and in appearance the reducing
of this day to its original honor would prove the readiest means to restore
the Church again to her original luster and beauty even in those places where
that cloud is not yet dispelled, etc. But this by the way.

Secondly, In order to the sanctifying of the Lords day, we must cease not only
from doing our own works, but from speaking our own words. Good reason, for it
is none of our own day, therefore let none say Our tongue is our own on this
day. Christian, if thou can not speak religiously on the Lords day, learn to
speak sparingly; rather be silent, then sinful in thy speeches. Valerius
Maximus reports of Zenocrates, that being in company with some who used ill
language he was very mute; and being asked the reason, he replied, It has
often repented me that I have spoken, never that I have held my peace. Thus
much the Scripture teaches us, That in the multitude of words there wants not
sin therefore Prove. 17.27, 28.
he that spares his words is wise. Indeed if a man speak of heavenly things on
the Lords holy day he may with Paul continue his discourse till midnight, and
never speak too much; but of earthly things we cannot speak too little; Oh that
our hearts and lips were more heavenly on the Lords day, that there might be
more sprinklings of grace and heaven in all our Sabbath Day discourses! how
much were it to be wished that on this day Christians would speak less of what
they saw, more of what they heard in the public assemblies? Alas! should the
Lord put that Question to many Christians now, which once he did on this day to
the two Disciples going to Emmaus; What manner of communication is this that ye
have one with another? how would it put some thousands to the blush, who have
nothing but earth, or froth in their mouths?

Thirdly, we must also lay a charge upon our hearts not to think our own
thoughts on the Lords day. Romans 7.14.
For the Law of God is spiritual, and binds the heart from thinking, as well
as the tongue from speaking, or the hand from working. Besides what vile
hypocrisy is it to lay a restraint upon our words and actions, when in the
mean time we give scope and liberty to our thoughts to wander after a thousand
vanities? this is just like painted Sepulchers, fair without, but full of
rottenness, and dead men's bones within. Further, our own vain and worldly
thoughts are great distractions and obstructions to the duties of the day,
Exodus 8.24.
like that plague of flies in Egypt, which was so vexatious that they could
neither work, nor eat, nor drink, and 10.12.
but the Flies molested them. Such a plague is a worldly heart on the Lords
day, a man can neither pray, nor hear, nor meditate, but earthly thoughts
pester and disturb him; yea, like that plague of Locusts that devoured all;
earthly thoughts eat up all the pleasant fruit of Sabbaths and Sermons; Luke
8.14.
yea like thorns they choke the very seed of the Word and render it
unprofitable: How highly does it concern us therefore on the Lords day
especially to look to our hearts? Now if ever Solomon's counsel is seasonable,
Prove. 4.23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, Or, Cum omni custodia, with all keeping, as
some read it; set guards and double guards upon it, for as Bernard truly
speaks, Cord nihil fugacius, Nothing is more flitting then the heart of man;
it is a wandering Dinah, we had need watch it warily, and check it speedily when
it begins to hanker-after the world: In a word, to cure evil and earthly
thoughts on the Lords day, we should do well to awe our hearts with the
apprehension of Gods all-seeing eye: It Is observable that our Lord appeared to
his servant John upon his own day in a heart-searching-similitude, His eyes
were as a flame of fire, Rev. 1.14.
not only burning in jealousy against sin and sinners, but bright and shining
as the searcher of hearts and tryer of reins, by which title he then also
styled himself. Rev. 2.23.
Consider Christian that on the Lords day especially thy heart lies under the
view of that fiery flaming eye of Christ; therefore let thy thoughts be none
but such as that pure and piercing eye will approve, and if Christ as the
searcher of hearts be not awful to thee, yet me thinks Christ as the judge of
secrets should. O let the terror of that last day work upon our hearts every
Lords day, the seat of the Judge is fitly resembled by a cloud, not a throne of
silver or gold, but a cloud: Rev. 14.14.
Now as we know the clouds are storehouses of refreshing showers, so also of
storms and tempests; and thus doubtless that day of the Lord will be as a day
of refreshing to some, so a stormy day of tempests and terrors to others; and a
great part of the tempest of that day will fall upon the thoughts and hearts of
men, for Eccles. 12. ult.
God will bring every secret thing into judgment; we must be accountable not
only for idle words, but vain thoughts. And thus much of the first thing, we
must keep the Sabbath as a day of rest, but we must not rest in this rest; we
must not make it a Sabbath of idleness, but a Sabbath of holiness; we must not
so much cease from working, as change our work; servile work for soul work,
worldly employments for spiritual exercises: That is the next thing.

2. To our holy rest we must join holy work, and this is either public or
private; something indeed must be done in private before the public, our
closet-devotions and Family, duties common to other days must not he omitted
this day, but rather augmented; their Sacrifices under the Law were Numb. 28.9.
doubled upon the Sabbath Day, and observe it, Exodus 3.7.
their first service was the burning of Incense before the Lord. Matthew. 28.1.
Mark 16.2. John 20.1.
Now prayer is our Incense, let this be our morning exercise in private. Seek
the Lord, O my soul, seek him early, do as Mary Magdalen did, she was early up
to seek him whom her soul loved; she was last at the Cross, and first at the
Sepulcher, in the dawning, while it was yet dark, very early in the morning say
the Evangelists. Oh that our love to Christ could keep pace with hers! Shall we
love the world better than Christ? if we have a journey to go about worldly
concernments we can set out betimes; oh that we were as wise for our souls, as
we are for our bodies! let not sleep (that devourer of time) beguile us of our
golden hours in the morning in which we are freshest and fittest for converse
with God; let the sluggard that sleeps with the Sunbeams in his face remember
that saying of Austin; If the Sun could speak, how roundly might it salute thee
with this reproof? I labored more then thou yesterday, and yet I am risen
before thee to day. But this is too low an Argument, behold the Sun of
righteousness is risen, and he rose early this day, therefore let us not sleep
as do others, but say and sing with the Church, Isai. 26.^.
With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me
will I seek thee early.

Having performed our morning exercises in private how cheerfully should we
repair to the public Assemblies and draw nigh to God in public Ordinances, on
this acceptable day, this season of grace, when Christ sits in State (as one
speaks) scattering treasures of grace amongst hungry and thirsty Saints that
are poor in Spirit, and wait for spiritual alms at the Throne of grace? Psalm.
84.1, 2.
How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea even
faints for the courts of the Lord: My heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God. And again, Psalm 122.1.
I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the Lord. For
the Psalm. 87.2.
Lord loves the gates of Zion more then all the dwellings of Jacob; and most
sweetly the Prophet Isaiah (speaking of Gospel Times) Isai. 2, 1, 2.
Many people shall go and say, Come and let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and
we will walk in his paths. A most lively prediction of our Christian solemn
Assemblies, the select season of which is signified by t he practice of the
Apostles and Primitive Saints to be the first day of the week; on this day they
met to break bread, and Paul preached to them, Acts 20.7. on this day they were
all together. with one accord in prayer, ( Acts 2.1. with chap. 1.2, 4.) and at
these meetings the Scriptures were read by the Apostles command, Tertul. Apol.
cap. 39.
Col. 4.16. 1 These. 5.27. to which may be added singing of Psalms, usual at
their solemn Assemblies, 1 Cor. 14. an Ordinance by which God is much
glorified, and the souls of his people sweetly cheered and refreshed; what
greater act of honor can we do to the great God here on earth then publicly
to praise him in the great Congregation? especially on the Lords day, Psalm.
111.1.
when all the Churches of Christ in the world join consort with us in this
melodious duty? Hebr. 10.25.
Let us not therefore forsake the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is; while we enjoy public Liberties and Ordinances, let us
improve them; we know not how soon the songs of the Temple may be turned into
howlings, and Ichabod may be written upon all our Church-doors, the glory is
departed from Israel; Lam. 1.4, 16.
the ways of Sion de mourn, because none come to her solemn assemblies. The
Lord forbid that ever we should live to see that woeful day, wherein we shall
desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, but shall not see it: Let not
our neglect of the Lords day provoke the Lord to deprive us of it; let us
conscienciously wait upon God in Sabbath-Assemblies and public Ordinances,
lest we be forced (for contempt of the public) to seek our bread in secret
wandering up and down in caves and dens of the earth, destitute, afflicted;
tormented, as we read of some, better than our selves, Heb. 11.38, 39.

Lastly, The public solemnities of the day being ended, what remains but that
we return again to our private exercises? searching the Scriptures concerning
the truths taught in public, as the Acts 17.11.
noble Bereans did; to which we may join Repetition and Conference, to whet the
Word upon one another hearts; let not our souls be weary of Sabbath-work, only
take heed, as of resting in the rest, so also in the work of the day: for what
one truly speaks of duties and actings of grace, [they are good duties and good
graces, but bad Christs] the like may I say of Sabbaths never so well kept,
they are good Sabbaths, but bad Saviors; let our rest and confidence be only
in Christ, and to such as take him for their rest, his work is but recreation,
and so indeed we should esteem it in a spiritual sense; not looking upon it as
a sour task, or a rigid exaction, but calling the Sabbath a delight, we should
keep it accordingly, even the whole day, with the whole man, as a day of
delights to the Lord, being transported beyond flesh and the world, and having
our conversation in heaven, as much as is possible for creatures clothed with
flesh.

To come to a closure, There is a double duty to be performed in private on the
Lords day, which I seriously advise Christians to make Conscience of; namely,
the spiritual duty of meditation, and the celestial duty of praise.

First, how seasonable it is on the Sabbath to meditate, not only on the Word,
but the Works of God, appears from Psalm. 92. which is a Psalm for the
Sabbath Day: How does the Psalmist there search and dive into the wonderful
works of God? Verse. 5. How great are thy works O Lord! and thy thoughts are
very deep. Here we have a large field, works of Creation, and works of
Providence; here our souls may wander from sea to land, See Mr. Baxter Saints
ever-lasting Rest.
from earth to Heaven, from time to eternity; yea walk upon the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and enter into Heaven it self, the Paradise of God: How manifold are thy
works, O Lord, in wisdom have thou made them all! Every creature of God that
we cast our eyes upon this day should be as a flower to feed our Meditations. I
speak of cursory Meditation; or that which is occasional; one special use
whereof is to feed our graces by our senses, and (as we are Christians) to
conduct us to Christ by the view of all creatures and actions; when we look
upon the Sun, it bids us look up to Christ the Sun of righteousness, every star
may mind us of that star of Jacob, that bright and morning star; if we look
upon our houses, Christ is the door; if upon our bodies, he is the head; if
upon our clothes, he is the garment of salvation; if upon our friends and
relations, he is our husband, our friend, our Lord, our Lawgiver, our King; if
we walk, he is the way; if we read, he is the word; if we eat and drink, he is
our food; if we live, Christ is our life: that is, a holy heart may make this
spiritual use of all earthly objects and occasions to contemplate Christ in
them; and if we improve not our senses this way, it is all one as if we were
blind, or brutish.

But besides this, there is a more distinct, deliberate, solemn and set
meditation required on the Lords day; and the work of Redemption being the
occasion of the day, how should our hearts work upon this blessed subject! Come
Christian, call in thy thoughts from all worldly concernments, and contemplate
this rare contrivance of thy Redemption by Jesus Christ; ponder it deeply, get
lively and strong apprehensions of it, that it may leave deep and lasting
impressions upon thy soul; view over the several passages and transactions in
this Masterpiece of all Gods works; view it first in the platform, how
gloriously was this laid, in the eternal projects and Ephesians. 1.4.
purposes of Gods love! yea in that eternal promise past between the Father and
the Son, Titus 1.2.
In hopes of eternal life which God that cannot lie, promised before the world
began. Mark it, here was a promise, a promise of eternal life, made by God, by
God that cannot lie, and that before there was a world, or man in the world. Oh
the everlastingness, infiniteness, unsearchableness of this love of God! that
the everlasting God, the Majesty of heaven and earth should take care of me
before the world was; that he should busy himself and his Son about a
worthless wretched worm, born out of due time, the least of Saints, the
greatest of sinners: O my soul admire, adore this first love, this free love of
God and Christ!

Next see the early discovery and shining forth of this mystery in the very
morning of the world; no sooner is man fallen, but God reaches out a Genesis 3.15.
promise to him, and (after many ages) sends his blessed Son out of his bosom
to fulfill it; in the Gal. 4.4.
fullness of time Christ comes; we could not come up to him, lo! he comes down
to us, O see the King of glory stooping, bowing the Heavens to come down and
dwell in a dungeon, to lodge amongst prisoners, and pitch his tent in the
rebels camp. Think O my soul, how did the holy Angels wonder to see the King of
Heaven stepping down from his throne to sit on his footstool; yea putting off
(to the view) the robes of a prince, to put on the livery of a Phil. 2.7, 8.
servant, and that, after treason had been stamped upon it, taking our nature, I
mean, after it had been up in arms against God; not that he took the sin of our
nature (he that could make our nature without sin, could also, and did take it
without sin) but the shame of it he took, in that he took it, when it was under
a cloud, under a blot before God and Angels. How does this express the love of
Christ, a heart full of love to lost sinners! q. d. poor soult I cannot keep
from you, I love your very nature, and will join it to my self, and so I may
save you from sin and wrath, I care not if I become one with you, and dwell in
your very flesh: My glory shall not hinder, I will rather veil it for a while,
and take the form of a servant, and become of no reputation, than you shall
perish for ever. Again, how does this speak the unspeakable love of God; See
Mr. Ambrose looking to Jesus, p. 342.
as one sweetly observes, God did so love the very nature of his elect, that
though for the present he had them not all with him in heaven, yet he must have
their picture in his Son, to see them in, and love them in. O meditate much on
this admirable strein of love till it melt thy heart and make it burn within
thee!

From the Incarnation of our blessed Savior we may trace him through the
several passages of his life, to his death and passion, and here with an eye of
faith look upon him whom thou have pierced, behold the man, as he said, even
that man of sorrows, suffering, bleeding, dying on that tree of shame and
ignominy; dwell upon the death of Christ till it put life into thy dead heart;
then follow thy crucified Lord from the cross to the Sepulcher: and by the way
ponder deeply the severity of Gods justice, the sinfulness of sin, the love of
Christ, and the worth of souls, which are not redeemed with corruptible things
as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18,
19.
as a lamb without blemish and without spot. Why did the Primitive Saints
sacramentally show forth the Lords death, on the Lords day, Acts 20.7. but to
signify to us, that to contemplate and commemorate the death of Christ is a
special duty of the day? So also his Resurrection, which was the great
transaction of the day, therefore a proper subject for serious meditation. It
is Christ that died yea rather that is risen again, and become the first fruits
of them that slept. Consider, O my souls the holy triumph of thy Redeemer this
day, when he trod on the serpents head, took from death its sting, from hell
its standard! Suppose thou had stood by the Sepulcher, and seen the Sun of
righteousness (covered with a cloud before) shining forth most gloriously in
the morning of the Resurrection-day; how would this have raised, and ravished
thy heart! How glad were the Disciples when they saw the Lord! so glad, that
it is said, They believed not for joy: O the day of Christ's rising from the dead
was a day of joy and gladness! John 20.20. Luke 24.41.
No day like this, when our surety was released, the Covenant and sure mercies
of David confirmed, hope revived, heaven and eternal life assured.

In the midst of these thoughts who can but cry out with the Apostle, O that I
may know him, and the power of his resurrection! Phil. 3.10.
That I may feel the working of that mighty power which God wrought in Christ,
Ephesians. 1.19.
when he raised him from the dead! O that the same Romans 1.4. and 6.4, 5.
spirit of holiness which quickened Christ from the dead this day (and so made
the day holy) would also quicken my soul from the death of sin to the life of
holiness, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so I also might walk in newness of life, being planted into the
likeness of his resurrection, as also of his death.

Our hearts being thus tuned by meditation, how should our tongues show forth
the praises of our precious Redeemer! Let him have the praise and the glory of
the whole work of our Redemption. Awake my glory, utter a song: Sing that Psalm
of John the Divine, Unto him that loved us, Rev. 1.5, 6.
and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God, and his Father: To him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever. Thus give unto Christ the glory of his death, yea the praise of his
Resurrection, say with Peter, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.
who acording to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, reserved in heaven for us. Surely God requires a thousand
thousand Hallelujahs for this blessed work of our Redemption; he calls upon all
creatures to join with us in rejoicing upon this account: Isai. 44.23.
Sing O ye Heavens, for the Lord has done it, shout O ye lower parts of the
earth, break forth into singing ye mountains, O forest and every tree therein,
for the Lord has redeemed Jacob! Let us therefore devote our selves more
solemnly to this Angelical service; begin the day with prayer, and end it with
praise, not only in public but in private. O that every house were in this
respect a temple, that the songs of the Temple might be heard in all our
tabernacles on the Lords day, that the streets might ring with our praises,
even the high praises of our Creator and Redeemer! It Is Scripture counsel, That
we should speak to our selves in Psalms, Ephesians. 5, 19.
and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in our hearts to the
Lord, and singing with grace in our hearts; grace in the heart (as one says
well) is the best tune to every Psalm. We must sing with the Spirit, as well as
pray with the spirit. And therefore we should labor to be (with S. John) in
the Spirit on the Lords day. In a word, Christian prudence should direct us to
choose out suitable Psalms for such a solemn day, Psalm. 118. is very proper and
pertinent, The stone which the builders refused is become the head of the
corner; this is the Lords doing, and it is marvellons in our eyes. This is the
day which the Lord has made, we will be glad and rejoice in it. God is the
Lord which has showed us light, etc. Thou art my God and I will praise thee:
Thou art my God I will exalt thee; O give thanks unto the Lord for he is good,
for his mercy endures for ever. Thus much in brief concerning the prime duties
of the day. I shall conclude all with the words of that Prince of English
Poets: HERBERT.
O day most calm and bright,
The week were dark but for thy light.
The other days and thou,
Make up one man, whose face thou art,
Knocking at heaven with thy brow,
The working days are the back-part.
The Sundays of man's life
Thredded together on times string,
Make bracelets to adorn the wife,
Of the eternal glorious King.
Thou art the day of mirth,
And where the work-days trail on ground
Thy Flight is higher as thy birth,
O let me take thee at thy bound!
Leaping with thee from seven to seven
Till that we both being tossed from earth
Fly hand in hand to heaven.


FINIS.
Books sold by John Rothwel at the Fountain in Goldsmiths Row in Cheapside.
THe Use and Practice of Faith, or Faiths Universal usefulness, and quickening
influence into every kind and degree of the Christian life: Delivered in the
Public Lectures at Ipswich, by the late eminent and Faithful Servant of his
Lord Mr. Matthew Laurence Preacher to the said Town 4o.

Festered Conscience new lanced.

The Good Masters Plea, and the Evil Servants Cavil.

Orthodxal Navigation by Benjamin Hubbard.

The Saints Rest in an Evil day, both in their dependence upon God, and
assistance from him: Together with, Bowels of Mercy interceding for the Saints
in danger. Or, Sacred Sympathy unsealed, by Alex. Pringle, late Minister of the
Gospel at Georges Southwark.

The Universal Character, by which all Nations in the World may understand one
another Conceptions, reading out of one common Writing their own
Mother-tongues; an invention of general use, the Practice whereof may be
atteined in two hours space, observing the Grammatical Directions; which
Character is so contrived, that it may be spoken as well as written; By Cave
Beck, M. A.

The same Book is also Printed in French for the use of that Nation.

The Reign of Gustavus King of Sweden, son of Ericus, collected out of the
Histories of those times, and offered to the service of these.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel Collins Minister of Braintree
in Essex; By Matthew Newcomen, Minister of Dedham in the same County.

The Saints Delight in the Spring of Salvation, Or, Christ saving; Delivered in
a Sermon at Gregory's by Paul's, the day of their solemn Weekly Lecture there,
by Alex. Pringle late Pastor of Georges Southwark.


