THE Young Man and Maidens Forecast; SHOWING HOW They Reckoned their Chickens
before they were Hatched.
To the Tune of, The Country Farmer. Or, The Devonshire Damsels-
This may be Printed,

R. P.







I WILL tell you a Jest of a Provident Lass,
Whose Providence proved her a Provident Ass*
She laid forth her store in such brittle Ware,
That very small profit did fall to her share;
Thirteen to the Dozen of Eggs the would buy,
And set a Hen over them carefully;
As long as she went her footing she watched,
She counted her Chickens before they were Hatched*
Said she, if these Chickens five Capons do prove,
Capons be Meat which Gentlemen love;
Those Chickens she would sell to buy a Sow-Pig,
That it might have young ones e're it was big:
Then with her Pigs she would have an Ewe,
It may have Lambs not killed with the Dew:
And as she was thinking to buy her a Calf,
Her Heels they flew from her a Yard and a half*
Her Heels ^iss'd the ground, and up flew her Legs,
Down came her Basket, and br^ke all her (...)
There lay her Pigs, her Chickens, her Lambs
She could not have young ones except she (...)
Thus fortune did frown by a fall that she cat^^^,
Her Chickens proved Addle before they were Hatched:
Attend but a while, and I Will briefly declare,
Bad fortune did likewise fall to the Man's share.
And now the Man to the Market will go,
To see what Dame Nature on him will bestow*
He bought him five Eggs thinking to Thrive,
And thus did the business finely contrive^r
Said he, if these Eggs five Cocks they will frame*
And most of them prove to be Cocks of the Game,
So soon as their Spurs are long enough grown,
Then I may ingross a Cock Pit of my own.
Then may I have Gallants of every sort,
Both Lords, Knights, and Squires, and all to see ^^ort
If they Fight bravely these Gallants to please,
I may come to get Means by the rearing of these*
And when I have done, I Will get me a rich Wife,
That I may live happy all days of my Life,
And in the Church we will be loving matched,
But count not your Chickens before they be Hatche*
And when he came home he set his Eggs by,
He could not get up the Roost was so high;
But fetching a Ladder that unhappy time,
It was his hard luck with his Eggs for to Climb*
These Ladders prove fatal to many a Man,
And are undone by them now and than;
So was this poor Man undone by a fall,
Down comes the Basker, Man, Eggs and all.
There Iay the poor Man with a fall almost Lame.
His Cock-Pits and Gallants, and Cocks of the Game
The loosing of this grieved him to the Life,
Yet the grief it was more in the less of his Wife*
All you Young Men live virtuous Lives,
And think to get Portions now by your Wives;
Take warning by me before you are Matched,
Pray count not your Chickens before they be Hatched.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-B^ll in Pye-Corner, near
West-Smithfield*


