A DIALOGUE BETWEEN George Fox a Quaker, Geo. Keith a Quodlibitarian, Mr. M. an
Anabaptist, Mr. L. an Episcoparian.

WITH A Friendly ADDRESS to them all, By Sam. Reconcilable.

By Trepidantium Malleus.

LONDON, Printed for John Marshal at the Bible in Grace-Church Street. 1700.

A DIALOGUE between George Fox, etc.
G. F. Ah dear, dear George Keith, the overflowings of my Bowels are toward
thee. I remember the time when thou declaredst me to be inspired, and did
fall flat on the ground when I prayed; and did own and declare what I said,
That by the same Eternal Spirit by which Christ and the Apostles appointed
Baptism, and the Supper, was I commanded to take them away -- One year, on the
5th day of the 2d month, tho it dropped from on high, thou followedst me every
where all day long; How is it now?


G. K. I own I had many a good Token put into my hand by thee and thy means, as
well as Robert Barclay's. This was the Gilt about the bitter Pill, which made
it go down the better. I know now thou art an Impostor, and Deceiver, in a word
an old Fox.


G. F. O thou Conjurer, Devil, and Beelzebub; thou Wizard, Lion and Serpent;
thou art for the Lake, and the Lake for thee. --

Mr. L. He is none of these, but he is a Tarrier.


G. F. A Tarrier, what is that, I pray, one that tarrieth for the Light within,
or the appearance of the Son of Man, as the Scripture calls it? for what the
Sun in the Firmament is to the World, that is the Light to Man, as Friends have
infallibly expounded that place.

Mr. L. Poor George, thou that call him a Conjurer, I perceive thou art
none: Thou art so far from understanding things, thou understandst not words --
A Tarrier is but a half Fox (begotten of one on a Bitch) yet no Creature hates
a Fox so much as this amphibious Animal. G. Keith now, O Fox, hates thy
Discipline, Doctrine and all. I have taken pains with his scabby lousy Head
these six years past, which swarmed with thy Notions, it is bad enough still.


G. K. Truly, really, verily, and indeed, I do believe Baptism, and the Supper,
are all Ordinances; but there is not a lawful Administrator upon Earth.


G. F. Thou art a mad Reformer to tell People they must be baptized: By whom?
by Sir Nicholas Nemo?

Mr. M. George Keith, were that Philosopher alive who never laughed but once,
and that was when he saw an Ass feed on Thistles, he would laugh to see what
thou feedest on: Come among us, administer Baptism by plunging, the right way,
the only way --


G. K. Yes, I know you are right in this matter; and I have gotten an aged,
grave, sound Baptist to be my Assistant at Turners-Hall, and hear him with
great devotion every first Day.

Mr. M. O what do I hear! Blessed be the Day when the Baptists will have so
Learned an Advocate for their Cause. Methinks I see you already baptizing Men
and Women; and that all London, and all the Regions round about will come to
the Thames to be baptized of thee: That there will be such joy as if the
Heavens were again opened, etc.

Mr. L. How now, George Keith, I thought you had been better informed by my
Book about Baptism, and by what Friend Y. wrote on that Subject a year since.


G. K. Yes, I think you are in the right; and I went to Friend Y's house to
give him thanks for his Arguments.

Mr. M. It is said by some, That on a certain (or perhaps uncertain) Island in
Arabia dwell Men that have two Tongues; were you born there, Mr. Keith?


G. F. I believe in America there are Men that have not two Tongues only, but
twice too. George came from thence. Ever since he has lost the pure Language,
he has gotten all the Languages since the confusion of his Babel. Then he is
for the Baptists, then for the Independents, then for the Presbyterians, and --


G. K. Hold George, stop there, I ever declared against Presbytery; for that
sort of Men never gave me one poor five pounds, nor ever visited me, nor much
cared for a visit from me, except one (who is now against me too) and I have
made an Ass of him, and have rid him to purpose, and made him fall under his
Burden.

Mr. M. Yes, and in so doing he has crushed thy foot against the Wall; and at
last has, to the wonder of all, opened his Mouth to reprove the madness of the
Prophet. O, Sir, you are a great Canter, and a Recanter too; blow hot and cold:
That were thy mad Notions of Transmigration of Souls true, I should think the
Soul of some changeable Eccebolius had entered into thee. You can clip Notions,
and then new coin them to make them pass for yours.


G. K. I do every thing with unparalled pertness and confidence, and wiredraw
my Mouth, and peep through my Fingers to see who comes into my Meeting, when a
company of credulous Fools think I am in a great fit of Devotion all the while;
and I seek to bring every Man to the wrack to make him of the same dimensions
with me. I spare none, but like the Jackal in Arabia, rather than want matter
to feed on will take Men's Bodies out of the Grave; All our Reformers, I spare
none.


G. F. I wonder, seeing there is a Law in England against Wolves, thou have not
been taken long ago; Thou have said and unsaid; reviled Jack Presbyter for
conforming so much, and then for conforming no more.

Mr. M. It has been a Question a long time, which did the most mischief,
Guttembergus by inventing of Printing, or Bartholdus Swarts by inventing of
Gunpowder.


G. K. I tell you, all know I am a great Disputant; I have a high, very high
opinion of my self, and a mean, very mean opinion of others. In Disputes, like
Sampson, heap upon heap, heap upon heap I slay thousands.

Mr. M. Yes Sir, and some say with the like instrument too, the Jaw Bone of an
A -- I am no Philosopher; yet when you in your last Summons of us all at
Turners-Hall laid down your Notions very magisterially and dogmatically, you
said, My Philosophy teaches me this, and my Philosophy teaches me that, when
you talked so madly of Creation and Production of Substances and Accidents,
etc. that one Philosopher pulled his Hat over his Eyes, being hardly able to
forbear laughing, and Friend Y. looked like a Turky-cock with indignation. Many
think the production of thy Brain to be like that of thy Mother, unshap'd and
deformed. If a blinded Papist cannot see who the Beast in the Revelations is,
when it is said, The Kings of the Earth gave their Kingdom to him, which none
did but to the Pope; no wonder if you see not your Mistakes.


G. K. G. Fox, I have verified the old Proverb, the Old Fox is caught at last.

Mr. M. Yes, and another Proverb too, Set a Thief to catch a Thief.

Mr. L. Mr. Keith, let you and I withdraw a while, that I may fully satisfy you
about Episcopacy, Liturgies and Ceremonies.

Mr. M. What say you to us now, Mr. Keith?


G. K. I am perfectly reconciled to the Church of England: O the Church of
England, the Church of England! and I will shortly be ordained, and then it
will be the Reverend Mr. Keith.

Mr. M. Sir, Reverence is your due then. When you came into England, you told
your Followers, you would make a Reformation according to the Line of Scripture
-- And when you were asked your Opinion about Singing, that Antichristian
thing, you answered with me, That it was as unlawful to take a Praisebook, as a
Prayer Book, etc. You are every Body's, and no Body's; a Bird that leaps from
one Garden to another. What stuff do you disgorge at one time against them,
whom you magnify at another time. But what was your Vision of a Rope you so
much talked of when you first came into England, and set up for a Reformer.


G. K. It is too large to tell; but, That it was a Rope, that ended all.

Mr. M. Some think that was the Bell-rope of a Steeple; others say, Give him
Rope enough and he will -- Play, Sir, all the Hocus tricks for Preferment you
will; he was not the best Disciple who bore the Bag: No Man can muzzle you now;
but remember, that is commonly a bad business that ends in the Rope.


G. K. You are a company of Schismatics all of you, Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, and Quakers. It is well known, when Dungal was to be
burnt for a Wizard, he confessed, The Devil told him, when he was forward to
renounce his Baptism, but not the Solemn League and Covenant, that he would
excuse him here, for Old, Nick protested, he was at the making of the Covenant,
and had a great band in the drawing of it up: for my part I believe him, do not
you?

Mr. M. No not I, any more than I believe you; it is your custom to believe
him, not mine; he was a Liar (pray, Mr. Keith, remember I do not say you) from
the beginning, and will be to the end. When shall the World be emancipated from
your Impositions, whose Notions, whose Words, whose Actions fall out and
quarrel continually? You never lived in a temperate Zone, but in a torrid one,
always, continually, and evermore.


G. K. I confess I have spoken like William Penn, who under the Title of his
Sandy Foundation, says, By W. P. a Builder on the Foundation that cannot be
shaken. Yet this Foundation has been shaken to purpose, not only by others but
himself too since that time, about the Trinity, imputed Righteousness, the
Resurrection, etc. so have I pratled once, and done more than he.


G. F. I can hold no longer; O George, I am moved to tell thee, Tophet is
prepared for thee, O thou Adamantine Alexander the Apostate; thou Gimcrack,
thou Bloodhound, thou Moon-calf, thou Minister of the Devil, thou Night-bird,
one as black as Hell; for such words have I, and other Friends often used to
others, such as thou now art, and all in the Name of the Lord, and from the
Eternal Spirit of Truth, Love, and Meekness. I am upon the Throne, and have
power to bind and loose. The Lake's for G. Keith, and G. K. for the Lake, Fire
and Brimstone and all --


G. K. Stop G. so said Muggleton to thee, thou to him, and you both to whom you
please; God restore thee to thy senses. Thou have said, Thou were equal with
God -- as Holy as God, not only in Quality, but Equality -- And thou could
know Men's hearts, whether Saints or no, without speaking a word: That every
Quaker was infallible. Remember Audly's Letter to thee. Thou were not only
called by others, as Ann Gargel, The Son of God, but did write thy self so.
Thou toldst Oliver Cromwell, and King Charles (as well as others with thee)
contradictory things in the Name of the Lord, as Mr. Lesly has undeniably
proved to all the World, in his Snake in the Grass, Second Edition, Chap. 18.
p. 200, to 240. If ever you answer that Chapter, I will recall all my
Narratives, and return to the Quakers once more. If what is there said be true
(as God and Man know it is) you are the most horrid Villains, the most
monstrous Liers, the greatest Blasphemers on the face of the Earth, and the
most bloody ones too, that would have Oliver with the Sword set on France,
Spain, Holland, etc. And Buroughs prophesyed then the Fall of Rome, and urged
Oliver to carry his Arms there, and said, As sure as the Lord lives it should
come to pass. Read p. 540, 535, 536, 537. of Buroughs his Works, who denied
all when the King returned.


G. F. I wish (tho Colonel Fletcher would not) yet Samuel Jennings had hanged
thee in Pensilvania when thou did refuse to try thy Doctrine by Friends
Books, particularly William Penn's (as commanded) but would by Scripture,
which was justly denied thee. Friends said, Thou were bringing Men again to the
Scriptures, and the Professors Christ. I wish the Ship that brought thee from
thence into England had sunk into the bottom of the Sea. Since thy change thou
have censured Lesty for what he says of Witchcraft (in that Book) and did
say, There was an appearance of God in the thing (Quakerism) tho woefully
midwiv'd into the World. What then becomes of Giles ^ermin's terrible Letter,
page 297. Snake in the Grass, seeing thou thus blasphemest? I say, O thou
filthy Beast, who do purge upward and downward -- Thou have need of one to
wipe thee -- Thou make a pitiful stink wherever thou go: By thy vomiting
and purging, thou make every one sick that comes nigh thee; thou stinkest all
the Country over; thou art like a Horse with a galled back; thou make People
to vomit and spue to hear thee, etc.


G. K. All this Rhetoric have I heard, and read too, over and over. And so you
speak one to another, Now, and all in the Name of the Lord; Impostors,
Deceivers, Devil-driven Men; read Rogers of Bristol, and others. Lesly says,
Being men of Honor, he believes you all -- Thou may well be called George
Fox the Elder.

Mr. M. Right, Sir; and may not you be called, not George Keith, but George Fox
the Younger? for if ever any Man played the Fox, you have with us, with others,
especially Friend Y. and some believe you will with the Church of England in
time: if they do not hasten your Preferments, they shall hear of it in both
Ears.


G. F. Had the Money for the Rent, and to pay the Hireling (thy self) at
Turners-hall been easily raised, and not Friend C. and others dropped from thee,
thou had never so soon left the place, and cried Schism, Schism. But when
thou heardst that F. B. got at one clap an hundred pound at Cambridg, thou
thoughtest it high time to go to the same profitable Church he did, and to
bespatter all Dissenters as Lesly did, who compared the Quakers to young
Vipers, who eat out the Bowels of our Mother Presbytery, and says, page 57, 58.
They (the Apostles) frequented the Jewish Temple and Liturgy: They acknowledged
the Authority of God's High Priest, and submitted themselves to it as one
commissioned from God -- Tho they were against the Gospel, etc.

Mr. M. Hear Mr. Lesly; Were the Pharisees long Prayers read? Would you own a
Church ridiculing the Gospel? In short, Sir, if a Church must not be separated
from, that crucified Christ, and put Apostles to death, must a Church be left
that plucked King James a Papist, and a Tyrant too, from his Throne? that prays
for a Protestant King, and chooses sober Bishops? Is it a greater Sin to
dethrone King, James, than to crucify Christ and murder the Apostles? That you
and others go not to Common Prayer and Sacraments openly, but run into Corners
now as well as others once did.


G. F. George Keith, it is revealed unto me, Thou art a Hypocrite, I know it by
the Spirit of Discerning. I know also what Money the Bishop of London gave
thee, and what Money L. has procured for thee, and others too.


G. K. Yes as the Glover, and his two Quaker Prophets did in Cheapside, one
declared it was the Servant Maid, another the Servant Man that stole -- but at
last it was a common Thief afterward executed who confessed all. When the
Foxonian Quakers excommunicated Story, Wilkinson, Rogers, and others, and they
them, and all in the Name of the Lord, they would say, This is the Word of the
Lord from me to thee -- Yet the Quakers were always One. Thou in thy Journal
tellest of being led into Paradise, and knowing the Virtues of all the
Creatures, of being as perfect as Adam before he fell, as Christ himself; that
thou did wade through the Blood of a thousand Martyrs (by which tricks thou
gotest thousands of pounds.) I have told the People from the Pulpit, the
Mischief of Toleration, and that all is not Persecution Men call so, etc. I am
ready to spit in the faces of my old Schismatical Friends, Y. in particular. I
cannot for my heart love a Dissenter: I study Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity,
the Chief Book for the Church of England, and make the World believe his
Arguments are mine.

Mr. M. I believe from thence you will go to Parker's Ecclesiastical Polity
too, and with him call for Axes and Hammers, and say, The Cannibals in America
are Philosophers (or Gentlemen) if compared to the Dissenters -- And that the
conscientious Villain is the worst of Rogues, and not to be born with; and that
Christ sometimes acted like a Jewish Zealot, which Josephus says were
Cutthroats.

Mr. L. Maugre all Oppositions, I must say ( Snake, p. 92.) You have all
forsaken Episcopacy, which you cannot deny was in the days of the Apostles, and
in all ages among Christians to this day: Let such read Numbers 16. of them
that perished in the gainsaying of Kore, etc.

Mr. M. It is denied by all Dissenters. A Diocesan Bishop you speak of, or say
nothing to the purpose. There were many Bishops in the Churches of Ephesus,
Acts 20.17, 18. Colos. 1.1. that is, many Elders or Presbyters. I lately heard
that Mr. Pool, and Dr. Hammond, once contending on this Subject, Dr. H. was
examining Act. 20.17, 18. Mr. Pool said, Sir, The Bishop cannot be found in
that Verse; but if you look for him, he is in verse. 29. After my departure
shall come in ravenous Wolves not sparing the Flock -- Look you, Sir, into
Ireland, you know what Book was there printed, by whom, against whom --


G. K. G. Fox, thou toldst the World twenty four Languages were inspired into
thee one Night, who never understoodst thy Mother Tongue. Thy Battledoor proves
that thou know thy self to be an Impostor. The History Books thou did put
thy Name to, and pridest thy self as thine, were done by others; thou
understoodst none of them, but made the World believe, all was by Revelation
-- I have heard some Quakers say, Thou were equal to Christ, were born of a
Virgin.


G. F. Had Friends thought such a precious Friend as George Keith would have
come to this pass, they had wished that the pieces of Money they gave thee had
been all cased: That the Spit had stood still, or the Pot boiled over when they
prepared for thee. Many a good Dinner cost thee but a Groan -- G. Whitehead's
Prophecy is now fulfilled, Contempt is poured on thee -- For W. C. a Churchman
wrote against thee, and T. M. himself now.


G. K. If this be to prophesy, I will prophesy of him, That he shall sometimes
feel pain, hunger, and thirst -- That be shall die -- As for T. M. I have
offered him a Public Disputation, but refuse a Private one, about the Liturgy,
Episcopacy, and Ceremonies.

Mr. M. I have heard him say he will accept it, get you him Protection, without
which you are no Man to make such an Offer: If you so do, you shall never say
of him as of Mr. Penn, That he absconded, and would not appear -- Shall I be
plain with you, Mr. Keith, for once, and speak my mind freely to you; and will
you hear me patiently?


G. K. Keep to your Word, let it be but once; but I cannot promise Patience;
for every one knows I and Patience have been strangers these threescore years.

Mr. M. How came you to preach in Churches, where are Jacobitish Priests (are
you turning one too?) who dare leave out King William in their Prayers, and so
are open Trumpeters of Rebellion, praying only for his Confusion, and the
Prosperity of King James? Besides, may not dancing on a First Day be as lawful
as playing on Organs, not for Devotion, but for Diversion, as before the First
Lesson, and after the Sermon? How dismal is it to hear twenty Bills in the Desk
for sick Persons, some going to Sea, others drawing nigh the time of Travail --
And a cold Prayer read for all afflicted in Mind, Body, or Estate -- Do you
think you come to a Quakers Meeting, when you now ascend the Pulpit, and
understand not your Text, nor Scriptures you cite? but all know you are a woeful
Expositor of Scripture, tho otherwise ingenious, to say nothing of
Common Prayer, in your Prayer before Sermon, and nothing but Common Prayer, if
any at all, after Sermon. I am afraid, having so many bad Symptoms on you, you
will at last be found among such conforming Priests that tell us in print, That
reading Scripture by all is not convenient, makes them Rebels. (...), Search
the Scriptures, may be read indicetively, not imperatively. That Magistrates,
if they make Laws against God's Laws, must sometimes be obeyed, as 2 Chronicles.
32.33. That King Hezekiah, and his Parliament, appointed the Passover, should
be kept the second Month, tho God had said the first. That the first Table of
the Decalogue was made for no other end than to observe the Duties of the
second; and therefore the End is more noble than the Means inducing to it. So
that to do as we would be done unto, is all; and pawn their Souls for it: and
at last say,

By the Liturgy learn to pray:
Pray, and praise God every day.
The Apostles Creed believe also;
Do as you would be done unto.
Sacraments take, as well as you can;
This is the whole Duty of Man.
But if all Religion be expressed in those words, Mat. 12. As you would that Men
should do to you, do you even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets;
there is no necessity of Prayer, Creed, Sacraments: so that in this short cut
five of the Articles or Points, or what you call them, may be left out. You
will say in good time (or bad time, I fear) That it is better to go to a
Whore-house, than a Meeting, as others have said -- And at last carry your self
as ridiculous as, it is said, some of your Family do in public: that some say,
Are these your Ministers -- Woe to King William when you turn Jacobite.


G. K. Am I a Dog that I should do such things as these?

Mr. M. So said Hazael, and yet you know what he did. Your Church is an
Arminian Synagogue: Imputed Righteousness is scofft at by thousands, and hardly
heard of from the mouths of any one of her Priests: And one of them lately,
whom God has knocked down, greatly bewails it. But no end is there of your
corrupt Doctrines and Discipline.


G. F. Well George, as soon as ever I heard that thou went to receive what
the World calls Sacrament, and that in a Steeple-house too, and that from a
Doctor of Divinity, as Men profanely speak; and soon after did put off thy
upper Covering to fleshly Men, and so did idolize them, I was moved to come
unto thee; and my words thou know I call the Word of the Lord, tho the
Scripture be Dust, Serpents Meat. I therefore now open my Mouth, and speak unto
thee, saying, I have power to bind and loose on Earth, tho I did not discover
this a long time; some Judgment shall as surely betide thee, as London was
burnt after Thomas Ebbit prophesied of it two days before --


G. K. But, George, I no more regard thy Prophecy than the Quakers did his, who
all, as one Man, said it was a Delusion, and never moved their Goods. But he
after prophesied the Fire should end, then here, then there, when it still
raged and proceeded; so that he was a false Prophet, and thou art another. The
Curse causeless shall not come. Neither regard I G. Whitehead's Prophecy, who
took an Oath in the Lord Mayor's Court, in the year 95. yet on Record; and many
Quakers have taken Oaths in Chancery formerly, tho not nigh home.


G. F. What if G. Whitehead, or other Friends, have leave from the Lord to do
so, must thou go and tell the World of it?


G. K. Yes, yes, I know you wait for leave from the Lord, as you blasphemously
express it, to kill, not only the Priests and the Hirelings, but all such as
say, Where is the God of the Quakers? tho for the present it must not be so --
That is to say, you will not attempt it till you hope to effect it; you will
take then the first opportunity. Several Quakers were in Monmouth's Army;
William Penn keeps Soldiers ready in Pensilvania. I wish our Parliament and
Government would think of it, and crush you timely, who believe all the Power
will run into your hand, and then you will mow down all your Enemies.

Mr. M. Strange, Mr. Keith that you had not known all this, when a Quaker 28
years; Or had not left them sooner, if you knew it. I have heard T. M. say,
when Isaac Pennington's Book against you came out, he took it out of your hand
intending to answer it; On a perusal of it finding this passage, Can it be
supposed that so ingenuous a Man, and hard Studient, as G. Keith, should be so
long with us, and be an Advocate for us, and not know our Principles? He sent
you the Book again with this Message; Answer it who will, I cannot. Is it true?


G. K. I cannot deny it, he did; and I have heard, That as great a Lover as he
then was of me, when he was put to it by others, Whether he thought I was a
Good Man, he would never reply: I pray is that true?

Mr. M. Yes, and gave this reason, That you took little notice, as in your
Books, so in your Discourse, of the Quakers worst of Doctrins, An imaginary
Perfection or sinless State; tho when he had said much to you about it, you
seemed to consent to what he said. And when you came to the Presbyterian
Ministers on a Monday, at their then Meeting at St. Helens, to get one of them
to baptize some of your Followers, and break Bread to them; he desired those
Ministers to press on you the sense of Sin, and daily Imperfections. And he
once undertook to prove to you, That the Holy God saw more Sin in the best
Works of the best of Men, than they saw in their worst Works. And he so managed
it, that you were confounded, and answered not a word. He, you know, has often
appeared against another sort of Men who ridiculed Repentance, or having Sin a
burden. And some great Men say, he has done that Work effectually. He has
often said of you, You came to Confession like a Bear to the Stake, unwilling
to confess former corrupt Principles; and your Retractations are too short;
that you were impatient of any opposition in discourse, but talked in every
thing so, that the old Gentleman at Rome hardly thought himself such a piece of
Infallibility. He valued you more on Crose his Opinion of you in his History of
Quakerism, than on any Observations of his own.


G. K. I care not for him, he cannot cope with me.

Mr. M. Be more modest Mr. Keith, than to talk thus: Many men at B. Head think
otherwise; when you were forced to put rampant Passions in the place of solid
Arguments, and Ravings in the place of Reason. Try him once again if you
please, he is ready to prove when, where, and before whom you please, that you
have sinned scandalously in your Conformity. And to be plain with you, he is now
within hearing. He has heard every word that has been said by every one of us
since we thus came together.


G. K. There stands Sam. Reconcilable: It is next to a Miracle his Clapper has
not been going all this while.


S. R. Indeed, Gentlemen, your Clappers have all gone so fast, and have made so
much work for my ears, that I could not employ my tongue.


G. K. You are called Old Ishmael.


S. R. But whilst you are alive, I can be but the Young one. In short, when I
see you all thus fall out, I hope honest men may recover their Goods. You have
all left the best Reformed Churches; Presbyterian is but a Nickname for an Old
Protestant. But end these Jars, and come and dine with me to morrow, being
Lord's Day, every one of you.

Mr. L. I never dine abroad on Sundays.

Mr. M. Nor I first days.


G. F. I will as soon eat minced Pies in Pietide: I never dine with such as
thee any where, no not at my own House; for it is said, He that receives him
into his House, or bideth him Godspeed, is a partaker with him in his Sin.


S. R. Truly I do not intend to bid some of you Godspeed, nor reecive you as
Lodgers in my House, but after Dinner see you out as fairly as you came in.


G. F. But would thou dine with any of us if we invited thee?


S. R. Yes, and sup with you too if you please, and show good Nature against
ill Nature. Were I a Neighbor to a company of Jews or Mahometans, I would be a
kind one, as Abraham was to the Cananites, and the Children of Hell (and I look
on some of you as another such a Tribe) the Papist, the Quakers, Lodowick
Muggleton, and Mr. Lesly damn almost all the World but their own Party. But
you, G. Keith, begin to unchurch others at the first stroke, and may soon
unchristian them too.


G. K. Away thou City Scavinger Y. as some called you, finding fault with so
many Partys and Opinions.


S. R. I am glad I am so well employed, I hope I shall make your doors clean
whether you will or no. If I have carried away much Q. dirt, much B. dirt, much
C. dirt, much A. dirt, a Scavinger is a necessary Officer, all would stink
without him.

Mr. M. I say to thee, G. Fox, Thou art like that Beast in the Revelations,
that had Horns like a Lamb, but spoke like a Dragon; pretendest Modesty and
Perfection too, but thy Mouth is full of bitterness and cursing; thy Christ is
only the Light within, so that thou usest the word Christianity to destroy the
thing. And for you, Mr. Keith, who have now taken up Pomp and mere Pageantry in
Religion, and such fooleries as our first Reformers, and old Church of England
loathed; you have returned, as the Dog to his Vomit, and as the Sow washed to
^he wallowing in the Mire. All of you thus do who introduce Ceremonies, not
only condemned in the Word of God, but your own Homilies.

As for thee once more George Fox, thou, Muggleton, and Antonia Bourignon, are
three Grand Impostors; she could never read, and yet ever read; she pretends to
know men's Hearts, and denis you and us to be Christians.

One word to you, Mr. Keith, at parting: Pray, Mr. Deacon, your Work should lie
with the Poor: What Poor do you take care of?


G. K. Of my own poor self, and work enough; for my Life at present is a kind
of a mendicant begging Life.

Mr. M. I believe then in this you are very officious, more than the Scripture
Deacons were. Poor Man, I doubt this is one Reason, among others, why your
Hearers have such poor Preaching as they complain of every where; as that the
Yoke some would put on the Necks of the Disciples, was the Yoke of the Covenant
of Works, when it is evident to be the Ceremonial Law, and Circumcision in
particular; and many other Absurdities they say your Preachments are stufft
with. If you can pray (most, of you) no better in the Pulpit, some might direct
to a place where poor Malefactors pray better.


G. F. What say thou to us all, Sam. R?


S. R. Only thus, contemning your Contempt, I leave you.


FINIS.

