SPIRITUAL THRIFT.

OR, MEDITATIONS Wherein humble Christians (as in a Mirror) may view the
verity of their saving Graces, and may see how to make a spiritual improvement
of all opportunities and advantages of a pious proficiencie (or a holy Growth)
in Grace and goodness.

And wherein is laid open many errors incident to these declining times,

By ELIZABETH WARREN, a lover of Truth and Peace.

ECCLES. 9.10. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with all thy might,
for there is no work nor device, nor knowledge nor wisdom, in the grave
whither thou go. Imprimatur,

James Cranford.



LONDON, Printed by R. L. for Henry Shepherd, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Bible in Towre-street, 1647.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE pious improvement of precious time, is one main business and work of our
day, requiring sincerity in retired Meditations, and also sedulity in the
progress of our actions, my deep engagements to divine bounty, call me to
consecrate my self and my time in all humble gratefulness to his sacred
Majesty, from whom I have received such ample favors: I omit all apology for
defense or excuse, as nothing pertinent to the end proposed, craving only a
suspension of uncharitable censures, which proceed from a root of murmuring
misprision: The Theme propounded in my poor meditations, was a work designed
by our blessed Savior, even the gathering up of fragments, from that
plentiful saciety which expressed his bounty in supplying our wants: Some
spiritual uses were extracted from it, by virtue of an argument from the less
to the greater, wherein I humbly submit what I have done to the judgment and
practice of the godly in like causes: for being conscious to my mental and
bodily weakness, I went in the most facile and familiar way, to express what
I collected from that frugall precept, as an incitation to others, who have
geater abilities, still constantly declining to fall on any subject, which such
have treated of in their learned labors, and only gathering quotations from
them, to illustrate the matter wrapped up in my brevity, but my dull Meditations
appearing unpolished, are produced like abortives in an hour unexpected, and
may seem unseasonable, when the beams of new light are admired or adored, as
the rare rising Sun, for nothing now relisheth the curious palate, save the
Nectar and Ambrosia that affront the poor Manna, Qui phreneticum ligat, and
lethargi cum excitat, ambobus molestus est, ambos amat.
which will mar the acceptance of my labors with many, from whom I must
look for distastefull prejudice, yea although here be water which is drawn
from the fountain on purpose to quench the very flames of contention, yet
possibly producing an Antiperistasis, it may by accident be totally inverted,
Well moderation has matter sufficient, for modesty to act, in an indigence of
merit, and has learned this lesson in virtues Academy, to suffer rather then
do any evil, A continued memento of my mortal condition, calls me to labor
while my day does last, because in the grave unto which I am going, there is
neither counsel, wisdom, nor work, we are mutually obliged to our God by
covenant, continually to endeavor the total extirpation of that root of
bitterness, from whence proceeds, Schism, Error, and Heresy, to the
scandal of the Gospel: Good Reader, my leisure admits no enlargement, only I
entreat thy fervent Petitions, for my pious perseverance in the present truth,
which tendered unto thee declares that I am

Thine truly in the Lord, Elizabeth Warren.

SPIRITUAL THRIFT.
JOHN 6.12. Gather up the fragments which remain, that nothing be lost.
OUr blessed Savior both feasting fainting souls, Auditorem magis and
factoremquam expositorem desidera^t, August.

Si eorum curam suscepit qui subito tantum impetu delati fuerant, quomodo nobis
deesset si cum constanti^ animi proposito quaeramus, Call. in Ioh.


and feeding hungry bodies in their several exigencies, presents to our due
and serious meditation, a precious mirror of miraculous mercy, in the first
by his word he raises the dead, in the latter he graciously preserves the
living, his esteem of our souls is revealed in the one, his care of our
bodies is expressed in the other, which sacred Pillars like Jachin and Boas,
may support the fabrike of our weak infirm faith, yea cause us by a holy and
humble dependence, to cast our care on him that cares for us.

His mercy thus extended he calls for duty, Christus ad illustrandum
miraculum impleri cophinos jubet, simul tamen ad frugalitatem suos hor tari,
quum dicit colligite quae supersunt fragmenta, nequid pereat, Call. in Ioh. cap
6.
a debt ever owed to divine bounty, his command is to gather up the fragments
which remain, his reason is annexed that nothing be lost.

The words of this Scripture in their litterall sense, are an oecumenicall
precept from the master of the family, even that great Creator and feeder of
creatures, who designeth to his servants their several employments, and now
having satisfied a multitude of guests, with plentiful refreshment from such
poor and mean provision, he illustrateth the miracle by this passage of
providence, In cunctis quidem rebus necessaria est providentia.
that so much should be collected, from what was before so little.

Our blessed Savior commands to gather up, what lay on the ground as rejected
and contemptible, even those crumbs and fragments of fish and barley bread,
Solicitudo importat studium quoddam adhibitum ad aliquid consequendum, Aqui.

Bonorum enim omnium affluentia illi in manum data est.


the scattered remainders of their abundant faciety, that we who have forfeited
our right in the creatures conferred once on man by free donation, may humbly
conceive how unworthy we are, to enjoy refreshment from the meanest of them,
viewing them now not only as a gift, from the gracious hand of Gods rich and
royal bounty, but also as a purchase bought in again by him, who sacrificed
himself as the price of our redemption, since none could so well set a rate on
the creatures, or value them rightly at their just esteem, as he who bought in
with invaluable merit, lost men, who did forfeit himself and his patrimony.

Gather up the fragments, etc.
Non quod suos a labor, prohibeat, quo sibi quotidianum victum acquirant, sed
terrenam hanc vitam caelesti posthabendam esse oportet, quia haec una.
Christ calls for this duty from his dear Disciples, teaching them the price and
use of the creatures, and in directing them instructs us also, in the
thriving trade of considerate collection, for as we are bound by this precept
and practice, to gather up necessaries for our bodily subsistence, so are we to
labor in improving time and means, for soul refreshing food, which abides to
eternity, the argument is drawn from the less unto the greater, and is pressed
home in this ensuing precept, John 6.27. Vivendi pia causa est, ut in mundo
peregrinantes festinent in caelestem patriam Call. in Ioh.
Labor not (says Christ) for the meat that perishes, but for that which
endures to eternal life, which the Son of man shall give unto you, for him
has God the Father sealed.

He does not prohibit us to look or labor, for the necessary nourishment of
our frail and brittle bodies, but here and also in diverse places, expresses
his care for their competent provision, Compassione nostris doloribus condolet
Christus.
these earthly Tabernacles being the present residence of the precious soul in
her transitory pilgrimage, and therefore must be soberly and reverently
respected, yea supported and refreshed with fit accommodations, Now if the body
in which the soul resides (as in a ruinous mansion) must continually be
repaired, Comparatio est a minori ad majus.
that it may be fit for those several employments which God and nature has
designed it unto, no doubt the Divine and Immortal Spirit, immediately infused
by himself into it, has most precious cates provided by his care to sustain
it in life, even to all eternity.

Gather up, etc. John 17.3.

Our weak meditations reflecting on this subject, Omnia namque gravia and
difficilia facit amor facilia.
find various excellencies comprised in collection, which for our more
methodicall and orderly proceeding, we reduce into two propounded generals.

1 Temporals, 2 Spiritual goods.

First, we handle temporals because this Scripture calls us to gather up the
fragments that remain, and by this frugall precept of universal use, Hei mihi
quam magnum sobrietatis opus!
directs us in collecting and reserving the creatures. Secondly, by virtue of
the former argument, drawn as I said from the less to the greater, since we
must not neglect the care of our bodies, John 6.34.
then much more must our souls have their due and fit provision.

The food of our bodies is one of those requisites, De cibis quidem agitur sed
extendi omnes vitae parts debet haec sententia, Call. in Ioh, cap. 6.
which nature calls for to support her being, under which is comprised when we
crave our daily bread, all conducible necessaries for our comfortable
subsistence, and for this we must labor in our lawful callings, working with
our hands the thing that is good, and humbly submitting to Christ's sacred
precept, in gathering up remaynders often lost by remissness.

We see his Disciples were designed to the work, Discamus ergo non esse
procrastinandum quin audit Dei voce strenue quisque properet quam vocatur.

Non parvam laudem meretur prompra eorum obedientia.


which was presently performed by their painful industry, who did not
procrastinate nor delay the duty, imposed upon them by their Lord and master,
his oecumenicall authority was no whit gainsayd, nor quarrel they at all with
his sacred precept, or affront they it by arrogance as any way incompatible,
with the eminence and dignity of their high and holy calling.

Their practice presents us with profitable instructions, of humility,
industry, and universal obedience, John 6.13.
that stooping to the ground for our necessary nourishment, we might duly
consider our dusty pedigree, Mortalis vitae, vltalis mortis amara, illicitum
gustans gustat avarus homo.
earth being the material of our mortal bodies, which Death the period of
perishing nature, resolves again to those original principles from whence they
came to which they must return.

Their industrious fr^gality, both collecting and reserving, those present
remainders for future necessity, teaches us with the Pismire to take the
opportunity, of gathering and keeping things useful and profitable: L^^^nc^ in
eremo na^^^tu^, Christum expectat in solitudine.

Illi terrena sapiunt, qui promissa caelestia non habent.


for though rectified nature be indeed content with little, renewing grace
restraining all excess, yet are we admonished by their sacred example, not
greedily but gratefully to respect the creatures, avoiding those exorbitances
which Epicures and Worldlings run headlong into for want of heavenly wisdom,
who making a monopoly of pleasure or profit, are trapt up in the snares of
profuseness or penury.

Gather up etc.
Our Lord and Master has designed us a work, conducing to our present and
future emolument, N^gotia quidem aggredienda cunctan tor, sed insusceptis
constanter inhaerendum. Prove. 24.34.
which precept if we practice with all painful diligence, the benefit will
countervail our industrious sedulity, but if we be deficient or remiss in
duty, neglecting or contemning what time or means affords, our poverty will
come like the posting traveller, and our necessity rush in like an armed man,
Let us then by labor improve opportunities, tendered unto us by a hand of
providence, Solicitudo diligentiae non diffidentiae laudatur.

Opus est sobrietate, ne bona quae videmur habere, vertantur in perniciem
nostram.

Non opera illicita, sed charitatis vel necessitatis agimus.

Si vero aliqua est inter homines foelicitas, ea nam sine labor existit.

Non vir fortis est and strenuus qui perterritus laborem fugit, sed cui crescit
animus in ipsa rerum difficultate.


prizing and valuing the meanest of the creatures as much transcending what we
can merit, that every surplus of our plentiful saciety, may be an engagement
to dutiful obedience, and our daily enjoyment of these present favors, a
firm obligation to divine bounty.

Our youth and health is compared to a harvest, wherein men gather in their
Winter provision, which season being diligently and industriously improved;
possesses our garners with desired plenty, yea the poor and needy have a
portion of it, even that which falls from the hand of the reaper, which they
ought laboriously to glean and gather up, to relieve their present and future
necessity, and therefore the wisest of men has this maxim, as a motive
inducing us to take opportunity, he that gathers in Summer is a son of
Wisdom, but he that sleeps in Harvest is a son that causes shame, The hand
of the diligent (says he) shall bear rule, but the slothful or negligent
shall be under tribute, the one being dignified with designed honor, the other
dejected in servile vassallage, which should cause us to coll^ct by painful
industry, Prove. 16 26.
those scattered fragments which others count contemptible, and not by
negligence to lose the least, which might any way conduce to supply our
necessity.

And here all vagrants and idle persons, are checked and censured by this
frugall precept, Turpe est cedere oneri luctarique cum officio quod semel
accepisti.
because they gather not by present diligence, what might prevent much ensuing
penury, but sottishly slumbring in the summer of their youth, are suddenly
surprised by inevitable indigence, and overtaken unawares by declining age, Vae
cordibus trepidis and manibus remissis.
for which they have made no seasonable provision, for alas we see many
miserable creatures, instead of gathering by painful industry, by sloathfull
neglect contracting on themselves, the unnecessary burden of wilful poverty,
Divina providentia in voluntate hominis non impenit necessitatem quia si omnia
ev^nirent ex necessitate, praemia bonorum and poena malorum perirent.
whilst indulging their bodies with ease and idleness, the epidemicall disease
of these sinful times, they bereave themselves of that sit refreshment, they
ought to acquire by their honest labor, and surely where youth and health
shall permit a painful progress in our lawful callings, if it be neglected
by extravagant courses, it contracts a curse both on soul and body. There is
in this life no exemption from labor, for any estate or condition of men, Job
5.7.
the great and the small, the rich and the poor have a work to do while
their day does last, for as Eliphas says, Nil sine labor vita dedit
mortalibus.

Nemo piger quamvis Deus in ore habens, victum potest citra laborem acquirere.
Eccles. 9.10.


man is borne to labor, as the sparks to fly upward from the nature of their
element, let us therefore not wave nor decline by commission, our duty in
gathering what lies in our way, but what work soever our hand finds to do,
let us labor to do it even with all our might, because in the grave unto
which we are going, there is neither counsel, wisdom nor work.

The event or success of the labors of men is very various as experience
shows, Causas corruptelarum non illecebris sed in cordibus habemus.

Illuc est sapere, non quod ante pedes modo est videre, sed etiam illa quae
futura sunt prospicere.


some rising early and going to bed late, eat rather the bread of carfulness
then industry, some run like Asahell swift as a Roe, and yet attain not the end
of their race, because they propound to themselves in their aims, the pleasures
and profits of the presenc time, and some spend their strength both of brain
and body, in gathering things impertinent and merely superfluous, troubling
themselves to conform their garb, to the Camelion change of all fantastic
fashions.

Non magnas populolautitias paravit Christus, sed pane hordeaceo and aridis
piscibus co^tentos esse oportuit, Call.

Cum vult homo recte agere non potest, quia quando potuit noluit.

De alio in aliud transit homo quaerens, requiem ubi non est.

Qui non est hodie, eras minus aptus erit.


These follow not the precept of our blessed Savior, in gathering for present
or future necessity, because such industry supplies not our want, but rather
increases it, by profuse expense of wealth, for that which we should gather to
maintain the Gospel, to support the Commonweal, or supply the poors
necessity, is miserably scattered in such paths of prodigality, of which we
may say what needed this waste?

We have but our day assigned unto us, which for brevity of life is like a hand
breadth, and yet these few days are even full of trouble, and many
counterblasts to scatter our comforts, yet they are not embittered by lawful
industry, which puts us on the actions of laudable employment, but rather by
negligence which doubles our distress, and draws on misery by insensible
degrees, for the sluggard lusts and finds nothing, Prove. 13.4. Prove. 10.4.

Crastinus dies tuus non est, hodiernus est, Hodie quaeso hac hora, jam age
quod agendum est.


but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat, he becomes poor that
slacketh his hand, but the hand of the diligent makes rich, These Elegies
which set forth the praise of industry, are used in Scripture as goods to
excite us, to awake from the slumber of supine remissness, and to gather up
supplies for our own and others wants.

Gather up, etc,
This precept of our Savior should be always prevalent to persuade us
industriously to gather food by labor, Habemus colligendi mandatum, ergo
parts nostras non omittamus.
since several expressions of divine favor, have been showed to men in the way
of their callings, for when Jacob was busied in that painful service of
deceitful Laban his unkind Uncle, the Lord took a view of his labor and
affliction, Non quod nos Deo placemus propter nostram solitudinem, sed propter
Christum: sine fide Deum placere non possumus.
and gave him comfort by a special providence, transferring upon him such
outward blessings, as made others to envy his augmented riches, and calling
him away did also provide for his peace and safety in the midst of dangers.

Acts 7 22. Act 7 29. Exodus 3.1.
When humble Moses whose Princely education, adorned him highly with all humane
learning, became an exile in favor of Gods people, with whom he chose to
partake of affliction, Vbi tuus amor es^ Domine, labor non est sed sapor.
He feeds the sheep of Jethro and leads them, to the backside of the desert
even unto mount Horeb, where the Lord was pleased to reveal himself, by
miraculous means to confirm his message, and to take him from that poor and
obscure employment, Acts 7.35.
to become the Prince and judge of his people, which dearly proves his pious
labors, were crowned with the comfort of divine approbation.

David was employed in the trade of a sheepherd, 1 Samuel 16.11. Psalm. 78.71. 1
Kings 19.19. Amos 1.1.
when Samuel was sent to anoint him King of Israel, and Elisha was plowing with
twelve yoke of Oxen, when the Prophets Mantle was cast upon him, So Amos was
among the herdsmen of Tekoa when the voice of the Lord first came unto him, and
the Apostles were busied in mending their nets, Matthew. 4.21.
when called by Christ to be fishers of men.

Which examples prove not that men may aspire, Observato modum: nam rebus in
omnibus illud optimum erit, si quis tempus spectaverit aptum. Hesiod. Ester
2.17.
above their present particular station, but that none are excluded by their
painful industry from the dignity assigned them by divine providence, for
though Ester lived retired in the house of her kinsman, and went not to the
Court to seek for preferment, yet the state of royalty designed her by God,
was conferred by his bounty in the appointed time.

Labor we then to collect by industry what we formerly scattered by negligent
omission, Verbum Domini viget in aeternum, non honor, non percunia, neque
aliqua terrenasubstantia.

Anguibus exuitur tenui cum p^lle vetustas, cur nos angusta condition sumus.


since we have not only the precept of our Savior, but the practice of his
Saints inciting us to duty, which should put us upon a strict inquisition,
concerning our former deficiencie herein, that so being humbled for our
manifold failings, our renewed repentance may produce a reformation.

Indeed our endeavors should be carried on, in a conscientious regard of Gods
sacred precept, producing a principle of internal dejection, Mill parit
luctus, mortalibus una voluptas. Genesis 3.19.
from the only original of all our labor, it being imposed on our father
Adam, as a penalty inflicted for his pride and disobedience, that in the sweat
of his face he should eat his bread, till his return to the earth from whence
he was taken, Quia tui plenus non sum, ideo mihi oneri sum, Aug. 13. Eccles.
2.13.

Magno animo fortis perferre pericula fuerit, adeo a teneris assuescere multu^
est.


and therefore Solomon* in his sacred retractations, having given his heart to
search and find out wisdom, draws this conclusion from his various
obs^rvation, of our miserable progress in this painful pilgrimage, This sore
travel (says he) has God given to the sons of men to humble them thereby,
or* as is rendered by reverend Janius, to be exercised in, as our later
translation has it, Let us then I say from this internal principle, Hoc est
veresapere, dum exinanita omni confidentia and correcta pertinacia, nos Dei
authoritas ad se rapit mentesque nostras sic occupat, ut nobis nihil rectum
sit, nisi quod illa praescribit, Call. in Ioh.
stoop down to gather up refreshing food by labor, and when outward success
shall not answer our industry, let us thereby exercise our faith and patience,
which will be a sign that our humble hearts, have h^gher aims then wealth or
worldly honors, expecting approbation and satisfaction from him, who can only
fill the soul with rest and true refreshment.

Gather up, etc.
This command to gather up the fragments which remain, presupposes a
scattering in our plentiful sacietie, for then are we prone to contemn the
creatures, which otherwhiles we prize to supply our necessity, which has been
the cause that many of us, have so riotously abused these temporal blessings,
Sub velamine necessitatis incidi in laqueos voluptatis, and dum ad quiet^m
satietatis and indigentiae molestia transeo, in ipso transitu mihi insidiatur
laquaeus concupiscentiae.
because we know not in our own experience, wha^ woeful effects are produced by
such want, for did we consider these outward mercies, as pledges and tokens of
divine favors, it would cause us carefully to collect and improve them, to
glorify the Donor and purchaser of them, it being surely a crying sin,
irreverently or intemperately to abuse such blessings, and a high provocation
of exasperated justice, to plague us with indigence to our utter destruction.

2 Samuel 23.17. Major sum and ad major genitus quam ut ma^cipium sim mei
corporis.

Occasio nunquam tibi defuit tu semper occasioni.


David would not drink of that desired water, presented unto him by his valiant
worthies, but poured it out as a sacrifice to the Lord, esteeming it their
blood who purchased it with peril, and shall we neglect or abuse the
creatures, to vanity, intemperance, excess or riot, whose forfeited right is
again bought in unto us, by a precious price, more worth then heaven and earth.

Ille placeret in munere, qui placebatin cord.

Magna custodia tibi necessaria est quoniam ante oculus judicis vivis.

Omnis fortuna in sensu habitat sapientis. Genesis 32.10.


Have we then so reverently esteemed the creatures, as when being presented to
our view or taste, we have lifted up our hearts and our eyes unto heaven, to
magnify his mercy that gives us food convenient, or have we not rather out of
custom then conscience, performed the duty remisly and coldly, or ingratefully
omitted it to Gods dishonor, and to the danger and detriment of our selves and
others.

Have we been so truly contented and satisfied, with what our estate and
condition affords, that with holy Jacob we humbly acknowledge we are less
then the least of all Gods mercies, or have we not rather repined and murmured,
Est quaestus magnus pietas, cum animo sua sort contento. Numb. 11.10. Psalm.
78.25. Psalm. 78.31. Luke 16.19.

Quamdiu quis permistus est turbis, and in multitudine fluctu antium volutatur,
non vacat Deo, nec potest esse sanctus.

Qui Deo appropinquas non vestium quaere ornamenta sed morum.

Poenitentes serico and purpura induti, Christu^ induere sincere non possunt.

Christus ipse in mundum venit, and Patri se obedientem praeberet. Acts 10.38.


weeping with the Israelites at the doors of their tents, who not content with
the bread of Angels, had their palats pleased with Quails to their cost, so too
many of us inordinatly desiring, with voluptuous Dives to fare deliciously,
have passed the limits of Christian sobriery, and contracted that want which
attends wastfulnesse.

Have we taken pains to collect and gather up, the scattered fragments of our
former superfluities, improving our food, our apparel and all things, for the
fitting and furthering us to do God service? or have we not rather to our shame
and rebuke, taken too much liberty in these times of humiliation, wherein being
called to fasting and mourning, old hearts and new garments have proclaimed our
folly? for if we consider how cold and perfunctory, our performances have
been, even when judgments lay at our door, we may justly admire they are not
cast back, as dung in our faces to our deserved confusion.

Consider we then in our serious meditation, what collections we have made in
sincere obedience, and from what principles we have proceeded, in the daily
progress of our painful labors, that eying the footsteps of our blessed
Savior, who went about doing good continually, we make it a part of our joy
and solace, Quum implos videmus tantopere in pravis suis actionibus satagere,
pudcat nos torporis n^st^i. Matthew. 20.6. Matthew. 24.46.
to finish the work which he set us to do, and regardfully to veiw what
profitable employments, best suit with our general particular callings, that
nothing be omitted by pride or negligence, conducing to the benefit of our
selves or others, shall our ill-fixt-eyes be gazing on the world, when our
hands should be working in the vinyard of our Master, or shall with the evil
and slothful servant, suppose he defers or delays his coming? no rather let
us gather up what mercy afford us, and put into our hand by a precious
providence, that we may with comfort hear his sacred approbation, well done
good and faithful servant. Matthew. 25.23.


Gather up, etc.
The second general propounded unto us is the gathering up of treasures for
our spiritual state, consisting in precepts to direct our way, that we may not
stumble in difficult passages, secondly, Deus nos adjuvat and ut sciamus and ut
amemus, erga Pios in ultima reru^ omnium desperatione, dum l a mors in oculis
versatur, ab hominu^ and mundi intuitu se avertens, in Deum vitae and mortis
arbitrum conjecerit oculos.

Colligit thesauros quae manent in aeternum.


in promises of several kinds which serve for soul physic in every disaster,
thirdly, in observations concerning the godly subject in this life to many
revolutions, yet always delivered from danger and distress, as seems fit in
his wisdom, who knows what is best.

A Christian is compared to that prudent householder, who brings out of his
treasure things new and old, and having gathered by painful industry, a mass
of divine and moral excellencies, he is careful also to collect
opportunities, in dispensing and disposing them for his Masters honor, using
all blessings conferred upon him not to serve himself in ambitious ostentation,
but counts it the sum of his terrene felicity, to do good unto all in their
various occasions, his care is not so much to gather things temperall, which
sad and perish both in keeping and using, as to trade for the treasures of the
new Jerusalem, even those durable riches which abide to eternity, and therefore
he collects divine precepts, to direct his way as the shining light, Psalm.
119.105.
that when others stumble who walk in darkness, he may not precipitate into
sin and error, this lamp and lantern is able to direct us, Vna est in
trepida mihi re medicina Iehovae, cor patrium os verax, omnipotensque manus:

O homoin pietate and puritate, incipe celeriter currere!


when our paths unpaved are most dark and slipperie, for which cause holy David
still gathered them up, as peculiar treasures for divine direction, yea all the
Saints have esteemed it their honor, to stoop to Christ's Scepter in his
sacred precepts, his divine Decalogue even limming to the life, the absolute
perfection of a plenall purity.

Dominus per Evangelium nos vocat, nos vocanti per fidem respondemus.
The choicest expression of our dearest affection, is our cordial obedience to
Gods righteous precepts, as our Savior witnesses, saying to his servants, if
ye love me then keep my Commandments, this is the touchstone which tries the
gold transcending in its purity all others mettalls, the balance of the
sanctuary, to prove its worth and weight, from those part^all performances
which are lighter then vanity, for though, hypocrite like Herod may do many
things, Actum egi nihil pro^^ci, ^leum and op^tam perdidi, ne plas altia.
seemingly gathering up some sacred precepts, yet universal obedience bewraies
his guile of spirit, for here he stands still and can go no further.

The practick part of Religion and holiness, is the acting of precepts in a
pure conversation, Psalm. 119.100. Quomodo tenebit legi^ doctrinam, qui legis
animam quantum in se est extinguit, nam lex sine Christo inanis est, nec
quicquam habet solidi, quo igitur pro prius quisque novit Christum, tantundem
profecit in Dei sermon, Calv.

O homo in praeceptione intellige, quid debeas habere, Aug.

Iubet non juvat lex. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Ier 4.2. Esaias 26.4. James 1.6.
Psalm. 65.2. Psalm 96.9. Levit. 26.2.


not contenting our selves with a naked Theory, but clothing it comely with
pious practice, that our doing and suffering in the cause of God, may outstrip
all hypocrites and carnal professors, who please themselves in gathering the
husk, or superficial shell of seeming sanctity.

Precepts for action are those divine dictates, that call for the duties of
Piety and Charity, being properly reduced into these two heads to which any of
their branches may fitly be referred, precepts for suffering consider the
cause, and carriage of the patient under the Cross, that he suffer innocently
respecting the one, that he suffer patiently in regard of the other.

For pious action they are faithful Monitors, calling us continually to
particular duties, as to love the Lord with all our heart, with all our soul,
and with all our might, to fear him, serve him, and swear by his name, and
that in truth, in judgment, and righteousness, to trust in the Lord, and that
for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength: to invocate his
name, with faith and confidence, because he is a God that hears prayer, to
worship him purely with a holy worship, not defiled with the dictates of other
men's inventions, that we keep his Sabbaths, and reverence his Sanctuary, Ezekiel.
20.12.
which are sacred pledges of his precious favor.

Gather up, etc.
When holy David had sweetly set forth, Iubet Deus aliquid quae non possumus,
ut novimus quid ab illo pettere debemus.
the sacred progress of his zeal and piety, of which the 119 Psalm is a
Crystal mirror wherein it may be seen, he comes to epitomize those divine
excellencies, so copiously set forth in several expressions, into this
abridgement or concluding corrollary, This I had because I kept thy precepts.
Psalm. 119.56.


The indefiatigable industry he used in gathering up such abounding store of
these transcending treasures, appears in his vigilance who would rise at
midnight, Psalm. 119.118. Psalm. 119.62.
to praise the Lord for his righteous judgments, His eyes preventing even the
night watches, to meditate in the Word his delightful employment, The law of
Gods mouth being dearer unto him, Psalm 119.72.
then many thousands of gold and silver, neither lost he ought by that painful
industry, when in casting his account he concludes with comfort, Psalm. 119.104.
saying, by thy precepts have I got understanding, therefore I hate all the
ways of falsehood.

Job 23.12. Bona conscientia est laetitia interna.
So holy Job professes his integrity, in prizing Gods word above his necessary
food, as a conspicuous evidence of his sincere affection, and inevitable
argument of his sound uprightness, which may justly convince them of damnable
impiety, Psalm. 119.111.
who slight and contemn Gods sacred precepts, looking upon them as Laws
repealed, which are now of no force to obliege the conscience: but the
righteous take these precepts, as their heritage for ever, because they account
them the joy of their heart, Psalm. 119.89.
knowing that Gods Word is settled in Heaven, its power and permanence enduring
to eternity.

Fides omnia in se continet.
The benefit ensuing from such sedulity in collecting precepts for divine
direction, appears in the pure conversation of the godly, who use them as lamps
in darkness and difficulty, 2 Chronicles. 20.2.
thus pious Jehoshaphat being almost environed with a multitude of enemies
though of several Nations, threatening a direful and destructive war, from
which he could possibly make no evasion, yet goes not with Saul to the Witch at
Endor, neither to Baalzebub the god of Ekron, but being well principled in
sacred precepts, Psalm. 50.15. Prima quidem in precibus obtinet interior
affectus. 2 Chronicles. 20 12.
he repayres to the Lord by fasting and prayer, and that with abnegation of all
carnal confidence, or humane help in his present necessity, not knowing
whither to turn for succor, he fixes his eyes upon God alone.

Gather up, etc.
Esaias 50.10. Psalm. 46 1. Psalm. 88 1. Ester 4.16.
When the righteous walk in darkness and can see no light, the precept directs
them and shows them a way, even to trust in the Lord, and stay on their God,
who is a present help in the time of trouble, when these are afflicted with
Haman, they will pray, and fast with Ester, when the Church is in calamity, the
precepts of the Lord and practice of his Saints, being held forth in Scripture
as a guide unto us, for Gods precepts should be those intimate Remembrancers,
with whom we should consult in all our exigencies, Demonstratio nihil relinquit.
using their assistance and familiar direction, which are able to furnish us
with all heavenly wisdom.

If several tentations on the right hand or the left, Hosea 6.1.
shall carry us captive into any sinful way, the precepts of repentance and
sorrowful contrition, must pave a path for our ensuing comfort, for as the
deviation from divine direction, Optimus portus poenitentiae est mutatio
consilii, Hoc Poenitentiae initium est, hic ad pietatem ingressus, tristitiam
expeccat is nostris concipere, ac malorum nostrorum sensu vulnerari.
is the miserable cause of our many aberrations, so the pious progress of
sincere humiliation puts us in capacity of consolatory refreshment: I know such
tenets are now traduced, as if they were Popish or did plead for merit, or
should imply that our personal performances, are some way satisfactory to
divine j^stice, which we abhor as most derogatory, to the meritorious sacrifice
of our all-sufficient Savior, who having finished the wo^k of our redemption,
presents us to his Father in his own imputed righteousness, and yet he calls us
by his Word and Spirit, John 4.29. Phil. 2.12. Ex pecca^i fumo ortae sunt
lachrymae. Revel. 2.12.
to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, yea, seasonably to
remember from whence we are fallen, commanding to repent and do our first works.

If errors in doctrine come masked unto us, in the specious pretext of sacred
verity, Emoritur serpens hominis co^tracta saliva, sic vox veritatis,
interficit errorem.
we must speedily bring them to the light of Gods precepts, which will clearly
discover their palpable vanity, and therefore we wonder not that the subtle
Papists, present us the Script^re in an unknown tongue, nor that Sectaries
prohibit us the public Ministry, because it draws out the sword of the
Spirit, for although this many headed Hydra, seem very formidable to the faint
and fearful, yet these sacred precepts will so maule and wound her, that she
shall not be able to do us prejudice, Lege operum dicit Deus, fac quod jubeo,
Lege fide^ dicitur Deo, Da quod ^ubes, and jube quod vis. Aug.
but we may not think that such knowledge collected, and only reserved for
vain ostentation, will prove a fit antidote to preserve us from infection, or
secure our souls from the snares of error, we must therefore with David hide
the word in our hearts, as a means to keep us from such contagion, that we be
not led away with the evil of the times, nor fall from our steadfastness into
pits of perdition.

And as precepts for piety are comfortably collected, as lights to lead us
through difficult passages, so precepts of charity are also fit monitors,
Levit. 19 9.
concu^ring together to call us to duty, for these call upon us to extend
comp^ssion, to the poor the stranger, Deuteronomy. 26.13. Deuteronomy. 16.11.
the fatherless and widow, with whose sorrowful condition we should daily
sympathize, condoling their distresses with continual pity.

Homo inquam natus de muliere, brevi vivens tempore, repletur multis miseriis.
Esaias 58.7.

Oportet ut sciamus nostra abundantia sublevandamesse frat^um mopiam, Call. in
Ioh.


We cannot enumerate the various calamities, which are daily incident to our
frail condition, as sickness, poverty, imprisonment, banishment, desertions,
dejections, and mental terrors, here precepts of charity have their proper
objects to reflect upon, in their fit opportunities, of feeding the hungry,
clothing the naked, visiting the sick, and harboring the stranger, and never
had we more cause to excite, our dull depraved hearts unto duty, then now when
our poor afflicted brethren, have endured such miseries by a savage civil
War, how should we even collect all occasions, to appear in the posture of
pity and charity by gathering up the fragments of our own superfluities, to
relieve the necessities of our suffering neighbors.

Non sciunt de lumine aliquid a stimare, quorum est in tenebris habitatio. Amos
6.1. Amos 6.6.
But ah the stupidity which sin has contracted, upon all estates and conditions
of men, who gather not up such precepts of charity, nor collect such motives of
commiseration, but being themselves even at ease in Zion, they forget the
calamities of afflicted Joseph, having no bowels of mercy to alleviate their
burdens, nor to succor and support them in such deep dejections, Lacerati
sunt viri, tractae sunt matronae, infantes necati, nulli licuit in
possessionibus suis secu^um esse, itinera non poterant esse tutissima. Ezekiel.
16.49.
yet the same distresses which others have endured in these sorrowful times of
our sad visitation, may prove our portion who have hitherto been spared, if we
proceed to provoke an incensed Majesty, for England has paralleld the sins of
Sodom, in pride, fullness of bread and abundance of idleness, and now if she
strengthen not the hands of the needy, she aggravates her guilt and hastens
her judgment.

Quod a Deo recipiat pius, id rursus pro charitatem in sinum fratrum dispensat.

O peccata nostra nunquam satis deflenda, annon oportet quotidie hoc agere!


Has it then been our care to collect such precepts, as the Word holds out for
our ample direction, pouring forth our souls to satisfy the hungry, and
drawing out our store to relieve the afflicted? have we contributed to them?
not only with our purses, but also with the current of our prayers and tears,
putting up frequently our passionate petitious, and sorrowful supplications at
the Throne of Grace, if we find our selves thus fervently affected, with the
sorrowful sufferings of the Church of God, Romans 12.5.
it may prove us such members as are truly sensible, in partaking in the
dolours of the mystical body.

Gather up, etc.
But a higher gradation in our charitable progress, Studebant Pios quantum in
se est, vagos and errantes colligere in ovile Domini, quicquid enim facultatis
Deus singulis distribuit, charitatis exercendae vult esse organum vel
adminiculum. Call in Act. cap. 6. verse. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

Nisi a semetipso deficiat, ad eum qui supra se est non appropinquat.


is our care to collect soul comforts for them, which as they transcend in
unvaluable excellency, so are they permanent in endless duration, and
therefore we must gather with double diligence, what lies in our way by
opportune occasion, reserving distributions for particular exigencies, as
providence shall call us to make dispensation.

Have we then been industrious in gathering up knowledge, that we might be able
to instruct the ignorant, or have we collected such zeal and courage, that we
may be fit to admonish the unruly? have we labored for strength to support the
weak, and for moderation to be patient toward all men? or have we not rather
been deeply deficient, or totally omissive in these charitable duties?

Have we studied to bind up the broken hearted, Dolentem non potest co^solari,
qui non concordat dolori.

Emollis debet animus, ut afflictio congruat, congruens inhaereat, inhaerens
trahat, Greg. in Mora^.


by gathering up balm to consolidate such fractures, and then applied it to to
the wounded spirit, with the compassionate hand of a wise and charitable
discretion? or have we not rather like unskilful Chyrurgions, used Corrosives,
when Lenatives had been more seasonable, or cauteriz'd to stupifie the sense of
suffering, when we should have searched into the root of the matter?

Have we labored sincerely to reduce erring souls, Primordia conversarum
blandis refovenda sunt modis, nam qui sine lenitate erudit, exasperare potius
quam corrigere novit.
preposterously transported by seducing spirits, by gathering up truths to
tender unto them, as shining lights to show them their mistakes, or have we not
rather by bitter morosity, widened the breach and highthened our divisions, by
paving a path for those schismatic scandals, and sad separations which we
justly grieve at.

Having thus collected for divine direction, Amabilis est sapientia in
cognitione rerum.
these practical precepts of piety and charity, it rests that we gather up
some suffering instructions, to point at the way of our passive obedience.

Gather up, etc,
Matthew. 10.38.
Our blessed Savior prescribes the platform, positively saying unto his
Disciples, If any man will follow me, he must resolve to deny himself, Luke
9.23. Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine coepit, sanguine succrevit,
sanguine finis finis erit.
yea not only so, but must take up his cross, by a daily constant cont^nued
endeavor, for there is no immunity in respect of persons, nor any exemption in
regard of time, but as Christ first suffered, then entered into glory, so must
all his members have their measure of conformity.

Himself was that pure and immaculate Lamb, in whose blessed mouth was never
found guile, 1 Pet. 2.22.
who did no iniquity, but fulfilled all righteousness, required by the Law in
most absolute perfection, Matthew. 3.15.
yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him by affliction, Esaias 53.10.
and to put him to grief by most passionate dolours, that he might be a Patron
and pattern unto us, of humble patient and innocent suffering. Vt statua in sua
bas^, ^^c etiam vir bonus and virtutis studiosus in suo proposito constans and
immobilis esse debet.


This was the condition of the Prophets, Apostles and holy Martyrs under all
persecutions, who being innocent of those horrid imputations, which were
fastened upon them by calumnious aspersions, yet suffered with patience what
their cruel adversaries, in the evil of those times inflicted upon them, Heb.
11.36. Christi^nus despicit and contemnit omnia quae sunt in potestate
mortalium. 2 Chronicles. 24.20.
a catalogue whereof is presented unto us, by the Holy Ghost in Heb. 11,
showing the various and heavy afflictions, Gods people have endured from
persecuting enemies, Heb. 11.37 38.

They were tried by cruel mockings and scourgings, by bonds and imprisonments
in the lowest dungeons, both tempted with the flatteries of seducing
Sycophants, and assaulted with the fears of their humane frailties; Quanta enim
illa sunt indicia magni animi, cum quis crucem suam tollit and Christum
sequitur, cum principium surias contemnit cum ferocia saevaque verbera
aspernatur, cum coesus denique gladiis bidentis instar, neque murmr neque
querimonia consternationem ostendit.
yet submitted to be stoned as was faithful Zechariah, to be sawn asunder as
was holy Isayah, to be slain with the sword as was James the Apostle, or
beheaded as Saint Paul by flagitious Nero, to wander about in sheeps skins and
goats skins, being destitute, aff^icted, and tormented with terrors, yea
compelled to take up their woeful habitations, in deserts, dens, mountains, and
caves of the earth: and as we may read in Ecclesiastical Histories, were tried
with all various and exquisite tortures, yet never declined their pious
profession, nor turned their backs on Christ's sacred precepts, but by constant
perseverance, overcame all cruelties, being more then conquerours both in life
and death: but having occasion in the subsequent discourse, to treat by
observation of their several afflictions; I only drink here of the brook in
the way, referring the prosecution to its proper place.

Labor we then to gather up the precepts, of a holy harmless and pure
conversation, that we may by well doing adorn our profession, and put to
silence the ignorant and foolish, for we ought not to suffer as evil doers,
Porro dum confuse omnia miscentur, ut Diabolus tenebras sparge^do totum mu^dum
ordinem videtur evertere, sciamus sursum in Coelis lucer^ Dei provide^tiam, ut
tandem quae turbata sunt, componat.
or as pragmaticall busibodies, in other men's matters, but rather as Christians
that we need not be ashamed, but may glorify God in our cause and carriage:
This will convince the wicked of their folly, and give us encouragement to wayt
on the Lord, committing our souls unto him in our sufferings, as a faithful
Creator who will vindicate our innocence.

Gather up etc.
In collecting treasures for spiritual emolument, which was the second
propounded general, we first considered precepts both active and passive, as
lights to direct us in universal obedience, and now are to treat of the second
branch, calling us to gather up the precious promises, which have various
virtues in their several effects, both in purging, pardoning, healing, and
reviving, some serve like Physic to evacuate corruption, and other as cordials
in the qualmes of desertion, some serve as props to support our faith, or as
brazen pillars to sustain our confidence, Vix centesimus quisque apprehendit
quae unica est consolationis materia.
in brief they comprize a sacred quintessence, of all transcending and
desirable excellencies, which should cause us industriously to gather them up,
and to keep and use them both in weal and woe.

The promises of God are a rich revenue whereupon we should live in our lowest
condition, it being a prerogative peculiar to the Saints, to spend of this
stock in their particular pressures, Psalm. 119.49, 50. Priv legium quasi priva
lex aut beneficium.
and therefore holy David who was well acquainted, with motives inducing to
divine mercy, entreats the Lord to remember his promise, wherein he caused
him to put his trust, professing it was his comfort in trouble, even a
quickening word to cheer and revive him, yea the joy of his soul, Psalm.
119.121.
and the soul of his joy, as he there declares in patheticall expressions.

Great cause have the faithful to rejoice in the promises, as the Magna Charta
of all their privileges, 2 Cor. 1.20.
because in Christ Jesus they are Yea and Amen, to all that truly have an
interest in him, these trusting in the Lord have his Word to assure them, Psalm.
125.1. Matthew. 16.18.
that they shall be as mount Sion which cannot be removed, The very gates of
hell shall never prevail against the Church that is built on this Rock, which
implies not only a general promise, Secundum modum revelationis and
communicationis.
of such sacred immunities to the mystical body, but is also applied by
particular members, infeoffed by the Spirit in this sacred Charter.

Gather up, etc.
Ita per gradus promissionum sursum ascendunt ut tamen simplices maneant in sui
dejectione.
Let us then gather up these most precious promises, as our certain support in
the saddest trials, and let us not hang on that broken reed, the arm of flesh
which will surely deceive us, for what ever our state or condition be, we may
find suitable and seasonable promises to sustain our souls and supply our
wants, with consolatory refreshments in every calamity.

When the spirit is broken with sorrow for sin, by an humble apprehension of
our miserable condition, no earthly excellencies can give it true comfort, for
it thirsts for those waters that flow from the Sanctuary, Habet enim Christus
omnes beatudinis and aeternae vitae parts se inclusas, quas nobis Evangelium
offert.
then only Christ in the voice of the Gospel, speaks life and peace and
consolation to it, making it a cordial of his merciful promises, which
revives and cheers it in the deepest distresses.

Gather we up then in the sunshine of propsperity, what may serve for soul
shelter in storms of desertion, In extremitate maxima me juvat and juvabit
Jehovah.

O sons vitae, vena aquarum viventium, quando v^niam a ^aquas d^lce^i^is ru^^,
Aug in Sol.


that when creature comforts shall fail us as a brook, we may in this fountain
find full consolation, which will sweeten the cup of our bitterest calamities,
by dropping in a word of joy and refreshment, even making our Baca a heaven
upon earth, and changing the taste of those waters of Marah.

When corruption prevails like a mighty Giant leading us captive to the law of
sin, so that with the Apostle we cry out of our misery desiring to be delivered
from this body of death, Romans 7 23, 24.
we have the Lord engaged by promise, not only to pardon but subdue our
iniquities, Micah 7 18 19.
yea, to cast our sins into the depths of the sea, for he retains not his
anger but delights in mercy.

If Satan assault us with his fiery darts, dipped in the poison of his cruel
malice, to drive us to despair of divine succor, Peccata defleantur quo
defleta debeantur, Doleat reus and deleat Deus. Psalm. 3.2.
saying there is no help for us in our God, we have the promise as a precious
antidote against the venom of all such tentations, the Lord averring for our
certain solace, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee, this promise was made
unto valiant Joshuah, who led Gods people to their earthly Canaan, Josh. 1.5.
when he was to encounter with Gyantlike enemies, that he might not doubt but
be sure of victory, now the Apostle gathers up this word of comfort, Heb. 13 6.
as of special use in all our necessities, inferring from it that to answer
all tentations, Romans 16.20. Haec vera fidei probatio est quum Deus homines
quasi in tenebris ambulare jubet, Call. in Ioh. cap 6.
we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, this only is he even the God of
peace, who shall shortly tread Satan down under our feet, and cause us in
confidence of his truth and faithfulness, even to trample on the necks of our
spiritual enemies.

Gather up, etc.
If creature comforts shall deny their assistance, or prove deficient in our
necessary supply, let us cast all our care, and fix all our confidence, on him
that is the maker and feeder of creatures, saying with Habbakuk, Though the
figtree shall not blossom, Hab. 3.17, 18. Sed quia nos caro semper ad sua
commoda sollicitat, notandum est eorum sponte curam a C^risto suscepi,
quiscipsos negligunt.
and though there should be no fruit on the vines, though the Olive should
fail, and the fields yield no meat, and that there should be no herd in the
stalls, though the flocks be cut off from the fold by famine, and nothing
should remain for our bodily subsistence, yet faith will find out a satisfying
object, rejoicing in the Lord, even the God of our salvation, who is able and
willing to support and sustainus, with means or without, as seems best to his
wisdom, Matthew. 4 4.
since man does not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of
his moutb.

But some will say if divine contemplation, Object. Dicet aliquis non esse
istud perpetuum quod saepe videamus pios dum prorsus regno Dei sunt addicti,
fame tamen confici, and propemodum tabescere: Respondeo Christum etiamsi hoc
modo fidem n^st am probare velit, respicere tamen e coelo nostram inopiam, and
de ea sublevanda quantum nobis expedit esse sollicitu^, Call.
could fill the hungry when food is wanting, or spiritual graces those living
waters, quench the most violent thirst of the body, then maxims of this nature
might be suitable supports to keep the creature from a perishing condition, and
the gathering up of promises might happily help us in those heavy exigents not
evaded by nature, but we see the devouring vulture famine, seaseth
promiscuously on the godly and the wicked, making a prey of them both without
difference, by bringing them confusedly to the King of terrors.

We do not aver that by gathering up the promises, as our certain support in
several calamities, we should plead an immunity from any trial, incident to
man in his transitory pilgrimage, for our life is a warfare wherein several
assailants, cast piercing arrows of heart-wounding pressures, the faithful
being the mark, which their malice most ayms at, whose innocence renders them
obnoxious to such cruelty.

^uid indignatis quare and indignatio nil aliud quam accessio mali sunt. Acts
17.25. Esaias 51.20.

Nihil enim exasperat fervorem vulneris, quam ferendi impatientia.


Yet men that are sharers of like afflictions, may be distinguished by their
differing postures, which are as dissonant in the same distresses, as the
suffering subjects are in opposite quality, the one still praying and praising
God, like Paul and Silas in the the loathsome prison, the other murmuring and
belching out blasphemies, behaving themselves like wild Bulls in a net, by
which we may see the vitility of collecting, both precepts and promises for our
various exigencies, the very crumbs and fragments of spiritual refection, being
abundantly useful in our bodily necessities.

Da nobis inter Scillam and Charybdem, ita tendere, and tenere medium, ut
utroque periculo evitato salva perveniamus ad portum, Aug. Sol.
The innumerable troubles of our care consuming life, both in mental anxieties
and obvious calamities, should put us upon an exact sedulity, in collecting and
reserving the precious promises, for these are Panchrestick or universal
medicines, which serve for soul Physic in every disaster, they are hidden
Manna to sustain the godly, who have meat to eat which the world cannot know
of, these promises invest us by divine application, Ad te solamen unicum
nostrum quem a long quasi stellam matutinam, and Solemn justitiae, vix
lachrymantibus oculis in littore, coelestis patriae nos expectante^ videmus.
with a robe of righteousness which covers our deficiencie, and convey unto us
a plenall consolation, in the promised possession of our heavenly inheritance,
these are our evidence giving clear demonstration, what God has decreed in
his eternal purpose, yea teaching us to read all the glorious characters
written in the records of his revealed counsel.

Having showed the profit of collecting precepts, and also promises for our
spiritual comfort, it rests that we gather up some holy observations, of the
state of the godly in their various revolutions, being sometimes oppressed by
cruel enemies, Id ut fiat disca^^^^ non sapere, sed in rebus confusis
nihilominus sperare prosperum eventu^ quum Deum sequimur ducem qui suos nu^quam
frustratur, Calvin.
prevailing over them by power and policy, sometimes sorely lasht with the
scourg of wicked tongues, piercing like swords into parts most sensible,
sometime transported by gusts of tentation, and sudden counterblasts of erring
passion in prosperous events in peril of security, and in adverse occurrents
of deep impatience.

Gather up, etc.
Such observations are especially useful when we apply and appropriate them to
particular occasions, and by calling to remembrance Gods wonderful works,
find props to sustain us in our several dejections, for as the meanest
morsels of refreshing food, are grateful and acceptable to the hungry captive,
Qui enim improvidus ab adversitate deprehenditur, quasi ab host dormiens
invenitur.
so the crumbs and fragments of such sacred observations, may prove reviving
cordials in heart qualming trials, it is true, our scattered notions, while they
lie dispersed, are like severed coals which be presently extinct, but being
laid together, and blown up to be kindled, we enjoy the benefit of their heat
and light.

When the sacred Psalmist had sweetly warbled forth the glorious promises of
Gods gracious providence extended in the many particular extremities of exile
sickness, captivity, Psalm. 107.
and shipwreck, he collects this conclusion from what he had gathered, in his
true experience of those profitable passages, who so is wise will observe these
things and they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 107.43.


In gathering observations we may wisely obtain the knowledge of Gods
faithfulness extended to his own, whom he supporteth and sustaineth in all
afflictions, relieving and rescuing them in the needful time of trouble, they
may indeed with Daniel be cast into the den, Dan 6.16, 22. Dan. 3.27.
but God will shut up the mouths of the lions, they may with those worthies be
thrown into the furnace, and yet the fire have no power on their bodies, they
may with Jeremiah be plunged in the dungeon, Ier. 38.5, 6. Consilium tamen
Spiritus Sancti certum est* quicquid machinati fuerint impii, nihil omnino sine
Dei nutu and providentia fuisse actum, hic ergo optimum docemur, quantu^vis
effraeni lib^^i^e Satan exaltet cum impus omnibus dominari, tamen semper Dei
manum ut invitos trahat quocunque valu^rit, Calv in Act.
and stick fast in the mire an uncomfortable posture, till Ethiopian
Ebed-melech compassionatly co^doling, prevails by petition to procure his
enlargment, wherein we may view what various occurrents, God makes subservient
to his sacred counsel, the Prophet shall preach and proclaim the judgments,
inevitably ensuing to those rebellious Apostates the Princes and people shall
combine together, in a cruel design to put him to death, and the King shall
abuse his Regal power by complying with them in their bloody stratagem whose
merciless intentions were not by fire or sword, to put a period to his
painful sufferings, but by a ling^ing torment of famine, cold, and stench, to
macerate and torture his distressed body, yet in the depth of this dungeon
would the Lord be seen, as once in the mount unto faithful Abraham, using a
Black-more as his gracious instrument, to deliver his servant from this deadly
danger. Acts 12.7.


When imprisoned Peter was sleeping securely, notwithstanding the rage of his
cruel persecutours, Quanto ille potentior est ad salvandum tanto ego sum
securior, Aug. man. cap. 22.
being ready like a lamb to be brought to the slaughter, by the impetuous
virulence of insulting Herod, that juncture of time (at the prayers of the
Church) God wrought his deliverance by the ministry of an Angel, and by an
Angel also destroyed that cursed Tyrant, even then when he was Deified by
flattering Parasites, Act. 12.23.

Acts 23.12. Hic videmus ut impiorum consilii Deus quasi ex transverso occurrat.

Multa quidem sinit eos machinare, and improbos etia^ coelum conatus fluere,
sed tandem ipso articulo demonstrat, se ex coelo ridere, quicquid in terra
sa^agunt homines, Call. in Act.


When those cruel conspiratours who bound themselves by oath, not to eat nor
drink till they had slain St. Paul, had carried on their plot with such close
contrivance, and Satanicall subtilty, as they supposed him their own, the Lord
was pleased to infatuate their counsel, as erst he did the Dictates of crafty
Achitophel, detracting and defeating their cruel project, by the preventing
policy of the prudent Captain, Act. 23.27.

Gather up, etc.
Thus we see it the portion of Gods dearest servants, to be brought by the
wicked into dangers and distresses, being abused, contemned, and rejected by
the World, who want eyes to behold their internal excellency, 1 Cor 4 9.
and therefore the Apostle propounds it as his judgment, that the Saints are
set forth in these later times, as appointed unto death, yea to be made a
spectacle, 2 Cor. 6.5.
to Angels and to men in their sorrowful sufferings, Operu^ Dei non semper
exempla nobis apparent, sed postea te^poris successu consilium nobis suum
apperit, atque hoc cohibendae nostrae audacia aptissimum est fraenum.
enumerating many several calamities, incident to Christians professing the
Gospel, as afflictions, necessities, distresses, imprisonments, stripes,
tumults, labors, watchings and fastings, which shows our condition even limbed
to the life, in the due observation of these various trials, sharpened with
labor in hunger and thirst, being contemned as the filth and offscouring of
all things.

Which justly reproves those self-loving Christians, which cannot bear a
reproach for their Master, but will rather comply with the wicked in their
evil, Quare non mirum est, tam paucos ad ferendam crucem fortes and strenuos
inveniri.

Propone nihil esse, quod tibi accidere non possit, ^on soli^: est prop^ium
nosse futura Dei.


then reprove by their purity the unfruitful works of darkness, the cause of
this is our being unacquainted, with casting up the cost of sincere profession,
and by propounding to our selves such plausible conclusions, as are not
compatible with these observations.

Indeed, next unto the soul whose invaluable worth, appears by the price which
was paid to redeem it, we value fame, as an incomparable treasure, and precious
jewel in our dear esteem, and therefore are very tender and sensible, of any
wound or blemish therein, being deeply impatient when any obloquy, reflects
injuriously upon our reputation, yet by observation we may see the godly, most
subject to this trial in this valley of Baca, for those shall suffer
calumnious aspersions, to render them odious which shine clear by integrity.
Ester 3.8. Opprobria exprobrantium tibi, ceciderunt superme.


There is never wanting some ambitious Haman, to traduce the Church even to
Kings and Princes, representing them as he did the Jews to Ahashuerosh, under
the bitter notion of refractory Rebels, and lading with burdens of guilty
imputations, their precious candor by such cunning policy, that even Royal
authority abused by misprision, may prove the stalking horse of unhallowed
designs.

Gather up, etc. Nehem 6.1. Discamus quamlibet modeste and tranquille se gerant
Christi servi, and ab omni culpa remoti sint, mundi tamen probra effugere non
posse.

When noble Nehemiah had improved his interest, in the Princely favor of great
Artaxerxes, in building the wall and repairing the breaches, of ruined
Jerusalem, the Saints desired residence, as his pious, heroic, and honorable
achievements, have their due commemoration in Divine History story* we read
what slanders, derisions and contumelies, were fastened upon him by Sanballat
and Tobiah who with Geshem the Arabian their crafty confederate, assailed to
defeat him both by force and fraud, for which they are marked as malignant
enemies, with the blackest brand of perpetual infamy.

The most eminent in wisdom, courage and zeal, have been deeply depraved by
the tongues of the wicked, witness our holy and innocent Savior, causlesly
affronted with impudent calumnies, Matthew. 11.19.
being called a glutton, a bibber of wine, a friend and patron of Publicans and
sinners, Luke 23 2. John 18.30. ^uem nunc non modo despiciunt, sed etiam fastu
suo conculcant. John 8.48.
a perverter of the people, and an enemy to Caesar, a seditious malefactor, and
ambitious innovator, yea such a height of impudence had his adversaries
contracted, by the cruel custom of uncontrold impiety, as they justify their
wickedness, saying, say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan and have a
Devil.

So the Prophets, Apostles, and Primitive Martyrs, had hateful crimes still
laid to their charge, as in the series of sacred and Ecclesiastical histories,
may be duly observed by the intelligent reader, which we ought the more
carefully to collect for our instruction, Aufert vim praesentibus malis futura
prospexit.
in that they parallel those present calamities, which are fastened by the
wicked on most eminent persons, to obscure their virtues and render them
contemptible.

Athanasius post multiplicia certamina qualia vix ullum Ecclesiae Doctorem
sustinuisse legimus, placidissima morte ex hac vita excessit, cum ab initio ad
finem sui Episcopatus Alexandrinae Ecclesiae praefuisset quadraginta sex ^nnis:
adversus qu m totus pe^e orbis conspiravit, Eusebius. in Eccles.

Cur verear Chrysostomus appellare martyrem, qui tot iniuriis tot contumeliis
tot afflictionibus, nec ad impatientiam perpelli, nec a propaga^da Ch^istiana
pietate depelli potuit, Eras. Rh^


Those orthodox Fathers whose zeal and courage, opposed the current of the
Arrian heresy, were grievously afflicted with cruel contumelies and raging
persecutions from the heterodox party, for holy Athanasius whose heroic spirit
soared most high in his sacred confession, became thereby such an object of
their malice, as they thirsted for his blood and plotted his destruction, yet
when he fully had served his generation, and finished his course, to the honor
of his Savior, he dyed in peace, and has left for our comfort, a fragment
memorial of his zeal and piety.

Such was the condition of courageous Chrysostom, that admired elegant
golden-mouthed Orator, who set himself to oppose the impiety, of those times
abounding with most horrid wickedness, openly reproving those brazen-faced
vices, which were boldly committed in contempt of the Gospel, which contracted
upon him (notwithstanding his integrity) the implacable hatred of the Empress
Eudoxia, her insulting tyranny exposed him to exile, in which he suffered most
sorrowful pressures, besides which cruelties they laid to his charge such
horrid crimes as he never knew of. Yet the Lord was pleased to vindicate his
innocence, Vbi autem in Cappadociae, provinciam venimus multi sanctorum Patrum
Chorijuges lachrymarum fontes effundentiam and flentium, eo quod in exilium nos
proficisci videbant, dicebant tolerabilius fuisse si Sol radios suos
retraxisset obscuratus, quam quod os Iohannis tacuit. Chrysostom. in Epist.

Quare merito in hanc amentiam projecti sunt, ut sibi ultimum exitium
acceserent. Revel. 12.15.

Hic est spiritus vertiginis quo reprobos dementat Satan, ubi in coecitatem a
Domino proiecti sunt, Call.

Nullum nobis peius obstaculum est quam propria arrogantia, quod scilicet
sapere volumus plusquam oportet, ac inde Diabolica festu reiicimus, quod quid
rationi nostrae non est expositum.


and to cause it to shine in his darkest affliction, by making his name like a
precious unguent, most sweet and odoriferous in the account of the godly.

Those famous instruments, which the Lord vouchsafed to use, when truth was
detained in the prison of popery, even Wickliffe, Luther, Calvin, and Musculus,
with many other of reverend memory, when these stood up as Christ's faithful
witnesses, zealously contending for the precious faith, to set forth its luster
as a new lighted lamp, which was formerly extinguished by Antichristian
malice, the cruel dragon sent forth against them a revengfull torrent of
raging persecutions, threatening them not only with fire and sword, to bereave
them of their lives by barbarous cruelties, but also oppressing their innocent
fame, with slanderous figments and devised forgeries, representing them to the
world under the horrid notions of Heretics, Schismatics, Impostors and
Seducers, so contracting upon them by injurious aspersions, a general odium
from all estates of men.

Yet has the Lord still frustrated their devices, and crafty machinations so
closely contrived, that the vizor of hypocrisy is pulled off to their shame, and
their folly detected in persecuting truth, the memorial of those Martyrs and
Confessors being blessed, and highly esteemed as venerable and precious, but
the name of the adversaries putrid and rotten, and never remembered but with
lothed detestation.

The careful collecting of such observations, are very useful for our present
occasions, our times abounding with malicious spirits, that seek to deprave
the most pious persons, and now when the Lord by our valiant Worthies, has
done great things to the praise of his providence, we either ingratefully
contemn the benefits, or deprave the actors to eclipse his glory, not
gathering for our comfort by a due observation, how this Land has been
delivered from Hierarchicall tyranny, that cruel bondage imposing upon us the
insupportable burden of superstitious ceremonies, Nihil magis est iniqu^m,
quam beneficium in crimen trahi, Call.
nor how the wicked were caught in the snare, of their subtle malicious and
cruel contrivements, falling in the pit which they dig'd for others, and
snared in the grin of their destructive designs.

Do we but observe how the Lord has insatuated, the subtle projects of our
cruel enemies, Hic vide nus ut imp^orum consilii Deus quasi ex transve^so
occurrat, ut praemia honoram and poenama lorum non periret.
by breaking the snare whereby we are escaped, as birds out of the net of our
aparent danger, this would be matter of joy and thankfulness, and the result a
care to express true gratitude, in humble sincere and dutiful obedience, to
our gracious God in our lives and actions.

Animi affectus cum irruperunt cu^cta a missent, superiora ad inferiora
detrahunt.
But ah how malevolent and gainsaying spirits, requite the Lord and his gracious
instruments, who by painful industry have exposed themselves, to daily danger
to secure our liberties, and yet when the work is almost effected, by Gods
gracious blessing on their faithful endeavors, Apparet virtus arguiturque
malis.
their indefatigable labors are slighted with contempt, and secret murmurings
of malignant whisperers, and now when we are ready to reap the harvest of our
long desired and happy reformation, Vides and ignis absumit omnem objectam
materiam and affectus excandescens cortumpit quicquid fit obvium, Philo.
it were just with the Lord even to blast all our hopes, by embroyling us in
bitterness, though our unnatural divisions, for these are the sins have cried
loud in his ear, being the sad effects of shaking hands, with verity from
which many part now, Animus non capit veram voluptatem ni si liber metu, ac
caeteris affectibus, Plut.
by closing with error, and setting up Idols in their own evil hearts, for
only by pride do men make contention, to spin and lengthen out the third of
our miseries, and to turn and twist it into cords of calamity, to fetter and
hold us in a woeful condition.

Gather up, etc.
Gubernatores se ventorum mutationibus accommodant.

Animi morbi cum saevium, co^pesci non possunt. Revel. 12.3, 4.

Draco cauda sua ^rahit, tertiam partem stellarum coeli. Psalm. 104.20.


This has ever been the practice of those turbulent pragmaticks, who infested
the Church in the time of her travail, when she either is under some great
persecution, or laboring to bring forth some eminent reformation, then
malicious Satan, that old red Dragon, appears and draws near, to devour her
fruit, atracting with his tail even the stars from heaven, and casting them to
the earth to comply with his malice, and as when the Sun goes down, and
darkness brings night, then all the beasts of the forest creep forth, so
Heretics and Schismatics take troublesome seasons to disturb the Church in
her greatest affliction, for even now when much of the Christian world, Omnes
quidem videmus and privatim and public ad pravam aemulationem intentos, and in
malum quasi mutua conspiratione absque voce invitant Calvin. in Harm.

Ne terre at nos impiorum furor and audacia, nam haec consolatio non vulgaris
est and scimus Deum nobis addesse.


lies under the rage of Antichristian tyranny, they boldly break forth, like
wolves of the evening, to devour and scatter Christ's silly sheep.

The sad impression of these considerations, reflecting on our souls by the
view of such occurrents, may truly cheer us in our innocent sufferings, that
we may with comfort hold fast our profession, for if we be deterred by the
tongues of the wicked, and cannot abide the smart of that scourge, how shall we
be able to resist unto blood, in laying down our lives for the cause of the
Gospel, wherefore collecting by due observation, what the godly have endured to
keep faith undefiled, it may ever incite us with fortitude and patience, to
walk in the steps of their courage and constancy.

This collection is so conducible to the plenall consummation, Praeclarares est
aequabilitas in omni vita, sive laeti sieve tristes vid^^mur.
of that mental tranquillity which the godly should aim at, that incessant
labor is required herein, from the birth day of conversion, to our last
concluding period, for little do we know what need we may have, Nullum sine
labor^ est hominibus (...) opus, Phocyl.
in the many revolutions of our transitory state, of the very fragments, and
crumbs of refreshment, both spiritual and temporal which we now undervalue,
Job 1.8. cap. 22.3. Nuncius nunc (...), cotingit vincere ^^minem.
since even holy Job whose heroic virtues could find no parallel in times of
prosperity, was yet so dejected in his deep affliction, as his eminent graces
were ecclipsed with passion.

Gather up, etc,
This appears in that he cursed the day of his birth, bitterly expostulating in
his sorrowful complaint, Job 3.1.
whose burden was aggravated by those unskilful Physicians, Quis enim dicat
pi^^ in omnibus quae ab ipsis fiant esse imitabiles, non igitur in omnibus quae
faciunt, sed sapienter and caute debent laudam, ut sua D^o praerogativa
servetur, in cujusutique laudibus, nemo potest esse nimius, quantum que laudare
conetur, Neuburgensis.
and miserable comforters his own unkind friends, for these should have applied
compassionate lenatives, to have cured the disasters of his disconsolate
spirits, but instead of cordials to minister comfort, they gave him gall to
augment his anxiety, taxing him with hypocrisy, and many other evils, which
his innocent soul sincerely abhorred, the least of which pressures might have
plunged him in despair, had he not taken sanctuary in the name of the Lord, by
which we may see that eminence in grace is no certain immunity from unjust
aspersions, nor the godly at all times competent Judges, to determine
infallibly of their own and others state, for both Job and his friends had
their various aberrations, and dangerous excursions in the paths of sinful
passion, which duly observed may furnish us with caution, against the time of
approaching trials.

And as we are subject to sad dejections, when Gods rod lies heavy, upon our
souls or bodies, so our prosperity is attended with pride and security, Psalm.
30.6. Novit Deus mutare sententiam, si tu noveris emendare vita^, calamitates
infligit, non extinguere sed castigare.
lulling us asleep in the cradle of remissness, and thus was the kingly
Prophet surprised, saying in his prosperity, he should never be moved, for he
looked too much on the strength of his Mountain, which yet could not help him,
when God hid his face, he after improves his gifts of faith and prayer, and
brings out those treasures he laid up long before, till the voice of his
mourning was turned into sinning, and his sorrowful sackcloth to robes of joy
and gladness, Psalm, 30.11.

2 Kings 18.38. Rebus in angustis facile est contemnere vitam. 1 Kings 19.4.
There was a time when zealous Eliah was highly honored in the presence of Gods
people, his prayer being answered by the miraculous descent of that heavenly
fire which consumed his sacrifice, yet after enforced to flee for his life,
from the cruel persecution of Idolatrous Jezabel, he falls into impatience and
passionate complaints, desiring death as an end of his afflictions. Solerter
ergo animus ante actionis suae primordia cuncta debet adversa meditari, ut
semper haec cogitans, semper thorace patientiae munitus, and quicquid acciderit
providus superet and quicquid non accesserit lucrum putet, Greg in Mosis.
Matthew. 16.17.
There was also a time when holy Jeremiah, could exalt and triumph in the
strength of his faith, that the Lord was with him as a mighty one terrible, and
therefore his persecutors should stumble and fall, inciting the godly by his
precept and practice, to sing praise to the Lord for his abundant mercies, in
delivering the poor from the hand of evil doers, whose everlasting confusion
shall never be forgotten, yet presently, alas, we see him transported, by a
sudden Eurodydan of prevailing passion, and cursing the day wherein he was
borne, as the sad original of his labor and sorrow.

Gather up, etc.
Lapsus Pet^i qui hic narratur, illustre infirmitatis nostrae speculum est,
Call. in Ioh. Matthew. 26 72.
The Apostle Peter whose sacred confession rendered him blessed from the mouth of
his Savior who put him in possession of the precious privileges and divine
endowments wherewith he was invested, yet being too confident of his seeming
strength, and not wisely wary of his humane frailty, was fearfully foyld in a
gust of tentation, that tript up his feet and laid him very low.

The Apostle Paul was wrapped into Paradise, 2 Cor. 12 4. Qui minus deliciarum
novit in vita, minus timet mortem, quae qui consideraverit cadit superfaciem
suam intelligens procul sit a Majestate Dei, Hier.

Quod defertur non aufertur.


and honored with the happiness of heavenly revelations, yet brought down
again to converse on earth, and was buffeted by Satan through assailing
tentations, and as the Scriptures give ample testimonies of his various and
vehement continued afflictions, which as it is supposed by learned Divines can
scarcely be paralleld by any mere man, so to me it seems as his forest trial,
that he should again be tortured with inhabitant corruption, after he was
elevated to such transcending ravishment, as was altogether inexplicable by the
tongue of mortal man.

The use we should make of such sacred observations, In variis modis and
assiduis certamnibus servum suum Deus exercuit, Hoc sibi ante oculos speculum
ponunt omnes Christi servi, Call.
may become the matter of our comfort and caution, in the first we eye God in
his truth and faithfulness, in the latter our selves in our frailty and
weakness, he never fails us in our deepest distresses, but ever delivers us by
life or death, we wanting rectitude are prone to impatience, and ready to
murmr in the sense of our sufferings, and because we observe not the many
revolutions, continually incident to our transitory state, Ier. 43.11.
we make our bed in the bosom of the creature, and fettle like Moab on the
lees of our security.

This have we found by a sad experience, In summa hic poenarum usus est, ut
cautiores in p^sterum reddamur, nam si ad primos and secundos ictus opponimus
obstinatam cordis duritiem septuplo gravius feriet.
that when only oppressed with some bodily affl^ction, we have carried our
selves with bemoaning Ephraim like untamed heifers not used to the yoke, and
thus for lack of that spiritual provision, we should store up in time of
health and strength, even patience, humility, and self-denial, the inseparable
concomitants of faith in Jesus Christ, for as himself is the bread of life to
feed and feast our souls to all eternity, so his precepts, promises, and
effects of providence, are our daily viaticum, in our troublesome journey, Jer.
31.18.

Have we then in the days of our flourishing youth, Exteriora nempe pro
corpore cuncta creavit Deus, ipsum vero corpus pro anima, animam v^ro prose, ut
sibi soli vacaret, Aug. in Sol.
industriously labored to sustain declining age, and with pious Joseph
prudently gathered, a timely provision in the years of plenty, especially
storing up such permanent treasures, as may serve to support us in the saddest
trials, and with blessed Mary have hid up in our hearts, such prime passages of
divine providence, we may then be sure in the hour of tentation, to stand fast
in the faith, Animus magnus haeret origin suae.
giving glory to God, still declining those by-ways of turbulent anxiety, which
macerate others in times of affliction.

Our meditations having hitherto insisted on Christ's frugall precept Gather up
the fragments, consider we now his annexed reason, in the words ensuing that
nothing be lost.

A free agent whose absolute authority, commands obedience from every creature,
Job 33.13.
can be no accountant as Elihu speaks, Exodus 20.12.
to render a reason of any of his matters, yet our glorious God is graciously
pleased in a loving condiscention to our low capacities, Deuteronomy. 30.16.
to incite our dullness by propounding, ends, prevalent to persuade us to the
practice of duty, commanding us to keep his sacred precepts, Deuteronomy. 5.33.
and that for our good unto all eternity, Deuteronomy. 10.13.
all spiritual, temporal, and eternal blessings, being promised to excite us
to a cheerful obedience.

Vniquique operationi est propria quae dam voluptas.
Every man is prone by a natural instinct to desire benefits and decline
losses, the voice of the first is Who will show us any good, the complaint of
the latter alas it was but borrowed, what was formerly medicated expresses out
benefit, in the considerate collection of conducible excellencies, this annexed
reason is the end of our industry, by proposing this maxim that nothing be
lost.

Qui been dividit, been docet.

Quid vi^tus est and quid sapientia possit, utile nobis propositu^ est exemplar.


First of the creatures from the greatest to the least, which are all at our
service in their several stations, secondly of time which our Lord and Master,
betrusts us to trade with in fit negotiations, thirdly of our spiritual or
temporal endowments, which must not lie hid like a Talent in the napkin, and
fourthly a caution that we lose not our selves, in the intricate labyrinth of
sin and error.

We lose the creatures many several ways, especially by ignorance,
intemperance and ingratitude in the first for want of that divine dexterity,
whereby we should read in the volume of the creatures, Oculus turbatus aliud
pro alio cernit, and men's pravatum cogitationum confusione perturbata, ide^
patitur, Chrysostom.
in the second for want of a wise mod^ration, in their reverent, sober and
sanctified use, and in the third for lack of an internal principle, rendering
us sensible of our own unworthiness, that humbled at the footstool of divine
bounty, we may gather up these notions that nothing be lost.

The Sun is the creature which excels in magnitude, Cur enim Soi and stellaem
calolucent, nisi ut suum ministerium praebeant hominibus.

Quid miserius quam scire omnia, praeter eum qui fecit omnia, and homini
subiecit omnia. Pythagoras tanta eum veneratione prosecutus est, etc.

Ioh. Pierii in Hier. lib. 4. cap. 2.

Anaxagoras Solemn Saxum cande factum arbitratus est.

Quicquid excessit modum pendet instabili loco.

In eo magis convincitur hominum impietas si Deum non cognoscant, quod non
tantum oculis eorum sul iicit gloriae suae testimonia in suis operibus, ^ sed
omnia etiam eorum usus destinat.

Tantum seimus quantum in memoria. tene^us.


all other that are visible in their several dimensions, working in the Sphere
of its own activity, upon all Celestial and Terrrestiall bodies*
communicating light to the Stars and Planets, and acting by his influence on
plants and metals, and does these by an Ordinance from the all-Creator, who
thus designed it to be serviceable to man yet the light of the Sun were even
lost unto us, if our meditations should terminate in empty speculation, as
Pythagoras who viewed it with such admiration, that he lost himself in his
blind superstition, supposing it a God, and therefore adored it, as a Deity
capable of divine honor, again Anaxagoras in another extreme, beholding it
contemns it as no more but a stone, the one miscarryed in his lofty misprision,
the other stupefied in his belluine blockishnesse.

Let us therefore beware in contemplatng the creatures, that we raise them not
too high in our intimate affections, but use them as stairs whereby we may
ascend, to the sovereign good our most glorious Creator, whose invisible and
eternal power and Godhead, the Worlds Creation limits out unto us, being a
vast volume wherein we may read, the various lectures of his immense power and
wisdom, there being such symmetry, order and comeliness, in all the parts of
this spacious structure, as may lead us to adore and admire him in all things,
that they may not by ignorance be obliterate as lost.

Now as those excellent and beautiful creatures, styled in Scripture the Host
of heaven, are to be contemplated or considered of us, in their Philosophical
or Physical relations, so are also the smallest to a grain of mustard seed, as
useful to supply our natural necessity, having innate qualities which being
known of us, do comfortably contribute to our health and safety.

Thus the smallest of the creatures, Deus quidem a principio se per creaturam
toti generi humano patefecit.
have the prints and footsteps, of Gods power and providence engraven upon
them, his beauty, bounty, magnificense and glory, shining in their excellent
and various operations, and therefore the wisest of the sons of men, thought it
not unworthy his royal dignity, 1 Kings 4.33.
to treat of plants from the Cedar in Lybanon, unto the very hysope that
springs out of the wall, and thus the Psalmist having amply set forth, Psalm.
104.2.
the admirable frame of heavens glorious fabrike, comparing the expansion to a
shadowed curtain, Magnifientiam operum Dei, nunquam satis elogiis ornasse.
wherein are involved invisible treasures, he descends to describe the earth,
with its furniture, being much of it covered with the deep as with a garment,
and the rest disposed of, by an ordering providence, into mountains, Neque
tamen intelligo subtiliter and Phylosophico more disseruisse ipsos de naturae
arcanis, sed apud indoctum vulgus simpliciter aliquid proponere.
hills, valleys, and fertile plains, the sea abounding with several creatures
from the great Leviathan to the little shelfish, many of them being both meat
and medicine, profitable and necessary for our comfortable subsistence, the
habitable part of the earth being the basis of innumerable Cities and sumptuous
buildings, her bowels and entrails replete with riches, of metals, minerals
and stones of great value, the superficies of it being clothed with a mantle
embroydered with variety of plants and flowers, Job 28.7.
whose beauties and virtues have been the worthy subject of many discourses
both pleasant and profitable, Fundavit Deus mundum supra nihilum, ut fundaret
se mundus supra Deum.
Yet this vast Globe so ponderous and weighty, God hangs upon nothing as holy
Job speaks, his power being illustrated in bearing up the world, from sinking
by ruin into a Chaos of confusion. Now since all things concur in their silent
harmony, to set forth the glory of an Almighty Architect, let not ignorance
detain us from reading in this folio, nor from learning this lesson that
nothing be lost.

Quae viri illi arcanorum naturae conscii, ingeniis maxim omnium diligenter
exploraverunt.
Those eminent Philosophers who industriously extracted-the very spirit or
quintessence of all humane knowledge, enriched the world with their learned
labors, in acquainting their Readers with the mysteries of nature, these did
not lose so much of the creature as Ignorants do in their senseless,
stupidity, Nihil esse in ulla art rerum omnium quod nescirent, in ore habent
omnes eruditionis elegantiam Phylosophiae splendorem in luce constituam cupiunt.
but sought out by painful and due observation, the occult operations of
several creatures, and finding out many mavelous qualities, in metals,
mineralls, stones, and plants, they communicated by writing what they collected
by experience, to the benefit of present and future generations, and although
many of them have missed the mark, not propounding right ends in their curious
speculations, yet their practical proficiencie may convince those of
negligence, who will not contemplate the visible creatures. Praeclara saepe
latent.


The knowledge of the creation, makes it useful to^us, In Aegypto omnes esse
medicos, accessit huc ciborum abstinentia, succorum herbarumque non incuriosa
cognitio.
in the species of its natural and artificial influence, as herbs collected
and fitly compounded, make precious Physic to evacuate ill humors, the paths
we walk in presenting us with plenty of wholesome plants for our cure and
comfort, in which are wrapped up such sovereign antidotes, and profitable
preservatives as our bodies are in need of, and therefore we should learn in a
rational way, Vbi desinit Philosophus, ibi incipit Medicus.
to know both their virtues and noxious qualities, that we may prudently
provide fit supplies, and gather them in season that nothing be lost.

It is not in our power or purpose to insist, Cur terra producit fructos suos,
nisi ut alimenta hominibus supperant, hominem ergo non posuit. Deus in terra,
ut sit tanqua^ in theatro otiosus operum suorum spectator: sed ut in ejus
obsequium homines adducant.
either on the names or nature of the creatures, which are so numerous and
various in quality, as our life is too short for a work of that length, our
intentionall aim being only to excite, both our selves and others, by a view
of some creatures, to consider them all as emblems of his excellency, whose
bounty confers them to relieve our necessity, for though there be many whose
venomous natures render them odious, in our ordinary esteem, yet they carry
with them a present remedy, against the poison of their stings and teeth,
neither is there any in all the Universe, from the greatest to the least but is
some way profitable, either by removing things hurtful from us, or by bringing
in good to supply several wants.

The Silk-worme does furnish us with those materials, Quotidie videmus Deum pro
immensa sua indulgentia plus largiri hominibus quam postulat little necessitas
non tantu^ quo reficiant vires sed quo etiam corda sua exhilerant, Call.

Hiaci^thus quem ab Appoll^ne in storem con^e^sum Poetae fabulantur,
prudentiae, ac sapientiae, symbolum est, Johan. Pi^rii vol. lib. 2. cap. 31.


which serve abundantly for use and ornament, the Indian Nut has several
properties, to cloth us, feed us, and quench our thirst, the little Emmet is
instrumentally useful for food to some creatures and for Physic to others,
her eyes being a banquet to the delicate Partrich but ill used a purgative of
violent operation: So many creatures which have only vegation, for a little
moment and then quickly perish, have a double use in affording us refreshment,
and in giving a memento of our mortal condition, but we have no need of
Egyptian hierogliphicks, to inform our judgments in such necessary,
knowledge, though they may be sometimes of laudable use, and significant to
those who want better instruction, in them there is truly many things
observable, yet little that makes for our present purpose, Confusum est
quicquid in pulverem sectum est.

In rerum natura quae spectissima florent, celerrime marcescunt, veluti rosae,
lilia, violae, cum alia dure^t, and in hominum vita quae florentissima sunt,
citissime vertu^turin diversum.

Non decidunt folia Myrto perpetua fron de pubenti, Plinius.

Contra serpentem and scorpionem ictus tripolia valere.

Long convenientius divinae literae per Bovem eos intelligunt, qui justitiae
jugum trahunt, and frugalibus operibus laborem suum intendunt: Bovillo capite,
labores sive res fortiter gestas, ostentantibus.

Ante alia autem tam ovis quam agnus hierogliphicum est innocentiae, Hinc illud
apud Cyprianum sapientissime scriptum, meminisse debemus, ut innocentia Christi
ana ovibus aequetur: Saepe summa ingenia in occulto latent, laborantem Deus
adjuvat, Doctor Bright.

Vias peculiares scrutantur qui industrio sunt ingenio, inertis ergo est
nescire quod liceat sibi, Epich.


their learning leading them in another way, superstitiously to adore even the
basest creatures.

Neither shall we treat of those oecult qualities; mentioned by them that write
of that subject, which are either in beasts, plants, metals or minerals,
because we dare not aver them for truth, Yet do we not any way disparage those
Authors, or question the verity of what they affirm, but rather take such
testimonies as our daily experience, affords us for probation of what we
intend: Divine providence ordaining for our comfort, that we are not infested
with those cruel creatures, as Tygres, Bears, Wolves or Panthers, which are
very frequent in other Climates, neither does our land bring forth Lions or
Elephants, but as they are brought us from other Countries, but instead of
these we abound with many more useful and profitable to supply our necessity,
of which for a taste I only name two, as serving to relieve us with several
benefits, The laborious Ox first treads out the corn which fits us with
provision both for hunger and thirst, and after he has spent and exhausted
his strength, goes then to the stall and the shambles for our use, so the sheep
an emblem of harmless innocence, both feeds us with its milk and clothes us
with its wool, and as I designed by divine bounty to be amply beneficial to
our necessitous condition, it satisfies us with its flesh which is never
unseasonable, but is always both fit and covenient nourishment.

But aiming at brevity in my weak meditations, I omit the mentioning of many
creatures, though I reverence their memories who have positively concluded,
that our enjoyments therein are abundantly various, and one whose learning has
rendered him eminent, and his zeal and piety worthy all honor, maintains in a
Tractate the able sufficiency, of English drugs, for cure of all diseases, for
which cause it is requisite by rational observation, to acquire some
experience of their nature and virtues, since the very bruits by infused
instinct, can relieve themselves with them in their frequent necessity, and
therefore man who enjoyed by creation, such an ample excellency of universal
knowledge, should labor by industry, to reassume a moity of his pristine
intelligence concerning the creatures, Multasque haec herba curatione similes
vires habet, ut de illa tradunt Medici, Iris halitus pravum odorem corrigit,
gratamque and suavem reddit spiritum: and venena repellit, Johan. Pierii. in
Hierog.

Nolite contemnere peccata quia minima, sed tim te quia plura timenda ruina
multitudinis, etsi non magnitudinis: nonne bestrae minutae, si multae necant,
guttae pluvi^ flum^^a implent, and domos delicie^t, Aug.

Arcanum demens detegit aebrietas, and pudor and probitas and motus omnis abest.

Hoc unum miser peccatum omnes miseros fecit.


not ignorantly shutting the eyes of his intellect, nor sordidly stumbling in
supine remissness, but so willingly awaking, that he read in these characters,
this profitable lesson that nothing be lost.

And as the creatures are lost by ignorance, so especially by intemperance
which wastes and consumes them, depriving us not only of their present comfort,
but cutting the cable of our health and safety, for by this loss and abuse of
the creatures, diseases and disasters like floods break in upon us, ruining
our souls, our bodies, and estates, in the devouring gulf of inevitable
destruction.

But the miserable loss which most speaks our folly, is gluttony and
drunkenness, with their ushers and atendants, metamorphosing men like
enchanting Circes, into swine the most sordid of all bruit creatures, yea
basely bereaving them of their rational faculty, and rendering them
contemptible to the vilest objects, opening the sluices to let in a deluge, even
to drown the soul in deep abominations, For when men become vassals to this
horrid vice, they are totally divested of all real excellency, and are stripped
and wounded by that cursed thief, the destroying Abaddon of the bottomless
pit, he hardens their hearts like the nether millstone, and seares their
consciences in a reprobate condition, leading them blindfold till they suddenly
precipitate, into the hellish whirlpool of final impenitencie.

Our riotous intemperance is one crying sin, Timemus in futuro ut homines
famelica potius gemitabant, quam saturi laetare, si Deus propter hominum
peccata, manum suum restringit, sponte enim ad nos assidue flueret Dei
liberalitas, nisi eam vitiorum nostrorum obstacula arcerent.
which calls for vengeance in the ears of the lord, superfluous excess like
a raging torrent, overflowing the banks of all modest sobriety, and indeed a
plethory of peace and plenty, had introduced so deep a distemper, as caused
the Lord in his care of our safety, to lanch our tumor with a piercing sword,
which heavy judgment has lain upon us by a civil War in our unnatural
divisions, turning our fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of
us that inhabit therein, For men have been drunk with the blood of the earth,
and lately the earth has been drunk with men's blood, yet this has not awaked
them from their sottish ebriety, but still they will lose and abuse the
creatures, yea though further calamities be daily threatened to be thundered down
from the seat of supreme justice, Poenite^tia non tam in abstinentia ciboru^
quam in mortificatio ne viti^rum consistit, Hierom.
who takes it to heart by an humble sense of sin, or smites his breast saying,
what have I done?

Is not this the day wherein the Lord of Hosts, calls us by our miseries to
weeping and mourning, to fasting, abstinence, and humiliation, in the
sorrowful sense of our sinful aberra^ions, yet lo instead of repentance,
contention and deep dejection for our multiplied iniquities, there is joy and
gladness, mirth and joviality, eating and drinking to riot and intemperance,
this frugall precept or annexed reason, has found no place in the minds or
lives of men, who desperately take up the Epicures conclusion, Esaias 22.13.
Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die.

Lachrymae sunt testes naturae, non indices diffide^tiae, metus naturae est sed
cura pietatis ex gratia est, Ambros.
How have we lost those happy opportunities of humbling our souls in our
solemn fasting days, when penitential sermons and sad relations did cause
our ears to affect our intellect? but alas now the rod is but lifted from our
backs, and we have little cause to expect a long cessation, we return to our
intemperance abusing the creatures, and slighting Christ's precept that nothing
be lost.

Intemperance is a vice which contracts a detriment, upon all estates and
conditions of men, who lose the creatures by inverting their order, Quid genus
aut virtus aut optima pro ficit illi, qui intemperantia accumulat sibi dolores.

Noxiae mill modis.


and bringing them into the bondage of vanity, Gods glory is obscured by
wasting his benefits, and man's comfort abridged, does mental and bodily, yea
the Church and Commonweal, are both sadly sensible, of the grievous guilt of
this loud-crying sin, while some are devouring the fat of the land, and others
are perishing in pining indigence, some clothed like Dives, in silk and
purple, Nemo ex istis quos purpuratos vides ex hoc ipso foelix est, non magis
quam ex illis quibus sceptrum and Chlamydem in fabula assignant.
while others are exposed to cold and nakedness, elated with pride some revell
in riot, whilst others sink in dejected calamity, abuse and excess bringing
murmuring confusion, and turbulent distractions upon all estates, and no
marvel if miseries so much break in upon us, and make an inundation to
absorpe our tranquillity, when impudent intemperance affronts even the Angel
that stands with a brand: shed sword in his hand, for the Lord who has smitten
us with War and Pestilence, now threatens us with Famine the sorest of his
rods, the heavens contesting by a confluence of tears, to check our intemperate
abuse of the creatures.

How has our food our apparel and the rest, Difficile est i^^ impossible,
ut praesentibus quis feratur bonis, and futuris, ut hic ventrem and illic
mentem impleat.
been pervetted from their pure and pristine ordination, and abused as weapons
to fight against the Lord, whose incensed fury flames out in fiery judgments,
he gave us food for our relief and succor, in our natural necessities of
hunger and thirst, and clothes to shelter us from heat and cold, as a modest
vail both to shadow and shroud us, Omnia terrena nec meliores servi, nec Domini
deteriores.

Hoc me o Deus docuisti, ut quemadmodum medicame^ta sic alimenta sumptutus
accedam.

Quomodo dicit se credere in Christum, qui non facit quod Christus facere
praecepit.

Nihil equius est quam Deo consecrare nostra omnia.


but we have abused them to riotous excess, even to pride, profaneness,
lasciviousness and folly, while taking occasion of licentious liberty, we have
made our selves the servants of corruption, From whence we may conclude to our
shame and sorrow, that we are deeply guilty of the l^sse of the creature, being
not only deficient in contemplative Theory, but also in the practice of sober
temperance, for we have not considered how all was forfeited, and at what price
bought in again unto us, which rightly remembered would duly direct us, in this
pious maxim that nothing be lost.

Thirdly, the creatures are lost by ingratitude, to our best Benefactor, who
confers all upon us, requiring only his royal tribute, even the homage of
humble and real gratefulness, not only in verbal or orall expressions, which
present him with a formal external complement, Quaecunquae in usum nostrum
destinavit Deus tanquam immensae ejus bonita it is and paterni in nos amoris
symbola, ad eum celebrandu^ nos invitant-
but in soul sincerity and mental integrity, proceeding from a principle of
internal dejection, for poverty of spirit in a sense of our indigence will
make us lie low confessing our indignity, and saying with Mephibosheth to his
bountiful Sovereigne, What is thy servant to enjoy such favor? he counted
himself a dead dog in comparison of many not meeting with such high
preferment, and so may we also esteem our condition, in our vast distance from
the highest Majesty.

The Lord expostulateth with ungrateful Israel, Hosea 2.8. Sponte enim ad nos
assidue flueret Dei liberalitas.
concerning the creatures conferred upon them, the corn, the wine, the oil
and the flax, their gold and their silver, which he multiplied in mercy, yet
lo what use they make of these favors, Hosea 2.12.
which should have obliged them to divine bounty, even to ascribe unto Idols
that honor and acknowledgement which they should have rendered to the Lord
alone, Ostende mihi Domine quantum debeo te laudare.
so many of us who have deeply drunk in the precious dew of his daily
benefits, have returned rebellion instead of gratefulness, and by slighting
his favors have rendered them lost.

Our degenerate unthankfulness both for positive mercies, and private
blessings proclaims our unworthiness, the Lord has in both enlarged his
bounty, Dum omnibus coeli and terrae opibus fruimur, in celebranda Dei
bonitatis oportet esse exerce^ur.

Sit igitur haec continua piorum meditatio quum praemuntur variis aetumnis,
quum fame, aut nuditate, aut morbis laborant: quum injuriis vexantur and
angustiis constricti tenentur quum videntur singulis momentis propemodum a
morte absorbendi, hanc este sationem quae suo te^pore fructum proferet, Calvin.
in Ioh.


but we have for neither expressed due gratitude, His gracious goodness is
like himself infinite, even a boundless Ocean without brinke or bottom, but
our dull stupidity is not capable of rendering, the debt which we owe him by a
humble retribution, which is the cause that instead of gratefulness, we often
grudge at our present condition, repining and murmuring at those several
taxations imposed by the State for public necessity.

Let us now consider the condition of our brethren, whose insupportable
pressures have so far exceeded ours, that there is no comparison berween our
little taste, and their deep draught of the cup of calamity, we are sadly
sensible of pecuniary payments, which pare away the excressence of our former
superfluities, but they are still pinched with most smarting penury, of hunger
and thirst, of cold and nakedness, the world at this day being in a
combustion, and wars making waste by a cruel consumption, those horrid
barbarismes in Germany and Ireland, not putting a Catastrophe to such tragical
relations, witness the woeful and heavy tidings we have lately heard, of their
sorrowful sufferings, and the Wars in the Northen and Western parts, where by
sad devastation the creatures are lost.

How shall we ever return a moity, of that thanks and praise which we owe to
the Lord, who has set his salvation even for walls and bulwarks, hedging us
about with his Almighty protection? Esaias 26.1.
How should we praise him for our preservation, from the piercing sword which
has shed so much blood, Praesertim nobis testis est nunquam cessare Dei
beneficia, in quibus Pater nobis apparet.
and for the enjoyment of our quiet habitations? when others are exposed to
affrighting exile, we have rested in peace and risen in safety, when terror
and astonishment has surprised such sufferers, the destroying Angel being
charged to spare us, and to pass by our houses in these days of visitation,
how should we praise him for the fruits of the earth now gathered in for our
necessary sustenance, who have justly deserved to be deprived of those
benefits, having forfeited the creatures by our former ingratitude, For we have
oppressed Gods incomparable patience, Petinde enim Pater familias cibum and potum
filiis and domesticis suis distribuit, ita hoc juris habet Deus ut singulos
tractet prout visum est, sive autem prosperis exhilarat, sive adversis humiliat.

Beneficiorum memoriam, nullo pacto senescere sinamus, nihil tam inhumanum vel
tam immane, quam ingratitudo: Gratitudo enim matter est omnium virtutum
reliquarum: Equidem nihil tam propriu^ hominis esse, quam non modo beneficio,
sed etiam benevolentiae significatione alligari, Cicero in Orat.


by many ways abusing the choicest of his blessings, and setting up Idols in
our own evil hearts, to detract from the honor that is due unto his name, and
in making our selves the end we have aimed at, have ingratefully forgotten
even the Lord our maker, sacrilegiously robbing him of his sacred prerogative,
by sacrificing to the net of our own inventions, For he will not give his glory
to another, nor permit the creature to share in his praise, but is jealous of
his honor which admits no corrivall, to be shrined or adored in our intimate
affections.

We live at his finding being dependent on him, for all our present and future
felicity, and therefore should sing our Hosanna on earth, as hereafter
Hallelujah in the heavenly Jerusalem, thus all the comforts conveyed by the
creature, as a conduit unto us for continued refreshment, should run by
gratefulness as streams into the Ocean, from whence they have flowed in
abundance unto us.

When Plato his scholars presented him with gifts, as the ample expressions of
their real gratitude, poor Eschines confreshing his indigent condition
bestowed himself as a gift on his Master, which ingenuous Plato so highly
valued, that he annexed a promise to his cordial acceptance, that his endeavor
should be to enrich him with virtue, and so render him more capable of desired
felicity.

So our highest gratitude is to give up our selves, in all holy service to our
heavenly Master, in whose sacred Academy we have been instructed, in the saving
principles of celestial wisdom, Laus tua Domine inco^prehensibilis est, cord
non comprehenditur, ore non mensuratur, etc. Aug. Sol.

Hoc divinitatis proprium est, quod sibi vendicat quemadmodum etiam Apostolus,
Heb. 1.3. dicit cum omnia potenti suo nutu sustinere.


Let therefore our souls as a living sacrifice be devoted and consecrate unto
him alone, who gave a being even when we were not, infusing into us an
immortal spirit, and when we had defaced his glorious Image and razed out the
Character of original righteousness, he left us not to perish in that woeful
condition, but sent his dear Son to redeem and save us, The very pillars of
the world were dissolved by sin, yet this mighty Atlas does support and sustain
them, bearing up the creatures by the word of his power, which else would soon
sink into ruin and confusion.

Had we been redeemed from some temporal bondage as once the Israelites from
the iron Furnace, even this might oblige us to celebrate the memory of such a
mercy in our thankful remembrance, T^^ss 1.10.
but Jesus delivers us from the wrath to come, even those endless,
unutterable and inconceiveable horrors, Si homo non vicissic mimicum hominis
non just victus esset inimicus, ergo qui extiteritagnus in passione factus est
leo in resurrectione.
that guilty souls not washed in his blood, must suffer in hell unto all
eternity, Yea he has restored our right in the creatures, and given us a
propriety in their peaceful possession, that they ministering supply to our
several necessities, our senses may knock at the door of our intellect, in
brief our interest both in heaven and earth, is all comprised in his
meritorious sacrifice, and therefore gratitude engraven in our hearts, should
be read in this lesson that notbing be lost.

Norma iustitiae divinae, est Dei voluntas, quia enim vult ideo est iustum, non
quia iustum ideo vult,
The second propounded general is time, a Talent which our Master betrusts us
to trade with, and therefore we should not remisly lose it, but wisely employ
it in fit negotiations, not wasting it in idleness, curiosity, or anxiety, the
moths and cankers which consume our time, but piously redeeming it by the
continued practice, of such holy duties as adorn our profession, Esaias 1.16, 17.
first ceasing from evil as the Prophet exhorts, O tempus rerum omnium
preciossi^um!
then learning to do well to witness our sincerity, since habitual virtues
will operate by action, and take hold of occasion that time be not lost.

Idleness exhausteth this invaluable treasure, and irrecoverably wastes it in
a way of omission, for although in sin there be nothing positive, yet
idleness especially is a mere privation, being an anonymy, ataxy, and
inconformity, to the perfect purity of Gods righteous Law, Multa quae
concupiscentiae flammam incondunt. 2 Samuel 11.2.
yea the pregant mother and nurse of all vices, conceiving and bringing them
unto maturity, for it has been observed in divine History that some eminently
famous have been caught in this snare, the bait of concupiscence covering the
hook, of that guilt and infamy produced by idleness.

Inter caetera mala illud pessimu^ est, quod vitia ipsa mutamus, and ad otium
diversa via mittitur, Sen. de vita beata.
Themistocles was wont by a witty allusion to resemble idleness to an open
Sepulcher, sending out continually a contagious air, to the danger of all
infected by it, who not only bury themselves in this grave, absorpt and
swallowed up in sensual pollutions, but contaminate others with their
poisonous breath, and render them obnoxious both to guilt, and punishment, and
therefore the light of nature detects it as loathsome and odious to ingenious
persons, Venenata arbor rem e qua mel pessimum gignitur.
and only embraced by effeminate sluggards, the professed enemies unto worth
and wisdom, for which cause Cleanthes though poor and obscure, was accounted
by the vetruous more happy in his industry, then idle Domitian the luxurious
Emperor who spent his time in catching of flies.

Idleness that devourer of our precious time, like a breach in the wall lets
in thieves to destroy us, Omnia morte finiuntur, and in inferne non sit
poenitentia, nec aliquis ad virtutes recursus, ergo dum in ipso saeculo, es,
age, nequid pereat tempus.
being a common road or randevouze of vices, which easily finds passage where
this paves their way, for indeed the deficiencie or want of good, is the real
habit and presence of evil, which were it believed would deject and humble us,
that have hitherto not viewed it in the notion of sin, yet so hateful was it
even to ethnike spirits, who had no more but the twilight of nature, that
Cynicall Diogenes would role his tub, to avoid the censure of simple idleness:
for it is not only a personal disaster, Sicut amor veritatis sacram
solitudinem requirat, ita charitatis necessitas, rectum negotium.
defaming the subject in whom it resides, but of pernicious consequence to
public concernments, which suffer a prejudice when time is thus lost.

Time is offered as a precious benefit, in the present use and enjoyment of it,
and therefore idleness which insensibly consumes it, is dangerous yea deadly
in respect of its event, Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco.
for as poison kills by its venomous quality, diffusing its contagion into every
part, so idleness wounds yea slays poor souls, when it robs and bereaves
them of the benefit of time, which should fasten upon us the Apostles precept,
Col. 4 5.
who bids us walk wisely redeeming the time, it being an abridgement of those
documents of virtue, which adorn the conversation of most cautious Christians.

A curious wit conceiving a contest, twixt industrious Euphia and slothful
Argia, Armat spina rosas, molla tegunt apes.
brings the first as an actour in the Scene of well spent time, the other as a
factor, which trades in sloth and ease, now as virtue and valor give the
prize to Euphia, for her pious, painful and profitable labors, Voluptatem
fuge, quae in posterum dolorem parit.
so the merit of infamy, and obloquy of folly, is the sordid encomium of
slumbring Argia.

The present time should be valued most precious, respecting both our
spiritual and temporal necessities, since none can call back the day that is
past, nor be sure of to morrow in respect of life's brevity, Vigilare, decet
hominem, qui vult sua t^mpori consicere officia: nam qui dormiunt libenter,
sine lucro, and cum malo quiescunt.
and therefore the Egyptians in their Hierogliphicall Tables, painted Time with
a forelock but all bald behind, to show we should be ready to catch
opportunity, and lay hold on time before it pass from us, for industry attends
to graspe with advantage, the fruit which grows on the tree of time, which
coming to maturity is delicious and savorie, to all but the sluggish who
render it lost.

Now as idleness wastes and consumes precious time, so curiosity crumbles, and
trifles it to nothing, for some employments are so totally impertinent, Nam
curiosus nemo est, qui non fit malevolus, Plaut.
as they leave no footsteps in the path of virtue, having neither precepts to
regulate their way, nor promises annexed for their happy conclusion, of which
fort no doubt were those curious Arts, the converts repented of, Act^ 19.19.
when Christ was preached to them, for as soon as the scales of their sin and
ignorance, began to fall off from the eyes of their mind, Qui utilia non qui
multa novit is sapit.

Vbi non quaeritur Dei veritas tota externa species nihil est, and certe ubi
non lucet Sol justitiae, tenebrae animam obscurant.


they saw such practices were Diabolical, and altogether incompatible with
Christian sincerity, It seems before they had highly valued the Theory and
practice of such curious follies, when the price of their books amounted to a
sum so large and ample in those antique times, Act. 19.19.

No less is their madness who will try conclusions, to effect things
unfensible both by Art and Nature, undervaluing the time wherein they make
probation, Homo infoeliciter ad diversas vanitates a pueritia sua tractus est,
ut in claro speculo videmus.
of reallizing forms presented to their fancy, others lay out themselves and
their short inch of time, in projects and monopolies for private emolument, few
of these minding their concluding period, nor remembering this maxim that
nothing be lost.

O mortales intemperatissimis agimur nisi jam mature.

Quod fieri nequeat pedes hominis in aqua obambulantes pingunt Aegyptii.


Some search to find the Philosophers Stone, endeavoring by Alchymy to produce
perfect gold, both losing the benefit of their borrowed time, and substracting
by Arithmetic their all into nothing. Some study Palmestry, and some
Phisiognomy, others will calculate by Prognostication, losing by such practices
the commendable exercise, of their wits and fortunes in more profitable
employments: Some spend their studies in devising strange fashions, Chamaleon
omnem imitatur colorem praeterquam album.
in sophisticating food and disguising of apparel, not considering how the
Lord has verified his threatening, in visiting these sins in this miserable
Kingdom.

The use or abuse of this talent of time, Serum est tunc vivere incipere, tum
desinendum est.
is the hinge on which our estate is so turned, that our day of nature is
styled a moment, on which is impending our future eternity, for though the most
excellent improvement of time, be no meritory cause of our ensuing felicity,
yet the laying of it out in such impertinent follies, may prove a black
indictment to aggravate our judgment: yet curious spirits will turn every
stone till they weary themselves in the way of vanity, Varietas delectat
certitudo prodest.
like restless Sysiphus the emblem of their folly, whose doom is their
destiny when time is thus lost.

And as idleness eats and curiosity consumes, Gratum est hospitium, sed grave
servitium curae.
like devouring Harpies our precious hours of time, so anxiety melts and
diminishes continually, our few and evil days which are swifter then a
post, adding incessant, and unnecessary bitterness, to our sorrowful life by
immoderate anxiety, which is only a care to fulfill those lusts, Humanum paucis
vivit genus.
against which we should rather contest by endeavor; for what is the flesh but
a darling foe, which yet we indulge with too much endearment, it is a prison to
the soul, which it fetters and mannacles with the heavy chain and clog of
concupisence, confining that high borne immortal essence in a slavery
unbeseeming her pristine Nobility, and making her to drudge in the mill of
anxiety, Innumer^^ quidem sunt noxarum species quibus misere oppressos, sub
pedibus dejicitur anima.
to purvey provision for her insolent handmaid, thus Princes go on foot and
servants are mounted while the flesh usurps dominion in depressing the Spirit,
and robbing us by care of that sweet contentment, which our time might afford
us if it were not thus lost.

Our Savior forbids all carking anxiety, Vitae nostrae sollicitudines,
rationem ipsam obtenebrant.
as a pest producing all possible prejudice, the diseases and disasters in our
mentull condition appearing in the symptoms of distracting diffidence, as what
shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we cloth us says
unrectified nature, which cannot direct us to lift up our eyes to the liberal
hand of Celestial bounty, for which cause Christ sent us to the inferior
creatures, even to view in them the effects of providence, Matthew. 6.26.
since God feeds the ravens and clotheth the lillies, maintaining as the
sensitive so the vegetative creatures, and will he not much more provide for
his people, who have interest in his love, which is firm and immovable, by
making a gracious supply of our wants, Multi sunt qui vag^ mentis errore,
coelum and terram circuire, malant quam Deum se offerentem aspicere.

Nulla magis re enim cruciatur homo, quam rerum mundanarum cura.


as his sacred wisdom sees most convenient, for though care cannot add a
cubite to our stature, nor a mite to our state in the present or future, yet
the gain of godliness is profitable to all things and confers contentation in
every condition: O might we then cast our care on him who cares for us in our
deepest dejections, avoiding, dividing and distracting anxiety, which devoureth
our time and renders it lost.

Three sorts of worldlings are miserably macerated, with the mental malady of
this anxious distemper, the covetous, ambitious, Angustus est anim^s quem
terrena delectant.
and voluptuous sort of men, who have nothing to feed on but the empty
creature, and therefore no marvel their insatiable appetite is never filled
with terrene enjoyments, since the souls circumference is too large in its
excellence, to be circumscribed in such poor dimensions.

Josh 7.21. Poma Gommorhaea pulchra quidem sunt, sed cum franguntur in vagum
pulverem fatiscunt. 2 Kings 5.21, 23.

Quis dives, qui nil cupiat, quis pauper avarus?

Hyaena vocem imitatur humanam, and nomen alicujus ^discit, quem evocatum
lacerat.

Quidam obsequio blandiuntur in perniciem trahant.

Lupus animal est cani simile, nunc amico, nunc inimico, Johan. Pi^rii Hiero.
collect. lib. 1.


Thus covetous anxiety corrupted Achan, and made him greedy of the wedge of
gold, but discovered not the direful event, to deter him from the sin of
sacrilege which proved his ruin, so Gehazie hastened after noble Naaman, who
freely gave him even more then he asked, but little was he aware of the
spreading leprosy, wrapped up in the bribe he so cunningly gained.

Covetous anxiety consumes the precious time, by shrining up an idol in man's
intimate affections, and making it like Michah an Ephod and Teraphim, that he
may solemnly sacrifice to his golden god, this makes him also like a cruel
Caniball, devouring living men in his quest of greedy gain, when spreading his
net to surprise the needy, he makes all a prey which he gets into his fangs,
yea such a proficient is the covetous worldling, that he becomes a graduate in
the school of Mammon, and falls from grinding the faces of the poor, to eat
up himself by devouring anxiety, starving like Midas in heaps of wealth,
because his desire is enlarged like hell, which puts him to the torture of
wretched Tantalus, who sees but tastes not what should refresh him, Thus cruel
to his soul, his body and his fame, he posts apace to the pit of perdition,
Stultus est qui cortis relictis, sectatur incerta, semper avarus eget.
anxious perplexity involving him about, yea consuming his time and proclaiming
it lost.

So the ambitious person is anxious in aspiring, to that height of eminency he
propounds as his end, Ad summum quicquid venit, ad exitiu^ prope est.

O fluxus mortalitatis, quam tenue momentum est inter omnia and nihil. 1 Pet. 5
5.

Foeliciciter sapitis, qui al^eno periculo sapit. Luke 1.52.

Par^us cinis modo est, qui magnus ignis fuit.

Multum turbare non est multum agere.

Spes nostrae plurimum evanescunt, and minima quaque de causa homines plerumque
exanimantur.

Eadem res and utilis and perniciosa fit prout ea uteris.

Quid agis miser perire vis, horula una imo vel unica part^ horulae, libidinem
patras quod aeternum doleas.

En perditissime inter jocos and ludos perdidisti regnum, (...) stultissime pro
ca^^^s voluptatula immensas vendidisti voluptates: en impur^^^me ut
dleectatiunculas pauxillo tempo^^s retineres perdidisti omnia.

Hic vitae innoxiae fructus est gratiam etiam apud extrareos, habere. Hosea 7.8.


and swelling with the poison of popular breath, he cracks like thunder to the
amazement of mortals, such was the condition of aspiring Absalom, ambitious
Haman, and haughty Antiochus, who fell like Lucifer from their height of
glory, down into the Abyss of inexplicable misery, for the Word does witness
God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble, who enjoy his favor; He
puts down the mighty from their seats of dignity, and exalts the meek
unto supreme honor, which if men did consider, it would bridle their ambition,
as Minerva curbed her winged Pegasus, and not suffer them with Phaeton, in
their insolent career, to set all in combustion in this lower Region, and
indeed it is not easy to enumerate the evils, that ambition produces in these
sorrowful times, since the anxious pursuit of an ayrie eminence, has miserably
managed our multiplied divisions, which should cause us now in a due regard,
both of our personal and public safety, to decline all the by paths of
ambitious anxiety, in which precious time is so sinfully lost.

So the voluptuous Epicure whose licentions principles, prohibits all labor as
a professed prejudice, yet entertains anxiety to be a purveyor, or rather a
pander to impudent incontinence, for not content with paternall provision, he
rangeth with the prodigal in extravagant pastures, and supposing a banquet of
exorbitant pleasures, he feeds like a swine on sordid sensual draffe, yet he
finds no satisfaction to his poor deluded soul, in the anxious pursuit of all
these empty husks, but like Sardanapalus writes his own Epitaph as a lasting
monument of his luxurious infamy: for having divested his soul of right
reason, his body of health, and his state of fit subsistence, he leaves little
behind him to solemnize his funerals, save a rotten memorial which renders
him lost.

Our precious time must be prudently redeemed, not only in the negative by
ceasing from evil, but also in the positive or affirmative part, which is
doing good in truth and sincerity, so shall we transcend those seeming
Sedentaries, which are like a cake on the hearth not turned, being at the best
but dow baked Christians, whose Religion relies on a private praise, Ille sapit
medium qui been utrumque tenet.
for though ceasing from evil be an initiall premised, prohibiting those sins
which consume precious time, yet the perfect progress of all pious actions,
are as prevalent preservatives that time be not lost.

The Preacher presents us with a various catalogue, of many generals produced
by time, Eccles. 3.1, 2.
from some of which no sex are exempted, as a time to be born, and a time to
die, but to plant or pluck up to kill or to heal, Vana ergo sunt gaudia saeculi
quae quasi manentia blandiuntur, sed amatores suos cito transeundo decipiunt.
to break down or to build, are not common to all, but as branches growing on
this fruitful tree, they are opportunely gathered to suit with our occasions,
our renting and sewing, our getting and losing, our war and our peace have
their period prefixed: all things being beautiful, in their season by that
luster, which wisdoms rays reflect on our actions: Bona conscientia est
laetitia interna.
for which cause the corollary or concluding application, drawn for our use
from the former premises, is summed into a Breviary comprised in two duties,
that a man rejoice and do good in his life, Eccles. 3.12.

Iubilu^ dicitur quando ineffabile gaudiu^ mente concipitur, quod ne abscondi
possit, nec sermonibus aperiri, Greg.
Joy is a beam of that sacred Son of righteousness, whose divine influence
inspires true comfort, and therefore a stranger from the life of God, has no
claim or interest to joy in believing, the faithful only have internal
principles, of peace and joy to revive and to cheer them, unto all the duties
of piety and charity, wherein they rejoice to do good in their life, Est
gaudium quod non datur impiis sed iis solum qui te gratis colunt, Aug. in Con.
and in this appears the apparent antipathy that is between the godly and the
wicked, their actions running in an opposite current, and their conclusions as
distant as Heaven and Hell, for the wicked cannot sleep unless they have done
evil which is unto them as a choice repast, but the righteous are impatient of
delay in good duties, Validior est enim vox operis quam oris
esteem-it their joy to do the will of God, This is indeed an improvement of
time, being the errand we are sent of in our present pilgrimage, and should be
attended as the important business, and work of the day, that time be not lost.

There is a time of doing and a time of suffering, to be duly regarded, Multa
facere multas molestias co^tinet.
and considered of us, some actions requiring our present performance, some
causes calling for our passive obedience, but having in our way found occasion
to insist, upon such duties in gathering up of precepts, I refer the Reader to
that part of the Treatise, and only instance in these few particulars.

Thus to vindicate truth when detained in unrighteousnes or imprisoned by
error is a redeeming of time, Tanta ab Augustino illo dictata and edita sunt,
tantaque in Ecclesia disputata, adversus diversos haereticos conscripta, ex
Canoniciis libris exposita, and ea omnia vix quisquam studiosorum nosse and
perlegere posset, Possid. in vita Aug.
if by open confession, and undaunted resolution, we stand up to mayntain it,
both with tongue and pen, which was the work of those famous Worthies the godly
Fathers in contesting with Heretics, whose divine dexterity in defending the
truth is admirable and imitable to succeeding generations.

So resisting unto blood in Christ's cause and quarrel, was graspt of many
Martyrs embracing opportunity, who accounted it their glory by innocent
suffering, to pass to the palace of heavenly felicity, these vindicated truth
and redeemed time, improving and augmenting their betrusted treasure, and are
entered already through the strait and narrow gate, into the immortal
inheritance which they looked and longed for.

In brief the pious and prudentiall practice of all religious and moral
actions, Convenientibus laboribus vendunt nobis omnia bona divi, qua nil est
melius nec utilius. mortalibus, Euripid,
are a profitable employment of our precious t^me, whereby it is redeemed from
loss and detriment, and therefore sedulity and constant diligence is of great
necessity while our day continues, because the night comes when no man can
work, which should always excite us that time be not lost.

And as we must be careful that neither the creatures, nor time be lost for
lack of fit improvement, so in the next place our regard must be expressed,
that our gifts become subservient to our Lord and Master, for we consider those
endowments spiritual and temporal, conferred upon us by divine bounty, as
betrusted talents wherewith we must negotiate in the affairs of his Kingdom
that nothing be lost.

Spiritual endowments are radical graces, Tantu^ scimus quantum immemoria
tenemus. Gal. 5.22, 23.

Grande profundum est homo, euius ca^illos tu Domine numeratos habes, and tamen
capilli eius magis numirabiles sunt quam affectus and motus cordis, Aug.


seated in the soul as their proper subject, as faith, love, patience,
humility, and many like virtues called fruits of the spirit, of which should I
treat in taking any of them as a Theme propounded to my serious Meditations, I
should but even light a candle to the Sun, and expressing my weakness
illustrate others worth. For the Lord has abundantly extended his favor, in
stirring up the spirits of his many zealous servants, by their learned labors
to limb out the beauty, and express the effigies of those sacred excellencies.

Wherefore I proceed not to any definition, or quaint description of those
divine qualifications, but intentionally aim to show that we are responsible
for all our endowments both of grace and nature, not that any simply shall
become an accountant, for the happy fruition of such transcending treasures,
but for the use and improvement of them, which shall clearly manifest their
true proprietaries, for where the sincerity and truth of these graces, are
infused by the spirit into the soul of man, Nunquam enim in eodem statu
manent, sed saepe obumbrari pollunt.
they cannot totally or finally perish, though their acts and operations be not
always apparent.

It must then be received and retained as a principle, that spiritual
endowments are of two sorts, either saving graces in their real verity,
Ambigua splendens nos fallit imagine forma, and very specie nos l^dit opinio
falsa.
or common gifts in their reputed excellency, since both of these proceed from
the spirit, being given to edify the Church of Christ, and although they be
various in their diverse operations, yet are they concurrent as effects of one
cause, Inanis est sermo docentis, nisi intus sit qu^ docet.
the former to build up our selves in the faith, and saving knowledge of our
Lord and Savior, the latter for the use and instruction of others, who are to
be united to the mystical body.

Now because there be shadows and pictures of graces, which much resemble their
real habits, we should daily be trying the truth of our endowments, Officium
est fidei v^ritati Dei subscribere quoties and quicquid and quocunque modo
loquitur.
that we be not cheated with counterfeit pearls, for there may be such an
eminence of common gifts, where saving grace is not truly radicated, as may
possibly deceive both our selves and others, with the mere dead shadow and
image of faith.

Obumbrari potest gratia quia non est Deus, extingui non potest quia est a Deo,
divinae voluntatis do number est, non humanae ^^agilitatis meritum.
Again we may pass an uncomfortable censure, upon our selves in desertions or
afflictions, as if we were bereft of those spiritual endowments, and totally
divested of all saving grace, which misery befalls us when Satan's malice and
our own incredulity conspire to betray us, assailing and battering the fort of
our faith, by falsely affirming that our graces are lost.

It will therefore be useful in the hour of tentation, to know that our
graces be right and real, our faith being built on no sandy foundation, but
fixed on the rock whose strength is our confidence, and because we know there
will come a time, wherein our gifts must abide a trial, let us prove and
examine the truth of them all, Nunquam desperate Satan perditionem n^stram nos
de salute nostra saepius desperamus, Chrysostom. in hom. 34. in Matthew.

Non credit in Deum qui non in eo solo collocat totius foeli citatis suae
fiduciam. Zach. 28.1. Ier. 17.9. James 1.5.

Si sola est fides qui purificat hominum corda, restitutionem Dei imaginis in
nobis per Christum declarat.


by that rule of life the light of Gods word, for this is that pure and
transparent glass, which shows us the spots and defects of our endowments,
even the weakness of our faith, the scantnesse of our love, the coldness of
our zeal, and poorness of our patience, and as it manifests the blots and
blemishes, which obscure the beauty of our brightest graces, so it shows us the
pure aed most precious fountain, which stands open to purge away sin and
uncleanness: and since it is impossible that natural sagacity should fathom
the depth of our deceitful hearts, the Word directs us to ask wisdom of God,
to discover our unsoundnesse and spiritual deficiencie, that driven from the
props of all carnal confidence, in the seeming excellency of our best
endowments, we may lay all our weight by a holy dependence, on Jesus Christ our
all-sufficient Savior, for it is not the merit or worth of our faith, which
justifies our persons in Gods sacred presence, but the object apprehended, even
the Lord our righteousness, who renders us lovely which else had been lost.

This innocent pure and immaculate Lamb, has sacrificed himself the price of
our redemption and discharged the debt wherein we stood obliged, Fides impetrat
gratiam qua lex impletur.
to answer the exactness of inflexible justice, freeing us thereby from those
infernal sorrows, which guilty souls must eternally suffer, and giving us the
earnest of an immortal inheritance, reserved for ever in the heavens for us, 1
Pet. 1.4.
and because that nothing unclean or polluted shall enter the gates of that
celestial City, Revel. 22.27.
we are washed and purified in his precious blood, from all our original and
actual defilements, 1 John 1.7.
yea invested by him with the garments of salvation and robe of righteousness
which covers our deformity, Esaias 61.10.
not from the eye of Gods sacred omniscience, but from the stroke of his
revenging justice, Fides odor gratiae gustus indulgentiae, reconciliationis
jucunditas, and serenatae conscientiae suavitas,
so we see that faith is the root which gives sap to the several branches of
our other endowments, by fetching from Christ the fountain of grace, such
continual supplies that they cannot be lost.

If then we desire to enjoy the comfort of lasting graces which may ever
flourish, 1 Pet. 1.23.
they must be the offspring of that immortal seed, which endures for ever and
parallels eternity, and therefore believes who possess by precious faith,
those durable riches which cannot be exhausted, are especially called as a
peculiar people, to be forward and zealous in all good works, (...) 2 14. 1 Cor
13.8. Laudo fructum bo^^ operis sed in fide agnosco radicem. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.3.
for prophesying may fail, and tongues may cease, yea knowledge may vanish, and
common gifts perish, but grace is permanent when produced from faith, being
acted by love, and attended with humility.

That love acts our graces when they be sincere, most plainly appears from the
Apostle his conclusion, who deciphered the vanity of such empty endowments, as
are not acted by real charity: for this pregnant grace like the tree of life,
has always fruit which is fresh and flourishing, no heat of persecution, Amor
quae desinere potuit nunquam vera fuit.
nor drought of affliction, can cause it to wither, to dye or decay, witness
its continued and constant operations, in a special influence on all our
duties, the love of God attracting like the Lodestone, Nihil nobis
praestantibus a Deo possedari, quam spirituo gratiam imo sin haec nihili
reliqua omnia esse.
our selves and our love unto him again, for it acts out faith, confirms our
hope, perfects our patience, and regulates our zeal, animating and quickening
those graces in the soul, as if love were even the soul of our graces, for as
in the motion of some curious engine, one wheel artificially moves all the
rest, so are our endowments in their diverse operations, so acted by love that
they cannot be lost.

1 Cor. 13.4, 1.
Three ample eminencies are ascribed to charity by the Apostle Paul in his
sacred Encominm, for first he extols it in a negative excellency, O amor
praeceps, amor flagrans, amor vehemens, dulciter capis, strenue strigis,
sapienter erudis, nee consilio temperaris, nec pudore refrenaris, affectus es
desiderabilis, experientia dulcis, jucunditate plenus, and fruitione ^ternus,
Con. id.
as never doing ought worthy of blame, secondly, he gives it an affirmative
praise, as effecting all things deserving commendation: and thirdly, he admires
it in its perpetuity, transcending in permanence all other endowments, and as
he calls it the fulfilling of the Law, so may we style it the mirror of the
Gospel, being a glass wherein the truth of our graces are clearly discerned to
be right and real.

The theory of love is a divine subject, befitting the dignity of an immortal
soul, whose vast apprehensions were created capable of those finite
comprehensions in their measure and degree, for as nothing more manifests man's
degenerate misery, then his hateful antipathy to God and his Saints, so our
regenerate happiness is never more illustrated, then in showing the effects of
his love unto us, Amo unum bonum unum, in que su^ omnia bona and sufficit,

Desideria simple^ bonu^, quod est omne bonum and satis est. Aug.


this leads us by an internal principle, to universal obedience both active
and passive, quickening our endowments in their various expressions, as the
primum mobile of our sincere endeavors, and this put a difference between the
Sacrifice of Cain and Abel, though the actions were alike, because they
proceeded from contrary causes, and propounded ends as directly opponent, which
shall teach us caution in religious duties, and charitable performances though
eminently specious, that we look what influence the love of God, sheds abroad
in our hearts, to set our hands to work.

Let then our compassion in condoling others miseries, Amor purgat mentem
subjicit spiritui carnem, corfacit contritum, and compassionem efficit veram.
be acted and regulated by the law of love, which commands us so to sympathize
in the sorrows of our brethren as we would have others to condole our
distresses, not behaving our selves like the Priest and Levite, who would take
no notice of the poor wounded man, but rather resemble we the good Samaritan,
who extended pity both in care and cost, Luke 10.31, 32, 33, 34 35.
for what will it profit by a perfunctory complement, to bid the poor be
warmed and filled, if we cover not their nakedness, James 2.16.
nor feed their hungry bellies, by a seasonable supply of their several
necessities, for love is bountiful and will not capitulate, but goes to the
price to perfect good beginnings, Prove. 3.28.
not bidding the poor go and come again to morrow, so making the eyes of the
needy to fail.

Has it then been our care to find our compassion in the sense of others
sufferings to be acted by love, Qui laudem hominum intuens dedit sibi, non
pauperi dedit, aut si quid dedit vendidit, non donavit precium est illi videri.

Non tamen semper culpa videri, fed velle videri.


has no sinister end of applause or affection, been as flies in the ointment
to putrify our pity, but that only eying with bowels of mercy, the bleeding
condition of Gods poor afflicted, we have sincerely assisted them, with such
satisfying comfort, as our selves would desire in like time of adversity, for
ostentation is lothed of love, which is not puffed up with the blast of
vainglory, but casts down her crown at the footstool of her Savior, whose
love like an Adamant attracts her to duty, yet a cup of cold water shall not
lose its reward, Matthew. 10.42. Luke 21.3. Ele^mosyna par^^ magnum estopus.
nor the widows mite be cast in undervalued, but even these shall stand
registered in the records of love, which preserves the memorial that it shall
not be lost.

N^^^le ^incendi gen^^ est p^ti^ntia, ^incit qui pa^^t si vis vincere di^ce
p^ti, quia optima injurio ultio est oblivio, Sen. Heb. 12.1.

Arcta est vere via, quae ducit ad gaudia vitae.


And as our pity so also our patience is acted by charity which directs it in
suffering that it may truly transcend those moral excellencies, which many
Ethnicks have eminently obtained, whom although we admire for their aequanimity
both in prosperous calmes and storms of adversity, yet dare we not propound
their negative excellency, as a leading principle to guide us in our way, for
we have the Saints as a cloud of witnesses whose patience was acted by fervent
charity, and their trials were as Trophies of the victorious conquest, Esaias 53
7.
they atcheived in contesting for a Diadem of glory.

Piissime Domine qui sic nos amasti and salvasti sic vivificasti and
sublimasti: Nonne hic est ille innocens mi Domine quem ut servum redimeres
filium tradidisti. Nunquid non auctor vitae hic est, qui ut ovis ad occisionem
ductus ubique obendiens usque ad mortem factus.
But our highest precedent of love acting patience, is he who was led as a
lamb to the slaughter, or as a sheep before her shearer is dumb, so he opened
not his mouth in any murmuring impatience, Love brought him from heaven to
converse on earth, and to bear the burden of our sins and sorrows, by
undergoing to the utmost, what the justice of God, or the malice of man might
inflict upon him, and this was no involuntary or constrained patience, but
spontaneous in the ingresse and progress of his life, love acting all his
doings and sufferings, to the plenall consummation of our eternal redemption,
so he is a mirror of absolute perfection, in viewing of whom our eyes will be
amended, and our souls illightened and enlivened by love, which acting our
graces they shall not be lost. Commiseratione potius and emendatione, quam
insectatione and perditione digni videantur qui quaerendo veritatis aberrare a
rectoscopo, Cass. in Epist.

Haec autem justa and pia ira quam Scriptura vocatur zelu^ Dei, cum sit
iracundia amore Dei and pietatis excitata, qualis Christum invasit, cum
negotiatores expulit a domo pattissui.




And as love acts our patience so also our zeal, that it may not
preposterously transport our affections, or lead us blindfold to the shelfe of
temerity, on which so many have been wrackt and ruined: it rectifies zeal that
her ardent opperation, may only act for God and for his glory, ascending
heavenward like a flame from the Altar, which is sweetly perfumed with
odoriferous incense.

Zeal acted by love like celestial fire, burns up the dross of our dearest
corruptions, and consumes such combustibles as lie in the way, to hinder us
from celerity in the paths of truth and peace, for as radical heat in the
natural body, is our grand colume of life and motion, so zeal in the soul is
of special concernment, by its quickening influence upon all our duties, and as
our natural heat is discerned, from that, which is adventiciall, by feverish
distemper, so pious zeal is distinguished by the effects, from that which is
preposterous and not fitly principled: now as radical heat is to be carefully
preserved, by diet, physic, good air, and exercise, Haec vehementia and
severitas non vacat omni i^a
so must zeal be kept lively by the motions of the spirit, that it be not
extinct and so rendered quite lost.

Our fire on the hearth is of much utility, Vnde enim tot errorum labyrinthi in
mundo, nisi quod homines proprio sensu nonnisi ad vanitatem and mendacium
fe^untur, Call.
or rather necessity for several occasions, and therefore we feed it with
fuel continually, and blow it up to maintain and preserve it, but if it be in
the roof or seeling, where mischief is threatened if it come to a flame, we
quench it speedily, even while it is smoking, to prevent the fear of a future
danger: so zeal is most precious when its sacred operations, move in the
Sphere of its own activity, being guided by love, Profecto quaedam sunt tam
absurda, ut refutari non mereatur.
and divinely regulated, by the dictates and directions of essential verity,
but if it wander in sinister paths, and declines the assistance of holy
simplicity, it grows wild and turbulent and impassionate fury, throws
firebrands, arrows, and mortal darts, witness the distractions and exorbitant
tumults, which have roared aloud from those bellowing brainsicks, who set
Germany on fire by their odious insurrections, Quis titulum falso ad evertendam
salutis doctrinam praeteunt, sibique dominationem arrogant.
and may ruin England if mercy prevent not, zeal is in these of no more
concernment, then fiery metal in a horse that is blind, who rusheth himself
and his too rash rider, on the rock of some violent inevitable danger.

Zeal acted by love invites moderation, and sacred sapience to become her
associates, whose sollid gravity and sober posture, are useful to byas her
swift agitation, Major pars saepe vincat meliora. Psalm. 69.9.
that her heavenly heat may reflect on fit objects, and not be exhausted in
fanaticall distempers, for the zeal of Gods house is so pure and powerful,
Importabile est zelus absque scientia, nam unum lapsum multa trahit errorum
millia.
that it eats up all politic preposterous interests, this may we see in those
holy Martyrs and courageous Confessors contending for the faith, being meek as
Moses in their own private quarrels, but ardent zealous in the cause of their
Master.

Thus aiming at brevity in my limited lines, I willingly omit the many
probations, wherein I might manifest how pious zeal being acted by love, has
her sundry operations, setting an edge upon all our endowments, and rendering
them useful in their height of improvement, ^^^isti nos Domine (...)
inquierum igit^r est cor nostrum, (...) requiescit in ^^.
inciting our dullness and quickening our graces by this due memorandum that
nothing be lost.

And as our graces are produced from faith, and acted by love which gives life
unto them so are they ever attended with humility, as the badge or Ensign of
sincere reality, for the humble apprehension of our spiritual indigence, is
the first beatitude mentioned by our Savior, which places this above in the
front of virtues, which men put below in the rear of disesteem, Matthew 5.3.
(...) gratis respicis humiles and misericorditer salvos peccatores.
the poor in spirit being those humble souls, who lie low dejected in the
sense of sin, knocking importunately by their prayers and tears, at the gate of
mercy for a gracious answer.

Tanquam passer culus pede alligato, ita g^mit anima sub onere peccati.
H^mility attended the specious endowments, of the Patriarks, Prophets,
Apostles, agd Martyrs, who ingeniously confessed their frequent failings, as
did holy David, Joh, Jeremy, and Daniel, these humbled their souls in the
penitential practice, of duties conducible to their solemn occasions, Psalm.
51.8.
and have left us a model of their frame of spirit, deciphered in the record
of Divine History: There may we read of their broken bones, Psalm. 38.8.
their roarings groanings and wounded spirits, their mournful tears and
passionate complaints, poured out as expressions of their internal dolours:
Ezez 9.6.
Their faces were covered with shame and confusion in the humble apprehension
of the heinousness of sin, Hab. 1.13.
well knowing, that the Lord has most pure eyes, Peccatum est desectus vel
indignatio vel actio pugnans cum lege Dei offendens Deum, damnata a Deo, and
faciens reos aeternae irae, and aeternarumpaenarum, nisi sit facta remissios,
Chem. in loc.
and cannot endure to behold iniquity, this causes the soul to lie prostrate
before him, amazed at the view of its own deformity, the loathsomeness of sin
being so hateful an object, as cannot be set forth by any humane skill, it
being defective, infective, accursed, shameful, a leprosy, a gangrene, a
frenzy, mere filthiness, and therefore we have cause to be humbled
continually, while we carry about us this body of death, no marvel then though
Gods dearest servants, were deeply humbled at the sight or sense of sin, when
their brightest graces were often ecclipsed by the dark and dismal clouds of
this contagion.

But some will suppose the similitude improper, to parallel their state with
our present condition, they being under that yoke of the Law, More fidelium
quadruplex dicitur, ad peccatum quae mortificatio vocatur ad legem quatenus est
peccati virtus ad mundu^ quia mundus iis mortuus est, denique mors natural
quae est initium vitae aeternae. Heb. 10.14. Acts 26.18.
from which we are graciously freed by the Gospel, they living in dark and
obscure days, before the time of Christ's real exhibition, we having the light
to shine round about us, in the plenall consummation of what they expected: Why
then should we (say they) be humbled for sin, when the debt is discharged, and
the Bond also cancelled, our Acquittance sealed, and the work fully finished,
which puts us in possession of a Quietus est.

We gratefully acknowledge all this is true for Christ Jesus has completed
the work of our redemption, and by one offering has perfected for ever, all
them that are sanctified by faith in his name, Nemo recte possit poenitentiam
agere nisi qui speraverit indulgentiam.
but from these premises to draw a conclusion, that we ought not to grieve or
be humbled for sin, is no due inference, or have we just warrant to omit the
duty upon such ground, for our cleerer light is the greater engagemen to oblige
us by love to the practice of penitencie, since the mercy of God, and the merit
of our Savior, concurred to save even us that were lost.

None can deny that the godly of old, were wrapped even as we are in the mantle
of pollution, for all mankind had sinned in Adam, and were thereby deprived of
original righteousness: Romans 5.18.
shall we then conclude that the second Adam was less powerful to save then
the first was to destroy, or that the efficacy of justification, was tied to
the time of Christ's actual suffering, this were to deny them the saving
benefit of that free grace which they truly possessed, the Scripture styling
Saints and righteous, as being justified by faith in the promised Messiah.

Neither may we judge that all those which lived, in such times as the
ceremonies of the Law were in force, were therefore under that curse or
malediction, which the Law denounces against them that break it, Romans 6.14.
for all believers both then and now, being under grace are freed from that
yoke, Gal. 3.9.
and as Abraham was justified by faith in the promise, even so are the
faithful in every age, John 8.56.
he saw the day of Christ and rejoiced, embracing the comfort revealed far off,
the Scripture averring of the godly fathers, as their highest honor, Heb. 11
39.
that they dyed in the faith.

Their eminent graces were attended with humility, and abnegation of themselves
and their worth, for Abraham calls himself dust and ashes, even presenting
his Petition for sinful Sodom, Gen 18.27.
Jacob confesses he is less then the least of all Gods mercies extended unto
him, David is a worm in his own esteem and Heman accounts himself free
amongst the dead,, Genesis 32.10. Psalm. 22.10. Psalm. 88.5. Io^ 42.6. Ezra 9.6.
Ier. 13.17. Dan. 9.3. Matthew. 26 75. Romans 7.24.
so holy Job abhors himself, humbly repenting in dust and ashes, Ezra
blusheth to lift up his face being ashamed of the sin which others committed,
Jeremy mourns and weepeth in secret for the pride and pertinacie of a
stubborn people, Daniel addresseth himself to the Lord in prayer and
supplication with fasting and sackcloth, Peter weeps bitterly for his heinous
offense, and Paul is humbled for inhabitant corruption, Nobis dormit Christ^s,
and nos suscitet a somno.

Nemo Domine te quaere valet nisi te pejus invenerit.


All such narrations being written for our learning, who have need of exemplary
light to direct us, since we are to ready to embrace such tenants, as shake off
this practice as totally impertinent, But were we acquainted with the
odiousness of sin, and the deep deficiencie of our best endowments, it
would make us more humble in our approaches to the Lord, whose mercy it is
that we are not quite lost.

Why should we think these Worthies incapable, of the saving benefit of
justification, when the Lamb was slain from the foundation of the world,
Revel. 13.8.
in whose blood they were washed from all their sins, Revel. 1.5.
Christ Jesus being yesterday in the time past, to day and for ever a complete
Savior, although the revelation of that sacred mystery, Heb. 13 8.
be now more amply and clearly made manifest. Ephesians. 1 9.
These were a part of that glorious Church, which he purchased to himself
with a price invaluable, Ephesians 5 27.
the Saints being only that selected number, which are living members of his
mystical body, shall we then divest them of those sacred privileges, wherein
they were interested by the grace of adoption, or our selves of the benefit of
their godly example, by a false supposition of a legal disparity, for either
we must contradict the Holy Ghost which Paul spoke by in his fixed confidence,
Ephesians. 5.30.
saying, into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me O Lord
God of truth, Psalm. 31.5. Expiatio Christi viget in aeternum. Heb. 11.1.
or else we must confess that by joy in believing, they had plenary possession
of the promised redemption, faith being the ground of things that are hoped
for, and the evidence of things which are not seen.

The eleventh to the Hebrews is not only a catalogue, Non credit in De^ qui non
in eo solo collocat, totius foelicitatis suae fiduci^m.
but a specious Chronicle of the faith of the Fathers, wherein the excellency
of their saving graces, are collected and proposed as a pattern unto us, shall
we then decline that way of humility, wherein they walked to the promised rest,
by dreaming of a happiness in abandoning this grace, above the capacity of our
present condition: Nay rather know we while sin has a being, that sorrow
attends us even on every side, the godly still both humbled for their personal
failings, and also for the evils of the times in which we live, These are the
men which the Lord will have marked, Ezekiel 9 4.
that approaching judgments may not seize upon them, the mourners in Sion,
being they that like Moses still stand in the gap, Psalm. 106.23.
to divert his displeasure, for though heaven be Gods Throne, Esaias 66.1.
and the earth his footstool, his glory transcending all finite comprehensions,
yet will he look to him that is poor, Haec est nostra integra and perfecta
gloriatio in Deo, quando propriae justitiae nos inopes agnoscimus.
contrite and humble, that trembles at his Word, how sweet is this promise to a
penitent soul, that sees the deficiencie of all its endowments, and leans on
the prop of this word of truth, which never failing he cannot be lost.

And as humility attends our addresses to the Lord, so it commends our graces
in the view of men, as being an index of internal virtue, and a silent emblem
of all sacred excellencies, examples whereof we have for our instruction, in
the living Library of the lives of holy men, whose lowly deportments are
recorded to posterity, as a powerful inducement to the practice of humility.

Holy Abraham became a petitioner to Lot, when their rustic herdmen were in
contestation, Diversas voces componit humilitas, and concordi omnes tono
temperat, Plut.
craving with meekness to compose a difference, which the Canaanite and
Perizite might else have derided, for such an opposition in a trivial
occasion, might have opened the mouths of those heathenish Idolaters, Genesis
13.8, 9.
to blaspheme the Religion which they professed, who being one in their
judgment, were at odds in their practice, Placidis and ap^o compositis verbis
fera hominum corda mitigarit, and agrestes moras explicaverit.
Lo here the more emment prefers his inferior, and gives him the prerogative
of choosing or refusing, proposing unto us an imitable precedent, of rare
endowments attended with humility.

So his lowly carriage to the people of the Hittites, was also an evidence of
his mild moderation, Ge^. 23 7.
who being a stranger acquaints himself with them by a sweet insinuation both
in words and gesture, giving them that reverence whereof indeed himself, was
the true proprietary as they freely acknowledge, being reputed among them as a
mighty Prince, or as Junius renders it a Prince of God. Genesis 23.6.


This virtue of humility has ever attended the specious endowments of the
excellent on earth, for holy Jacob who inherited the blessing, was richly
qualified, with this rare ornament, and what could have been more useful unto
him in the many revolutions of his painful pilgrimage, Genesis 27.27.
then an humble spirit submitting both to exile, and obscure employments from
that Nabal Laban, Genesis 30.27. Numb. 14 2.
How could meek Moses have endured the murmurings of that proud perverse and
stifnecked people, had he not been dignified with divine humility, which fitted
him to bear all the burdens of their folly? How should holy Job so bravely
have encountered the bitter brunt of such crosses and losses, Sapiens
gubernator in tranquillitate te^pestatem expectat, and rebus tranquillis ad
dolorem aliquem praeparandus, est animus. Job 1.21. 2 Samuel 16.10.
if his humble soul had not formerly meditated, on the naked condition of our
birth and death? How should royal David so silently have suffered, the raging
reproaches of railing Shimes, if his humble spirit had not stoopt so low, as it
was out of the reach of that roaring Cannon.

But the height of excellence is our humble Savior, who proposes himself as
our most perfect pattern, saying unto us, Matthew. 11 29. 1 John 5.3.
and to all his Disciples, Learn of me for I am meek and lowly in heart,
adding a promise to his sacred precept that we shall find rest, yea rest to
our souls, for his yoke is easy and his burden light, his comandements not
grievous nor hard to be borne, no clog so heavy as the chain of pride, which
has made men companions to infernal spirits, nor no yoke so easy a^ the love
of humility, which attending our graces they cannot be lost.

Scimus Deum saepe mercedem rependere umbris virtutum, ut o^tenda^ sibi placeri
virtutes spias.
Thus have I briefly though weakly treated of our spiritual endowments which
are sound and saving, and in the next place shall propound common gifts,
promiscuously conferred on the godly and the wicked, the one by virtue of a
rectifying principle, returning all to the praise of the Donor, the other
receiving such expressions of bounty, but not using them rightly, they are
rendered quite lost.

When Saul was called to be King of Israel, 1 Samuel 10.9.
a spirit of government was bestowed upon him, and a spirit of valor which
fitted him to vindicate, 1 Samuel 11.7. Mark 3.14, 15.
poor Jabesh Gilead from the affront of the Ammonites, so when Judas was
called to Apostolical dignity, he was endowed with abilities to preach and
work miracles, Acts 6.5.
and Nicholas the Deacon was chosen being a proselyte, as a man reputed full of
grace and wisdom, so Demes, Duatrephes, and many others, 2 Timothy 4.10. 3 John
1.9. Revel. 2 6.
had temporary faith and eminent endowments yet proved Apostates, and by total
defection, have rendered themselves and their graces as lost.

These gifts are either mental, bodily, or accessory, Nulli unquam detrahas,
nec aliorum vituperatione te laudabilem videri malis, Hieron.
being the ornaments or tapestry of the lesser world, which is quaintly
beautified with these transient jewels, that are variously valued in men's
different esteem, for some have placed their summum Bonum in mental riches,
not knowing him that gives them, the Stoics have supposed an immunity from
passions, to be the very highest attainable felicity, Animus non capit veram
voluptatem, nisi liber metu ac caeteris affectibus, Plut.
not considering that virtue teaches men to regulate, but not to annihilate
these forms of appetite, which are of most excellent and laudable use, when
rectified by wisdom from inordinate excess.

The Epicure esteems a plentiful enjoyment, of sensual pleasures as his
sovereign good, the Mammonist counts gold his numen divinum, and the ambitious
makes honor his adored Idol, the Machiavell gives maxims to circumvent by
policy, Opus est fortitudine and prudentia contra passiones insurgere.
and the Monopolist wrongs all to advance private gain, thus our rational
powers are miserably blinded, by the the interposition of prevailing passions,
which subdue or suffocate those specious excellencies, which by right should
rule, not be ruled by them.

The most excellent gift is the understanding faculty, Voluntas libera est in
maloquia malis de lectatur, in bonis vero non libera est quia non liberata ab
amore peccati.
which sits Queen regent enthroned in the soul, the will and memory being
those Noble Peers, with whom she consults in the affairs of this Microcosme,
the affections and passions are those turbulent Pragmaticks, that do ill
offices by misinformation, abusing those high and superior powers, to have
their ends though they ruin all subservient to these are our bodily senses,
which are by the souls immediate operation, being the organs whereby the
species of things are heard or seen or perceived by us, the members of our
bodies are inferior agents, employed in their work by the superior powers,
Discite o miseri, and causas cognoscite rerum!
each totally vitiated in the fall of man, whereby not their essence but their
excellency was lost.

This causes aberration and miserable ataxie, in our purest naturals, till
rectified by grace, and yet comman gifts may be very illustrious, in the
admirable abilities of unsanctified nature, for here may reside the ample
theory, of all divine and humane learning, Splendida peccata.
brancht out by art into several Ideas, resembling the habits even of real
graces, but alas they want an internal principle, to give them life in a
spiritual existence, and therefore still are but common gifts, which being
things transient may quickly be lost.

Providentia enim hominibus lucrum est maximum, Sophocles.

Robor and murum and arma sapienti prudentia praestat, Pythag.


Man's intellect is capable of several endowments, by grace or nature infused
into it, the first we have considered in their spiritual excellence, the
later we shall briefly now view in their place, for knowledge does not
terminate in empty speculation, or the naked theory of divine or humane things,
but must be attired in a habit of gravity, that may fute with the eminence of
its birth and worth, for which cause those ingenious and active spirits, which
acquired most of this much esteemed treasure diffused it again for the benefit
of others the light of nature directing them therein.

August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 8. cap 4.
Socrates is said to excel in the active, Pythagoras in the contemplative part
of Philosophy, but Plato conjoined them in a perfect genus, which he subdivided
into these three sorts, the moral which chiefly consists in action, Per
arborem malis aureis fulgentem philosophiam and illum scientiaru^ orbem quo vis
auro pulchriorem and pretiosiorem intelligimus, quem men's sapientiae cupida,
perpetua vigilantia, and studio indefesso sectatur, Cass. Parm. in Or.
the natural as the subject of contemplation, and the rational which teaches
in a logical way, to make a distinction between true and false: but with him
to determine of the end of all actions, the cause of all natures, or the light
of all reasons, Saint Augustine thought it both tedious to follow, and rash to
affirm by a positive conclusion: yet admires his excellency as far
transcending, the most eminent of others in Theological knowledge, and
therefore fingles him from all the rest, as an absolute epitome of all Ethnic
perfections.

So Aristotle and Pliny were very profound, in accute searching out many
natural mysteries, wherein they improved their acquisite sagacity, and
enriched others both with light and learning, but he that translated Aristotle's
Problemes, has lost the commendation of his art and industry, the vulgar
tracing of such abstruse footsteps, being of perniciou consequence, to
licentious Wantons.

Aeneus Seneca, who as some suppose, Homo doctus in se semper divitias habet:
nam sola omniu^ possessionum virtus homini auferri n^quit.
both wr^te unto S^. Paul, and received writing from him, was free in taxing
the turpitude abounding in the fabulous theology of the times wherein he lived,
and though subtle discourse and solid judgment, be seldom inherent in the
self-same subject, yet in Cicero and Seneca were found a concurrence, both of
art and elegance in their highest apex.

The noble Mithridates, Hippocrates, and Galen, Mithridates maximus primo
invenitor antidoto, ex quibus unum etiam nomen ejus retinet, peruner enim haec
scientia, ad Principes, and Reges illustrissimos.
were famous for their knowledge in the useful art of Physic, so Gentius,
Lys^machus, and Artimisia, had their Princely studies much exercised this way,
improving by experience what art or nature, presented to the view of the eye or
intellect, their prudent observation paving us a path, to the precious fountain
of that noble Science.

And as the improvement of the liberal arts, Omnium bonarum artium magistri
erant
have illustrated the gifts of wise and learned Authors, so the curious
handycrafts set forth the excellency of man's natural ingenuity in its sundry
operations: Cain being the first that had skill in Architecture, and built a
City in the infancy of time, calling it Enoch by the name of his son, to
register his Posterity in the records of fame, Tubalem appellant, qui
instrumenti musicae inventor fuit.
so from his family was derived to others the musical numbers, and arts of
most antiquity, though their ample excellence and polished perfection, were not
brought to maturity until after ages.

Now although both Philosophy, Physic, and Music, Oderunt peccare boni
virtutis amor.
Astronomy, and Geometry be of great utility, yet practical knowledge has
worn the garland, and her followers are ranked among the most eminent, for
these have been famous for cardinal virtues, even Justice, Prudence,
Temperance, and Fortitude, and have by common gifts atteined such morality, as
rendered them exemplary to succeeding generations.

Fabricius was fortified in his c ndid integrity, as nothing could divert him
from ingenuous dealing, for his solid mind being biased with virtue, Roma
patrem patr^^, Ciceronem libera dixit.
his actions swerved not by fear or favor, King Pyrrhus his gold, nor his
promise of preferment, in sharing unto him so much of his Kingdom, could
prevail to make him perfidious to the State, or to go a hairs breadth from his
innated honesty. How famous for virtues in their various kinds, were also
those other noble Romans, as Regulus, the Catoes, the Scipioes, the Gracchi,
whose admired excellencies are mentioned in history, Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib.
2. cap. 21.
and therefore S. Augustine worthily wonders, that these were not deified in
their blind superstition, since the gods they worshipped, were vicious men, or
rather Devils as he learnedly proves: but in stead of such honor the valiant
Scipio, the conqueror of Hannibal, and tamer of Carthage, was ingratefully
banished from Rome, Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 21.
which he preserved, to poor Linternum where he dyed.

Nemo unquam imperium flagitio quaesitum bonis arribus quandiu exercui^.
The revolutions which alter men's personal estates, have a special influence
upon their common gifts, prosperity and adversity, dejection and dignity having
their several effects in the minds and lives of men, for as some are elated by
their riches and honor, so others are cast down in the sense of their
sorrows, but virtue is expressed when humble continence and resolved patience
still regulates them both.

Seneca says of riches and power, that they are a large field for virtue to
walk in, Natura nihil fru^^a agit.
where various endowments in their differing expressions, may take their turns
and not justle one another, for here is a spacious and desirable way, to
discover magnanimity in its utmost extent, Quanto regitur tant^ magis aestuat
ignis
in the liberal distribution of those several gifts, as are either of the
mind, the body, or estate. Now though indigence cannot express munificence,
nor obscurity manifest all mental virtues, yet poverty may illustrate the
endowment of patience, and limne it to the life in most orient colors, and
though here be no arm of outward potency, to execute the dictates of
distributive beneficence, yet want cannot suffocate internal excellence, but
still it will shine in the midst of fortunes malice.

So valor is bright where apparent dangers and obvious difficulties occur to
impede it, as in Hercules his labors, and Hannibal his marches, Quod fuit
durum pa^i, meminisse dulce est.
who cut his passages through the rocky Alps, for Alexanders atchievments had
never been so memorable, if he had not vanquished a potent Darius, nor had
Julius Caesar atteined such eminence, if Pompey his Antagonist had been weak or
obscure.

The tedious absence and troubles of Ulysses, Si nihil infesti durus vidisset
Ulysses.

Penelope foelix sed sine laud foret, Cir.


illustrated the constancy of his prudent Penelope, and Admetus his misfortune
even ministered matter, to his chaste Alceste, to express her virtue: but
contrariwise the height of prosperity and a surfeit of pleasures proclaimed the
infamy of great Agrippina and imperious Messalina, whose vices made them the
monsters of our sex. Thus they which improved what natures light, and fit
education infused into them, have set forth the pulchritude of these common
gifts, Consummat^ est infoelicitas, ubi turpia delectant.
conferred upon them by divine dispensation: but they which have quenched the
specious sparks of common ingenuity by impudent wickedness, were convinced of
their madness, and irrational stupidity, from those rays that shined in the
lives of others. Hence see we that the Gentiles who knew not the law, Romans
2.14, 15.
did by nature the things contained in the law, these having not the law, were
a law to themselves, Non decipitur ratio nec decipit unquam.
the effect of the law being written in their hearts, but the other which had
the same light of nature, and yet did not improve it, by like virtuous actions,
became miserably vain in their imaginations, Romans 1.21.
and their foolish hearts were replete with darkness. The use to be made of
such informations should teach us the improvement even of common gifts, Actus
voluntatis a voluntate producitur, sed a ratione suadetur.
wherein many of them made such happy progress, as we come far short of their
seeming excellency, and have cause to blush at our brutish ignorance, who live
in the sunshine of Christ's glorious Gospel, and yet have not answered by a holy
conversation, the sacred means we have sweetly enjoyed: If they knew so much
then we may know more, our light being derived from the meridian of mercy, which
though they walked in darkness, and the shadow of death, has guided our feet in
the paths of peace. Sicut ad corporis sanitatem non est satis ut peste quis v^l
pleu^itide careat sic ad animae sani at^m requiritur omnium vitiorum abdicat^o.
Luke 19.20.
How should our piety excel their prudence, and our Christian purity their
moral virtues, lest they rise in judgment, and condemn our remissness for non
improvement even of common gifts, which may lie heavy on those slothful
servants who hide up the talent of their Lord and Master, bereaving themselves
of the use of their endowments, which resting in the napkin are rendered quite
lost:

Inquiramus quae sunt illa praesentis vitae praeclara, divitiae, gloria,
potentia, magnu^ aestimari ab hominibus, and videbis, nihil illis esse
incertius, and s^cut in rota quae continuo versatur, aliqua pars ejus eo quod
crebta circumferentia, semper summa fiunt ima and ima summa, etc. 1 Cor. 6.20.
Thus much for our common gifts that are mental, our bodily and accessory are
now to be considered, and they be both so obvious to sense, as every one may
know the possessours of them, for that men are young, strong, healthful and
active, is clearly conspicuous to themselves and others, that they be rich, or
honorable, or in eminent authority, is usually engraven in most specious
characters, but the excellency of spiritual or mental endowments, are not so
easily or certainly known, for which cause we have labored with such
perspicuity as brevity permitted, to paint out their effigies, and make them
discernable.

Neither can we without the possession of grace, enjoy the comfort of these
accessory benefits, much less can we use them as organs of righteousness, in
giving up our all to God and his service, Miserias enim cumulat hominum
ingratitudo, nam Deu^ merito provocat impio contemptu donorum suorum ad
horribilem excandentia^. Call. in Act. 2.
for these ornaments of nature were not given unto us, to gratify Satan and
our own concupiscence, but to be subservient to the reasonable soul, that the
Lord may be glorified in our bodies and spirits, shall we think that our
wealth, our power or authority, were given us as weapons to contest with our
Creator, that we should with those Giants which warred against Heaven, even
fight with our God in abusing his gifts, No these are conferred as firm
obligations, to engage us more exactly to duty and thankfulness, in the pious
improvement of all our endowments, which otherwise employed, are even rendered
quite lost.

The transient mutability of our present condition expresses the decay of all
our outward gifts, our bodies being tossed like brittle barks on the
tempestuous Seas of succeeding calamities for a counterblast of sickness in
the morning of our youth, will quickly wither our beauty and strength, and make
us sensible of a sad revolution, as a monitor to mind us of our certain
mortality, Solamen miseris so^^es habuisse dolores.
but if we live till declining age, we are daily infested with several
infirmities, which rush in like waves till they ruin nature, and resolve us
again to our original principles.

The keepers of the house will begin to tremble, and the strong men to stoop
and bow by decaying, the grinders to cease because they are few, Eccles. 12.3.
and they to wax dark that look out by the windows, The Almond tree shall
flourish as old age its ensign, Miser homo quare omni hora te non disponis,
cogitate jam mortuum quem sis necessitate moriturum, cogita qualiter oculi
vertentur in capite, venae rumpentur, conscindetur.

In tribunal mentis ascend ut recte and sincere judices illud bonum esse quod
in Dei iudicio est bonum, and illud malum esse quod in Dei iudicio est malum.

Mala conscientia est spinain oculis, and sagitta in viscoribus, quo Siculi
Tyranni non invenere tormentum maius.


and the grasshopper be a burden where health is exhausted, and a deluge of
distresses overwhelme by inundation, our abilities of nature til at length they
are lost.

We may not suppose that the span of our life, which Job says is swift as a
weavers shittle, is all our own, or to be disposed of, as we think fit in
doing what we will, fith by many casualties we lose the use, of those
instruments of action, even the members of our bodies, some being deprived of
sight or hearing, others being lame or bereft of lims, and the most if they
live till a length of years, are defective in all or in some of these, which
should teach us to improve the best of our strength, health, wealth, and
honor, in the service of our Master that when he shall summon us before his
Tribunal, we may render our account with abounding comfort.

The cursed hypocrite may have common gifts, and so gain an esteem by his
seeming sanctity, but the spiritual improvement even of temporal endowments,
is only peculiar to the possessors of grace, for these are they that employ
their talent, of natural knowledge or acquisite wisdom, to find out truths
revealed in the Word, and to walk by that light as the guide of their lives:
Job 31.17, 18. Job 31.20.
Thus may we spiritualize our accessory gifts, which sanctified unto us are of
much utility, as did holy Job who used his riches to relieve the poor the
fatherless and widow, Job 29.15.
and to clothe the naked whose loins did bless him, because they were warmed
with the fleece of his sheep, his gracious abilities were as eyes to the
blind, Job 29.8.
and as feet to to the lame to succor and support them, at his honorable
presence the young men withdrew, Job 29.13.
and the aged arose to render him reverence, Job 29.17. Quanta adversus cum
iacula missa, quanta admota tormenta iactura rei familiaris infligitur, Dives
incensu Dominus and in liberis pater ditior, nec Dominus repent nec pater est,
Aug. de Temp. Ser. 105.
for he used his power to vindicate the oppressed, and to deliver, him that was
ready to perish, he brake the jaws of the wicked and ungodly, and plackt away
the pr^y which he held in his teeth, Lo how a concurrence of riches and honor
authority and power were improved by him, who when he was tossed with waves of
calamity could comfort himself that he had walked in integrity, for although
he humbly confesses his failings, as not able to answer God one of a thousand,
yet so wisely and innocently had he carried himself, as Satan was non plust
when he came to accuse him, Howbeit the Lord in his abundant wisdom, did try
him by the loss of all these enjoyments, that as in in prosperity he was
eminent for virtue, so his radiant graces might shine in affliction, his
admirable endowments had their daily exercise, and continued improvement in his
justice and liberality, but his faith and patience were then most illustrious,
Inter illas augustias and pressuras suas Dei benedictio victrice patientia
praedicatur. Matthew. 25.28.
when nothing was left him but the Lord alone, and as he is a mirror of
exemplary excellence, teaching as to trade in the employment of our gifts so
the end of his affliction was a diadem of comfort, and a double dowry of all
accessory endowments, Job. 42.10.

Our Savior commands to take away his talent, who hid it in the earth and
would not negotiate, and give it unto him who improving the five had made them
ten by his industrious employment: for to him that has (says he) shall be
given an abundance of blessings attending his endeavors, Matthew. 25.29.
but from him that has not a care to use it well; even that which he has
shall be taken from him. This may we see verified by daily experience, in
observing the passages that are obvious and apparent, Hosea 6.4.
the gifts of some men being like Ephraim, his goodness as the dew of the
morning, which soon goes away, but grace is a treasure which cannot be
exhausted though health and wealth and honor should fail, her precious effects
being permanent riches, and these are the endowments can never be lost.

Mare terras and omnia percurre, scrutare universa and ubique mifer eris, nil
ad Deum refugeris.
In the reason annexed to Christ's sacred precept we generally considered a
prohibition of loss, first, of the creatures, secondly, of time, thirdly, of
endowments spiritual or temporal, wherefore man being styled the lesser
world, as comprizing in his excellence all finite perfections a caution is
given that he lose not himself in the intricate labyrinth of sin and error.

Foelix qui potuit, rerum cognoscere causas.
A man loses himself when he loses his way, wandering in some by path beyond
his intention, he loses himself when he walks in darkness and suddenly falls
into unexpected danger, 2 Kings 6.26.
he loses himself when others mislead him, as the Arami^^s were led into the
midst of Samaria, and he loses himself by refusing a guide, which is able to
direct him in the ways of safety.

The metaphor of walking is frequently used for the progress of our lives
either in good or evil, Vniversos nihil posse quam creare, quam diu a Deo non
reguntur, nam quumonines in tenebris coeci versentur, Deus Verbi sui luce nobis
affulget, Ergo nisi malitia occupati occulos clausissent Christus conspicuum
facere poterat.
the practice of virtue and pollutions of vice, being the opposite ways of the
godly and the wicked, which should teach us heedfully to shun all sin, as the
sad original of all our miseries, and the intoxicating cup which so soon as we
tasted, we went out of our way, and so became lost.

Error and sin are terms so convertible, as they cannot be disjoined nor
easily distinguished, for mental errors contaminate the soul, as vicious
practices pollute soul and body, yea so are they involved and wrapped together
as they cannot be untwisted by any division, but jointly make up such cords of
iniquity; as draw men insensibly into pits up perdition, for which cause the
wicked are branded or stigmatized, with a note of infamy describing their
folly, Prove. 2.13.
in that they decline the straight ways of righteousness, to walk in the by
paths of darkness and error, Latet anguis in herba, and mertem species
fallere saepe solet.
which I wish were well considered of many in our times who look not upon
error in the notion of sin, and therefore slight it with some poor evasion,
as not guilty of censure by our selves or others.

Christ is the way the truth and the life, by whom alone we must go to the
Father, therefore they that have no interest in Jesus Christ, are out of the
way of life and salvation, the excellency of his ways, are set forth unto us,
Prove. 3.17. Quod malum in se est, non potest esse modaliter bonum.
as ways of pleasure and paths of prosperity, which caused the godly to be
ever solicitous, of walking sincerely in that sacred way.

Mistakes in our way are the original of errors, and the leading cause of our
many aberrations, and therefore the godly have frequently inculcated, their
desires herein, by various expressions, sometimes by option breathing their
devotions, Psalm. 11^.4.
O that my ways were direct (say in the Psalmist) sometimes by question in a
case of such concernment, wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? Psalm. 119
9. Psalm. 119.30.
sometime declaring their constant resolution, I have chosen the way of truth,
says holy, David, as most eligible, (...) petitioning divine direction, to be
taught the way where he should walk, Psalm. 142.8.
sometime professing his provident caution, Psalm. 39.1.
I said I will take heed to my ways, sometime affirming by a positive
conclusion, they do no iniquity that walk in his ways, Psalm. 119.3.
for the way of the just is like the shining light, which shines more and more
unto the perfect day: Prove. 4.18.
Have we not cause then to use all endeavor to be rightly informed concerning
our way, Ier. 6.16.
fith the Lord himself by his Prophet commands us to ask and enquire for the
old and good way.

Porro non mirum est, tantam errorum ac superstitionum caliginem in mundo
grassari, ubi tam pauci in Christum aspiciant, Call. in Ioh.
The immortal soul created for felicity, by her natural instinct seeks the
sovereign good, but having by sin lost her pristine way, she wanders like a
vagrant till rectified by grace, for Adam lost by his sinful defection the way
of his comfortable created excellence, a Christian standing with a flaming
sword to keep the way of the tree of life, but now Christ has paved us a fresh
and living way to the Throne of Grace through the veil which is his flesh, and
has left us his Word and Spirit to direct us, in a perfect way to the heavenly
Canaan, Scianus erga quum lucis obtinendae ratio, nobis in Christo ostenditur.
but every error is a crooked way, diametrially opposite to the rectitude of
verity, which neither declines to the right hand or left, but as a rule of
righteousness still shows us our way.

Immortale odium and nunquam fanabile vulnus. Iuven. Satyr.
Much is the trouble which at this time the Church groans under concerning a
way, which though Satan's malice and man's miserable at axie, has ministered the
matter of uncomfortable contests, for what can be more grievous to godly souls
then to see faithful brethren fall out by the way, Difficilimum est, eos
reconciliare, qui ex arctissima familiarita te in mutuum odium venerint.
when they that are one in fundamental truths, shall yet be divided in
circumstantiall differences, this is not to contend for the precious faith,
delivered to the Saints in the sacred Scriptures, ^o it rather a deviation by
unnecessary bitterness, from walking in the ways both of truth and peace,
which makes the hearts of the righteous sad, and strengthens the wicked in
their pride and profaneness, who tell it in Gath to disgrace the Gospel,
Operarius iniquitatis, in mala gaudet.

Haeresia-machia, instar sagittarum ipsorum corda vulnerant.


and publish it in Ashkelon to reproach our Religion.

The fruit which grows on this tree of contention, has a noxious quality and
of dangerous consequence, and may be resembled to those poisonous plants, whose
shadow proves deadly to those that sleep under them, so dissentions have
ushered in pernicious errors which have slain and wounded many sleeping souls,
Error magistri tentatio discipuli.
rendering them obnoxious to those secret pitfalls, into which they are plunged
t^a^ err from their way.

And as error is a maze wherein we lose our way, so is it darkness which
involves us in danger, Arius in Alexandria seintilla una fuit, sed quia non
statim oppressa, totum orbem ejus flamma populata est. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. Haeret
lateri, lethalis arundo.
by the first we are transported from the path of precious truth, by the latter
entangled in the trains of error, for those strong delusions have prevailing
influence, especially on them who believe not the truth, and the Word does
witness they are sent of God, as judgments to punish their impious
aberrations: O then beware of rejecting verity, and slighting Christ's voice, in
his lively Oracles, lest indulging a lie thou be made an example, of his
justice in punishing one sin with another.

There is nothing more contrary then light and darkness, Hieronymus Augustino
gra^^lans illi quod haereticorum omnium moruit odium quod quidem gaudet sibi
cum illo esse commune.
nor any thing more opposite then truth and error, now for falsehood to put on
the shape of verity, needs the cunning contrivement of some great Archimaga,
and therefore Satan that subtle Sophister comes in with his fallacies to
circumvent us, and pretending new light so wraps us in darkness, as we cannot
discover our approaching danger.

His stratagems are many, and of direful cons^quence, Laqueos posuit in verbo,
and in opere, and in omni via nostra, ad capiendas animas nostras.
all tending to the eversion of our spiritual comfort, not enduring the sway
of Christ's sacred Scepter, the Word of truth to direct and guide us, and
therefore as he blindes the wicked and profane, with the filthy foggs of all
gross abominations: so he darkens light to delude the simple, that error
embraced may render them lost.

One engine which he uses to advance his enterprises, Venit tentator
tenebrosus, non defuit locus, non defuit tempus.

Exit quidem aliq^^ splendoris specie^ fed fulgori sim^l^, quae nihil quam
oculos praestringat, Call. in Ioh. cap. 3.

Diversa Daemonum genera sunt, qui nihil aliud die noctuque operantur. Genesis 3.5.


has a double edge to circumvent and slay us, turning two ways both
besmearing the truth, and painting out error in a borrowed beauty, for one of
his methods into cast aspersions, like mire in the face of transparent verity,
that her glorious luster being thereby obscured, she may seem contemptible in
the view of the vulgar, but contrariwise he adornes soul error, in the grave
and near mantle of a seeming sanctity, and so covers her deformity with a vail
of virtue, that she may in the dark be admired as amiable.

The Scripture is cl^^re in proving this assertion, from the deceit he used in
beguiling our first parents, to whom he accuses even the God of truth, as
maligning the fruition of their attainable happiness, whereas himself was
that cursed Apolyon that bereft them of felicity by his murtherous lying, R
vel. 9.11.
tempting them to taste of forbidden fruit, which wrapped man in darkness thus
woefully lost. Sero te amavi o pulch^itudo antiqua ^^nova tu^intus eras ^^^go
f^ras, Aug.
Thus has he ever obscured the beauty, and depraved the dignity of divine
truth, by casting an odium on the most illustrious, as we formerly showed in
collecting observations, for the luster of verity is so transcendingly
ravishing, as all should be taken with the admiration of it, if the malice of
Satan did not darken her resplendence, by casting in some prejudice to
prevaricate our judgment.

Mihi satis est si Christo Domino meo and sanctis suis placueto, Diabolo and
suis squamis invisum me esse ex animo laetor and gratias ago Deo me^, Lutherus.
John 8.40.
It were easy to accumulate in the series of History, many several examples to
prove this maxim, for did he not move the Patriarks to envy, against poor
Joseph who told but the truth, they thought to have prevented his Prophetical
predictions, revealed in his dreams which he told unto them, but the Lord
would not lose one tittle of that truth, which they sought to exterminate by
their cruel malice. Genesis 50.20.

De tenebris euntes in tenebras, nesciunt ubi corruant, Miseri qui nesciunt
quid amittant, and miseriores utique quisciunt quid amittant, qui cadunt
apertis oculis, and descendunt infernum viventes.
The voice of him who is truth it self, confirms this conclusion instead of
many witnesses, when he tells the Jews that they sought to kill him, because he
was a man that had told them the truth, against him as a man they could find
no accusation, but they stumbled at the truth which discovered their darkness,
for they could not endure to hear of that excellence, the divine Deity that
dwells in his manhood, nor patiently would suffer the balm of his truth, to
break the head or heart of their vices: This was the original of all those
aspersions, and bitter calumnies they fastened upon him, their hatred of that
truth which so shone in his doctrine, that it bewrayed the darkness which they
lived and lay in: Which was obvious to Pilate that unjust Judge, who knew the
Highpriests had delivered him for envy and yet had not courage to vindicate
his innocence but cruelly condemned him against his own light, Matthew. 27.18.
Matthew. 5.10.
yet our Savior told him though he were a King his regal power was not of
this world, John 18.36, 37.
but that he was borne and came among men to bear witness to the truth, Heb.
9.16.
which he sealed with his blood, and as himself so many of his Saints, have
lost their lives for witnessing the truth; Diaboli filii sunt qui homines ab
Ecclesia seducendo interficiunt, Cyril.
their cruel enemies the ch ldren of darkness declaring against them by
malicious slanders.

And as Satan is malicious in depraving pure truth, so he paints out errout to
advance his dark Regiment, and is very ambitious and active to adore her, to
delude the simple, with her seeming beauty, for these she incounters like that
impudent harlot, with flattering kisses and insinuating postures, making an
ample and elegant Narration, Prove. 7.1. Serpens nisi edit Serpentem, D^aco non
fiet.
of the pleasure and profit is gained by her enjoyment, but that she may bring
in the prey to her net, she promises peace offerings and paying of vows,
that seeming sa^ctity thus placed in the front, unhallowed policy may bring up
the rear, after she proceeds to ensnare with her ornaments, Prove. 7.16, 17,
18.
the tapestry, carved works, fine linen of Egypt, the perfuming of her bed,
with myrrh aloes, and cynamon, Majoris minor esca ferae.
and with all this variety satiety of love: So he follows her indeed as an
ox to the slaughter, or a fool that goes to the stocks for correction, not
aware of a dart which strikes through his liver, nor knowing that her guests
are in the depth of hell, Prove. 9.18.
for errors den is both dark and deadly, being a lively emblem of the
bottomless pit, for if any fall into it, they neither know when, nor where
they shall stay in that doleful danger.

The way of the wicked is resembled to darkness, Hic est spiritus vertiginis,
quo reprobos dementat Satan, ubi in coecitatem a Domino projectisunt.
because they know not whereat they stumble, and those that are involved in the
darkness of error, have the feet of their affections tript up in their
stumbling, so that they fall from one evil to another, and hardly are reduced
into paths of truth or peace, unless mercy dart in, some clear Gospel light,
to dispell that darkness in which they were lost.

The Philosophers say there is no pure darkness, wherein there is not some
mixture of light, so we may say there is no error, Non dantur gurae tenebrae.
wherein there is not some mixture of truth, for erroneous spirits have boasted
of this, that they hold many principles of undoubted verity, yet the leven of
their error so sowreth the lump, that it makes no sweet bread of sincerity and
truth: For as darkness is a privation of light, so is sin or error, there is
nothing positive, Mala voluntas, est effici^ns causa operis mali, male autem
voluntatis efficietem causam nemo quaerit non enim est efficiens sed deficiens
causas vero deficientes velle invenire tale est, ac si quispiam veli^ videre
tenebras, vel audire silentium, quod tamen utrumque nobis notum est, neque
illud nisi per oculos, neque hoc nisi pet aures, Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 12.
cap. 3. Luke 18.33. Job 38.1.
neither are they efficient but rather deficient, the evil of defect not
admitting definition: yet we know there is darkness where we see no light, and
perceive there is silence, where we hear no sound, but to see the darkness,
or to hear the silence, transcends the activity of our eyes or ears.

The darkness of error is a doleful condition, beset with dangers which are
almost inevitable, because being insensible of this mental malady, they
seldom seek to the heavenly Physician, it is easy to convince gross sinners
of their evil, who sometimes with the Publican, will smite upon their breast,
and say God be merciful to me a sinner, as conscious to the guilt and weight
of their sin, but to make men understand that they are in an error, requires
the aid of a divine power, that may speak with a witness, as the Lord did to
Job, even out of the whirlwind to declare his majesty: for he was in an error
when he thought he might expostulate, to know the cause of his severe
correction, or plead with God as a man with his neighbor, requiring
satisfaction by the rule of equity, but when he saw the error of his rash
request, he was humbled for it even in dust and ashes, his deep apprehensions
of a dreadful Majesty, Job 23.5.
deterring his soul from that lothed darkness: Job 42.6.
So the folly of his friends and their rigid censure, in judging him an
Hypocrite was a grievous error, howbeit they thought they had pleaded for God,
Job ^2.5.
to vindicate his justice in Jobs condign punishment, but the Lord plainly
tells them, Job 42.7, 8, 9. Non fit mare tranquillam nisi cessaverint venti, non
extinguitur ignis nisi materiam incendii spinarumque sacramenta detraxeris.

Canes feroces ad ovem vocem irritantur.

In oculo c^civitium nocte durante coecitatis est, sed non asparet nisi luce
veniente.


his wrath was kindled, because they spoke not the thing that was right, and
bids them bring sacrifice, that Job may pray for them, to divert the judgments
their sin had deserved,

I wish the godly in our present times, would acquaint themselves to consider
such passages, that they might beware of erroneous mistakes, in contracting
harsh censures on other of Gods people, for the bitter root of our sad
divisions, both in Church and State, has by these how much fastened, and cannot
be plucked up, to end our calamities till darkness be dispelled by the rays of
pure light: since nothing has so hindered our happy Reformation, not retarded
the settling of a pious discipline, Diligite homines interfierte erro^e^, sine
superbia de veritate praesumite, sine saevitia pro veritate contendite, Atha^.
as the miserable disturbance both of truth and peace, which darkning our
counsels have rendered them lost.

Let this teach us caution in respect of our frailty, for error is incident to
man since the fall, and also compassion on them that are seduced, endeavoring
to restore them by the spirit of meekness, for this would bring balm to bind
up the wound, not multiplied contentions to make it bleed afresh, if we were
less confident, in maintaining our assertions, and more compassionate in
reforming others.

One caution may be useful in a double regard, that we-never extenuate the
evil of error, but abhor it as darkness and be humbled for it, as a high
provocation of divine vengeance, again beware of despising or judging, Nolite
ergo ante tempus judicare, quia fortasse quos vos laudatis Deus reprehendit,
and quos vos reprehenditis, ille laudabit, Petr. Chrysolog.
the persons or final estates of any, since some by their gracious and humble
retractations, have repaired those breaches, they made by their errors,
witness those famous and admired Worthies, who sought Gods glory by such self
denyalls, and advanced those truths by ingenious confession, they had formerly
opposed in the darkness of error, we may well be ashamed to patronize evil,
but not to relinquish it when light expels darkness, lest persisting in error
produce its gradation, from a failing of infirmity, to a fault of presumption.

Our indulging of error is one of those sins, which the Lord has visited in
our sad castigation, Quare nihil melius cavere quam tibi in tempore ne vel
minimum quicquam tibi indulgeus, qu^ a Satana tentaris.

Quare discamus non alibi quam in Domino fortes esse.


the greatness whereof he that runs may read, in the grievous calamities
infl^cted upon us, yet we have resembled rebellious children, or incorrigible
servants not bettered by the rod, while hardening our hearts and stifning our
necks, we refuse to return from errors darkness, this has occasioned our
wretched stumbling, and fearful falling into many enormities, in that we have
doted on indulgent error, not dreading the event which may render us lost.

Neither have we only mistaken our way, Coufusis permix tisque verbis,
veritatem frequentissime eludunt and medutorum au^esqono capiunt.
by wandering unhappily in a labyrinth of error, or been wrapped in the mantle of
miserable darkness, which has made us obnoxious unto deadly danger, but we
have been also misled by others, who like blind guides have deluded poor
souls, and steered their course like unski^full Pilots, on Scylla and
Charybdis, to wrack us with ruin, for the only original of our multiplied
contentions, was illegal tyranny obtruded in ceremonies, Per Puritanorum
lat^ra, orthodoxam vul^erant veritatem.
in which such success was achieved in short time, as promised a progress to
their subtle machinations, for the enemies of truth then had cause to triumph,
and glory in the power they received from the Beast, in working miracles
metamorphosing men, into a brutish stupidity, which renders them lost.

This was the condition of those ignorant souls, who liv^d in places where
preaching was cried down, Ita alii alios mutuo decipiunt,
and where the prohibition of a painful ministry, introduced the principles
of Atheistical impiety, for men were taught by many of their leaders, to dash
a commandment out of the decalogue, yea to slight Religion and the power of
godliness, as a main opposition of their ayms and ends.

Grave est non site quod faceres, gravius aute non facere quod scies.
Thus the leaders of Gods people have caused them to err, the watchmen being
blind and delighting to slumber, so that no trumpet being sounded by these
Sentinels, the Fort might be surprised without any resistance, for it was easy
for Popery to slide in unawares, where profaneness was porter to induce
superstition: and affected ignorance entertained innovation, which came posting
forward in the posture of Jehu.

Satan quaerit qua part sep^m facillime transcendere quibus machinis
inclinatum currum possit evertere.

Sirenum voces and Circes pocula nosti.


But O the misery of our mental darkness, which leads us by error into all
extremes, that as soon as we escape the net of one danger, we fall into
another, being quickly misled, for we do not ponder the path of our feet, nor
weigh our gold in the balance of the Sanctuary, but still take up tenants on
trust from others, who deceived themselves have deluded us also: this makes us
loath that pure bread of life, the delicious banquet of our poor hungry souls,
which once we prized as incomparably precious, hungring and thirsting to be
satisfied with it. Quare merito in hanc amentiam projecti sunt, ut sibi ultimum
exitium accerserent!
And therefore it is the more sad and deplorable, that men who have been called
by the preaching of the Word, should renounce or contemn that sacred ordinance
which they found efficacious in the work of their conversion, is the Lords hand
shortened that it cannot save, or is his arm weakened in the power of the
Gospel? has the sword of the spirit now lost its edge, Heb. 6.7.
or the armor of God is that grown unusefull? no surely the Word like the rain
that descends, Matthew. 13 8.
has its fructifying effect upon the good ground, 1 Cor. 1.21.
and the foolishness of preaching so deeply undervalued shall have its
operation on them that believe.

Woe then to all them that betray the trust of those poor blind souls, which
lean so much upon them, Pelle ovina contegi vis, ut si fieri potest, prius te
vulpis mordentem, sentiat, quam praesentiat veni ntem. John 10.27.
by leading them aside from the streams of living waters, to those broken
cisterns which can hold no comfort, how can they dispense with their
consciences that tell them, that Christ is contemned in the person of his
ministers, since he takes the affront as done unto himself, which is cast upon
them by erroneous spirits, Cant. 1.3.
Christ's sheep hear his voice and will follow him, rejoicing to find him in
the odor of his ointments, and dare not turn their backs on the preaching of
the Word, Psalm. 63.5.
but are satisfied with it as with marrow and fatness.

Christ says to the Jews who rejected his Word, Christus non venit ut
seliberaret qui sub servitute non erat, sed nos de servitute peccati redimeret.

Et si non vultis venire ad me ut vitam habeatis: iterum exprobrat nihil illis
praeter malitiam obstare quominus vitam in scripturis oblata^ percipiant: nam
quum eos nolle dicit ignorantiae and coecitatis cansam pravitati and
contumaciae assignat, Call. in Ioh. cap. 5.40. John 6.44. Prove. 8.34.


Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life, a patheticall expression
to show the perverseness, of gainsaying spirits which refuse precious means,
for though no man can come to Christ of himself, unless the Father internally
draw him, yet have we external and rational power, to go to the place where
his Word is dispensed and in doing this with sincere affection, may expect the
blessing which wisdom pronounces to those which daily wait at her gates, and
give attendance at the posts of her doors, for so we shall prove what our
gracious God will vouchsafe to effect by his sacred Ordinance, which is no
less powerful to quicken dead souls, then his voice to raise Lazarus who lay
in the grave, and sure this will one day aggravate their judgment, who
neglecting means have refused mercy, and following blind guides were misled
in darkness, and absorpt in those errors which render them lost.

The Apostle puts a Quere to the seduced G^lathians, Maneat moralis
benevol^ntiae, inter discordes sententia.
concerning the way of their receiving the spir^t, whether it were dispensed in
the works of the Law, or communicated to them by the hearing of faith, and the
like let a weak one by his holy example, be bold to propound to our seduced
brethren, was the public ministry the means of your conversion, or the private
meetings wherein it is cried down, Lingua vocata chaat^er mentis.
I mean not that sweet and christian society, wherein frequently the godly
speak one to another, Mal. 3.16, 17. Ventus est validus and mirabilia efficit,
arbores evellit saxa to^quet insublimo, aedi^^cia dejicit, sic spiritus sanctus
efficaciss^mus in verbo est, quia divina potentia operatur and ex cordibus
lapideis facit carnea, ex mortuis vivos.
by holy conference and mutual assistance, to build up themselves both in
faith and love, for this is accepted and approved by the Lord, who registers
such things in the book of his remembrance, yea will own these and lay them
up, as precious jewels, to be spared as a man spares his son that serves him,
for no doubt there be many who assemble in private, to repeat what was
delivered in the public ministry, and to crave a blessing for internal
efficacy, on the outward means to themselves and others: These do not
calumniate with reproachful revilings the message or messengers of Christ in
the Gospel, but do willingly subscribe to this undoubted truth, that the
preaching of the Word is powerful to conversion: Therefore to these I propound
not the question, but to them that meet in another way, to erect a Babel or
fabric of confusion, to overtop or undermine the most faithful ministry: Was
it not, I say, the preaching of the Word, whereby ye were called out of natures
darkness, to enjoy the revelation of those sacred mysteries, which made known
unto you the counsel of God? How is it then that ye loath the breast, out of
which ye have sucked such sacred refreshment, and refuse the benefit of that
sincere milk, by virtue whereof ye are grown to maturity: This plainly showed
the rock from whence ye were hewn, even the woeful estate whereunto Adam
brought us, Non hic tempus timendi sed clamandi! o peccata nostra nunquam satis
deslen da! O misericordia tua Domine, nu^quam satis praedicanda! O p^enitentia
nunquam magis necessaria! O gratia tua Domine humillime and jugiter impl^rand^!
then made you partakers by divine dispensation, of those inestimable treasures
are laid up in Christ: if you can any where find food more preciou^, then
those divine delicacies the ministry affords us, I should not blame you
although ye did travel even from East to West to find soul satisfaction, but
since the Manna falls about our tents, Gods bounty vouchsafing it even at the
door, let not our plenty now make us grow insolent, to contemn the blessing
which we cannot value, no let it be our care to express true gratefulness, in
embracing and obeying the voice of the Word, that its active operation may
reduce us from error, and dispell all the darkness in which we were lost.

In the last place we may lose ourselves, by refusing a guide which might lead
us in safety; even the holy Scriptures wherein are revealed all necessary
truths for our comfort and instruction, for in these are contained those sacred
precepts, and precious promises we formerly mentioned, Veritas est per quam
immutata qua sunt, quae fuerant, and quae futura sunt dicuntur.
with those divine observations which we also collected, for the ample benefit
of our selves and others, but my intentionall brevity admits me not to touch,
what any have written in commendation of Scripture, nor to fall upon that
argument by way of common place, which my weakness prohibite^h as too high and
transcending.

This only I desire for my self and others, that we look on Scripture as a
continent of comfort, Sacrascriptura in se continet, sola and perfect totam
veritate^ communicabilem, ergo est instrumentum sacrum de veritate, ad salutem
necessaria, per Prophetas and Apostolos tanquam Dei amanu^nses, fideliter and
perfect in libris canonicis perscriptum, Trelcatius.
because it has a treasure contained in it, which cannot be exhausted, unto
all e^ernity, and therefore though heaven and earth pass away, no tittle or
jot of the Scripture shall fail, but its precepts, promises, and prophetical
predictions, either of mercy or judgment shall be permanent for ever: for
though Christ put a period to the legal ceremonies, which were types and
shadows of good things to come, yet the law was not annihilated in respect of
its morality, but stands in force as a rule for direction: Himself was the
substance prefigured in those shadows, and the real Antitype of their
signification: yea he came to fulfill the Law in full perf^ction, which shows
it is a myrrour of perpetual purity.

Look we then on the Scriptures as our safest guide, Hinc and immediate
Decalogum suo digito Deus inscripsit tabulis.

Objectum est fidei adequatum omne v^rbum Dei in genere.

Fides est cognitio Dei veritatis, and fiducia eademque certism^, terum
sperandatum.


to lead us through the difficulties of every condition, consulting with them
when reason is nonplust, and can find no footing to direct us in our way:
which was the practice of David, and Heman, of Job, Jehoshaphat and many other
worcester hies, what time they were oppressed, even beyond humane strength, repairing
to the Word they found full consolation.

The Scripture is a clear and transparent fountain, in which we may view our
spiritual de^ormity, and understand the original of all our misery, Non
pendet reconciliatio ex dignitate paenae, ut scholastici somniant. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
to be the depravation of our nature by sin, and that guilt bound us over to
eternal punishment, for the due satisfaction of divine justice, being chained
to the curse as a miserable consequent, of our woeful defection, the bitter
root of all.

Sic voluit Deus ruinam vasis fragilis reformare, ut nec peccatum hominis di
nutterit impunitum, quia iustus est, nec insanabile, quia misericors, Aug. G^n.
4.8.
The Scripture declares that the Gospel was preached to man immediately after
his fall, That the seed of the woman should break the serpents head, and
conquer the power of infernal darkness: This was glad tidings to the humble
soul, dejected in the sense of its sin and misery, that it might not sink
into the pit of despair but embracing the promise might never be lost.

The gathering of the Church was first in Adams family, wherein were a time,
both the godly and the wicked, Cain slaying Abel his innocent brother, Mergitur
interdum sed non submergitur unquam, salvificum Christi servans Ecclesia verbum.
Protomartyr and emblem of the Church its persecution, after it was gathered
into an Arc, to save it from drowning in the universal deluge, when only Noah
and them of his family, enjoyed the benefit of life's preservation: These
passages of providence were not only recorded, by Historical narration in the
sacred Scripture, Scriptum est creationem mundi, simulachrum esse invisi ilium
Dei.
but were also significant setting forth unto us the state of the Church in her
militant condition: for which cause a collection of some passages of
providence, were presented in the view of our weak observations, serving to
illustrate the love of our God, extended to his people that they might not be
lost

Perspicuitatem scriptura consideramus utroque modo, tum natura sua, quatenus a
Deo inspirata est, tum ratione nostri quatenus inspitamur a Deo ad perceptione
illius. Romans 7.13.
A single eye is one of those requisites, which in viewing the Scriptures will
be useful unto us, that the Lord may be looked on as most wise and holy, and
our selves as indigent, sinful, and miserable, for in viewing the vast and
inconceiveable distance, twixt his glorious greatness and our miserable
baseness, we may see the necessity of such a Mediator, as might make an
infinite meritorious satisfaction: This shows the grievous nature of sin, so
deservedly odious to the divine Majesty, as all the creatures in heaven and
earth could make no answer to his absolute justice: Wherefore Christ is the sum
or divine subject, which the Scriptures treat of as their highest argument, Est
spirituale os interioris hominis, quod nutritur recipiens verbum vitae, quod
verbum est panis qui descendit e Coelo.

Quid enim est oraculum, nempe voluntas divina hominis ore enuntiara. Quid enim
est humilitatis fructus ubi detrimentum est veritatis. Romans 1.17.


for which cause they are styled by a learned Father, the garments or swathing
band of the babe Christ Jesus.

Our blessed Savior himself was content to have his Doctrine examined by
Scripture, and to call in their testimony as a witness to the truth, of those
divine Oracles delivered by him, and as it is observed by them that know the
Tongues, he usually quoted the Septuag^nts Translation, which refutes their
error who will not admit, that ought is to be used except the Original.

So the holy Apostles use Scripture testimony, to confirm the verity of their
words and writings, reciting Moses the Psalms and the Prophets, Hab. 2.4.
in their Narrations, Sermons, and Exhortations, Acts 13.17. 2 Timothy 3.15. Acts
18.11. Vtinam omnes faceremus illud, q^od scriptum est sc^utamini scripturas,
Or.
inciting their Auditors to the study of the Scriptures, which young Timothy
had traded in, from his tender age, yea it was the commendation of those noble
Bereans, that they searched the Scriptures to find divine truth, and were we
so wise by their godly example, to try all Doctrines by the Touchstone of
Scripture, we should not wander for want of a guide, misled in those errors
which render us lost.

All Scripture is given by divine inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. Omnis enim scientia
veritatis, est a prima veritate, cuius scriptura instrumentale symbolum est,
Trel.
being profitable to teach and instruct in righteousness, nor is it of private
interpretation, to be turned or twisted to the fancies of men, for the godly
penmen of the sacred Scriptures, were acted or moved by the Holy Ghost, whose
divine dictates they faithfully delivered, to direct the Church as a guide
infallible.

It is called also a most sure word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 2.19. Non putomus
scindendas Ecclesias esse, propter ea quae nos ex se neque digniores, neque
indigniores, coram Deo facere possunt, Cyp.
unto which the Saints do well to give heed, as unto a light that shines in
darkness, until the day dawn, and the day star arise: It is a comfort in this
time of trouble, that there is such a Judge to stint every strife, for the word
shall judge men in their ultimate trial, though now they refuse to be guided
by it.

The Scripture is reverently esteemed by the righteous, as the sacred evidence
of their heavenly inheritance, giving them here while it guides them in the
way, a taste of the fruits of their promised Canaan, Saera scriptura locum
tenet ab autoritate negative.
but the wicked of the world contemn and despise it, and relish it no more
then the white of an egg, as appears by those blasphemous and contemptible
epithites, which some in these times have given unto the Scriptures, Grave
praejudicium est quod non iudiciu^ s^d malitiam habet.
no marvel though they rush into violent exorbitancies, and ruin themselves
on the rock of temerity, when they dare adventure without this safe guide, in
the uncoucht ways of erroneous darkness: The brightness of the Sun gives no
light to the blind, Deus dicltur indurare quando non emollit.
nor can they rightly judge of the beauty of colors, but the hearing ear and
the seeing eye, shall enjoy the benefit of the sacred Scripture.

Cautus auditor and lector cito deprel^e^deret in sidias, and cuniculos quibus
veritas subvertitur: and revera aperte in luce demonstrabit nam cu^ quaeque
novitas ebullit statim cernitur frumentorum gravitas and levitas palearum, tunc
sine magno molimme excutitur ab arca quod nullo pondere inter arcam tenebatur.
The Heretics and Schismatics in every age have perverted the Scriptures to
their own destruction, abusing their authority to mayntain those false tenets,
which they flatly opposed in their genuine sense, Thus did Arrius, Donatus, the
Manichees, and others, against whom the godly made just opposition, detecting
their falsehood, and refuting their heresies, which they sought to patronize by
wrested Scripture.

These erring spirits refused a guide, which occasioned the p^ogresse of their
blind illusions, because the further they erred from light, the more they were
involved in the snares of darkness, and while they contemned pure Scripture
truth, they miserably doted on devised fables which drew them unawares into a
labyrinth of errors in which circular maze they were miserably lost.

Clavis est scientia scripturarum, per quam apetitur ianua veritatis.
Follow then the Scripture, as an infallible guide, which who so is led by shall
never miscarry, because it is a key which opens the cabinet of Gods sacred
counsel concerning all mysteries: for the Scripture is the best expounder of
it self, where the text is dubious, in our shallow apprehension, the precedent
and subsequent serving to illustrate, the sense of Scripture in its true
interpretation, but men should not touch it with polluted hands, defiled in the
mire of sinful prejudice, but wash them in innocence like holy David, what
time he came near to compass Gods altar: In sacra scriptura non solum bonitas
est quod praecipitur, and foelicitas quod promittitur, sed etiam veritas est
quod dicitur.
humbly imploring divine assistance, in viewing or meditating this divine
subject, that the spirit may lead us into every truth, his sacred operation
accompanying the Scriptures, For if we consult with frail flesh and blood,
with carnal reason or mere humane knowledge, we may possibly lose our selves
^ these woods, by declining or deserting this absolute guide, which is the
cause that new minted errors, are stamped for current though counterfeit coin,
and the basest bullion of exploded old heresies, now passing for payment, among
men misguided, but orthodox truths are accounted threadbare, Est natura hominis
novitatis avida.
and like antike fashions are quite laid aside in the deep disesteem which men
have of the Scriptures, because their pure light detects each false way.

The Scriptures are sufficient to confirm every truth, Spiritus sancti doctrina
est, quae canonicis literis prodita est, ergo si ad divinae traditionis caput
revertantur, cessaterror humanus, Cyp. ad Pam.
revealed to Gods people for their comfort and instruction, and also to refute
the most impudent errors, which are now gilded over to obscure their
deformity: for habitual aberrations are of great antiquity, deriving their
pedigree from Adams defection, even to us who improving that wretched
patrimony, are prone to drink in the most poisonous errors: especially we of
the weaker sex, Haereses apud eos multum valent, qui in fide non valent, sed
nihil valentes si in been valentem fidem incurrant
have hereditary evil from our grandmother Eve, on whom the subtilty of the
insinuating Serpent, had a fatal influence to seduce and betray her, and
therefore the Apostle to humble us the more, says, the woman was deceived and
was in the transgression, placing her as principal in guilt and sin, who was
created subordinate by divine institution: 1 Timothy 2.13, 14. 1 Cor. 11 8, 9. 2 Timothy 3.6.
for which cause he inweighs against those seducers, who lead away captive poor
silly women, who armed with abilities to understand the Scriptures, become a
prey to erroneous teachers.

Let me then in pity even petition our sisters, that they submit to the
guidance of the sacred Scriptures, from which precious fountain flow those
wholesome streams, Psalm. 46.4.
that refresh and make glad the city of our God, his Church being the pillar,
which holds forth to our view, 1 Timothy 3.15.
the Imperial Edicts of the highest majesty, even the sacred Scriptures wherein
is proclaimed his divine dictates for infallible direction: V^ capiat pisc^s
piscato^ no^te laborat, ut se^p^um servet sur^^^ nemo parat.
Let these be matter of sweetest meditation, to satiate our souls with enduring
comfort, that we may not thirst for those puddle waters, which instead of
profit, prove poison unto us.

It rests now that we carefully collect, the scattered fragments of our dull
meditations, and take a view what we have observed, from the precept of our
Savior, and his reason annexed, in the first we considered his oecumenicall
authority, in designing to his servants this gathering employment, and also
their humility, and dutiful obedience, in submitting to his precept, in the
work imposed.

In collecting we considered temporal necessaries, as the literal sense of
this frugall precept, and then by an argument from the less to the greater, we
inferred the necessity of spiritual provision, first sacred precepts, of piety
and charity, directing our active and passive obedience, then promises purging,
pardoning, and healing, salves fit to cure each wound of the soul, lastly, we
gathered up sundry observations, to view in them the condition of the godly, in
their many afflictions, miraculous deliverances, and various revolutions into
different estates.

In the reason we considered how an absolute agent, condescends to the
weakness of our shallow capacity, propounding our benefit as a special
motive, inducing to the obedience of his sacred precept, since every one says,
Who will show us any good? and laments the loss of what was but lent him,
which illustrates the usefulness of this frugall precept, and annexed reason
that nothing be lost.

Neither of the creatures whose order is inverted, by ignorance, intemperance,
and base ingratitude, nor yet of time which is wastfully devoured, by
idleness, curiosity, and wretched anxiety, nor of our endowments, spiritual
and temporal, which were weakly considered in their various kinds, the
donations of the spirit being of two sorts, either saving graces, or common
gifts, the temporals we briefly referred to these three, mental, bodily, and
accessory endowments, which of these be permanent, which subject to decay, we
formerly showed to incite to their improvement, because we are accountants for
the talent of our master, wherewith we must trade that it may not be lost.

Lastly, a caution was tendered unto us, that we lose not our selves in the
labyrinth of error, into which we fall, when we wander from our way, when we
walk in darkness, or are wrong misled, and when we refuse that infallible
guide, the sacred Scriptures, that might lead us safely, we suddenly err both
from truth and peace, and turn into by-ways which render us lost.

Our compassionate Savior whose miraculous mercy, has been the matter of our
poor Meditations, vouchsafe us the assistance of his sanctifying spirit, both
to know and do what his word directs us, that our judgments being informed by
the light of his truth, and our lives reformed from all sinful obliquity, we
may gratefully consecrate all to his praise, Luke 19.10.
who came to seek, and save us that were lost.

FINIS.

