A DECLARATION OF THE Earl of Warwick, Lord High Admiral OF ENGLAND: In
Answer of a scandalous Pamphlet, falsely reflecting upon his Lordships Honor
and Proceedings.

Published by special Command.

Nouemb: 17th London printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old
Bailey. 1648.

A Declaration of the Earl of Warwick, Lord High Admiral of England, in
Answer of a scandalous Pamphlet, falsely reflecting upon his Lordships Honor and
Proceedings.
HAving this day seen a Letter from LONDON, dated the third of this instant
November, importing, That there is a Pamphlet printed entitled; A Declaration
of the Earl of Warwick, showing a Resolution to join with the Prince if the
Treaty take not effect. I thought my self bound to take notice of it, having
so horrid a reflection upon my Honor, and wickedly aspersing me with a
supposed Resolution so repugnant to the Trust, which I hold under the
PARLIAMENT. And therefore I do hereby declare, That as both Houses of
Parliament have been pleased to entrust me with the Charge of the Fleet, so I
have endeavored to improve that Authority committed to me, with a faithful,
and inviolable respect unto my duty.

When I first undertook this great Charge, I was really sensible how much the
Cause, Truth, and glory of God, the settlement of my Countries Peace, and the
preventing of the bloody, and desperate designs of the Enemies thereof,
depended upon the management of this Expedition, and how much I was obliged in
Conscience and Honor to omit nothing that might have a tendency to those ends.
That Obligation I have (according to my best Reason and Judgment) faithfully
discharged, and by the blessing of Heaven have received this fruit
(notwithstanding the many obstructions and difficulties that intervened) that
the Honor of the Parliament by Sea is cleared, the Fleet committed to my charge
preserved in a condition of Honor and safety; The affections of the Seamen
settled; the design of those wicked Revolters, that perfidiously betrayed so
considerable a part of the Kingdoms Navy broken, and such as associated with
them either rendered or reduced (other then those few that for a while have
basely sheltered themselves within the Sluice at Helver, and one that was out of
this Harbor when I came into it.) And as to the pretended Resolution of my
joining with the Prince, in case the Treaty should not take effect, falsely
charged upon me, by that Phamphlet, I do profess, in the presence of God, who
knows my heart, and ways, that it never entered into my thoughts, and that my
soul abhors it, as inconsistent with my Duty, prejudicial to the Parliament,
destructive to the Kingdoms Peace, and unworthy of a free borne English man;
being confident that the Parliament will omit nothing on their part, to make
the issue of the Treaty (by Gods blessing) successful, and happy. And
therefore, as I have hitherto been faithful to the Kingdom, and to the
Parliament, where I have the Honor to sit as a Peer, so I do and shall scorn
to sacrifice my conscience, and those public and dear concernments of my
Country, wherein I have a portion, to the misled fancy of any person of what
rank, quality, or condition soever; And while I have a heart, and a hand, I
shall not fail (by Gods assistance) to have them, on all occasions, lifted up,
for the Service of the Parliament; and common Interests of England, with my
uttermost integrity, and to my highest hazard; And my actions shall confute the
lies and jealousies as well of that false Author, as of any other who (either
from an ignorance of my proceedings, or perhaps from a sense, of their own
guilt) dare take the freedom (in these times, wherein the Tongue and Press
assume so luxurious a latitude) so unjustly to bespatter my Honor and
Intentions; To vindicate the sincerity whereof I shall commit my self to him
that judges righteously.

Warwick.
A Board the St. George in Helver Sluice, 11. November. 1648.
FINIS.

