THE ZEALOVS SOVLDIER.
depiction of a soldier with sword.

I
FOr God, and for his cause, 'Ile count it gain
To lose my life; o can one happier Die,
Then for to Fall, in Battle, to maintain
Gods worship, truth, extirpate Popery:
I fight not, for to venge my self, nor yet,
For coin, but Gods true, worship up to set.
II
Those Mercinary Soldiers that do Fight
Only for pay, are most. Degenerate.
Not worthy to enjoy the subjects Right
Not worthy love of God, of Church or State,
Though I Deny not, but They useful are,
Yet should not, with the Good, in honor share.
III
The Ancient Heathen, on their Foes would Run,
Their Naked Breasts, would offer, to their swords
Cause for Their Country, then should Christians shun,
To Fight for Theirs, and what more joy afford
For Their Religion, cursed for aye be He,
Bears Such a mind, and His Posterity,
IV
Whoo'd be Dejected, though a while he bear
Adversity, who would some three years past
Have though, that God, So high, our cause would rear
And with such Nemerous victories have graced
His Righteuos Cause-when we then thought to be
A Prey to the Mallicious Enemy.
V
Who in Their height of Glory, were brought low
And made to Stoop to Those They did despise,
And made that Power above them for to know
Which erst They wretched worms, in monstrous wise
Blasphemed, swearing God Damn them as They stood
And sure on many was that wish made good
VI
But here me thinks, I hear some say we buy
And purchase our Religion at deer rate;
Thou impious fool, had we lain still perdie,
Thou had not been alive the truth to ra^e,
For thou and we I think had sure been slain,
Had we sat still, as now we wars maintain.
VII
Forbear to utter your Malignant spleen,
And mark the end how God his cause will crown
With glory, how often have you lately seen
Our Armies have the Foemen overthrown:
Towns each day are surrendered, and we take
Prisoners enough, an Army strong to make.
VIII
God has no doubt a purpose to bring on
A work both for his glory and our good,
You Will say it has been the confusion
And cause of shedding many thousands blood:
'Twas for our sins that God this war did bring,
But know we may have cause rejoice and sing.
IX
Some few years since when we behold and see
The fruits of our hard labors and behold,
This Kingdom flourish in tranquillity,
And Gods true worship as it ought extold:
Then shall we says o praised be the Lord,
That we attained peace have by the sword.
X
Sing to the Lord a Psalm of thanks and praise,
And to his holy Temple let us bring
An heart unspotted, let us an eccoe raise
With our loud voices* may to Nations ring,
Far distant from us, chaunting loudly thus,
Praised be the Lord that has assisted us.

