THE Young Man and Maids Recreation OR, The Spring Birds Notes.
Tune of, Charon make have, etc. This may be Printed R. P.



My Dearest lets walk through the Meaddows this weather,
and hear the Birds welcome in the spring,
Beneath a Shade we will sit down together*
and here the Nightingale sweet'y sing
There as we pass the Chirping Sparrow
now from the blustering winter tree
Will strain his throat for to b^d us good morrow,
as we pass over the flowery Mead.
The whistleing Blackbird will tune up his throat too,
to see us loveingly pass along,
The pretty Lack she will set up her note* too,
and in the Air sing us her fine song;
The Magpye in the hedge will Chatter,
and tell the Good-wise of her Guess
Seeming to ta^tle of many a matter;
thus all the Birds will their joys express.
There we shall here too the sweet singing Thrushes,
strain up their throats with the Genny-Ren,
Seated on twigs in the pleasant Green bustes,
singing as loud as their Throats can strain
And we shall see upon a Bow,
on tops of Lofty trees will sit,
The bonny Raven too, and the black Crow,
will sing that would make a Loose man beshit.
There is the Lovly Peacock, and the Pheasant,
gaudy for show, tho they Cannot sing,
Yet for to v^ew their sine feathers it is pleasant,
finer in Color then any thing;
There is the Partridge and the Lapwing,
though they sing not, the're Good meat,
Would make a Hungry ploughman be snaping,
if he such victuals could have to eat.


There is the Parrat will prittle and prattle,
calling for any thing he does lack,
Thus till he is tired he will twirtle and twattle,
asking you for a Good Cup of Sack
The Oul she sits and is confounded
thus for to hear the Parrot prate,
Crying, why can you not let a poor roundhed
sit here alone in his silent state.
There is the Gold Finch whose delicate singing,
fills the Groves with pleasant sound
And whilst the wood with her harmonies Ringing
^^cho her note^ does aloud resound,
There is the lang ^a^l'd butter'^ Buns,
who nodding si^s upon her r(...)p,
There is the Cuckcoo will flutter and mutter,
and up and down lo^ty branches Iump.
There are the Turtle D^ves kindly a wooing
thu^ing their Mates they desin to Love,
All the day long they are billing and Choosing
in pleasant branches within the Grove,
Till they have brought themselves to Labor,
then on tree tops they build their nest,
Next comes the Wood pecker like pipe and taber
and with his pecking disturbs their Rest.
Now let us speak of the birds of the water
for we have done with those of the A^r,
To bring in the rear they come swiming in aste*
in narlins brooks and in Rivers Clear
In the first place there is the Rings-Fisher;
who lo^^s to dabble in Running streams,
Tho she is little we ought not to miss her,
sin^e she is King of those birds it seems.
There is the Duck and the Drake besides many
more that are birds of the watre sort,
But they for Diving are better then any,
and before Dogs mill make Curtous sport,
There is the silver Swan besides,
who on the water takes delight
And up and down the smooth river Gl^des
bedect with fine feathers of S^^wie white.
Now m^ dear Shepherdess let us go ^ouing
and take the pleasures the fields affords
We will each other embraces and be ^^ving,
and charm our s^lves with kind melting words
The birds shall Smgand we will Dance,
and I Will a green ^own to the give
Such a one you may admire by Chance
and after love me fort while you live.
Printed for R. Kell. at the (...)


