A SOBER REPLY TO A Serious Enquiry. OR, An ANSWER to a Reformed QVAKER, in
Vindication of Himself, Mr. G. Keith and others, for their Conformity to the
Church of England, against what I have written on that Subject.

By Trepidantium Malleus.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by A. Baldwin, and John Marshal. 1700.

A SOBER REPLY to a SERIOUS ENQUIRY.
YESTERDAY, when I removed my Habitation from London to Mortloch, the Serious
Enquiry came to my hand. I grew weary of a City of Contention, and never
intended to write more about their Controversies, but apply my self to a large
delectable Habitation nigh the King's Park by Richmond, in some of the best Air
in the World, hoping to cure as many distempered Bodies, as I had distempered
Minds in that now forsaken City. Horace highly commends a Country Life:

Beatus ille qui procul negotiis.
Vt prisca gens mortalium --
Sir Kenelm Digby, after he had in lively colors described the Excellency of a
Country, and in apt ones the Vanity of a Court Life it self, as well as a City
one, says at last,

And if Contentment be a Stranger then,
I Will never seek it, but in Heaven, again.
These with many others, make a Country Life an Emblem of the Golden Age.

But my hopes of a Life free from Controversy, were nipt in the bud by this
Oppugner of me: For Silence in me might look like Victory in him, and a
betraying of my Righteous Cause.

Had Mr. Lesly, whom I greatly honor, or Mr. Keith, whom most men now as
greatly despise, no better Advocate for their now common Cause, or no fitter
Censurer of me, than one who never vindicates them or himself from one of my
Arguments against Conformity, but is not ashamed to say, p. 3. It might be
endless to answer some of your grand Objections? Ay, Sir, say you so! Is this
all? And instead of answering one of my Arguments, you offer about 60 Queries
and Particulars, most of them ridiculous and impertinent. If I am, as you say
you have heard, and found in my Books, a man of that ability -- that I can
answer Queries and Doubts of Conscience, I have something else to do than to
answer all your Queries, but will single out such as are material. You say,
Great were my pains to convince you when Quakers -- That you now bear testimony
to G. Keith 's found Doctrive (A Quakerish Phrase and Cant.) It is a Query
among some of you, Whether Mr, Lesly has fully answered my Arguments against
Conformity in our printed Epistles? Let Mr. Keith essay it, if he thinks he
can: So My first Friendly Epistle to him against Episcopacy. Why must I be
plagued with old stale Objections, and my Replies taken no notice of: An
intolerable Practice among some short-sighted men, or men of no depth.

Now to your chief reasons why you turn not Independents, offered by way of
Query: But I must contract.

1. They paganize, and make Antichristian all the Churches of Christ in the
World, except themselves.

This Charge is so foul and false, as I have proved in my Apology for them,
that I hope in you it came from Ignorance, I fear from Malice: perhaps from
both. Cotton in his Keys, Jer. Buroughs in his Irenicum, Du Maulin in his Plea
for Congregational Churches, and all I have read of, abhorred such black
Notions. Do they make Anabaptists Pagans, who, are often said to have too great
Affinity with them? Call they not Presbyterians their Brethren? Read the London
Union. Du Maulin, that Great Good Man, in his Moral Reflections, singles out Bp
Hall often as one of the greatest Saints on Earth. I confess some of them are
as mad upon some of their Notions, as Mr. Lesly, Mr. Keith, and your self, on
the Divsne Right of Episcopacy. I am sorry a man of worth and sense, tho not of
temper, was -- so weak in his Plea, for Congregational Churches, to lay down
four Arguments to prove the House of Stone was not the Church of God: As,
Christ died for the Church, but he died not for the House of Stone. Ergo, etc.

What is more common than a Metonimy of the Continent for the thing contained?
as, I drink off such a Cup or Glass, eat up such a Dish, for the Drinks and
Meats in them.

2. The second is false: for the Independents own the Church Membership of
Infants, and so their Baptism; inseparable Truths.

3. About living by the Gospel, etc. What Independent denied it, or the
Lawfulness of Tithes? What Penry did in the days of Q. Elizabeth, or some
Brownist, they are not to be answerable for. In Oliver's days this was no
Controversy.

4. You say, They set up Preachers that have no knowledge of the Tongues. What
they only? Where they make one, some Bishops have made two, and Good Bp Crofts
justifies it, Naked Truth. But these things I have considered in my Apology.

5. To the fifth I say, That not only they, but the Anabaptists, now own and
practice Ordination by laying on of Hands. Read some of their Confessions.

6. What Independents gather Churches from York to London, I know not. No doubt
they have gotten some Knaves, as you some good Men. But you have forty to one.

8. You say, they expect New Modifications. Have not yours often changed
Doctrine and Discipline? Organs, Bowings, etc. See the abominable Worship at
Paul's. Your Changes are for the worse, Popish ones. What Changes they make are
for the better, Protestant ones.

10. To the tenth Query Mr. Hales thinks the Power of the Keys nothing but
declarative, and so no more belongs to Ministers than private Christians.
Popish Absolutions, and and yours have been so ill managed, that most of yours
are sick of them now. Why in a time of Death only are men absolved?

12. If they think our Reformers worshipped God in a wrong way, Do not you
think so of some Reformed Churches, France, Holland, Geneva, Scotland of old,
and now? Do not Tome of you unchurch them, and Mr. Lesly unchristian them. See
his Black Book of Episcopacy. Did ever any Independent write in such bloody
Characters? And yet this man is your Oracle, and you all plow with his Heifer.
They who were our Reformers were not our Apostles. Mr. L. would be, I fear, if
occasion were, as very an Incendiary as Hugh Peter's, that madd Independent.
Keep to such as he, and go on, as one of yours did on his Execution.

Here is the last and best Edition
Of Hugh, the Author of Sedition.
He that shall say, will surely miss,
That Hugh now Independent is.
To call Jacobite Quakers Honest Loyal ones, as Mr. L. does, is to be abhorred
by all true Englishmen. No more of this: Pudet dicere and piget tacere.
Rebellion is now called Loyalty.

To your Reasons why you turned not Presbyterians, by way of Query.

Whether Christ did not bid his Disciples to say, Our Father -- Whether they
did not say, Our Father -- Whether it be not evil to expunge Our Father -- are
made three Questions; tho I put them, and so might he, into one.

1. The Assembly of Divines recommended the use of it, and some do it to this
day, Mr. Shower, and others.

2. Yet secondly, I must confess not only I think there is no command here, but
that it is not convenient to use it. See my Answer to W. C. a Churchman his
Trepidantium malleus intrepidanter malleatus, in favor of G. Whitehead and the
Quakers, against me, Mr. Keath, and Mr. Lesly too. And I add, That tho our
Bible, I think, is not only well, but laudably translated; yet on much and long
consideration and enquiry, I do aver, That (...) is not truly nor tolerably
translated. (...) is no more daily than weekly, or monthly. And I boldly
assert, That Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie, is a foul Translation,
tho used by Papists and Protestants. If it be asked, how must it be read? I
answer, it is no easy Question. Superessential, supersubstantial Bread are not
proper, not being understood by the Vulgar; tho Mr. Pool mentions them. He was
a famous Nonconformist, by the way, of whose Synopsis D. Barlow said, Opus
esset, non unius viri, sed totius saeculi, si tu non suscepsses. I think,
Tremellius gave the fairest stroke: Panen nostrum necessarium da nobis hodie,
Give us this day our necessary Bread. I humbly offer this to the consideration
of such Dissenters as use this Form. As for the Clergy, their Ears are bored at
the Prelates Doors, that they are sworn to serve them for ever: They dare not
alter it; but must keep to their old Mumpsimus, notwithstanding my new
Sumpsimus, for fear of being excommunicated, and sent as a Token to the Devil
for this offense. For my part, one reason among others why I use it not, is the
great Superstition of some men; so for this reason I sometimes put on my Hat in
hearing, and will justify this, if occasion be.

You ask us, Sir, whether (...) be not a different word from (...)? Yes, Sir,
as Ensiis and Gladius, but not a different thing. And are indeed Bishops called
Presbyters because once so? Would it be proper to call my Lord Mayor Mr.
Alderman, because once so? or a King Prince of Wales, because so before. Bishop
is a name of Office, Presbyter of Duty, say you. Learnedly distinguished, say I.

The naming of Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete, and Jerome's
Authority, are all of a piece, as I have proved long since. Whether K. James or
Bp B. said first, No Bishop, no King, is no matter, being confuted in Scotland.
Aeirus his damnable Doctrine against the Trinity, etc. made him a Heretic, not
denying Episcopacy, else Jerome had been one, the Reformed Churches-abroad had
been heretical. What madness is this!

The Canons of the Apostles, and Ignatius his Epistles, are justly questioned,
whether legitimate or spurious, by Protestants of all sorts: Yet if Ignatius
his Epistles were genuin, a Bishop was but a Bishop of one Church, one Altar --
In after Ages the difference was not of Order, but of Degree. Show a new
Ordination or Consecration.

Did St James make a Liturgy or Common Prayer Book, or One for him?

The Lord's Prayer and Creed, p. 3. and 4. you prove every word by Scripture at
large. Do we deny it? Was ever such mad work made till now! The Query about
sudden Death, All Women laboring with Child, etc. is foreign to our business.
Are you and G. Keith on immediate Inspiration still, that you say, That the
Petition in the Form of Marriage, that they might live as Isaac and Rebecca
(not as Abraham and Sarah, for he had a Hagar too; not as Jacob and Rachael,
for he had a Leah too) was from Inspiration from the Holy Ghost, not human
Invention. Was Cristmas, Man, known of old -- There is Praying by the Spirit as
to Gifts as well as Grace.

You commend him that called the Common Prayer Book, Optimmm Breviarium, the
worst name I think he could ever give it. What is it, the best Mass Book?
Agreed. One being asked how they could say of K. C. II. our most Religions
King? He said, It is the most Religious King we have, we have not a better. So
say I, it is the best Breviary we have, we have not a better.

The last Propositions in the third and last-part are common to all, they can
have no place here.

Now, Reader, if thou have read my Snake caught, thou can not think this a
Reply. I am ready to prove,

1. That it is more scandalous for Ministers to read other men's Prayers to God,
than read other men's Sermons to the People.

2. That the Church of the Jews, tho laden with Ceremonies (every one of Divine
Appointment) had no Liturgies in this its Infancy; and therefore worse is it
now.

3. That a Diocesan Bishop is not a Creature of God's making, and can no more
take upon him the sole Power of Ordination, than of Baptizing or giving the
Lord's Supper. To say nothing of their lazy vain Lives.

4. That to swear Canonical Obedience to such, to read Writs of Excommunication
against the best of men for Toys or Trifles, or swear Churchwardens, if
occasion be, to Articles none do keep, or can keep, etc. is double-died
Iniquity, big-bellied Wickedness.

5. That for these and other reasons Separation from the Church of England is
no Sin, but a Duty. I wish your Mr. L. and our Mr. A. might meet together; or
Mr. K. and my self.

To Mr. KEITH.
SIR,
THE Air at Mortlock being good for Distempers in the Head as well as Body (and
therefore Lodgings are for a time here taken up by many Londoners) I offer you
the best Room in my House till you are cured. Is it fair to employ or help or
countenance such a Bigot of yours as C. I. only that it might be said, I was
answered, tho it matters not how? You are Sir, if ever man was, what the Poet
says,

Et tantum constans in levitate sua

Ovid. Some of C. I. his Queries are as little to the Controversy, as theirs
who query of you,

1. Whether you did not say, You could better bear Death than Poverty, and so
conformed, because your Turners-Hall Hearers and Mathematical Scholars dropped
away, and you saw you could not be the Head of a new Party.

2. Whether before your Ordination you did not discourse according as your
Company was about Conformity or Non-comformity. Or if I should now ask.

3. Whether the Apostles wore a black Gown, etc. What would you say of any of
us? at least that we were Impertinents:

Aut illud quod dicere nolo.

Juven. Be not angry, Sir, if I tell you, to answer such as he is but the work
of one Afternoon, without any Book by me but the censured Paper. Many years
have I been from my Study, and to be plain in my present Circumstances care for
none. Farewell Mr. Changeable, and yet Mr. Infallible, I intend to answer every
thing against me, but not against other men. I have been at great cost and
Pains, let others be so, if occasion be.

Farewell London, Farewell Controversies.
FINIS.

