You pretty little Ladies will do so. OR, A Match made up against the
Whitson-Holy-days.
This Ditty was composed, the truth is so,
By a Young Man that did a Maiden woo;
He met with her under a shady Bower,
And made a Lady of her in an hour.
All you Young Men that know not how to woo,
Give ear to this, 'twill teach you what to do.
To the Tune of, Lusty Bacchus, etc.




FOrth walking in the Summers time
When Flora's flowers were in their prime
Under a sweet perfumed shade,
I saw a Young Man and a Maid,
With complements he did her crave,
S^ me^hing which he desired to have,
But to this question she said no,
You pretty little Ladies will do so.
The gallant Youth to her did say,
I Will make of thee a Lady gay,
I Will deck thy head like Loves fair Queen
And cloathe thee in a Gown of green:
Sweet Lady shall this bargain hold?
Kiss on condition make me bold,
What though at first you said me no;
You pretty little Ladies will do so.
Sweet sir, she thus replied again,
Spend not your breath and time in vain,
For any thing you crave of me,
I will deny it certainly,
And whatsoever you do say,
I Will answer you another way,
And when you ask me, I Will say no;
Quoth he, you pretty Ladys will do so.
Lady said he, it is my choice
When I shall elevate my voice,
For to record a true. Loves song:
In which I mean no Goddess wrong,
Will you deny to bear a part
And forthwith break my lovesick heart
Will you; quoth he, she answered no;
You pretty little Ladies will do so.


IF I should ask you to do t^is
To enrich my lips with one sweet kiss,
It would better be ten thousand fold
To me, than was great Craesus gold,
One honey kiss will end the strife
If otherwise 'twill cost my life,
Shall I dye or live, say I or no;
You pretty little Ladies can do so.
My person pure, my heart and hand,
Shall ever be at your command;
I Will ride and run at your desire,
Through water cold, or flames of fire,
What is it that I Will not undertake,
If I could once but hear thee speak,
One loving word to ease my woe?
You pretty little Ladies, etc.
This is the prime time of the year,
This is the time to make good cheer,
This is the time called Whitsontide,
This tim^ will I make thee my Bride,
If you thereto will give consent,
This match we never need repent,
Both hand in hand, to Church we will go.
You pretty Ladies will do so.
Five hundred pound I have said he,
All which I will bestow on thee,
Besides Corn, Sheep and Cattle store
And all that I have spoke before;
You shall have Servants great and small
To wait on you when e're you call,
What you will have done command them do
You pretty little Ladies will do so.
You shall be fed with diet fine,
Your drink shall be the purest wine,
The rarest Music can be had,
Cheerfully shall play to make you glad
And when you beat the Music sound,
If It please you for to dance around,
And nimbly trip it with the toe,
You pretty little Ladies can do so.
When she had heard his complement,
And he related his intent;
About his neck her arms she clips,
And with sweet kisses imbalm'd his lips*
And in requital of her pain
He paid her with the like again;
She left her note of answering no;
You pretty little Ladies will do so.
At last being ravished both with joy,
One to the other seemed not ^oy,
But on a sudden down they fell,
How he came off I cannot tell;
But sure they drive some pretty trade,
Cupid and Venus sent them aid;
They did as other Lovers do;
You pretty little Ladies will do so.
FINIS.
London, Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


