A WARRANT SENT From the LORD MAYOR and ALDERMEN, to all the trained Bands in
London, and the Liberties thereof.

ALSO A true Platform of Captain GIFFORD, showing how to plant Ordnance and
batter by night.

LIKEWISE, The Quality of a Serjeant-Major, with such Arts and Sciences as
appertain unto his place.

Published by especial Command.

LONDON, September. 23. Printed for Francis Coules. 1642.

By the Mayor.
WHEREAS great Complaint is made unto me by the Captains of the trained Bands
within this City, That when they are commanded forth, upon service of this
City, for the more safety thereof, a very small number of men enrolled do make
their appearance; and that some of them apearing, do depart from their colors
before they be lodged, in contempt and great neglect of the said service; these
are therefore to will and require you in His Majesty's name, forthwith upon
sight hereof to call before you all and every the Constables within your Ward,
and give them strict Charge, to repair to the Houses in their several
Precincts, and give commandment that all such as are enrolled by the Captains
within your Ward, do immediately, after warning given by the beat of the
Drumb, repair to their Colors, and place of Rendevouz, with their competent
arms, and that none of them depart thence without leave of their Captain; and
that from time to time notice be taken of all such soldiers so enrolled, as
shall absent themselves from performing that their service; and that the names
of such delinquents, and what defects shall be found, be returned unto me in
writing, to the end such course may be taken with them as to Justice shall
appertain. And hereof I require you not to fail, as you will answer the
contrary at your peril.

MICHEL,

How to make a shot at a Hill or Valley by a Quadrant, and specially if the
mark be further then the Piece will reach on a straight line.
AT a Hill mount the Piece to so many degrees above point blank, as may reach
the mark, and add to that the difference of degrees in height between your
station and the mark.

How to batter by night.
ALL the Pieces being laid right in the day, plumb the middle of the Mouth and
Breech of each Piece with a right line and plummet; and where the lead falls,
stick a small pin in each place, unto which pin tie a small line, and extend it
somewhat further, then take a large quadrant, being fashioned to a Rule, and
put the Ruler into the mouth of the Piece, laying it unto his true height to
the mark, and note the degrees in a Book. And if you mean to batter at night,
plumb the piece both on the line and quadrant, as formerly, and take the just
height of the two plummets lines fastened to the mouth and breech with a piece
of wax, which you may do by a close lantern.

How to plant Ordnance by night.
FIrst, Go to the place by day where you mean to plant your Ordnance; and take
two Iron pinns with you and a beetle to drive them, and seeing the ground fit
for your purpose drive in one of your stakes, and going backward about 20 foot
stand as you may see the mark you mean to shoot at over the top of the stake
you drove in, and in that very place drive in your other stake; And going a
little backward, view whether the two stakes stand in one right line unto the
mark, which must be done, then take your Astrolobe, holding it in your Thumb
by the Ring, and turn the Athilieday until you may see the mark through the
two sights thereof; And see what degree it cuts, the same must you note in the
Table Book. Then in a dark night bring your Ordnance between the two stakes,
and tie a line to your two stakes, and plumbe the mouth and breech of the piece
upon the line, and turn the piece up and down, until the plummet line of the
Quadrant do fall upon the degree and place, and the Athilieday did point unto
and the Astrolobe. If you will have more pieces then one, you must drive more
Pins of each side of the first line, or parallel the middle line, at 10 foot
distance, and allow for every 200 yards between the piece and the mark 4
Inches at the breech, provided that the lines be true paralleld every way.

The Quality of a Sergeant Major.
FIrst, valor, Resolution and experience, wise, discreet, of quick conceit
and understanding, of a modest and temperate behavior both in life and diet;
void of rashness and selfe-wilfulnesse; he must have an able body to endure
any hardness; he must be just in his doing, affable, void of pride,
vainglory, or covetousness: he should have knowledge in Arithmetic,
Geometry, Cosmography, Astronomy; to speak sundry languages, to be a good
Engineere.

Then to know the goodness of the powder; which is to be known three manner of
ways.

1. It must taste sharp, but not salt.

2. It must look bluish, but not black.

3. It must burn with a sudden puff, and nothing to remain afterward but a
whitish smoke, which will scale off in dry scales.

To be skillful in shooting Pieces of Ordnance; in the lading of them with
powder and shot; the proportion of the metal to a pound of the shot, as thus:
If 200, then the weight of the shot in powder: if 300, one ninth part more; if
175, then one ninth part more: if 150, two ninth parts less: if 100, one third
part less: the Ordnance to stand in a rich ground, as the wheels be not one
nimbler then another.

FINIS.

