(...).

THE REFINEMENT OF ZION: OR, The old Orthodox Protestant Doctrine justified,
and defended against several Exceptions of the Antinomians, methodically
digested into Questions, wherein many weighty and important cases of conscience
are handled, Concerning the nature of Faith and Repentance, or Conversion to
God: of his eternal Love, and beholding of sin in his dearest children: of
Justification from eternity, of of Preparations to the acceptance of Christ, of
Prayer for pardon of sin, and turning to God: of the Gospel Covenant, and
tenders of Salvation, on the terms of Faith and Repentance.

For the establishment of the scrupulous, conviction of the erroneous, and
consolation of distressed Consciences.

By Anthony Warton, Minister of the word at Breamore in Hampshire.

Mal. 3.2, 3. (...), etc. LXXII. Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in
the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. LONDON, Printed by John
Streater, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London, 1657.

To the Christian Reader, Grace, mercy and peace be multiplied through the
Knowledge of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ.
GOod Christian Reader, I am one who through decrepit old age, and other
impotency and disability of body, have of late years kept almost, and
altogether at home, and therefore have not heard of any of our late illuminated
Preachers, only I have been told, that they do in their Sermons much censure
that way of preaching, which the Protestant Ministers both in England, and in
other Countries, have hitherto used, D. his Doctrine of Joh. Baptist. 2. A
Conference with a dying man. 3. Gods Reconciliaetion to man; and man's reconcil.
to God. S. Of Free Grace. Tit. 1.9.
telling their hearers that we are Legal teachers, and not Evangelical. But
otherwise what the particulars were that they did find fault with in our
Doctrine, I understood not until ^f late, a friend of mine did put into my
hands, and sent me for a few weeks three small Treatises of an Antinomian, and
requested me to make some animadversions on them, because he taught diverse
things which seemed strange unto him. After this, I met with sundry Authors of
the same strain, who also censured, and condemned the Doctrine commonly taught
by Protestant Preachers. Now because it is the duty of every Minister of the
Gospel, not only to teach the truth, but to convince those that contradict, and
gainsay it, lest the people of Christ should be led into error, I have
adventured therefore to publish this small Treatise: wherein, I hope, I have by
Gods gracious assistance, detected and laid open, not all indeed, but many of
the most subtle, and deceitful fallacies of these men, especially of Mr. D.
(as by my friend I was requested) and have confirmed the truth, which he and
they oppugn. God of his goodness so settle and establish all throughout this
Land, in the truth of his Gospel, that we may not be separated, and divided one
from another, but with one mind, and one mouth glorify God and our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. So prays

Thine unfeigned friend, and well-willer in the truth, Anthony Warton.

A Catalogue of the Questions.
Quest. 1. WHether Christ be made ours by Faith? And whether we do put him on
by Faith? Or rather whether he be not to be set forth freely in the preaching
of the Gospel, without any conditions? page 1 Quest. 2. Whether a man when he
is converted from infidelity to Faith, do change his estate before God? page 26
Quest. 3. Whether God may be said to love us eternally, before we do repent,
and believe in Christ, even while we do live in sin? And whether God do love
his children as much while they lie in sin, as when they rise out of it by
repentance, and live holily? page 29 Quest. 4. What is meant by our
reconciliation to God? page 38 Quest. 5. Whether the doctrine of
reconciliation, as Mr. D. has propounded it, be a better means of comfort to
distressed Consciences, then our Protestant Doctrine is? page 43 Quest. 6.
Whether all the Elect be justified ab aeterno, from ale eternity, before they
do believe in Christ? and consequently, whether the Scripture, when it says we
are justified by Faith, means that Faith justifies us only in tribunali
conscientiae nostrae, in our own consciences as a learned man speaks; or
declaratively, as says, Mr. D.? Or whether it does not justify us
instrumentaliter et correlative as the learned Protestants de commonly teach,
that is, as an instrument, or means whereby we are made partakers of Christ's
righteousness to our justification before God? page 45 Quest. 7. Whether any
previous dispositions, preparations, or qualifications be required of men in
the Gospel, that they may be partakers of salvation by Christ? page 72 Quest.
8. Whether we are made the sons of God by Faith in Christ? or but declared so
to be? page 114 Quest. 9. Whether a man is to pray for the pardon of his sins,
after he is regenerated, and does believe and repent? page 1 Quest. 10. Whether
it be heinous, and hateful impiety for the Churches, and children of God, to
fast, and pray, that God would turn away his anger, and indignation from them,
when they lie under his judgments; or at other times, when their consciences
are terrified, and troubled with their sins? And whether God may be said to be
pacified and appeased by our fasting, and prayers, or hy any such things? page,
12 Quest. 11. Whether God do correct his children for their slns? p. 22 Quest.
12, Whether a man may be assured of salvation by his love to the brethren, and
by other effects, and fruits of sanctification? Or, whether he can be assured
of salvation no way else, but only by Faith in Christ? page 33 Quest. 13.
Whether the Gospel may properly be said to be a Covenant, as that of the Law
was? page 30 Quest. 14. Whether those Ministers that do offer remission of sins
and salvation by Christ, not to all absolutely, but upon condition that they do
repent, and believe in Christ be legal Teachers? And whether by their doctrine
they do make the Gospel a Covenant of works as the Lawis? p. 77 Quest. 15.
Whether the Orthodox Protestant Ministers, who teach men to believe in Christ,
and to repent, that they may obtain remission of sins, and salvation by Christ,
or those who offer Christ and remission of sins to all without requiring any
thing of them, either Faith, or Repentance, or new obedience, do preach Christ
the more truly, and more to the edification, and consolation of their hearers?
page 84
At the end of this Treatise, these places of holy Scripture are expounded, and
vindicated from the false glosses, which Mr. D. sets upon them.

Matthew. 6.14. If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses.

1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor adulterers, etc. shall inherit
the Kingdom of God.

Heb. 12.14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord.

1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love
the brethren.

The Refinement of Zion.
Quest. 1. Whether Christ and his righteousness be made ours by faith. And
whether we do put on Christ by faith? Or rather, whether He be not to be set
forth freely in the preaching of the Gospel without any condition.
SECT. I. A certain Authors Opinion concerning this Question.
SOme Protestants, holy men, The Doctrine of John Baptist.
(says this Author) do say, that Christ is made ours (in the sight of God) by
faith alone, Christ being the garment, our Faith the hand that puts this
Garment on; yet methinks (says he) that here is Christ set forth upon some
conditions, and not so freely given. I must here (says he) profess my
Ignorance, that I cannot conceive, how faith should put on Christ, apply
Christ, or make Christ ours in the sight of God. I therefore profess my self
openly, to lean unto them that say, that Christ's righteousness is made ours
before God by Gods imputation, before the act of our faith, and therefore
necessarily without it. Even as our sins were made Christ's, so is his
righteousness made ours. Now how were our sins made Christ's? Let the Prophet
Esaias speak, The Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all, so that the Lord who
calls things which are not as though they were, makes us righteous by His
imputation of Christ's righteousness. Thus far this Author.

SECT. II. Christ's Righteousness is made ours by Faith.
NOw that I may examine these things, It is true, Christ's righteousness is
made ours by imputation, ours who believe in him, and hereupon we are said to
be justified by faith: But where in all the Scripture do you read that we are
justified without faith, or that God imputes Christ's righteousness, and
consequently remission of sins to any Infidels, or unbelievers?



Subordinata non pugnant, the latter of these is in some sort subordinare unto
the former, there is no repugnancy therefore between them; for Christ's
righteousness is made ours, ex part Dei, on Gods part by Imputation; but ex
part nostra, on our part by Faith, whereby we receive both Christ and
remission of sins, John 1.12. Act. 10.43. and 26.18.
and salvation by him, offered unto us in the Gospel. I do therefore retort
this argument upon the Author of it thus, As our sins were made Christ's, so is
his righteousness made ours; but our sins were made Christ's not only by Gods
imputation, but by his voluntary taking them upon him: therefore we also are
made righteous, not only by Gods Imputation, but by our taking and receiving
Christ's righteousness by Faith.

Again, says he, as Christ became sin for us so are we made the righteousness
of God in him: Confer. p. 17. Isa. 53.6.
But (say I) Christ became sin for us, not only by his Fathers imputation, (or
as I say, faith) by his laying on him the iniquity of us all; but by his own
taking of our sins upon him to satisfy Divine Justice, Joh. 10.15, 18. Romans
8.32.
and to expiate them by his passion, as these, words of His, bear witness, I
slay down my life for my sheep, no man takes it from me, I lay it down of my
self. Again as St. Paul says, that God spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up, Ephesians. 5.2.
(that is to death) for us all. So says he also, That Christ gave himself for
us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Wherefore
seeing we are so made the righteousness of God in Christ, as he became sin for
us, it follows necessarily, that together with Gods act in imputing Christ's
righteousness unto us, there concurreth also our act in receiving his
righteousness, when, in the Gospel, it is offered unto us. But of this, more at
large hereafter in the sixth question.

SECT. III. Christ is made ours by Faith.
LEt us now in the next place, examine and see, whether Christ be made ours in
the sight of God by faith? Mr. D. thus expresses himself, concerning this, I
must here profess my ignorance, that I cannot conceive how Faith should make
Christ ours in the sight of God. It should seem he does not altogether deny
that Christ is made ours by Faith, but will not yield that he is thus made ours
in the sight of God. Now, what his meaning in this may be, I do not certainly
know, unless perhaps it be, that he is made ours by Faith, declaratively only,
to our own consciences, of which see Quest. 6. But when those holy men, of whom
he speaks, do say that Christ is made ours in the sight of God by Faith, they
do not exclude neither God the Author and principal efficient of this work, nor
the word, the external instrumental cause thereof; but all our own works in
opposition to faith. Their meaning therefore is, that Faith is the only
internal instrument ex part nostra, on our part, or the only hand as it were
of the Soul, whereby we do receive Christ; and he (according to his gracious
promise unto all that do believe in him) is made ours.

Again, when they say that Christ is made ours in the sight of God by Faith
alone, they do oppose Gods judgment unto man's. Men indeed, judging according
to the judgment of charity, do hold him to be a good Christian, and one that is
interested in Christ, who outwardly makes profession of Christ, and in the
sight of man is unreproveable in his life and conversation. But as Almighty God
himself said unto Samuel, The Lord sees not as man sees, 1 Samuel 16.7.
for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord sees the heart. In
his sight therefore who sees things, and pronounces of them as they are,
Christ is made ours, not by an outward profession, but by Faith alone. I am
induced to be of this judgment with these holy men and good Protestants, which
Mr. D. here speaks of, by these Reasons following.

2 Cor. 11.2.
It is their union, or their being joined together in marriage, which makes
the husband to be his wives, and the wife to be her husbands. And even in like
manner, is Christ made ours, when we are espoused unto him by faith, and not
before; whereupon it is that Christ's Spouse speaks with great rejoicing, and
says, My well-beloved is mine and I am his. Cant. 2.16.

Paul plainly teaches, Ephesians. 2.22. and 5.23. Seeing therefore we are ingrafted
into Christ and into his Church by Faith, and are saved by Faith, Ephesians. 2.8. It
follows necessarily, that Christ is made ours by Faith. All unbelievers and
ungodly men, are limbs and members of the Devil, they cannot therefore be said
while they continue such, to be members of the Lord Jesus. For what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness, and what communion has light with
darkness, and what concord has Christ with Belial? says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
6.14. Now if men be thus estranged from Christ until they do believe, it must
needs follow that by believing they do become Christ's, and Christ theirs.

Moreover the Scripture teaches, that we do receive Christ by Faith, John
1.12. Now what is this but to say, that he is made ours by Faith, and a man is
not said to receive that, which he has already, but which he wants, or
which he is destitute of, until he do receive it. He that says, he received a
man into his house, or that he received this or that into his custody, implies
that neither the man was in his house, nor that thing in his custody before.
And he that says, he received such or such a piece of gold, or silver of
another, implies that he had it not before. So in like manner, seeing we are
said to receive Christ by Faith, what does this import or imply? but that we
were without Christ as long as we continued in unbelief, and consequently that
he became ours, when we believed in him? Lastly, St. Paul tells the
Ephesians, that at that time, to wit, Ephesians. 2.12.
when they were drowned in infidelity, they were without Christ, and without
God in the world: But (says he) Now in Christ Jesus, that is, now that you do
believe in Christ Jesus, Ye, who sometimes were far off, are made nigh, that
is, unto God, by the blood of Christ. From hence also it is evident, that by
believing in Christ it is that we come to be interested in God, and in his Son
Christ Jesus.

Perhaps it will here be said; ab aeterno, or at least that he was ours, and we
his, ever since the time that he purchased us by his passion.

I grant that Christ after a sort had right unto us and we unto him, before we
believed in him, ab aeterno from all eternity, and because when the fullness of
time, decreed by God, was come, he purchased us by his Passion: but he had no
right in us, as in his members, nor could we be said to have right in him as in
our Head, while we lived in sin and unbelief, and were not united unto him by
his Spirit: For the Apostle tells us plainly, Romans 8.9.
that If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Now if those
who have not the Spirit of Christ (which is the case of unbelievers) be none of
his, certainly then until they do by Faith receive Christ, they cannot be said
to be his, nor he theirs.



ad rem (as the learned speak) unto that thing which was thus given him, sed
non in re, but had no right in it, until being born, it became his at the time
appointed by the Doner. And even in like manner, seeing Christ and his merits,
are by himself and his Father in the Gospel, as it were in a deed of gift, Seu
in Charta Magna Regni Coelorum, or in the Great Charter of the Kingdom of
Heaven, conveyed and passed over, not unto all absolutely, but unto believers
only. I cannot see how we can be said to have any right in or to Christ at all,
or how he can be said to be ours until we do believe, except only in his and
his Fathers intention and Decree, which shall be accomplished in the due time
appointed by him and his Father. Thus a Son that is taken into a Copyhold after
his Father, has a right unto that Copyhold; and therefore it may be said to be
his, but not simply and absolutely, but only in reversion. So all the elect of
God before they do believe, have a right unto Christ, in that sort, as I have
before expressed; but they have no right nor interest in him nor can he be said
to be theirs absolutely, until they do be ieve and receive him by Faith, no
more than a Son, ( Qui jus habet hereditatis ad Paterna bona, that is Heir unto
his Fathers Lands and goods) can say while his Father lives, that they are his
own; for were they so, then Solomon could not say, that He that robs his
Father and Mother, Pro. 28.24.
and says, It is no transgression, is the companion of a destroyer. For a man
cannot be charged with robbery, when he takes nothing but that which is his
own.

Thus (as I suppose) I have made it manifest, that we have no right in Christ
until we do believe in him, and that therefore he is made ours by Faith. It is
true God gave Christ his only begotten Son, and Christ gave himself unto death
for us, but it was with this purpose, intention and Decree, that we at the time
appointed and determined by him and his Father, should by Faith receive him,
being offered unto us in the preaching of the Gospel. Until therefore he shall
be thus received of us, we cannot be said to have any right or interest in him,
nor he ^o be ours any otherwise than as has been said.

For the further c^ea^ing of that which I have before spoken, concerning right
in and to a thing, I ha e thought good to insert these things following, which
I humbly submit to the censure of the Learned. To have right in a thing, there
is more required then to have right unto it, Jus in re, et jus ad rem, right in
a thing, and right to a thing. Jus in re dicitur, quod habetur de re, quae est
nostra, Sayr. lib. 9. cap. 3. Cas. consc.
et existens: unde ad comparandum jus in re, non est satis rem existere, sed
ulterius requiritur eandem rem esse nostram. i. e. nobis traditam. Jus ad rem
dicitur illud quod habetur ex aliquo vinculo o^ligationis circa rem nobis
debitam, nondum tamen factam nostram. Hence I infer these three Conclusions.

1. That a man may have right to a thing, and yet no right in it.

2. That as long as he has no right in it, it is none of his.

3. That it becomes his by being delivered unto him.

Now I demand, Is not Christ delivered unto us by God the Father and by
himself, when in the Gospel he is preached, and offered unto us, and we by
Faith do accept of him, and not before?

These things being thus premised, I will now by Gods gracious assistance,
examine Master S. his 7. Arguments, whereby he endeavors to prove, that
Christ is not made ours by Faith.



Organice, instrumentally. For as Keckerman has observed in his Logic, the
Act of the Author or Principal efficient cause, is many times attributed to the
Instrument. Thus not only our justification, but also our sanctification, which
is Gods proper Act, an Act of his Almighty power, is in holy Scripture
attributed to Faith, sometimes to the word of God, and sometimes to the
Ministers who do preach the word. To Faith, Acts 15.9.
where St. Peter says, that God did purify the hearts of the believing
Gentiles by Faith, to wit, both from the guilt of sin in their justification,
and from the tyranny and dominion of sin in their sanctification. To the word,
1 Pet. 1.23.
We are born again not of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word of God.
Lastly, to the Ministers of the word; 1 Cor. 4.15.
For St. Paul says to the Corinthians, I have begotten you by the Gospel. And
he calls Onesimus his for, and says, Philem. 11.
that he begat him in his bonds. He tells us also, that God sent him to the
Gentiles, to turn them from darkness to light, Act. 26.18.
and from the power of Satan to God. Now in the same sense that we are said to
be purified, converted, and born again by Faith, the word, and the Ministers
that preach the word, Is Christ said to be made ours, and we to be justified by
Faith; to wit, instrumentally, as by means, which it pleased God to use in our
ingrafting into Christ, and in our justification, which are wrought only and
altogether hy his Divine power; and not by any power of the means, which
receive all their efficacy from him, and can do nothing toward a sinners
conversion of themselves. The result of all thit I have said, is this; It is an
Act of Gods Almightiness to make Christ ours by his own power and authority, as
the Author of this work. But it is no Act of Omnipotency to make Christ ours
instrumentally, that is, to receive him by Faith, when he is offered to us of
God.

A second Objection of M. S. is this, M.S. says, the more we grow in Faith,
the more we should be interested in Christ, and be more and more justified: but
he well knows, that the Protestant Doctrine is, that Faith justifies not as
it is a virtue, or any act of ours, sed objective et correlative, but in regard
of Christ the object thereof, whereunto it relates; Even as a Surgeon may
be said to heal a man that is wounded, with his own hands; not that his hands,
had any virtue in them to heal, but because by them he searched the wound, and
applied a healing plaster unto it, which drew out the purulent corruption, and
cured him. For even so, are we in like manner said to be justified and saved by
Faith, because we do by Faith lay hold of Christ, and apply his merits to our
souls. So that, it is not so much Faith, as Christ in whom we believe; by whom
we are justified and saved, that is, who has both merited our justification,
and does actually acquit and absolve us from our sins. And in like manner does
Faith interest us in Christ, not for the dignity and worthiness thereof; but
because it is Gods Ordinance and appointment, that we should receive Christ,
and have him dwelling in our hearts by Faith. Wheresoever therefore there is
true Faith to be found, though never so weak, and faint, or feeble, that man is
a true member of Christ and perfectly justified and absolved from all his sins.
Those of old amongst the Israelites, that were stung with the fiery Serpents
were perfectly cured, if they did look up to the brazen Serpent and beheld it,
although their sight was never so dark and dim, as well as the younger sort,
whose sight was most perfect: so a weak Faith, as well as a strong, does lay
hold of Christ, and of justification and salvation by him; For as the
Israelites were healed by beholding the brazen Serpent, because it was Gods
Ordinance, that health, which was otherwise wrought miraculously, only by his
own Divine power, should hereupon follow and ensue: so the same is to be said
of Faith. And therefore from hence an answer may be given to that question,
which Mr. S. asks in his next words, where speaking of some, who call these
other acts of Faith, that is when it is grown and increased, Faith of
assurance, and Acts of manifestation, he faith, If Faith be thus in its other
degrees of working,

Israelite with a quick sight, could by that natural virtue that was in his
eye, more clearly behold the brazen Serpent then he that had a dark and dim eye
sight. But as he that did lift up his eyes, and beheld the brazen Serpent,
though never so weakly, was through Gods Ordnance as perfectly cured, as he
that saw and beheld it most clearly and most evidently: so Faith in the least
degree, through Gods Ordinance, is as effectual to interest us in Christ, and
to make us partakers of salvation by him, as the strongest Faith that is. Thus
I have showed the cause, or the reason why a weak Faith, can give us an
interest in Christ, and the salvation which he has purchased for us; although
it cannot so firmly assure us hereof. But whereas he holds, That Faith when
it is increased, and grown stronger by an addition of more degrees than it had
at the first, does only give us a greater manifestation, and assurance of
salvation by Christ, but no interest in him; I cannot assent unto him in this,
for the interest which we have in Christ and his merits, at the first by
believing in him, is continued by perseverance in the same Faith: and
therefore, John 1.12. Ephesians. 3.17.
as we are said to receive Christ by Faith, so he is said to dwell, that is to
remain and make his abode in our hearts by Faith. Consonantly whereunto the
Apostle tells us, Heb. 3.14.
that We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast unto the end. And on the contrary he says, Heb. 10.38.
If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Thus Faith not
only in the first act, or beginning of it, but in the continuance also, and
greatest height, or strength thereof, does interest us in Christ, and as the
Apostle says, makes us partakers of him, as well as it does evidence unto us
and assure us hereof. Here therefore I would know whether it be not a manifest
contradiction, to say as Mr. S. does, Christ is ours without Faith, but we
cannot partake of him as ours, but by believing.

Thirdly, he objecteth also, and says, If Christ should

Whereunto I answer, That no such thing follows hereupon: but the contrary;
For upon our Faith and Repentance, our sins are pardoned, and forgiven us, not
for a time, but for ever, Ezekiel. 18.22.
They shall never therefore be mentioned unto us, that is, imputed and laid to
our charge any more, no not when Faith cease. Neither needs this to seem
strange to Mr. S. or any other, that Faith which is but temporal should obtain
an eternal pardon; for a salve which by its own inherent virtue, does in a few
days heal a wound, needs afterward to be used no more; much less will there
be any need of Faith in Christ, or of repentance, for the continuance of the
remission of our sins, and of our justification in the world to come, seeing by
Christ's Promise, and by his Ordinance, (which has more force in it, then the
most Sovereign or precious balm, or salve) upon our repentance and Faith in
Christ, we are for ever acquitted and absolved from all our sins.

Whereas then Mr. S. in his next words demands, and asks, Shall Faith begin
our interest here, and not be able to continue it hereafter?

John 3.46.
I answer him; No, it shall not, For he that believes on the Son of God has
everlasting life. His Faith indeed shall cease with this corruptible life of
his; 2 Cor. 13.
but he himself shall be raised up by the power of Christ, and not dye any more
forever. John 11.26.




First, Whereas he asks, whether a sinner can be too foul for a Savior?

I answer, No, if he will carefully and conscionably practice and observe the
means of salvation, which he does prescribe him, which are Repentance, Faith,
and new Obedience. For as the Apostle tells us, Christ being (in his passion)
made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey
him. Heb. 5.9.
On the contrary therefore whosoever he is that does not obey Christ, but does
wilfully contemn, or carelessly neglect the means of his salvation, (as many do)
it is in vain for him to look for salvation by Christ, for as St. Augustine
says elegantly, De verbis Apostoli Ser. 15.
Qui fecit te sine te, non te justificat sine te, He that made thee without
thee, does not justify thee without thee. His next demand is, Can a sinner be
too much wounded for a Physician to heal?

Surely no. Not for Christ our heavenly Physician: but then he must take his
Physic, and observe such a Diet, as he prescribes him, that is, he must
receive Christ and his merits by Faith, and live orderly according to his
Gospel, that is, as St. Paul sets it down. He must deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and live soberly, Tit. 2.12.
and righteously, and godlily in this present world. On the contrary therefore,
as long as infidelity, or incredulity possesses his heart, and lies
putrefying and rotting in his carnal lusts, it is in vain for him to think, or
to persuade himself that he is healed by Christ.

Lastly, Whereas he asks, Can a sinner be too filthy, for a fountain opened
to wash?

Surely no, not for that fountain of which Zachary speaks, That is opened to
the house of David, Zac. 31, 12.
and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleaness. But did he
ever hear that a fountain, though never so limpid and clear,, did cleanse any,
unless they did wash themselves with the water of it? And even in like manner
shall none be purifyed, and cleansed from their spiritual filthyness and
uncleanness, until they do by Faith-sprinkle their souls with the blood of
Christ: For as we have heard St. Peter tell us, Christ purifieth the hearts of
sinn^rs by Faith. As long therefore as Faith with the inseparable effects
thereof are wanting, it is in vain for any to imagine that he is purified from
his sins.

Fifthly, He that offers Christ (says M. S.) offers all Christ is exalted to
give repentance unto Israel. Acts 5.31. Gal. 2.21.
And Faith is called, The Faith of the Son of God.

Here first of all, it is to be observed, that he acknowledges Faith and
Repentance to be conditions required of us in the Gospel; that we may be saved
by Christ, which elsewhere he denies.

Secondly, he says, That God in offering Christ, does offer these conditions
in him. Which words of his, may receive a double construction, or
understanding. First, that Repentance and Faith are not in our power; but that
Christ has merited these graces for us, and that he does work them in us by
his spirit, when the Gospel is preached. This the places of Scripture alleged
by him do prove, and we do constantly profess and preach the same; but by that
which he has written in other places of this Treatise, I know that he has
another meaning, and that is, that Christ performed the conditions of the
Covenant of grace, or of the Gospel for us, that is, as he speaks, that he
repented for us, and believed for us, and that his Faith and Repentance are in
the Gospel offered unto us, and are accepted of God for us, as if we our selves
did repent and believe. This strange opinion of his, I have examined, Quest.
13. Whither I do referr you, for more ample satisfaction in this matter.

S.) to offer Jesus Christ, then any grace of Christ's, or gift of Christ, unto
a sinner. For a sinner is as unprepared, and unfit for the one as the other,
equally in sin and pollution to both. All this is true, I grant, if he do speak
of a sinner, as he is by nature and of himself. But what can be inferred, or
concluded hence against the Protestant Doctrine, that has been hitherto
constantly taught, I cannot see nor perceive: but may rather wrest his weapons
out of his hands, and use them against himself. For if it be all one, or, as he
says, if it be no more to offer Christ then any grace of Christ, or gift of
Christ, unto a sinner, then seeing the grace, and gift of remission of sins, or
of justification is received by Faith, as both St. Peter teaches, Acts 10.43.
and St. Paul, Acts 26.18. Christ himself also is to be received of us by Faith:
and as our sins are not forgiven,, but we are bound over unto punishment for
them in Gods word, until we believe in Christ; so neither can any have any
interest in Christ, as long as we remain in infidelity and incredulity, and do
not believe in him contrary to Mr. S. and Mr. D. new doctrine. Thus I have
answered this Objection also, according to the generality of the words, wherein
it was propounded. But thinking more intentively with my self what M. S. his
meaning might be, I guessed that his words must be taken Restricte, in a more
restrained sense, as if he should reason thus, The graces of Faith and
Repentance are freely and absolutely offered in the Gospel, without requiring
any antecedent act of Faith or Repentance, whereby they are to be received and
made ours; therefore Christ is also as absolutely offered without any
condition, either of Faith or Repentance. Now hereunto I do answer, that all
are in the Gospel commanded to believe in Christ, and to repent that they may
be saved by him, but Faith and Repentance were never offered to all, neither by
Christ himself, nor by his Apostles when they preached the Gospel, nor are the
Ministers of the Gospel now so to offer them. It Is true, Christ gives Faith
and Repentance to his spiritual Israel. This we are to teach, Acts 5.31.
that men may be stirred up to seek both Faith and Repentance of Christ, in the
use of such means as he has prescribed. But it is one thing to teach this, and
another to offer Faith and Repentance to all absolutely. It is Christ and his
merits, that are offered unto us in the Gospel: but Faith is required of us, as
the means whereby both himself and his merits are received, and Repentance and
new Obedience is in joined as a necessary condition, without which we can have
no communion with Christ, as I shall have occasion to show hereafter. But if I
shall grant that Faith and Repentance are offered unto us in the Gospel, yet I
may retort the Argument of Mr. S. upon himself; for Faith and consequently
Repentance, are not offered unto us, nor wrought in us, nisi mediante verbo,
but by the means and ministry of the word, For Faith comes by hearing, Romans
10.17.
and hearing by the word of God; therefore Christ is neither absolutely
offered, nor absolutely made ours, sed mediante eodem verbo, et fide, but by
means of the same word, and Faith, whereby we receive him.

Lastly, I do argue thus, eternal life is not to be had without Faith in
Christ. This St. John gives us to understand when he says, John 20.31.
These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the
Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his name. Seeing
therefore (as Mr. S. says) we are alike indisposed to any gift of Christ, as
we are to Christ himself, it follows therefore necessarily, that seeing the
gift of life is not ours without Faith, neither is Christ himself ours without
Faith, which if it be granted, it cannot be avoided, but must needs be
acknowledged, that he is made ours by Faith. And this the Apostle expressly
avoucheth, Ephesians. 2.12. Ye were at that time without Christ, that is, whilst
they were Infidels and unbelievers.

Ephesians. 2.10.
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus.

Genesis 2.
and so he was made a living Soul. The same course also does the Lord
ordinarily take in our regeneration, which is a new Creation. For, that there
are certain preparations, such as are the hearing of the word, some knowledge
of sin, and of a man's own misery by sin, and of the grace of God in Christ,
ordinarily thereunto precedent in adultis, in those that are of capacity and
understanding, shall be showed afterward (God willing) in the seventh
Question. It does not appear therefore neither by this, nor by any former
Reasons of Mr. S. that Christ is ours before we do believe in him, or that he
is not made ours by Faith.

Christ in the Soul, but Christ bringing-in them, and working them more and
more in the soul.

Unto this I answer, Posita prima causa, non tolluntur secundae. The working of
the first cause does not exclude the secondary, and subordinate from acting
that which appertains and belongs unto them. Christ's apprehending therefore
of us by his Grace, and by his Spirit, does not exclude, but necessarily
infers our apprehending and appropriating of him to our selves by Faith. For
as St. Paul says, Phil. 3.
we apprehend him, or rather are apprehended of him. His meaning is, that we
both apprehend him, and he apprehends us: but the firmness and certainty of
our salvation, consists rather in his apprehending of us, then in our
apprehending of him; these two do always go together, and are never separated.
To make this yet more plain, briefly thus it is,

Christ is made ours 1. On Gods part. 1. By his eternal Decree of
Predestination, ordaining him to be ours; in the due time appointed by him, but
not before. 2. By his word, wherein he offers Christ, and of his grace gives
him unto us, when we do believe in him. 3. By his Spirit, whereby he
regenerated us, and infuseth into us the habit of Faith, and exciteth the Act.
2. On his own part, By meriting for us, and working in us grace, whereby we do
believe in him, and are made partakers of him, and of his merits. 3. On our
part, by Faith,, whereby we do receive Christ offered unto us in the Gospel,
and upon our hearing thereof do believe in him, reposing and placing the whole
confidence of our salvation in him, as in our only Mediator,


I come now to Mr. S. his Conclusion of this matter, which is this;



he that believes on the Son has life, John 3.36.
but he that believes not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him.



To this I answer, That to receive Christ's blood, is not, for a wicked sinner,
to believe (while he continues in drunkenness, and whoredom, or in any other
vile sins) that he is reconciled to God by the blood of Christ, as Mr. D. and
he, do understand it; but it is to rely on Christ's blood, both for the pardon,
and purging away of his sins, according to the promises of the Gospel; which
whosoever does, though he were never so unclean before, his soul being thus
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, by a true and lively Faith, will become
pure and holy: for neither shall his former sins be imputed unto him, nor will
he welter, and wallow in the puddle of sin any more, but will serve God in
righteousness, and holiness all his days.

SECT. IIII. We do put on Christ, and apply him unto our selves by Faith.
I Will now leave Mr. S. for a while, and return to Mr. D. I cannot conceive
(says he) how Faith should put on Christ. Can you conceive then, what St Paul
means, when he says, Gal. 3.26.
Ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, for as many as have
been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, to wit, by that Faith of theirs,
whereof in their Baptism they made profession. The meaning of this metaphorical
speech of his, is to teach us, that if we do appear before God naked, as we are
of our selves, our filthiness and deformity is such, that God will loath and
abhor us. We must therefore put on Christ, or cloth our selves with Christ, as
it were with a garment, that we may be amiable in Gods eyes, that is, we must
be united unto Christ, as a man's garment which he puts on, is to his Body,
before we can find any acceptance with God,: For he has made us accepted in
his beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.
This was typified and presignred by Jacobs obtaining of his Fathers blessing,
by coming and appearing before him in the garments of his elder brother; for so
we do obtain the blessed inheritance of Heaven by being invested with Christ's
righteousness. But contrary hereunto Mr. D. tells us, Reconcil. of man to
God, page 57.
That this is our receiving of Christ, our putting on of Christ, our living by
Faith, that Faith assures us of Gods favor, and good will toward as in Jesus
Christ. But who sees not, that he does here confound things that differ. For
it is one thing to receive a thing, and to put it on; and another to be assured
that we have done both these, that is, not only received it, but put it on. And
in like manner to live, and to be hereof assured are diverse things. To receive
Christ therefore and to put him on, and to be assured that we have received him
and put him on, are diverse things. And our living by Faith, and being hereby
assured of Gods favor, and good will toward us,

John 4.10. But as we all know, a gift when it is offered, must be received
before we can have any interest or propriety in it. And hereupon it is, that
Christ when he came amongst his own Countrymen the Jews, and offered himself
unto them, St. John says, that to as many as received him, he gave power to be
the Sons of God, even to those that believed in his name; giving us to
understand who they were that received him, to wit, such as believed in him.
Now why does the Evangelist speak thus, if Christ be not received by Faith? The
Apostle tells the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.12.
that they in the days of their ignorance and infidelity were without Christ.
I would know therefore how they came to have Christ, but by receiving him, when
he was offered unto them in the preaching of the Gospel?

But here it may be said, Christ in his Gospel, Mark 1.15. Heb. 5.9. Acts 3.26.
Why then should we be said to receive Christ, and to apply him, and his merits
unto us any more by Faith, then by our Repentance.

To this I answer, Paul says, Acts 26.18.
that forgiveness of sins, and the inheritance of Heaven, which Christ has
purchased for us, are received by Faith. Now there is no such thing spoken, of
Repentance, or new Obedience, but they are required in another respect, or for
another Reason, to wit, That we may have communion with Christ, and glorify
the name of God, and his Gospel by living holily. Thus both Faith and
Repentance are Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, or of the Gospel; but, in
diverse respects. For by Faith we receive Christ, and salvation by him; and
without Repentance, we cannot receive him, or the salvation which by his death
he has purchased, and in his Gospel offers unto us. Briefly then, thus it
is. Faith is a condition necessary to be performed by us, that we may thereby
receive Christ, and be incorporated, and united unto him: Repentance is
Conditio sine qua non, that is, a necessary condition without the performance
whereof, 2 Cor. 6.14. Heb. 5.9.
we can have no communion with Christ, nor hope of Heaven.

SECT. V. Christ is freely given, notwithstanding the Conditions that are
required of us.


gratis, notwithstanding these conditions. For they are not meritorious, as in
many compacts and Covenants that pass between man and man: but conditions, to
which Christ and his merits are freely offered, and given in the Gospel,
through the mere mercy and goodness of God, and not for any merit, or desert of
these conditions. I would know of these men, whether the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the glory thereof be not freely given us of God? Yet I hope they will not deny,
but that Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience, must go before tfie fruition and
possession thereof, Heb. 12.14,
as conditions, or as things on our part to be performed, or else we shall
never come there. What, does not the Apostle set it down as a condition of our
glorification, and salvation in Heaven? when he says to the Collossians, Now
has Christ reconciled you in the body of his flesh through death, to present
you holy and unblameable, Col. 1.22.
and unreproveable in his sight, if you continue in the Faith grounded and
settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel? Like whereunto is
that of the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.15. where he says, that the woman
notwithstanding the dolorous pains in childbirth, which God has laid upon
her, shall be saved, if they continue in Faith, and charity, and holiness with
sobriety. The like conditionals we meet with, Romans 11.22. Rev. 3.20. and in
diverse other places of the new Testament. Whence these men who take upon them
to be the only Patrons of free Grace may see how absurdly they reason, when
they say, Grace is free; therefore nothing is required of us, antecedenter, to
the receiving of Christ, or of justification, or of any other grace. For I
would know of them, whether eternal life be not (...) the free gift of God, or
a gift of Gods grace, as the Apostle calls it, Romans 6.23. Now what will they
say, that nothing is to be done of us, that we are neither to repent, nor
believe, nor to do any good works before we come to Heaven, that we may be
saved by grace? If so, then let them profess themselves Libertines, or if they
will not do that, let them take heed, that they do not lay down such
Principles, whence Libertinisme may necessarily be inferred. For I would know
of them, where, in all the Scripture, remission of sins is so granted by God
that nothing is required of us neither Faith nor Repentance? Where there is
such an absolute grant, a man is tied to nothing; whence it will follow, that
he may have remission of sins, and consequently be saved, although he never
believe, repent, nor amend his life, but live in sin all his days.

But that I may let them see wherein they do deceive themselves, Whereas they
say, That grace is free,

I answer, That they do deceive themselves and others with an equivocation. For
when they say, grace is free, gratuita, free in regard of any recompense or
satisfaction; and so freedom in this sense, is opposed to merit: but the
meaning is not that we are, inde liberati a conditionibus fidei et
resipiscentiae, thereby freed from the conditions of Faith, and repentance,
without which there is no remission of sins, nor salvation to be had, no more
then we are freed, ab officio gratitudinis erga Deum, from our duty of
thankfulness toward God, after we are justified and in the state of grace.
Yet thus do these men speak of freedom, when they say, grace is free, opposing
freedom not to merit, but to any bond of duty toward God, in the same sense as
St. Paul does, when he says, that a woman is free from the Law of her husband,
when he is dead. Romans 7.3.

SECT. VI. In what sense and signification this word Grace is used, and taken
in holy Scripture, and that we do ascribe our salvation wholly to Grace.
BUt that I may make this yet more plain, I say that Grace is taken in several
senses and significations in holy Scripture, but principally in these two.

First properly, pro gratuita Dei benevolentia et favore, for the free good
will and favor of God, as when the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.8.
Ye are saved by Grace, that is by the free favor and mercy of God. Romans 3.24.
Romans 4.16, Ephesians. 1.5.6.
And so it is to be understood in those sayings. All have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his Grace. And therefore
it is of Faith, that it might be of Grace. And having predestined us to the
adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure
of his will, to the praise of the glory of his Grace.

Secondly, Grace is taken by a Metonymie, for a supernatural gift of grace,
Ephesians. 4.7. 2 Cor. 6.1.
as in these places following, Unto every one of us is given grace, according
to the measure of the gift of Christ, etc. We beseech you that ye receive not
the Grace of God in vain. Under this latter signification of Grace are
comprehended both Christ himself, John 4.10.
for he calls himself the gift of God, and all the several Acts also, or
parts of our salvation, which he has merited for us, and works in us, or
bestows upon us, as our justification, adoption, sanctification, preservation
in the state of Grace, redemption from hell, and eternal glorification, and
salvation in Heaven. Now judge, whether those can be enemies to Grace, or
whether they are justly charged not to preach free Grace, who do thus ascribe
our whole salvation to the Grace of God? It is true indeed, we do teach men to
repent and believe in Christ, that they may be saved by him; but withal we do
teach them, that Faith and Repentance are Graces of God, or dona ex gratia,
gifts of his Grace, and that they cannot practice nor perform them, viribus
liberi arbitrii sui, by their own free will, or by any power of their own; but
must seek and sue unto God for them in the use of such means, as he has
prescribed. For God does not force his graces upon us, nor does not work upon
us, as on stocks or stones: but seeing he has made us reasonable creatures, he
therefore speaks unto us by his word, and persuades, and inableth us by his
Spirit, to do those things, which he requirerh of us. Thus he deals with us,
as with men; but yet so, that still our salvation is wholly of his grace, both
the beginning, middle, and the end thereof. For though it be, we that do
repent, and believe, and obey; and not God: yet we do all this, not of our
selves, but by his grace. Thus do we always, and in all things magnify, and
extol the grace of God acknowledging it to be the only cause of our whole
salvation by Christ.

Yet all this that I have said, S. thinks to overthrow, by saying, That all
sorts, even Papists and Arminians, do thus acknowledge grace, in general, as we
do.

But who sees not, that we do more then so?

Quest. 2. Whether a man when he is converted from Infidelity to Faith, do
change his estate before God?
Reconcil. of God to man, page 32,
MAster, D. says that a man's believing does not change his estate before God.
Whereupon, that I may pass my censure, this I say; that if before God, he
means only, according to that he is in Gods eternal predestination, this may
be admitted; for so he is a believer, that is, decreed to be a believer from
all eternity. But if his meaning be, that his estate before he believed, and
after his conversion, is the same before God, that is in Gods account, or in
reality and truth, as well as in outward appearance, in which sense Zachary and
Elizabeth, are said both to be righteous before God, this may not be granted:
For upon Zacheus his conversion, our Savior spoke unto him and said, Luke 1.
This day is salvation come unto this house. He was not in the state of
salvation therefore before. Now the same is to be said of all other converts
and true believers, whereof is to be seen in the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
of whom St. Paul says, You has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and
sins, wherein in times past ye walked; and afterward he speaks unto them and
says, Ye were sometimes darkness, Ephesians. 4.8.
but are now light in the Lord. Now I would know whether he does not change his
estate that passes from death to life? (which our Savior our in express words
affirms of the believer, John 5.24.) and from darkness to light? As manifest
a change of their estate, do those words of the Apostle import, and imply, when
he says unto them, Remember that ye being in times passed Gentiles in the
flesh, that at that time ye were without Christ, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13.
being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. But now in
Christ Jesus, ye who were sometimes far off, are made nigh by the blood of
Christ? Can any thing be spoken more plainly? to show what a great difference
there was between their former estate, and condition whilst they remained in
infidelity, and their present, since they were converted to the Faith of
Christ? To be without Christ, and without God; and to be nigh unto God, and
unto Christ, that is, to be the children of God, and members of Christ, must
needs argue a great change in a man's spiritual estate. Those words also of St,
Paul Col. 1.13. do evince as manifest a change of our spiritual estate, when he
says, That God the Father has delivered us from the power of darkness, and
has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. For how is it possible,
there should be any such translation, if our state remained unalterable, and
still the same? It is false therefore that Mr. D. teaches, to wit, Reconcil.
of God to man, page 27.28.
That our Faith only gives us evidence, and assurance of our salvation which
we had before: but, that we are not to believe, and to serve God that we may
obtain salvation, ( non per modum meriti, not by way of merit; I mean not so,
but that we may obtain by Faith, both right unto, and possession, or fruition
of, that salvation in Heaven, which Christ has purchased for us) In this he
contradicts the Scripture, for St Peter calls the salvation of our souls,
the end of our Faith. Now I would know, 1 Pet. 1.9.
whether a man does undertake, or do any thing, nisi ex intuitu, et cum
intention finis, but for some end, or other, which he propounds unto himself?
When we do therefore believe in Christ, and Repent us of our sins past, we do
it with this intention, and for this end, That we may be partakers of eternal
salvation in Heaven through Christ. Whereupon, when the Jailer demanded of Paul
and Silas, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? Acts 16.31.
They said Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, thou and thine
house. He finds fault with this question. Reconcil. of God to man. page 34.
If the Jailer had asked this question of Mr. D. he in cho^er and scorn would
have answered him, What thou ignorant and impious man, do thou ask me what
thou must do to be saved, as if Christ had not thoroughly wrought and finished
the work of thy salvation? I tell thee, thy salvation is not now to be begun,
thou have been in the state of salvation, ab aeterno, from everlasting, or at
leastwise ever since Christ suffered his bitter Passion on the Cross. Believe
only in the Lord Jesus, and this thy Faith, hujusce rei (...) erit
evidentissimum, shall be a most clear evidence hereof. Thus Mr. D. would have
answered; but St. Paul knowing well, that the Jailer did only enquire
concerning the means of his salvation, which were by him to be used, he
answered him therefore, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, Phil. 2.12.
and thine house. And in a like sense did St. Paul bid the Philippians, Work
out their salvation (not in regard of the merit, but the means thereof) with
fear and trembling. And St. Peter prescribes repentance, as a means to be
practiced by us, that our sins may not be laid to our charge by Christ at his
coming, but that we may be absolved from them; Acts. 3.19.20.
for so he says, Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he
shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you. Let it be
considered therefore, whether Mr. D. does nor deal most injuriously with us,
when he censureth our Religion for a fal^e Religion, because we do thus
prescribe unto men Faith and Repentance, as means of their eternal salvation by
Christ. Certainly St. Paul speaking of himself and of the rest of the Ministers
of the Gospel says, 2 Cor. 5.20.
As though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be
reconciled unto God. Now how is this to be understood, but in respect of the
means of our reconciliation, Reconcil. of God to man. page 34.
which are to be performed by us? Yet Mr. D. is not ashamed to write thus, Now
this is the common character of all false Religions, of what sort soever, Jews,
Turks, Papists, Pharisaical Protestants, Heathen, all propound in some degree
or other, an angry God, a Diety not reconciled, and then prescribe certain
means, and services whereby to appease his wrath, and to quench his
displeasure, or to obtain his love and favor: that is, in regard of the
effects thereof, so it must be understood, or else he fights not against us,
but against a fancy of his own. We are told, that the wrath of God abides on
him that believes not. John 4 36
Are not all then under wrath, or as St. Paul calls them, the children of
wrath, until they do believe? Ephesians. 2.3.
But for the better understanding hereof, our next Question shall be,

Quest. 3. Whether God may be said to love us eternally before we do repent,
and believe in Christ, even while we do live in sin? And whether God do love
his Children as much while they lie in sin, as when they rise out of it by
Repentance, and live holily.
SECT. I. Mr. D's. opinion concerning this Question is set down, and censured.
MR. D's. resolution, and determination hereof is this: Ezekiel. 16.4.
God loved us with as great love when we were in blood and pollution, as he did
ever afterward when we were cleansed: as well before, as after our conversion;
He loved Paul with as great a love, when he persecuted the Church, as when he
preached the Gospel.

Thus speaks Mr. D. of this high mystery, without distinguishing of the
di^ers acceptions of Gods Love, which cannot but greatly offend many godly and
good, souls, and confirm and harden profane ones in their wicked courses; yea,
imbolden them to do evil. For (will such carnal ones say) seeing God loves his
elect as much when they welter and wallow in sin, as when they live holily and
purely; I Will therefore take my pleasure, and deny my self nothing that is
delightful unto me. For though I be not so strict as some are, yet I see that I
may be as highly in Gods love, as the holiest of them all. For preventing of
such presumptuous thoughts. And for clearing of the truth, I will lay down the
answer to the Question in two several conclusions.

SECT. II. How Gods love is ever the same without any alteration.
THe former whereof is, That if the Love of God be taken properly, as it is in
it self pro actu divini amoris, for the internal Act of Gods Love, so it is
immutable, eternal, and ever the same, accidens enim in Deo nullum est, and
hereupon it is that St. John says, 1 John 4.11.
God is Love; his Love therefore must needs be immutable, and eternal, as he
himself is. Wherefore if we shall speak of Gods Love properly, so it must be
granted, that he loved his people from all eternity, even before they did
believe in Christ, and forsake their sins. This is that which the Lord makes
profession of by his Prophet when he says, Ier. 31.1.
I loved thee with an everlasting love. And our blessed Savior says, John
13.1.
that whom the Lord loves, he loves unto the end. When any of the children of
God therefore, are at any time or other supplanted by the Devil, and do fall
into sin, as David did, the Lord cease not to love them; for it is his love
that upholdeth them, that they do not fall totally and finally, and that
recovereth, and raises them up again. Thus Gods Love is eternal in it self,
and has neither beginning nor end, as our love has.

David, Psalm 5.5. where he says, Thou hate all workers of iniquity: for
hatred is contrary to love. Wherefore seeing the elect of God, as well as
others, before their calling and conversion, were workers of iniquity, How can
it be said, that God loved them eternally.

Reconcil. of man to God, page 19, 20, 21, 22.
This Objection Mr. D. encountreth. And first he brings three answers of
Others.

The first whereof is, That God hates the works, but not the persons of his
elect.

The second, That God loves his elect before their conversion, amore
benevolentiae, sed non complacentiae, with a love of benevolence, not of
complacencie.

The third, that God loves them with the love of election, but not of
justification: all which he scornfully rejects. And then takes upon him to
unty the knot thus. The Lord hates all the workers of iniquity, is the voice
of the Law; The other, the Lord loves sinners He should say, workers of
iniquity.
, is the voice of the Gospel. Now the Law and the Gospel speak diverse things;
the one being the manifestation of Gods justice, tells us what we are by
nature: the other being the manifestation of Gods mercy, tells us what we are
by grace in Jesus Christ. Thus he: Now I do acknowledge indeed, that the Law
does reveal Gods wrath against sin, and passes sentence of condemnation, not
only on those that are workers of iniquity; but on every one that commiteth the
least sin that is: for so it says, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
Book of the Law to do them. But where does the Gospel reveal Gods Love, or
offer any mercy to those that are workers of iniquity? Not any where; but on
the contrary says, that he that commits sin that is, that sins, dedi^ a
opera, of set purpose, or pleno voluntatis consusu, with full consent of will,
as Zanchius says, or as Polanus fitly expresses it, qui facit artem peccandi,
he rhat makes a Trade of sin, which is to be a worker of iniquity, he is of
the Devil. 1 John 3.8.
Again it is not the Law, but the Gospel also that says, Except ye Repent,
Luke 13.3. John 3.38.
ye shall all perish, And, he that believes in the Son, has eternal life; but
he that believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides
on him. Thus, not only the Law, but the Gospel also reveals the wrath and
hatred of God against all that are workers of iniquity. It is true, the Gospel
offers pardon, and reveals Gods love to repentant sinners; but I believe
Mr. D. will not call such, workers of iniquity. Whereas then Dav^d says, The
Lord hates all workers of iniquity. First it may be said, that if we shall
speak of the elect themselves, not as they are elect, but being considered as
they before their calling and conversion were workers of iniquity, as well as
others, so God hated them, though not odio, redundante in personas illorum, or
odio inimicitiae, that is, so as to reprobate, or to reject and cast them off,
yet odio abominat onis, that is, so that he was offended and displeased with
them while they took such courses, and did not love them ( amore complacentiae,
with a love of complacencie) but loath them while they were polluted, and
defiled with their sins. Thus afterward in the very next verse, the Prophet
says, Virum sanguinum et doli abhominabitur Jehovah. The Lord will abhor the
bloody and deceitful man. I find that Estius in tert. Sent. et in D st. 32. and
others, do say, That God does hate the elect, quoad statum presentem suum,
while they live in sin, and are unconverted; alleging for confirmation
hereof, this very saying of David, The Lord hates all the workers of iniquity,
and that in the 14th Chapter of the Book of Wisdom, Similiter odio sunt Deo,
impius et impietas ejus, The ungodly and his ungodliness are both alike hateful
unto God. Thus do they speak of the elect being considered, as they were
sinners before their conversion. But otherwise if we shall consider the elect,
as God in his eternal Counsel and Decree saw them justified and sanctified, so
he loved them, not only amore benevolentiae, that is, with such a love whereby
he did will their good, sed complacentiae, but of complacencie, or delight. For
thus all things are present with God, ab aeterno, from all eternity, and there
is nothing neither past, nor future unto him. And the the reason hereof is, God
knew all things most perfectly before any of them were.
because he sees all things that either are, were or ever shall be in the
world, non extra se in creaturis not without himself, in the creatures, as we
do; but in se, in himself, that is, in his eternal Counsel and Decree, or, in
se, non solum tanquam in causa efficiente, sed exemplari rerum omnium.
Wherefore although being considered, as we were in our selves before our
calling and conversion, that is, full of sin, and void of all goodness, we may
in some sense, be said to be objects of Gods hatred; yet, as we were vessels of
Election, so we were always beloved. For as St. Augustine says, Tract. in
Johan. 112. Deus omnes sanctos suos ante mundi constitutionem dilexit, sicut
praedestinav^t, God loved all his Saints before the foundation of the world, as
they were of him predestined. For we must not say, that God absolutely and
simply, first hates, and then loves the same things, as men do; for then we
shall make him variable and mutable as we our selves are, whereas there is
neither Variableness nor turning, Jam. 1.17.
nor so much as any shadow of turning with God.

If this answer do not give full satisfaction, Dav^d says, The Lord hates all
the workers of iniquity, he speaks of those that do work iniquity
perseverantly, that is, who do continue in sin without Repentance, as the next
words may seem to declare, when he adds, thou shall destroy them that speak
leasing. For it is certain, God will destroy none eternally, but obstinate and
impenitent sinners.

This answer I do prefer before the former. For if we shall speak of hatred, as
the word is commonly used, then I cannot but subscribe to Zanchius, whose
thesis, or position is this, Electos nunquam odit Deus, trascitur quidem illis,
ut illos duriter castiget saepe; De natura Dei lib. 4. c. 7. Quest. 2.
sed hoc facit ex amore ad illorum salutem, odit tamen nunquam. In English
thus, God never hates the elect, indeed he is angry with them, so that he does
oftentimes chasten them sharply: but this, he does out of love to their
salvation; notwithstanding he does never hate them. For says he, odisse
dicitur Deus, quibus male vult, God is said, to hate those whom he bears ill
will unto. And thus also does Cicero speak of hatred, when he says, Quem quis
odit periisse expetit, whom a man hates, he desires his destruction. In which
words, he lets us see, what is commonly meant by hatred.

Thus I hope I have cleared this matter. And now I would know of Mr. D. why he
does say, that Faith does justify declaratively, if the Gospel which preaches
Faith in Christ, does declare the love of God, either to all, or to any, that
are workers of iniquity? For Faith cannot be without a reformed conversation,
as he himself acknowledges? All the workers of iniquity therefore are
destiture of true justifying Faith, Reconcil. of God to man. page 44.
whereby to be assured of Gods love and of their salvation by Christ. Mr. D.
therefore, will he nill he, must needs acknowledge, that if Faith do justify
declaratively, then the Gospel does no where declare the Love of God toward
the workers of iniquity, and consequently, That it is not only the voice of the
Law, but of the Gospel also, that says, The Lord hates all the workers of
iniquity.

SECT. III. How God way be said to love his children sometimes more, and
sometimes less.
THe second Conclusion is this, If we shall speak of the Love of God, as it
does manifest it self by its effects, so it is neither eternal, nor always the
same, but sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser toward his children. And in
this sense David speaks of Gods Love, Psa. 147.8.
when he says, The Lord loves the righteous: and Solomon Prove. 8.17. where he
brings in the Son of God, the eternal wisdom of his Father, speaking and
saying, I love them that love me, that is, them only and none else. Now there
was a time when the elect did not love God, but the world and the things
thereof, a time when they were not righteous, but wicked; they were not at that
time therefore loved of God in this sense, as Solomon and David here speak of
his Love, that is, so as to taste, or to be made partakers of the comfortable
effects thereof. The Lord also speaks of his Love tanquam de re futura, as of
a thing to be accomplished in time to come, when he says or his revolted
people, I will love them freely. I will, Hos. 14.4.
says the Lord, he did not therefore thus love them always. Now this also
must be understood, not of the internal Act of Gods love, which is eternal; but
of the manifestation of his love, in the saving effects thereof. Thus also are
we to understand St. Paul when he blesses the Corinthians, and prays for
them saying, 2 Cor. 13.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God be with you. For his
meaning is not, that God would then first begin to love them, as if he had
hated them, or had borne them no good will before; but that he would multiply
the effects of his Love upon them, or that he would continue the gracious
influence of his Love toward them, in the most comfortable and saving effects
thereof. In the same sense also does our Savior speak of Gods Love, John 14.21.
He that has my Commandments and keeps them, it is he that loves me; and
he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest my self unto him. When Christ says here, He that loves me shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love him, he speaks (as the next words do
show) of the manifestation of his, and his Fathers love, by the saving effects
thereof, Tunc enim Deus nova ratione suam exhibet dilectionem, cum novo homines
afficit beneficio. For then does God exhibit his Love after a new manner, when
he bestowetn on men a new benefit, says Jansenius. Like whereunto are the
words of Dionisius Carthusianus on this saying of Christ. God loves all that
are predestinate eternally, and simply even then, when they do not love him,
but are wicked. For he first loved us. 1 John 4.19.
He loves them (I say) according to that he sees them to be, in his Decree of
Predestination. But when they are converted and do love God, he bestows on
them the effects of his Love, which he does fully, and finally vouthsafe them,
when they obtain the inheritance of Heaven, Peter Lumbard also Lib. 3. Sent.
Did. 32. does excellently unfold this matter, I will therefore shut up this
discourse in his words. The Love of God (says he) is considered two manner of
ways, secundum essentiam, et secundu^ efficientiam, according to the essence
and according to the efficiency of it. It is neither more nor less according to
the essence; but according to the efficiency of it: In which regard those may be
said to be more loved, for whom out of his love he has from eternity prepared
majus bonu^, the greater good, or a greater blessing; and does in time confer
the same upon them: and those less lo^ed, quibus non tantum, for whom and on
whom, he has from eternity prepared, and in time bestows, not so much good,
or not so great a blessing. Thereupon also it is, that some when they are
converted, and justified, are said then to begin to be loved of God; not that
God can love any one nova dilectione with a new love: yea, he loved with
everlasting love before the foundation of the world, whomsoever he loves. But
they are then said to begin to be loved of him, when they receive the effects
of Gods eternal love, to wit, grace or glory. Whereupon Augustine says, Far be
it from us that we should say, that God loves any one temporally, as it were
with a new love, which was not in him before, with whom, nec praeterita
transierunt, neither the things that are past, have passed away, et futura jam
facta sunt, and those that are future, are already present or are done.
Therefore he loved all his Saints before the foundation of the world sicut
praedestinavit, as they were predestined by him. But when they are converted
and do find him, then they are said to begin to be loved of him, Ut eo modo
dicatur, quo potest humano affectu capi, quod dicitur, to speak after that
manner, that the thing which is spoken, may be comprehended by man's capacity.

Thus also when God is said to be angry with the wicked, and well pleased with
the good, the change is in them and not in Him, as light is offensive to weak
eyes, but comfortable to strong; to wit, through the change that is in them,
not in it self: so when any one begins to be Gods friend being justified, he
himself is changed, not God.

Now if the Question be asked, whether one may be said to be loved of God more
at one time then at another, distinguenda est dilectionis intelligentia, that
we may understand this aright, we must distinguish of love; for if it be
referred unto the effects of love, concessibile est, it is to be granted, that
God does love some, more at one time than at another; but if it be referred to
the essence of Gods Lo e, inficiabile est, it is to be denied? Hitherto Peter
Lumbard. And thus this deep mystery, or matter is sufficiently cleared. I Will
only add two things more to pre^ent the mistaking of this Doctrine.

The former is, that all those, quibus ab aeterno Deus been vult, whom God
eternally loves, shall in time, have all those good things, that is, those
effects of grace, wrought in them which he decreed for them. As long therefore
as men do live in sin they cannot conclude, nor they cannot believe, that God
loves them with any special love, as he does his Elect, whom he has appointed
heirs of salvation* because as yet no effects of Election do appear in them.

The other thing which I think good here to add is that Mr. D. has no cause so
sharply and bitterly (as he does) to repro^e some of our Protestant Preachers
and writers, because they tell men, that if they forsake sin, and follow after
Gods commandments, and do that which is acceptable in his sight, then God will
love them. For seeing they speak no otherwise of Gods Love than the holy
Scripture does, Why should he so rack their words, as if they taught, that God
were mutable in his Love, as man is, and not rather understand them to speak
popularly of the Love of God, as the Scripture it self does in those places,
which I have before alleged, that is, not in regard of the essence, but of
the efficiency and influence thereof, in its gracious and most comfortable
effects. He has the more reason thus heartily to inrerpret their words,
because they are (at least some of them) no such babes, that they can be
thought to be ignorant of the eternity and immutability of Gods Love, being
considered simply as it is in it self, any more then of his other Attributes.

Quest. 4. What is meant by our Reconciliation to God?
SECT. I. Wherein is showed, What it is.
Reconcil. of man to God, page 48. Reconcil. of God to man. page 34.
MR. D. distinguishes hereof, and says, That it is twofold. 1. Gods
Reconciliation to us. 2. Our Reconciliation to God. Of which he speaks thus,
We have not one jot, not one apex in all the new Covenant to be found of
reconciling God to us: but of our reconciliation to God. Why then does he write
so much of Gods reconciliation to us, not well weighing what he says? For
Reconciliation imports precedent enmity, or at least some distaste, and
displeasure taken for some fault committed or offense given. For as Zanchius,
In Epistolam ad Coloss.
Davenantius, and other learned do say, Reconciliare nihil aliud est, quam
amicitiam offensione aliqua diremptam resarcire, et sic inimicos in pristinam
concordiam reducere. To reconcile, is nothing else, than to repair friendship
after it has been broken off by some offense, and so of enemies to make them
agree again, as they did formerly. In this sense our Savior himself speaks
of Reconciliation, when he says, If thou bring thy gift to the altar,
Matthew. 5.23.
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, that is, that
he is offended with thee for some fault, or offense or other, which thou have
committed against him, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way,
and be reconciled to thy brother, that is, go and confess thy fault to him,
and give him that satisfaction, which is meet and so regain his favor. Now
thus cannot God be said to reconcile himself unto us, seeing there is no need
thereof: nay seeing it is altogether impossible there should be any such thing.
It is therefore but an improper, or an abusive speech, to say that God was
always reconciled unto us.

And this indeed Mr. D. ingenuously acknowledged; Reconcil. of God to man. page
5.
for because God always loved his elect: therefore says he, he cannot
properly be said to reconcile himself unto them. And may not I say further,
Because he never wronged them, nor gave them any just cause of offense;
therefore in propriety of speech, he cannot be said to reconcile himself unto
them. But I have no intent to carp at words so that no wrong sense be couched
under them. For I know th at good Divines and other good Authors, do now and
then speak of Reconciliation, as common to both parties. See Estius in Lib. 4.
Sent, D^st. 35. Sect. 7. Uxor marito reconciliatur, quae offensa est. Erasmus
annot.: in 1 Cor. 7.

I come therefore to the other branch of his distinction, that is, Our
reconciliation unto God. In remissione igitur peccatorum cum primis consistit
haec reconciliatio, in quit Zanchius in haec verba Pauli ab illo citata ad Ephesians.
cap. 2. Reconcil. of man to God. p. 48. 50.
St. Paul shows us, wherein this does consist, when he says, that God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them. For hereby he gives us to understand, that our reconciliation to God
consists in his pardoning of our sins, and accepting of Christ's Passion, as a
satisfaction unto his justice for them. But Mr. D. takes it in another sense,
For he distinguishes of man's reconciliation to God, and says, that it is,
either Original whereby our nature was reconciled unto God by the death of his
Son, without any condition or qualification wrought in us: or Actual, which he
calls, the reconciliation of our persons, or consciences, and says, that it
is wrought within us, although not by our own power.

Now he understands hereby nothing else, Reconcil. of man to God. page 51.
but (that I may use his own words) the manifestation of Gods reconciliation to
us, and of the reconciliation of our nature to God in Jesus Christ. But surely,
not only our natures, but our persons are reconciled to God by the death of
Christ. Heb. 9.14.
Yea the blood of Christ (as the Apostle says) does purge our Consciences from
dead works, to serve the living God: because Christ by his death has
purchased, not only the pardon, but the purging away of our sinful corruptions.
By Christ's death then we are reconciled to God in regard of merit: but we are
actually reconciled unto God, when by Faith we do receive Christ, and do apply
his merits unto our souls. Of the former the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
viz. Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 2.16.
when he says, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; and in
the other places alleged by Mr. D. Of the latter, when he says, We pray you
in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled unto God. Now how the former can be
said to be Original, and the Reconciliation of our Nature, I cannot see, nor
conceive; seeing it was wrought for us by Christ without us, and is not
originally neither propagated to us, nor inherent in our Nature, as Original
sin is.

Again, what reason has he to call the manifestation of our Reconciliation to
our consciences, by the name of actual Reconciliation? For though nothing does
appear, or show it self unto us, until it does actually exist. Yet many things
do actually* exist, and have being, though they are not presently discerned of
us.

SECT. II. Objections answered.


as it is in it self: yet notwithstanding he did not approve of us, but
disliked us, and was offended and displeased with us while we continued in our
sins; we were in this regard therefore reconciled unto God, until we were
converted unto him, and did by Faith lay hold on Christ: even as David, though
he always loved and favored Absolon, yet when he had slain his brother Ammon,
was offended and displeased with him, and would not admit him into his
presence, until Joab wrought the means of his reconciliation.

But here it will be said, So also did Christ reconcile us unto his Father by
his death,

It is true, we were reconciled to God, by his death, quoad meritum, vel quoad
pretium redemptionis et reconciliationis nostrae, in regard of the merit, or
price of our Redemption and Reconciliation; but we are not actually reconciled
until by Faith we do believe in Christ, 1 John 5.11, 12.
and are united unto him. For he that has the Son has life, but he that has
not the Son has not life, but the wrath of God abides on him. And hereupon it
was, that St. Paul accounted all he had, but as dung that he might win Christ,
Phil. 3.8. Math. 17.4.
and be found in him. For why, Christ is the beloved Son of the Father, in whom
it is that he is well pleased with us. As long therefore as we are out of
Christ, and remain in our sins, we are liable to Gods displeasure, and
therefore had need to be reconciled unto him. For though God loves us ab
aeterno, from everlasting, amore complacentiae, with a love of complacencie and
delight, secundum intuitum praedestinationis suae, that is, as he beholds us,
justified and sanctified in his Decree of predestination; yet being considered
as we were of our selves, when we remained in our sins, and were aliens from
Christ, he could take no pleasure in us.

If this answer do not give full satisfaction, then I say they may be said to
be reconciled unto him, when they are converted and do believe, because he then
takes off this suspension, by working in them the saving effects of his love,
and not only declaratively. For first, God works these effects in them, and
then by them declares and manifests his Love unto them, and assures them
thereof.

Paul therefore uses the words justification and reconciliation promiscuously,
Romans 5.9.10.
and indifferently, as importing the same thing, being justified by the blood
of Christ (says he) we shall be saved from wrath through him: This he proves
thus, for if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, (where, you see he puts reconciled for justified, implying there is no
real difference between them) much more being reconciled we shall be saved by
his life. See this proved afterward Question 6.
Now we are not actually justified from the sentence of condemnation, which God
in his word has denounced against us for our sins, until we do believe in
Christ. It follows necessarily therefore, that we are not actually reconciled
unto God until we do believe in Christ, and are united unto him.

Quest. 5. Whether the Doctrine of Reconciliation, as Mr. D. has propounded
it, be a better means of comfort to distressed consciences, then our Protestant
Doctrine is?
FIrst, He teaches that God was reconciled to us, that is, as he understands
it, that he loved us, ab aeterne, from all eternity, without any precedent
dispositions, or qualifications, which he found, or foresaw in us, or any
conditions to be performed by us, to gain His love and His favor. Now
whatsoever comfort this can afford to any, if it be a means to keep those that
are great sinners, or such as are troubled with the apprehension of their own
unworthiness from despair, our Doctrine will do the same also. For there is no
judicious, nor no orthodox Protestant, who teaches not, that God loved us
freely from everlasting, and that His love is the cause of our loving Him, and
of all the goodness that is in us, as St. John says, We love him, because he
loved us first; 1 John 4.19.
and not that he loves us, because we love Him, to speak properly of his Love,
as it is in it self: though otherwise when we speak of Gods Love, according to
the influence it has upon us, or according to the gracious effects thereof, we
say as the holy Scripture does that the Lord will love those that love him, and
keep his commandments.

In this sense our Savior speaks of Gods Love, If a man love me, he will
keep my words, John 14.23.
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode
with him. And John 16.27. The Father himself loves you, because ye have loved
me, and have believed that I came out from God. Where we must not so understand
our Savior, as if he made his Disciples loving of him, and believing him, to
be the cause why God did first set his Love upon them, for he loved them
erernally: but to be the cause, why God did abundantly testify his Love
toward them, by many gracious, rare, and most comfortable effects thereof,
rather than to the world. We may say therefore as Dionysius Carthusianus does,
That our Savior in these words, sets down the cause of Gods Love, a
posteriori, that is, he cause of the effects of Gods Love, and so makes his
Disciples loving of him, and believing in him, a sign and an assurance unto
them, that his Father loved them.

Reconcil. of man to God. page 49, 50, 52, and 57.
Secondly, speaking of our Reconciliation to God, that is, as he expresses
himself, of the declaration or manifestation of Gods Reconciliation to us, he
teaches, that we are thus reconciled to God by Faith only; but makes joy in
the Holy Ghost, and the Love of God, and of our Brethren, and new Obedience,
inseparable Companions of this our Reconciliation. Now it a man cannot find
these graces in himself, What great comfort can he take that Gods Love is
eternal without any conditions on our part to be performed? Or, how can this
encourage men against desperation, more than our Doctrine, which is, That Gods
Love may be known by the inseparable effects thereof? For he will not say, that
God loves all, or that he was from all eternity reconciled unto all, but only
unto the Elect. Until therefore a man shall find in himself the undoubted
effects of his Election, he can take no great comfort in this, that Gods Love
is free, and without any conditions. He speaks therefore not so advisedly
when he says, Reconcil. of God to man. page 64.
If you search into the reason of your many years bondage, of your miserable
doubting, you shall find your disease, in that which has been spoken, and I
hope the remedy also. And as frivolous are those words of his, Ib. page 65.
Let us learn to distinguish when God speaks of his Reconciliation to us, and
when he speaks of our Reconciliation to him. For, how shall we learn this,
seeing he has told us before, that there is no mention in the Scripture of
Gods Reconciliation to us,

Quest. 6. Whether all the Elect be justified ab aeterno, When I say, that we
are justified by Faith instrumentally, I do not mean, that Faith is properly,
but analogically, the Instrument or means whereby we do receive Christ, and his
righteousness to our justification.
from all eternity, before they do believe in Christ? and consequently whether
the Scripture, when it says, that we are justified by Faith, means that
Faith justifies us only in tribunali conscientiae nostrae, in our own
consciences, as same of the learned Protestants speak; or declaratively as
says Mr. D.? Or whether it does not justify us instrumentaliter et
correlative, as other Orthodox Protestants not a few do teach, that is, as an
Instrument, or means whereby we are made partakers of Christ's righteousness,
renouncing our selves and our own works altogether, and relying on Christ only
for our justification.
SECT. I. Pro^ed by Scripture, that we are actually justified by Faith.
IT is not denied by any that we are justified ab aeterno from all eternity, in
Gods eternal Counsel and Decree: but so are we also eternally sanctified and
gloryfied.

The Question is, Whether we be not actually justified? Or, whether our sins do
not remain upon record against us, until we do believe in Christ? Doubtless the
Scripture every where avoucheth that we are justified by Faith in Christ?

St Paul affirms, that the Scripture, that is, of the old Abraham believed
God and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Where the Apostle tells us,
Romans 4.3.
whom they are to whom God impu^eth righteousness, that is, Believers. It is
false therefore that Mr. D. says that men are justified by God before they do
believe.

Paul also tells us, That he counted all things he had but as dung that he
might win Christ, and be found in him, not having his own righteousness which
was of the Law, Phil. 3.8, 9.
but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by Faith.

In these words, St. Paul gives us to understand, that there was a time when
he was not in Christ, for otherwise, why does he say, that he accounted al
things but dung that he might win Christ and be found in him, if he had been in
him already. And he here teaches also, that this benefit did accrue unto him
by being in Christ, that whereas he was of himself a sinner, as we all are, it
was by Faith in Christ only, that he came to be righteous before God. For why
does he say, That the righteousness which is of God is through the Faith of
Christ, and by Faith? but because we are made partakers of this righteousness
to our justification before God by Faith in Christ, and not otherwise.

We who are Jews by nature, Gal. 2.15, 16.
and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by the
works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in
Jesus Christ that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the Law: for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.
Hence I do reason thus, In the same sense that the Apostle denies
justification to works, he attributes it to Faith. This is evident, because he
makes a manifest opposition between justification by the works of the Law, and
by Faith in Christ. But he denies us to be justified by works before God, and
not declaratively to others, or to our own consciences. On the contrary
therefore, when St. Paul says, that we are justified by the Faith of Christ,
his meaning is, that we are justified actually and before God by Faith, and not
declaratively only to our own consciences.

remission of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. 1 John 1.7. Apoc. 1.5. But men before they
believe, are without Christ, Ephesians. 2.11.12. Therefore before they believe, their
sins are not pardoned, or, which is all one, before they believe, they are not
justified, nor absolved from their sins.

Moreover St. Paul teaches us. Acts 26.18. that we God sent him unto the
Gentiles to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan to God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance amongst all that are sanctified by Faith in Christ. Hence I infer,
that they were not justified and absolved from their sins, before they were
enlightened and believed in Christ, even while they walked in darkness, and
were under the power of Satan. For what needs the Apostle to say, that he was
sent to turn them from darkness to light, that they might by Faith receive
forgiveness of sins, if they had had it before?

Like hereunto is that of St. Peter, Be it known unto Acts 13.3.
that by this man (by Jesus Christ) is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins, and by him all that believe (not any before they believe) are justified
from all things, from which you could not be justified by the Law of Moses. For
the Law justifies none, but condemns all that do not in all things observe
it, Deuteronomy. 27.26. From which condemnation (as St. Peter here teaches) they are
not absolved and freed, but by Faith in Christ. Now what is this but to say,
that we are justified by Faith and not before Faith, or without it?

I may also reason thus, Whosoever is justified, is reconciled Matthew. 3.17. But
without Faith, it is not possible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Therefore neither
is it possible that any one without Faith should be justified.

Luke 24.47. And Peter also says, That God has exalted Christ with his own
right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior for to give repentance to Israel and
remission of sins, Acts 5.31. To whom also has God promised remission of sins?
Verily not to those that do live in sin, but that do leave their sins, and
return unto GOd, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22, 23, 24. Pardon of sin therefore, or, which is
all one, justification and absolution from sin, is not to be had until a man do
repent and become a new man.

But what need I to heap up any more testimonies, or Paul shuts up his
disputation of justification in these words, Therefore we conclude that a man
is justified by Faith without the deeds of the Law, Romans 3.28. It will not
serve M. D.'s turn to say, That Paul's meaning is, that we are justified
declaratively to our own consciences by Faith only, and not by works. For St.
Peter who spoke by the same Spirit that St. Paul did, teaches us, That by the
constant practice not only of Faith, but of other virtues and good works also,
we are to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 2.10. that is, to our own
souls and consciences. Consequently therefore, by the same works may also be
assured in our consciences of our justification before God, and of our
reconciliation to his Divine Majesty. For he that is assured of his Election,
and of his effectual Vocation, is assured of his justification and salvation.
Mr. D. therefore sets a false gloss upon St Paul's words, when he says,
that his meaning is not that we are actually justified before God by Faith
only; but declaratively to our own consciences: for thus are we justified by
other Virtues, as well as by Faith.

SECT. II. Mr. D. his Objections answered.
ALL these plain Testimonies, and many more Mr. D. thinks to avoid and put
off, by saying, that we were justified actually by Christ's righteousness before
we did believe, even at that very time, when he suffered his bitter Passion,
and bare our sins on his Body on the Tree, and that therefore (as I intimated
before) the Scriptures which say we are justified by Faith, must be thus
understood, That Faith justifies declaratively, that is, that our Faith
declares, and makes it evident unto our consciences, that our sins are
forgiven, and that we are justified before God. But the Scriptures (as I have
showed) do speak so plainly, that they will not suffer themselves thus to be
wrested. Notwithstanding, he goes about to prove this his exposition, by these
Arguments following. Confer. p. 14. Romans 4.5. Romans 5.10.


1. That the Act of our Faith is a Consequent of our justification, and not an
Antecedent, is plain. For God justifies the ungodly. And we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son, when we were enemies. Now (says he) Believers
cannot be called enemies, but friends. But we were reconciled when we were
enemies.

The answer hereunto is easy, to wit, antecedenter ad reconciliationem
nostram, that is before we were reconciled, but not when we did actually
believe. The Apostle therefore in these words of his, denotat tatum terminum (a
quo) istius reconciliationis, non terminum (ad quem), that is, And so speaks
in the same sense as Isay does c. 3. when he says, The lame man shall leap as
an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing, which as Chamier says, must be
understood, in sensu diviso, non in composito.
he shows what manner of persons we were before we were reconciled to God,
not what we are being reconciled. He speaks therefore in the same sense, as
our Savior does when he says, Math. 11.5.
the lame walk and the deaf hear. The meaning whereof no man will conceive to
be that the lame, still continuing lame, did walk, and that the deaf still
continuing deaf, did hear: but that those who formerly were lame and deaf,
being cured by Christ, did go and hear.

And even so in like manner when the Apostle says, that God justifies the
ungodly, and that we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, when we
were enemies; the meaning is not, That the ungodly remaining ungodly, are
justified, or that any are enemies to God after they are actually reconciled
unto him: but that we who by nature and of our selves were ungodly, and
therefore enemies, were justified from that ungodliness of ours, and reconciled
unto God when we believed in Christ.



meritorie, that is, in regard of merit; but are not actually reconciled, until
we do by Faith receive Christ and apply the merits of his Passion to our souls.
In the same sense is Christ said to bear our sins on his Body on the tree, that
is, the punishment of our sins, whereby he purchased the pardon of them. It
does not follow therefore, neither from these, nor from any other the like
sayings, that actual remission of sins, is as ancient as satisfaction for sin;
nor that the persons of Gods Elect, were just before the Tribunal of God at the
same time, when Christ Jesus took our sins upon himself. Mr. D. therefore does
indeed wrest those places of Scripture, which speak of the actual performance
of the price of our Redemption, when he alleges them to impugn actual
remission of sins by Faith.

Another of his Objections is this. Confer. p. 15.
They that are ingrafted into Christ Jesus, are justified: but we must be
ingrafted into Christ Jesus before we can believe, therefore we must be
justified before we can believe?

What force, and what strength, there is in this reasoning of his, I will
request him to consider by the like. Confer. p. 21.
When he says, They that are ingrafted into Christ Jesus are justified; But we
must be ingrafted into Christ Jesus, before we can believe. If here he do
understand priority of time, I deny this Assumption of his. For at the same
time that we are ingrafted into Christ, we receive power from him to believe.

Again, seeing Christ is offered unto us in the Promises of the Gospel, How can
we be made partakers of Christ, if we do not by Faith believe and receive those
promises? To say nothing, that to be ingrafted into Christ, is nothing but to
believe in Christ. For God by working Faith in us, does ingraft us into Christ.
I deny therefore his minor Proposition, for we are not ingrafted into Christ at
all, until the Spirit has wrought Faith in us.

He alleges, That the effects of righteousness is Assurance: but to what
purpose I know not, Esaias 32.17.
unless it be against himself. For if righteousness do always bring assurance
with it of Gods Love and favor, or of the forgiveness of sins, and of our
justification, then it cannot be said that we are assured of our justification
only by Faith, as he teaches.

Afterward I find him reasoning thus, St. Peter says, Christ bare our sins
in his own Body on the tree, that we being delivered from sin might live in
righteousness. 1 Pet. 2.24.
St. John tells us, John 1.29.
Christ takes them away. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world. If the justice of God has laid allour iniquities upon his back, has
not his mercy taken them from us? If the Lord Christ did take them away, then
they are no more.



Again, I do here further add, That the persons of whom both St. Peter and St.
John do speak in these words, are Believers. Christ bare our sins, that is,
ours who believe in him: for of them St. Peter speaks, and to them he wrote
this, and not to infidels. So also when St. John says, Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world. By the world here, he means all those
throughout the world both Jews, and Gentiles, that do believe in him, and
receive him for their Savior in the same sense as St. John the Apostle
speaks, when he says, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father
Jesus Christ the just, 1 John 2.1.
and he is the propitiation for our sins, (ours of the Jewish Nation, or of the
Israelites who do believe in him) and not for ours only, but for the sins of
the whole world; that is, of all both Jews and Gentiles, that do believe in him
throughout the world.

SECT. III. An Objection answered.
I Have done with Mr. D. And must now essay if I can give satisfaction to a
stronger reason than any of his, which I find alleged by an acute and learned
Divine, for whom I am no fit match. Vindic. Gra. Lib. 1. Sect. 4.
For thus does he reason, Justificatio est actus Dei immanens, non transiens,
that is to say, an internal, not an external Act of God, est ergo aeternus, non
temporaneus, it is therefore eternal, and not done in time, as the outward
works of God are. Whereupon he infers and concludes, that when the
Scripture says, We are justified by Faith, the meaning hereof is, that we are
justified by Faith in tribunali conscientiae, that is, that God when we believe
in Christ justifies us in the tribunal which be sets up in our own souls,
and consciences, but that otherwise we were justified ab aeterno apud Deum,
eternally with God. But methinks this exposition of his quite overthrows the
Doctrine of justification by Faith, as it is taught by the Protestants. For the
Protestants Doctrine is,

First, that our justification is, actus individuus, an individual act, that
is, accomplished all at once, in one and the same instant.

Secondly, quod non admittit majus et minus, that it is not increased nor
diminished by degrees, as our sanctification is. But this justification is not
any such indivisible act. For frequent and ordinary experience shows, that
those who are. Believers and in the state of grace, yea, excellent Christians
otherwise, are sometimes confident that their sins are pardoned, and that they
are in Gods favor; and, at other times, though they rely still upon God, for
the pardon of their sins, and for salvation by Christ, yet they cannot say,
that they are pardoned.

In a word, the Children of God, have sometimes a greater, sometimes a lesser
assurance of the pardon of their sins, and of their salvation, and sometimes
hardly any at all. The reason whereof in many of them, is melancholy abounding,
which depraveth the fancy, depresseth the heart, and always raises fears in
opposition, contrary to that which a man's heart is set upon, and which it most
desires. Sometimes again, the Faith of the Believer, is assailed with strong,
strange, and hideous temptations, which deprive him of that assurance, which
formerly, he had, or were it not for these temptations, would have. And
sometimes also weakness of judgment in those whose hearts are upright with God,
is a great cause, why they cannot lay hold of that comfort which belongs unto
them. Now if we shall say, that a man is justified by Faith, when his Faith
does declare and evidence unto his conscience that his sins are pardoned, then
we shall exclude some of these good Christians from the state of justification,
and of others of them we shall say, contrary to the common tenent of
Protestants, that they are sometimes more, and sometimes less justified.



ab aeterno in mente Dei, eternally in Gods counsel, or in Gods mind and
purpose, even as those that are arraigned in Courts of justice here in this
world, are acquitted, or condemned in animo et mente judicis, in the Judges
mind and decree or determination, before he passes sentence of judgment upon
them. But they are not actually judged, until this sentence is pronounced, and
published. Now the same is to be said concerning the actual justification of
those that do believe in Christ. For justification, as the Protestants do prove
by the Scriptures, est vocabulum forense, is a judicial term, and therefore is
to be taken, in sensu forensi, in a judicial sense. It imports therefore an
external judicial act of God, that is to say, his pronouncing or publishing of
sentence of judgment. For then is a Judge said to judge him that is arraigned
before him, when he gives either sentence of absolution, or condemnation upon
him: and even in like manner, God the judge of all the world does justify
those that believe in Christ, by passing sentence of absolution upon them, and
condemns all unbelievers, and ungod y sinners, by giving sentence of
condemnation against them.

where does he now pass sentence, either of absolution, or condemnation upon
any, that they may be said to be judged by him?

I answer, that he does this in his word, in verbo Evangelij where every true
believer may find himself already justified from his sins in scriptis (as the
Lawyers use to speak) sententia finali, with such a definitive sentence, as
shall stand for ever, and never be revoked, but confirmed by Christ at the
latter day.

This answer offered it self unto me long since, when I read the former
Objection, and I have found since, that it was no new invention, or device of
mine own, but the old Protestant Doctrine. Zanch. de attributis Dei lib. 4.
cap. 2. q. 6.
For thus writes Zanchius, a learned, judicious, and an ancient Protestant
This grace whereby we are justified before God, data fuit ab aeterno, was given
us from all eternity, because he loved eternally in Christ, and made us
accepted unto himself in him, as the Apostle says to the Ephesians.
Notwithstanding we are not reipsa, really justified by his grace, but when we
do by Faith apprehend it. For neither is the arraigned person said to be
absolved, that is, justified, (though the Prince have decreed that he shall be
absolved) until the arraigned person himself, has heard the voice of
absolution, and has assented thereunto. When we hear the voice of the Gospel,
we hear the voice of absolution; when we assent thereunto, we do reipsa, really
or indeed receive absolution, or are justified. Therefore the Apostle when he
speaks of this grace, as we are justified thereby, does not name only grace,
but joyneth Faith with it, as it is every where manifest in his Epistle. Thus
has the most learned and judicious Zanchius opened this matter.

I have also of late (since I penned this) met with a Treatise of learned Mr.
Rutherfurth, The Trial and Triumph of Faith, p. 62.
wherein I find that he fully accords with Zanchius: his words are these,
Justification is a forinsecal sentence, in time pronounced in the Gospel, and
applied to me now, and never while the instant now that I believe: it is not
formally an act of the understanding to know a truth concerning my self, but
it is an heart-adherence of the affection to Christ as the Savior of sinners,
at the presence of which a sentence of free absolution is pronounced. Suppose
the Prince have it in his mind to pardon twenty malefactors, his grace is the
cause why they are pardoned; yet are they never in Law pardoned, so as they can
in Law plead immunity, that is. until.
while they can produce their Princes Royal sealed pardon. Thus far Mr.
Rutherfurth.

Mr. Gataker
Two other learned Divines also, whom I have lately read, do thus answer the
former Objection, they say, That justification is not an Act immanent and
eternal in God; Mr. Ball in his Treatise of Faith. p. 89.
but transient and in time, inferring some change in the person justified, not
physical, but moral and in respect of state, whereby it comes to pass, that
the person is in another condition and account then he was before.

This answer, I conceive is the same in sense with the former. For I demand,
What change of estate is there in him that is justified? (I mean not as he is
also sanctified, but as he is justified) but this, that whereas before he was
guilty of eternal damnation, and bound over to eternal punishment for his sins,
he is now absolved from the guilt of his sins, and from the sentence of
condemnation? But where is he thus absolved now, and was not so before?
Profecto non in mente Divina, certainly, not in Gods mind and purpose, for God
is unchangeable. I would gladly therefore be taught and informed, where this is
done any where else, nisi in verbo Evangelii? But by Christ in his Gospel. For
although Christ do by his Spirit absolve the Believer in foro conscientiae suae
in his own conscience: yet hereby he is not justified before God, but in his
conscience assured of his justification, as has been before declared. See Mr.
Baxter, who (I think) has excellently unfolded this matter in his Aphorisms
of justification.

SECT. IIII. Two Reasons more, proving that we were not justified ab aeterno.
BY this that has been said, I suppose, this matter is sufficiently cleared:
but were it so that a satisfactory answer could not be readily given to such
intricate doubts, and difficulties in such high mysteries, as this is, Communem
tamen Protestantium doctrinam, relinquendam, et repudiandam non esse,
judicarem, I would judge, that it were not good hereupon to depart from the
common received doctrine of the Protestants, that is so well grounded on the
holy Scripture.

For, besides all the former testimonies that I have alleged, St. Paul
reckoning up the several links of the golden chain of our salvation, and
setting them down in order, does not rank our Justification with our Election;
but places it after our Vocation: for so he says, whom God has
predestined, them he has called; whom he has called, them he has
justified; whom he has justified, them he has glorified. Now it is certain,
we are called in time, non ab aeterno, not from everlasting. It follows
necessarily therefore, that we were not eternally justified, but at that very
time, when being effectually called, we did believe in Christ. For as the
Apostle here informs us, objectum justificationis adaequatum sunt vocati, the
called of God, (that is, effectually by his spirit ingrafting his word in their
hearts) are the adequate object of justification, that is, all such, and only
such called ones does God justify. It Is evident therefore from these words of
St. Paul, that none are actually justified until they are called.

The force of this Reason will not be avoided by saying, That St. Paul speaks
here of a declarative justification, or of justification, not as it is really
acted,

Paul speaks here of things as they are in themselves, not of the bare
manifestation of them; of real predestination, real vocation, and real
glorification, and therefore also of a real justification.

Again, in this golden Chain of our salvation, predestination is the first
Principle, or first cause of it, glorification is the end or consummation of
it, and the means by which we do proceed from predestination to glorification,
are our vocation and justification. Whence it follows, that the Apostle
speaks here of a real justification; for the manifestation thereof unto a
Believers conscience, is no necessary means of his salvation. A very hard and
harsh sentence it would be to say, That none can possibly be saved, who is not
assured of his salvation, by having it made evident to his conscience, that his
sins are pardoned, and that he is in the state of grace. A more comfortable,
and truer assertion it is to say, that every one, though he be never so much
terrified, and troubled in his mind with doubts and fears, shall yet be saved,
if he do cast himself upon Christ, and constantly rely upon him for salvation,
according to the gracious Promises in the Gospel: For blessed is every one that
trusts in him. Psalm. 2.12.

Paul makes between the Corinthians former estate while they lived in sin, and
their estate since they believed, plainly proves that Justification goes not
before, but after Faith. Such (says he) were some of you, that is, spotted and
polluted with those vile sins, which he had before mentioned, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified: they were not therefore justified before, no
more then they were before sanctified: for of both these he speaks alike;
neither will there be any real opposition, between the Corinthians estate
before and after their calling and conversion, unless we shall say, that as
they were really adulterers, idolaters, etc. and not only in outward
appearance; so now, after they were converted and did believe, they were really
and actually justified, as well as sanctified, and not declaratively only to
the conscience, or eternally only in Gods Decree.

SECT. V. Another Objection answered.
LOng after I had finished this Treatise, a Soldier that quartered with me, in
a calm conference, that we had together, reasoned thus against me, to prove
that men are justified before they do believe, even from everlasting. St. Paul
says, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies, that is, the Elect. But men are elected before they do believe,
therefore they are justified before they believe.

To the Major proposition, to wit, That God justifies the Elect,

I answer, that all the Elect are actually justified, not as soon as they are
elected, but in that time, and after that manner as God in his Decree of
Election has determined and set down, that is, when they do believe, as St.
Paul explaineth himself in the words following, where he first moves another
Question like to the former, saying, Who shall condemn? And then he answers,
It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who also sits at the
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us, [us believers.] And then he
asks us again, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? us, he
means, who do believe in Christ, and are his members. Thus he uses these two
words indifferently, Elect and Us, as expressing the same persons, and so
gives us to understand, that when he says, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, he speaks of the Elect as
they are Believers, in the same sense as he said before, those whom he did
predestinate, them also he called, and whom he justified, them also he
glorified; not that they were actually called, as soon as they were
predestined; or glorified, as soon as they were justified. But either,
because they were so apud Deum with God, to whom all things are present. Or
else he says not, whom he has predestined, them he will call; and whom he
has justified, them he will glorify: but he has called, he has glorified
them, because they shall in the due time, appointed by God, he as certainly
called and glorified, as if they were so already. And even so in like manner,
when the Apostle says, It is God that justifies the Elect, he speaks thus,
because of the certainty of their justification.

SECT. VI. The Objections of the most Learned Chamierus answered.
BEing put in mind by a worthy friend of mine, that the most learned Chamierus
(who by his acute, elaborate and most excellent works and writings, has very
well deserved of the Church of God) does oppugn the former Doctrine of actual
justification by Faith in Christ; I have thought good in the last place, to
examine those things that are asserted, and objected by him, against that which
is most commonly taught, and professed by other Protestant Divines.

Panstrat. de justif.
he argues thus, Paul testifies, That God loved us even then when we were
enemies. Now this cannot be without imputation of righteousness, for it cannot
be imagined, that God should love any sinner, as he is a sinner; But when we
were Gods enemies, and as yet did nothing that was good, we were only sinners,
secun^um inhaerentiam, according to inherency, or inherently: therefore we
could not be loved of God.

But say I secundum essentiam, Chamier would have it, that God loved us merely
as sinners, but as his creatures. As a father redeemeth and releaseth his
riotous son out of prison, into which he is cast for debt, non quatenus
prodigum, not as he is an unthrift, but as he is his son, whom he loves,
though he hate his vice. This most learned man therefore, did not so well
confisider of the Matter when he said Monstra sibi fingunt, they feign
monstrous conceits to themselves, who say that sinners who are just neither by
their own, nor by another righteousness are loved of God, that is, merely as
sinners, than which nothing can be devised more abhorrent to divinity. This is
true indeed, if we should be compelled and enforced by our Doctrine to say,
that God loves sinners, as sinners: but it drives us not upon any such rocks.
We are not necessitated therefore to grant his Conclusion, which is, There was
need of this imputed righteousness, preventing whatsoever good can be in us,
that is, as he means, that we might be loved of God before we were and had my
being, even from eternity. For if imputation of righteousness, do prevent
whatsoever good can be in us, then it must needs prevent, and go before Faith.
And so it will follow, that our justification is an immanent and an eternal Act
of God, which this learned Divine will have in Gods consideration to prevent
his loving of us. But, that it is no such immanent Act, is proved afterward.

I find this great learned Divine in another place reasoning thus, De Sola fide
justificante, lib. 22. c. 8.
to prove that God loves none but those that are justified and have their sins
forgiven them by him, Dilectio Dei opponitur odio, etc. Gods love is opposed
unto hatred.



in quibus contrary operantur, in which they work those things, which are
contrary one to another. For example justification and condemnation are
opposite Effects of Gods Love, and of his hatred. But it does not follow
hereupon, that because God damneth none but obstinate sinners whom he hates,
that he loves no man unless he be first justified from his sins. For though
God does not condemn any, nor hate any but for their sins; yet he does gratis
freely justify, as many as he justifies through his grace, without any merits
of theirs; yea, contrary to the merit of their sins, as St. Paul teaches, Romans
3.23, 24. And this indeed the most Learned Chamier not only acknowledges, but
abundantly confirms by most valid testimonies of holy Scripture. Probat enim
justificationem effici per charitatem Dei, tanquam efficientem causam. For he
proves that our justification is through the love of God, as the efficient
cause thereof, After that the kindness, and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us, Tit. 3, 4, 5. God commends his love to us, that
whereas we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, Being justified therefore by
his blood, we shall much more be saved now by his life, Romans 5. Seeing these
things are thus alleged and delivered by Chamierus himself, I wonder that he
could so far forget himself, as after a few lines to say, Deum non amare aliter
nisi remissis peccatis, that God does not love us, unless our sins be first
forgiven us. For if it were so, How could Gods Love be said to be the efficient
cause of our justification. For sure I am, he will not say, Causam effectu suo
posteriorem esse, that the Cause is after its Effect.

In the next place, whereas he says, the hatred of God is for the guilt of
sin, therefore as long as the guilt of sin remains, so long must we needs be
hated of God. I grant, that God hates none but for sin: but it does not follow
hereupon, that every one is hated of God, as long as the guilt of his sins does
remain. For then seeing the guilt of sin in all the Elect, does go before the
remission thereof, ( Quod enim non est, non remittitur, for that which is not,
cannot be said to be forgiven) it would follow, that the Elect themselves, as
well as others, were once hated of God, and not beloved of him: whereas the
Lord himself says, That he loved them with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3.
Thus then it is; God hates sin in all, yea in the Elect themselves: but he
pitied their persons, and loved them from all eternity, as they were his
Creatures, and, out of this his love, provided for them a Savior.

Whereas then this most worthy Divine, concludes thus, If therefore it
behooves him whom God loves, not to be guilty of sin: but there is no man but
he is guilty of sin, unless his sin be pardoned and forgiven him, that is,
unless he be justified, and so leaves it to be inferred, that we must be
justified before we can be loved of God; That which I have said already, does
sufficiently manifest the inconsequence hereof. Whereunto this I add further,
that where three is alike guilt, we cannot always infer a necessity of like
condemnation. As for example, a Sovereign Prince, or King, when many of his
Subjects are risen up against him in rebellion, and are all alike guilty of
death, does of his mercy and free grace, pardon some of them: but others he as
freely makes examples of his justice, for terror unto the rest of his
Subjects, and causes them to be put to death. Even thus it is in this present
case: for whereas all of us for our sins have deserved eternal death, God of
his grace converteth, absolveth, and justifies some, and others he leaves in
their sins, and condemns them according to their demerits. Thus Gods love, or
his grace, is the cause of our justification, and not our justification the
cause of Gods loving us, as has been showed before, and shall now by Gods grace
be further proved, tum ex concessis Chamieri, both from that which Chamier
grants and delivers for truth; and from other places of Scripture, beside
those which I have already produced.

Lib. 22. cap. 12. de sola fide justificante. Mat. 26.28
Mors Christi est vera causa justificationis, says he, The death of Christ is
the true cause of our justification. And this indeed is most truly spoken of
him; for our blessed Savior himself tells us, That he shed his blood for the
remission of our sins. Now, how is this to be understood, but that he shed his
blood to purchase the pardon of our sins? Ephesians. 1.7.
For thus St. Paul also says, that we have redemption through his blood, even
the forgiveness of our sins. And St. John likewise says, that the blood of
Christ cleanses us from all sins. 1 John 1.7.
Now, what is this, but for him to say, that the forgiveness of our sins, is an
effect of Christ's blood which he shed for us? Or, that I may speak in Chamier's
words, that Christ's death is the true cause of our justification.

Now from hence, I do first infer, that our justification cannot be the cause
why God loves us. Quicquid enim est causa causae est causa causati; For
whatsoever is the cause of the cause, is also the cause of that which is caused
by that cause. Now Gods love was the cause why he sent his Son to be a
propitiation for our sins. 1 John 4.10. Our propitiation therefore, and
consequently our justification, which is therewith necessarily connexed, or
which is involved in it, Romans 3.25. cannot be the cause of Gods love, for then
Gods love should both be the cause and the effect of our propitiation and
justification by Christ.

Again, if Christ's death be (as it is indeed) the true cause of our
justification, then we cannot be actually justified ab aeterno from all
eternity. Temporale enim non est causa aeterni, for that which is in a definite
time, cannot be the cause of that which has been for ever. But Christ suffered
for our sins, non ab aeterno; sed tempore a Deo definito, not from eternity;
but at that time which God had determined, Gal. 4.4. His Passion therefore,
either must not be the cause of our justification, or if we shall say that it
is, as this most learned Divine, and all other (for any thing that I know to
the contrary) do: we must needs grant, that we were not actually justified ab
aeterno, from all eternity, but in time.

Lastly, Whereas St. Paul teaches, Romans 3.24, 25. that We are justified by the
redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through Faith in his blood: from hence also it follows, that our
sins are actually pardoned, and we justified from them in time, and not from
all eternity. For it cannot be said of our Election (and there is the same
reason of every other immanent, and eternal Act of God) that we were elected
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, as a cause thereof. For our
Election is immediately of Gods grace, and not effected by any external means,
or for any external cause, extra Deum without God himself, no more then are
opera ulla ejus ad intra any of his internal acts, or works. For as much
therefore, as the Apostle teaches, That we are justified by the redemption
which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
Faith in his blood, unto me it seems very evident, that our justification can
be none of the immanent and eternal works of God, that are acted altogether
within himself.

Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13 where he tells them, That God had from the beginning,
chosen them unto salvation through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of
the truth. But his meaning is not, That sanctification of the Spirit, and Faith
of the truth, were any causes, no nor means of their Election, but of their
salvation; as if he should have said, God has from the beginning chosen you
unto salvation, to be enjoyed and possessed of you, by being sanctified by Gods
Spirit, and by believing in Christ, as by means leading thereunto. Thus the
Apostle, in saying he has chosen you unto salvation, that is, to obtain
salvation by sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of the truth, makes
these means, of their salvation not of their Election. Yea not only the
Orthodox Protestant Divines, but Popish Doctors also do thus expound these
words of St. Paul, amongst whom Estius commenteth thus upon them. The effects
of Gods Election, ordained unto salvation are hereby signified; as if he should
say, God has chosen you; or has taken you unto salvation, by means thereunto
allotted, to wit, through sanctification of the Spirit, and Faith of the truth.
Theophylact also (alleged by him) thus expounds these words, God has from
the beginning, that is, from eternity, chosen you unto salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit, that is, (says he) he has saved us in
sanctifying us by the Spirit. Thus our salvation is by means, but our Election
is the immediate work, or act of God whereof there can no cause or reason be
given, nisi been placitum Divinum, but Gods own gracious good pleasure.

This that I have thus taught, is the Doctrine of the most Orthodox Divines. I
cannot therefore but wonder, what should move the most illustrious Chamier to
say, quod amari mereamur a Deo per imputationem justitiae Christi, et quod inde
diligamur, et destinemur vitae aeternae, that we deserve to be loved of God
through the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and that thereupon we are
beloved and allotted, or elected unto eternal life. This, I say, seems unto
me, a most strange assertion: for hence it would follow, that Gods Love and his
Election, were not free, or altogether gratuitous. But God speaking unto his
Church and people says dilexi te gratis, I have loved thee freely. And St.
Paul teaches, that God has predestined us to the adoption of sons by Jesus
Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will. The same Apostle also
says, that the Election of Gods people, is of grace.

Now merit and free love and grace cannot stand together. Christ indeed has
merited all the saving effects of Gods Love: at, dilectio ipsamet Dei est
gratuitae, but Gods love it self is not merited, but free. He loves us merely
ex beneplacito suo, of his good pleasure. This love of his is the cause why he
gave us his only begotten Son to work our salvation, John 3.16. This love of
his therefore must needs be the cause also of all Christ's merits, both of our
redemption, justification, adoption, sanctification, and glorification. Neither
our justification therefore, nor any other of these can be the cause of Gods
love, if we shall speak properly of his love, and not of some one or other
effects thereof. But proceed we to the next thing, wherein Chamierus dissenteth
from that which is most commonly taught by other Protestants, concerning our
justification.

This learned man also teaches, contrary to the common Doctrine of the
Protestants, that there are no preparations unto our justification. Now if it
were, as he says, that our justification is an eternal Act of God, this would
necessarily follow. But seeing we are not actually justified until we do
believe in Christ, and are not ordinarily brought to renounce our selves, and
to put the whole confidence of our salvation in Christ, until we be wrought
upon, and prepared thereunto both by the Law and the Gospel, as is to be showed
in the next Question: therefore seeing he produces nothing that I have met
with, for confirmation of this his assertion, I will leave the further
examination, and sifting of it unto its due place.

And so I come to the last thing, that by the learned Chamierus is asserted in
opposition to the common Doctrine of Protestants, and that is, That we are not
justified by Faith in Christ: for he speaks expressly and says, falsum est
fidem impetrare justificationem, It Is false that Faith obtains justification.
For confirmation whereof he reasons thus,

If it were so, then Faith should go before our justification, both in reason,
and in time, which may by no means be granted. For Faith it self, is by it self
a part of our sanctification; but there is no sanctification, but it is after
justification, which in deed, and in nature, is before it. Which is the cause
why we do say, that Faith does no otherwise justify but relatively, that is,
because it has for its peculiar object the mercy of God, on which it relieth:
Now this is that properly that justifies, as the Church is built relatively
upon the Faith of Peter, that is, upon Christ, whom the Faith of Peter
confessed.

That I may examine these things in order, as they lie. First, whereas he
says, If Faith should obtain our justification, then Faith should go before
our justification, both in reason, and in time. I deny this consequence, for
from hence it follows only, that Faith goes before our justification in
order of nature, or in reason; but not in time, because a man is justified at
the same instant that he lays hold on Christ, and believes in him. But he
denies, that Faith goes before our justification in any respect at all, and
his reason is, because Faith is a part of our sanctification: but there is no
sanctification, but it is after justification, which indeed and in nature is
before it.

The first of these Propositions, I do willingly grant, that Faith is a part of
sanctification: but whereas he assumeth, that there is nosanctification, but it
is after justification, I cannot assent unto him in this. For many worthy
Divines do hold, that sanctification is before justification: their judgment
therefore, I might oppose unto the learned Chamiers, and others that hold the
contrary: For the clearing of this matter, I do distinguish of sanctification,
and say, that it is either habitual, and so God does sanctify us by infusing
holiness into us; or actual and so we do sanctify our selves by renouncing
the works of sin, and living holily. Of both these Moses speaks, when he
says, Sanctify your selves and be ye holy, for I am the Lord your God, and ye
shall keep my Statutes and do them, Lev. 20.7.8.
for I am the Lord which sanctify you. When the Lord says here, Sanctify
your selves and be ye holy; this must be understood of actual sanctification,
that is, of holiness that is to be actually performed by us. But whereas the
Lord uses this as a reason to stir us up hereunto, [for I am the Lord which
sanctify you] this is spoken of habitual sanctification. For how does the Lord
sanctify us, but by infusing the habit, or the internal grace of holiness
into us, whereby we are enabled to perform the several acts of holiness, or to
live holily, the effectual excitation of Gods blessed Spirit herewith
concurring. But because these words of the Lord, which I have alleged, though
they speak of a twofold sanctification, are taken in another sense by very
learned Divines, than this that I have given: for confirmation therefore of
habitual sanctification, I do allege those words of St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
where he prays, that God would sanctify them wholly, or thoroughly. And those
1 Cor. 1.30. where he says, That Christ is made unto us sanctification, See
also 1 Pet. 1.2. Now of actual sanctification St. Paul speaks when he says,
This is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication: that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor: not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles which know not God. Hereof also speaks St. Peter in that precept of
his, Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. In these, and in other places, the
Scripture speaks of Sanctification both habitual wrought in us by God;
himself, and of sanctification acted, and wrought by us through the assistance
of Gods Spirit, exciting us unto holiness. Whereas then this most learned
Divine says, That there is no sanctification but it is after justification,
this is true, if it be understood of actual sanctication. For we are first
justified by Faith, and then this Faith inflameth our hearts with the love of
God, and stirs us up to glorify him, and to serve him in holiness and
righteousness, according to all his commandments.

Thus the several works of holiness and righteousness, do proceed from Faith,
Etiamsi non elicitive, imperative tamen, though not elicitly, yet imperatively,
Faith stirs us up unto them. For as St. Paul says, The end of the
commandment is love, out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.5.
and Faith unfeigned. It is true therefore, that Faith and therefore
justification, which is thereby laid hold of, and obtained, is before actual
sanctification. For (as this learned man says well) fides vera est fons et
scaturigo omnium bonorum operum in fidelibus. De sola fide justificante, Lib.
22. cap. 12.
True Faith is the fountain and source of all good works in the faithful. But I
cannot say that there is no sanctification, but it is after justification: for
habitual Faith is a part of habitual anctification. Now the infused habits of
grace, such as Faith is, are before their acts. If therefore it can be proved,
that adulti, or such as are of capacity and understanding, are not justified
without, or before actual Faith, then it will inevitably follow, that there is
some sanctification, that is not after justification. Yea, (beside what has
been said already, to prove that we are actually justified by Faith and not
without it) methinketh Chamierus himself does as good as grant it, when he
says, Verum est, propterea nos factos in Christo justitiam Dei, quod Christo
nos simus incorporati per fidem; It is true that we are therefore made the
righteousness of God in Christ, because we are incorporated into him by Faith.
We are not then justified before Faith, or before we do believe in Christ.

Again, this most excellent Divine says, In adultis fatemur remissionem
peccatorum ab inhaerente justitia nunquam sepaerari, We confess, that remission
of sins is never separated from inherent righteousness in those that are grown
in years. But, say I, many of the Elect after they have the use of reason and
understanding, being well grown in years, do yet live in sin for some time, and
do not serve God in righteousness, until he by his grace does afterward convert
them. According therefore to his own Doctrine, it follows, that justification
from sin, at least in adultis, in those that are grown in years, does not go
before Faith; But, says he. Faith justifies relative, as it has for its
proper and peculiar object the mercy of God, on which it relieth. Whence (as I
conceive) he would have it inferred, That seeing the mercy of God is eternal,
therefore our justification is so also, and therefore before Faith.

Now hereunto I answer, that though Christ's righteousness be materialiter the
proper object of our justification, or that which is imputed to us for our
justification. Yet I will not deny, bur that Gods mercy considered as the
internal cause moving God to justify us, may thus be said to be the proper, and
peculiar object on which our Faith relyeth for justification. But it does not
follow hereupon, that we were justified ab aeterno, from everlasting, because
Gods mercy is the cause of our justification: no more than that we are
sanctified and glorified eternally, because our sanctification and
glorification are wholly of Gods mercy:

Quest. 7. Whether any previous dispositions, preparations, or qualifications
be required of men in the Gospel, that they may be partakers of salvation by
Christ.
SECT. I. The Preparations that go before our Regeneration and Conversion.
THose that take upon them to be the only Preachers of Free Grace, do condemn
us, who teach that men must repent and believe, if they will be saved, for
requiring such qualifications and preparations in them. If the promise of
salvation, and justification, (says Mr. Hobson) had been tendered to us, as a
looking upon some qualification in us, and not bringing, in the bowels of it, a
power to produce all qualifications in us, it had not been free, but still a
Covenant of works; but it is free, therefore there is a great deal of comfort
to poor Souls.

And Mr. S. says, That Christ is offered to sinners as sinners, and that no
qualification is required of them, that they may be saved by him.

Reconcil. of God to man, page 40.
Mr. D. also tells us, That a man is to believe, that God is his Father in
Christ, without any precedent qualifications.

Thus do they teach: but we think it not good to speak thus confusedly of this
matter, knowing that many by these and the like speeches, which they meet with
in these men's writings, are led into most dangerous errors. To avoid therefore
mistaking, we say, that salvation may be taken either pro salute inchoata, or
consummata, that is, either for our salvation as it is begun in us, in our
regeneration, or in our conversion from sin to righteousness, and from
infidelity or incredulity, to Faith in Christ; or else for our salvation, as it
shall be consummated and perfected in us in heaven. If we shall speak o
salvation in the former sense, we do not say, That Faith and Repentance are
precedent qualifications or previous qualifications, or previous dispositions
unto it; for then we should be said to be saved, before we are saved; or saved
and not saved, which is a manifest contradiction. For our salvation is begun in
our conversion to God by Repentance and Faith in Christ. It is no new light,
but the constant Doctrine formerly taught, as well as now, by all Orthodox
Protestants, that homo in primo puncto conversionis suae se habeat mere
passive, et obedientialiter, that is, that man in the first instant of his
conversion, is no actor, but a receiver of grace, wrought in him by the Spirit
of God; but in the next instant, actus agit, being thus acted, or wrought upon
by God, he also acts, or co-operateth, and works with God. And yet though
we do constantly teach thus, we do not reject all previous dispositions, or
preparations to saving grace, or to the very first beginning of our salvation
in our conversion to God, and to Christ. For the Law, Romans 3.21.
must ordinarily first be preached unto sinners, to prepare and make way for
the Gospel; For by the Law comes the knowledge of sin. As long as men are
ignorant thereof, they are ready to rely on themselves, and do not see that
they stand in any great need of Christ, as it is to be seen in our ignorant
people, who put the confidence of their salvation, not in Christ only, and in
his merits, but in their good prayers, and good serving of God, and good
meaning, boasting and bragging, that they serve God truly, and keep all his
commandments. Now our blessed Savior, offers not himself unto such
justitiaries, as such, or while they continue such: but rejects them, Matt.
9.13.
and tells them, that he came not to call the righteous, his meaning is,
those that justify themselves, and are righteous in their own conceits, but
sinners, that is, such as acknowledge themselves sinners, unto Repentance, and
consequently unto salvation. And in the same sense he tells us, Matt. 9.12.
that the whole have no need of the Physician, but they that are sick; hereby
giving us to understand, that as men slight the Physician, and will not send
for him, until they are afraid of sickness; so neither will any seek to him, or
rely upon him for salvation, until they feel their sins, which are the deadly
sicknesses and maladies of their souls. Such poor and such distressed sinners
therefore they are, whom Christ inviteth unto him, and promises to relieve
them, when he says, Matthew. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will ease you. And
Esaias 61.1, 2, 3. he tells us, that the Lord sent him to cure, and to save,
not all in general, or sinners as sinners, as Mr. S. speaks, but poor,
contrite, and broken hearted sinners; for so he says, The spirit of the Lord
is upon me, therefore he has anointed me, he has sent me to preach the
Gospel unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, and to comfort those that
mourn in Sion. All these sayings of our blessed Savior himself, do evince and
make it manifest, that there are some previous dispositions, necessary to the
receiving of Christ, even those which I have thus spoken of with some others.
Concerning which our own learned Divines, at the Synod at Dort, in their
Suffragium Collegiale do speak excellently. I Will therefore set down their words
at large, as they are delivered in two distinct Theses.

I. There are certain outward works ordinarily required of men, before they are
brought to the estate of Regeneration, or Conversion, which are wont sometimes
to be freely done by them, and sometimes freely omitted; as to go to the
Church, to hear the word preached, and others of the like sort. Romans 10.14.


It is manifest that such are required. How shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard. Now that these are in our own power, both reason tells
us, seeing every one has ability to move, or not to move from place to place;
and experience proves it, seeing we see that men in outward things, do either
do this or that, as they think good, or omit them both. They may sit still at
home therefore, when they should go to the Church, and they may stop their ears
when the Minister is preaching the Gospel. Mark 6.20 Acts 13.14.
Herod heard John willingly. The Jews refused to hear the Gospel. Psalm. 58.5.
The wicked do stop their ears like deaf aspes.

II. There are certain internal effects previous unto a man's Conversion, or
Regeneration, which by the power of Gods Word and Spirit, are excited in the
hearts of men, as yet not justified; such as the knowledge of Gods Will, the
sense of sin, the fear of punishment, thoughts about their deliverance, and
some hopes of pardon.

God by his grace is not wont to bring men to the state of justification,
wherein we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by a sudden
enthusiasm; but being first subdued, and prepared with many previous actions,
in the ministry of the word. This we may see in those who upon the hearing of
St. Peter's Sermon, feel the burden of sin, are afraid, do mourn, desire
deliverance, and conceive some hope of pardon; Acts 2.37.
all which may be gathered out of those words, When they had heard these
things, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and the other
Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? This is the very nature of the
thing required. For as in the natural generation of a man, there are many
previous dispositions, which go before the introduction of the form; so also in
the spiritual, by many antecedent actions of grace, do we come to our spiritual
maturity. This lastly, is apparent by the instruments, which God uses in
regenerating men: for he uses the ministry of men, and the instrument of the
word, 1 Cor. 4.15.
I have begotten you by the Gospel, But if God would immediately regenerate and
justify a wicked man, prepared hereunto with no sorrow, no desire, no hope of
pardon, there would be no need, neither of the ministry of men, nor of the
word preached, for the effecting thereof, neither need the Ministers to take
any care to divide the word aright, first by wounding the consciences of their
hearers, aptly and prudently with the terrors of the Law, and afterward by
raising rhem up with the Promises of the Gospel, and exhorting them to seek
Repentance and Faith of God, by prayers and tears. Thus far, those worthy
Divines.

SECT. II. The Preparations that are necessary to our future glorification, and
perfect salvation in Heaven.
THus I have showed what qualifications are necessary to the receiving of
saving grace, and consequently to the first beginning of our salvation by
Christ. Now if we shall speak of our salvation, as it shall be consummated, and
perfected in Heaven, it is most true, that we must also by Gods grace, and by
his Spirit be qualified, renewed and prepared for it, as our Savior himself
assures us in these words, Matthew. 5.20.
For I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Heb. 12.14.
Consonantly unto this the Apostle tells us, that without holiness no man
shall see the Lord, that is, in his kingdom, and to his comfort. For all
unclean persons shall be excluded out of the new Jerusalem, as St. John also
bears witness, 1 Cor. 6.9.
Revel. 21.27. Whereunto St. Paul also subscribeth, when he says, Know ye not
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Wherefore if
salvation be taken for our complete salvation in Heaven, so Sanctification,
Faith, Repentance, John 3.16.38. Luke 13.3. Rev. 19.7.
and good works go before it, although not as any meritorious causes thereof,
yet as preparations to it, as we are given to understand, when it is said, The
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready; and the
next words show how, not by any natural power or ability of her own, sed dono
Dei, but by Gods free gift or grace; for so it follows, and to her was
granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the
fine linen, is the righteousness of Saints. And that it is necessary for us
thus, (subsidio gratiae divinae) by the assistance of Gods grace, to prepare
our selves to meet Christ in his Kingdom of glory, both the parable of the five
wise Virgins, Matthew. 25.
that prepared their lamps to meet the bridegroom shows, and St. John also
confirms it, when he says, 1 John 3.3.
whosoever has this hope in him, that is, to see Christ Jesus in his glory,
and to be glorified with him, he purifieth himself as he is pure. These things
which I have thus alleged, do manifest and make it evident, that God
sanctifies, prepares, and makes his Elect fit for his Kingdom of Glory,
before he does admit, and receive them into it.

SECT. III. An Objection answered.
BUt against this Doctrine Mr. H. Mr. S. and the rest of them, do object and
say, That if such previous dispositions, qualifications, and preparations, do
go before our justification, and salvation, then our salvation shall not be of
grace, but of works,

It Is true indeed, if we did hold as the Papists do, that we by such works of
preparation, do merit our salvation, then it should be of works, and not of
grace: but we are far from this.

For first, we say, that God of his grace, by his Word, and Spirit does work
these preparations in us, and not we our selves, by any strength or power of
our own free will.



Quest 14.

SECT. IIII. More Objections answered.
A Good while after I had thus answered the former Objection, in a private
conference, which I had with ^ne, who denied all antecedent preparations to a
sinners ^onversion, he spoke unto me to this effect.

Let Christ be offered unto sinners,

Hereunto I replied, that no doubt many will be ready to come in unto Christ,
Assyria, 2 Kings 2.17.
when he had carried away the ten Tribes, brought from Babylon, and other
places to inhabit the Cities of Samaria, instead of the children of Israel. For
as those heathen people, when one of the Priests of the captivated Israelites,
was by the King of Assyria sent unto them to instruct them, how the God of
Israel was to be worshipped; are said after this to have borh worshipped the
Lord, and the gods of those Nations whence they came. So if the Gospel only be
preached, to men before they have been brought by the Law to see what miserable
sinners they are, they hearing, that Christ by his death has redeemed us from
hell, and purchased Heaven for us, may readily receive him for their Savior,
and profess his name: but so, that they will still retain the same ignorant
and proud conceit of their own good deeds, and good deserving as they did
before, For so we see many of our people that are ignorant of the Law, in words
to acknowledge Christ for their Savior, and yet if they be asked how they hope
to be saved, they will tell you, for their good prayers, and for their good
meaning, and good serving of God. And thus indeed all men naturally, are ready
to rely upon themselves until by the Law they come to see their sins, and the
great wrath that is hanging over their heads for them. Wherefore as the Law was
first given, and, after that man had transgressed it, Genesis 3.15.
the Gospel, or evangelical Promise of salvation by Christ, was made known unto
him: So the Law is first to be preached unto men, and set before them as a
looking-glass, that they may by comparing themselves with it, see their sins,
and see and perceive in what a woeful state and condition they are. And when
they are humbled and do renounce and deny themselves altogether, acknowledging
that if God should enter into judgment with them, they must needs be damned to
the everlasting torments of hell: now is the Gospel to be preached unto them,
and Jesus Christ and the merits of his grace are in their excellency and
greatest luster, to be set forth before them. For now when they are truly
humbled with the sight and sense of their sins, and of that woeful condition
wherein they are because of them, they will highly esteem of Jesus Christ, and
long, and thirst after him, and desirously lay hold on him, and renouncing all
other means of salvation, will rest themselves only on him. Yea, now, the more
miserable they see themselves to be, the more will they magnify the riches of
Gods mercy in their salvation by Christ, and the more ardently, and
affectionately will they love Christ, and study and strive, to be so much the
more thankful unto him for their salvation all their days. For, what is it
that enlarges the heart in thankfulness, but an hearty acknowledgment of the
greatness of the benefit, that is done us? As long therefore as a man is
ignorant of his sins, and of the danger that he is in by the means of them, he
can never acknowledge how greatly he is indebted and beholding unto Christ, for
his redemption and salvation, and therefore he can never truly love him, as he
ought, nor be truly thankful unto him. You see then how necessary it is, that
the Law should be taught, as well as the Gospel.

Now, whereas it was objected unto me,

To this I answered, timoratas conscientias, tender and trembling consciences,
which are so cast down with the sight and sense of their sins, that it is high
time to pour the oil of joy, and the balm of the Gospel into their contrite
and broken hearts, such undiscreet preaching of the Law, cannot but be a great
means to weaken Faith, where it is wrought already, and to hinder others from
believing, who by the comfortable Promises of the Gospel, might be encouraged
to lay hold of Christ by Faith, and to cast themselves confidently on him for
their salvation. But though this be so, yet the preaching of the Law, is as
necessary to humble those that see not their sins, and the danger of them, but
live securely in them; that so despairing of salvation in themselves, they may
seek it by Christ only.

Again, after that men do deny themselves, and their own works altogether, and
rely only on Christ for salvation, although the Law is not to be pressed on
them, as it is a Covenant of works, nor preached in the full latitude thereof;
yet that they may not turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, (as St. Jude
speaks) but carry themselves so, that they may glorify the name of God, and
not cause it to be blasphemed, it shall be necessary for them, to set the Law
before them, as the Rule of their actions, or as a directory, according
whereunto they are to frame, and conform their life and conversation. In this
regard the moral Law (for of that only I speak) is not abrogated, but
subordinated unto the Gospel, yea, and after a sort incorporated into it. For
all the duties of the moral Law, may be reduced to these three heads, 1. Piety
toward God. 2. Justice or Righteousness toward a man's neighbor. And thirdly,
Sobriety, or temperance in ordering of himself. Now all these the Gospel
prescribes and requires, as well as the Law. ^.2.11.12
For as St. Paul says, the grace of God which brings salvation, has
appeared to all men, (to wit, in the preaching of the Gospel, not of the Law)
teaching that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godlily in this present world. Thus both the Law, and the
Gospel do bind us to the practice of all moral duties. Whereupon it is that St.
Paul says, that he did herein exercise himself, Acts 24.16.
to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man.

But I know that some of those with whom I now deal, will confess, that such
duties are taught in the Gospel, but that we are not bound to them by the Law,
it being wholly abrogated.

Paul has told us, We are not under the Law, but under Grace. But otherwise
the moral Law has not lost its power, nor its authority, to bind us to to our
duties, that we owe to God and man. For in this regard, St. Paul alleges the
authority of the Law, to prove that children ought to honor their Parents,
Ephesians. 6.2. and that Christians ought by love to serve one another, For (says
he) all the Law is fulfilled in one word, Gal. 5.13.14.
even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And by alike Argument
from the authority of the Law, he proves, that we ought to love one another.
Romans 13.8, 9
Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loves another has
fulfilled the Law. For this, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not
kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not
covet. And if there be be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in
this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Jam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11.
St. James also teaches, that believers are bound to the obedience of the Law,
when he says, If you fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well. But if ye have respect to
persons, ye commit sin, and are If believers be not bound to the obedience of
the Law, they cannot thereby be convicted, as transgressors though they fail
never so much in the duties that are therein required.
convinced of the Law as transgressors, etc. Now let any reasonable man judge,
whether the Apostles of Christ, would thus have alleged the Law to stir up
believers to mutual love, and the offices thereof, if the moral Law were
altogether abrogated, and had no authority to bind us to the obedience of it,
no more than the ceremonial? If any one should tell Christians, that they are
bound to be circumci^ed, or to abstain from the eating of Swines flesh, because
the Ceremonial Law forbids the eating of Swines flesh, and commands every
male-child to be Circumcised the eighth day; every one would laugh at such
reasoning as this, because the Ceremonial Law is abrogated, and is of no force
to bind us to the obedience of it. Now thus ridiculous would these men make
both St. Paul and St. James to be, in pressing us to love one another by that
precept of the moral Law, which says, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, if the moral Law be of no authority now, to bind believers to obedience,
but altogether abrogated, as is the Ceremonial. But far be it, that any
Christian should thus blasphemously slight, or extenuate the force of the
Apostles Argument. It stands us upon therefore, all of us to say, and to
acknowledge every one, 1 Cor. 9.21.
for himself, as St. Paul does, That he is not without Law to God, but under
the Law to Christ, that is, as it is Regula vitae et morum, the Rule of our
life and of our actions. In this respect St. Paul said of himself, That he did
with his mind serve the Law of God, Romans 7.25. acknowledging that he was
subject unto the direction and commanding power and authority of it. And does
not St. Paul also say, That the Woman that has an husband, is bound by the Law
to her husband as long as he lives, Romans 7.2. The Law therefore is not
abrogated as it is the rule of righteousness, whereby our actions are to be
regulated; but we are thus still bound unto the obedience of it.

SECT. V. Other Objections answered, whereby Mr. S. endeavors to prove, that
sinners as sinners are called to believe in Christ, without any precedent
Qualifications, or Preparations. These for the avoiding of tediousness, I do
divide into several ranks.
Object. 1. That Faith is not the only work of the Gospel.
FIrst he objecteth thus, Faith is the only work of the Gospel. This is the
work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. John 6.29. And this is
his commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1
John 3.23. Whence his Conclusion seems to be, therefore no Preparations, nor
any thing else is required of us, but Faith only.

For answer hereunto, I say, Faith is the work of God, and another thing, that
it is the only work of God, or of the Gospel, as Mr. S. avoucheth. For when our
Savior says, this is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has
sent, his meaning is, (as St. John in the latter place alleged by him,
expresses it) that Faith in Jesus Christ, is a work commanded and required of
us by God. Now so is repentance also, for as St. Paul says, Acts 17.30; Now,
that is, in these days of grace, the Lord commands all men every where, to
wit, to whom the Gospel is preached, to repent. The Lord also in the Gospel
commands good works, as necessary effects and fruits both of Faith and
Repentance. For Faith works by love, Gal. 5.6. And hereupon the Apostle
says, Tit. 3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to
maintain good works, these things are good and profitable unto men. And
afterward, ver. 14. he lays down this precept, Let ours also, that is
believers, learn to maintain good works, for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful.

By these places it appears, that there are other works commanded of God in
the Gospel, beside Faith, and that as Faith has its necessary uses, so have
they also theirs. It does not follow therefore, because Faith is called the
work of God, nor because it is said, this is his Commandment, that we believe
in his Son Jesus Christ, that it is the only work of the Gospel, as Mr. S.
infers; for St. John even in the place which he alleges, speaks the same
of charity, and says, 1 John 3.23
This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment.

Again, Faith is also called the work of God, not as if and receive Christ the
bread of life, that we may live eternally by him. Christ in that chapter,
calls himself the living bread which came down from Heaven: 1 John 3.23.
and says, that if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, Whereas
then our Savior said unto the Jews, this is the work of God, that ye believe
in him whom he has sent, we may very well conceive his meaning to be, that it
is Faith only, and no other work whereby we do receive Christ,

Lastly, It may also be said, that Faith is by our Savior called the work of
God, (...), seu per modum eminentiae, by way of excellency and eminency,
because it does though not formally, yet virtually contain all other good works
in it. Calv. in locum.
For, as Calvin says, Faith excludes not either charity, or any other good
work, seeing it contains them all in it. For Faith is called the only work of
God, because we possessing Christ by it, are made the Sons of God, that he may
govern us by his Spirit. Because therefore Christ does not separate Faith from
its fruits, non mirum est, si in ea constituat proram (ut loquuntur) et puppim,
it is no marvel if he do include all in it. By this that has been said, it
appears evidently, that although faith in Christ be the only work of God,
which he requires of us to our justification; yet it is not the only work of
God absolutely, as if he required nothing else but Faith of us, or as if he
commanded us to practice none other good works in our life and conversation:
though otherwise in some sense, or in some respect and to some purpose (as has
been before showed) it may be said to be the only work of God.

Before I do proceed unto Mr. S. his second Objection, I have thought good to
demolish those other fortifications, which he has raised, and reared up to
uphold his former assertion, that Faith is the only work of the Gospel.

First, He argues thus, Salvation is not a business of our working and doing,
it was done by Christ with the Father. All our work is no work of salvation,
but in salvation. We here receive all, not by doing any thing that we may
receive more: but doing, because we receive so much, because we do not that we
may be saved. And yet we are to do as much as if we were to be saved by what we
do; because we should do as much for what is done already for us, and to our
hands, as if we were to receive it for what we did our selves.

That I may examine these things severally,

1. Whereas he says, Salvation is not a business of our

Hereunto I answer, That Christ only saves us, per modum meriti, by his merits
purchasing our salvation.

Secondly, He also only saves us, tanquam author salutis as the author or
principal efficient cause of our salvation, by his Spirit regenerating us, and
by his power delivering us from the servitude of sin and Satan. There is
nothing therefore for us to do by way of merit, neither can we do any thing,
that may any way conduce to our salvation virtute propria nostra, by our own
power, or by our own strength. Notwithstanding there are many things for us to
do by the grace of God, before we shall perfectly be saved, even all those good
works that God requires of us, which are as it were the way to Heaven. Ephesians.
2.10.
For as St. Paul says, We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them. In this
regard we are not to be idle, or to do nothing; but as we are commanded, we are
to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, that is, Phil. 2.12.
we are to use the means, which God has appointed, that we may come to Heaven,
and take possession of that salvation, which Christ has purchased for us. In
which regard St. Peter also counseled his hearers, Acts 2.40.
to save themselves from that untoward generation of the incredulous Jews
amongst whom they lived, to wit, by departing from their infidelity and evil
works. 1 Timothy 4.18
And St. Paul exhorts Timothy, to attend unto himself, and to doctrine, and
to continue therein, telling him, that in so doing, he should both save
himself, (by the faithful discharge of his duty) and those that did hear him,
by converting them to faith in Christ and leading them in the right way to

But says Mr. S. All our work is no work Of salvation, but In salvation.

But I answer him, It is both: for the work of a Christian, is to work out his
salvation in that sense and in that manner, as he is commanded by St. Paul (as
I have already sufficiently showed). And it is a work also In salvation,
because it is performed and done by those who are in statu salutis in the state
of salvation, or whose salvation is already begun in their Regeneration and
Sanctification.

But says he, We here receive all, not by doing any thing that we may receive
more: but doing because we receive so much, because we do not that we may be
saved.

What, Mr. S.! Do we here receive all? that is, if you speak consonantly to
your self, all our whole salvation? I had thought, that we had received only
the Romans 8.23.
first fruits of the Spirit, as 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13.14.
an earnest, or a seal of our salvation, to be perfected in Heaven as St. Paul
teaches, and that we are in regard theteof only saved in Romans 8.24
hope, and do here wait for Romans 8.23, 24.
the accomplishment of our adoption, the redemption full and final of our body.
How then can you say, that We are not to do any thing, that we may receive
more? more then we have, and are actually possessed of already? But say you, We
are not to do that we may be saved. Is it so indeed? Are we to do nothing that
we may be saved? This is new light, or rather a new delusion of the Devil. For
when those Jews that were pricked in their hearts with sorrow and remorse at
the hearing of St. Peter's Sermon, Acts 2. said unto him, and to the rest of
the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we do? Peter answered them not, Ye
need to do nothing, Christ has done all for you: but Repent, Acts 2.37.
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission
of sins. Thus St. Peter teaches, that there is something to be done of us, for
the obtaining of the forgiveness of our sins, Acts 16.30.
and consequently of salvation by Christ. And in like manner when the Jailer
came trembling to Paul and Silas, and said unto them, Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? St. Paul did not check him for this question of his he told him not
that it savoured of gross ignorance, for him to ask what he was to do that he
might be saved? but answered him and said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thou shall be saved, and thy house. Both these Apostles, do inform us, that
there is something to be done of us, that we may be saved, that is, that we
must repent, and believe in Christ, and be fruitful in all good works, which
are inseparable effects of Faith and Repentance. Whereupon St. Paul exhorts
us, not to be weary of well doing, Gal. 6.9.
and to encourage us hereunto, he tells us, that in due time we shall reap if
we faint not. There is something then to be done or us, (contrary to Mr. S. his
assertion) that we may receive more then we have already. For (as we are here
by the Apostle given to understand) this present life of ours, is but the seed
time, wherein we are to sow the seeds of virtue and good works, and hereafter
at Christ's appearing, the harvest comes, when we shall reap a crop of glory.
This is the expectation of all true believers, for as St. Paul says, 1 Cor.
15.19
had we hope in Christ only in this life, we were of all men the most miserable,

Lastly, Whereas he says, We are to do as much, as if we were to be saved by
what we do; because we should do as much for what is done already for us, and
to our hands, as if we were to receive it for what we did our selves.

Hereunto I answer, That seeing Gods glory is to be preferred before our own
salvation, therefore we ought both to desire, and to endeavor, were it
possible, to do not as much, but more for what is done for us already, as if we
were to be saved by what we do our selves. But otherwise, I must tell him, that
if we would obtain our salvation for our own works, then we must look to it,
that they be pure and perfect, and that we do all that the Law requires,
without failing in any thing. But he that shall challenge such perfection to
himself, is to be ranked amongst proud Pharisees, and deserves not the name of
an humble, and lowly hearted Christian. For a farewell therefore to this first
reason of his, I would know how Faith can be the only work of the Gospel, if
the Gospel do teach us to do as much in way of thankfulness to God for our
redemption, and salvation, as if we were to redeem, and save our selves.

Believe and thou shall be saved, Romans 10.10.

Paul speaks of, will not suffer a believer to be idle, or unfruitful, but,
as he himself tells us, Gal. 5.6. 1 Cor. 15.58
it works by love; yea it stirs up believers, always to abound in the
work of the Lord. Mt. S. his Faith therefore, if it be without works, and do
set all upon Christ's score, as if he had repented for us, and done all for us,
that we our selves should do, is no better, as St. James tells us, Jam. 2.17.
then a dead Faith.



Mark 1.15. The Faith therefore that is not founded on the Promises of the
Gospel, but a man's own fancy (as is the Faith which Mr. S. requires) is not a
true, but a false Faith.



How Christ by his Passion has wrought the great work of our salvation, I have
already showed. But it follows not hereupon, that there is nothing to be done
by us in a lower way for we must walk in that narrow way of which our Savior
speaks, Matthew. 7.14. Matt. 7.14.
that leads unto life, or else we shall never come to Heaven, nor have any
part in that salvation, which is there purchased, and prepared by Christ for
his Saints. It Is therefore not only a false, but a most impious, and most
dangerous assertion to say, as here Mr. S. does, That there needs no more on
our sides, to work or warrant salvation to us; but to be persuaded that Jesus
Christ died for us. If this were so, then indeed salvation would be a short
work. For not only all those must needs be saved, who are persuaded that Christ
died for all men absolutely, and therefore for themselves in particular, but
also the most loose, and licentious Libertines, and carnal Gospellers that are;
for even those, if not all, yet many of them do persuade themselves, that
Christ died for them, as well as for any other: but this Faith of theirs, is
nothing else, but most deadly and damnable presumption, as is showed in the 15.
Question.

Lastly, Whereas he objecteth, and says, They only Romans 1.17. Acts 13.39. And
that we are justified by grace, not of works. Romans 3.2^.

This we willingly grant, but tell him that there is more required to our
salvation, than to our justification. For as Bernard says excellently well,
Bona operae, De gratiae et libero arbitrio.
sunt occultae praedestinationis indicia, futurae glorificationis praesagia,
via regni, non causa regnandi. Good works are tokens of our predestination,
that otherwise lies hidden from us, fore-tokens of our future glorification,
the way to the Kingdom, but not the cause of the crown. Whosoever therefore
lives here idly, and works not, nor imployeth the talent, which he has
received of his heavenly Lord and Master, shall never come to Heaven; Matthew.
25.30.
but be cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Again whereas he says, They only are justified who believe. We acknowledge
this true, but tell him, that no man believes until he sees his own misery by
sin, and in what great need he stands of Christ, as has been already showed.
Albeit then we are justified by Faith only, yet this Faith is not ordinarily to
be had, without some precedent qualifications, such as are the hearing of the
word, denial of a man's own self, and of his righteousness, and a belief of
persuasion, that salvation is to be had by Christ only.

Object. 2. Gods love is not offered to all equally and indifferently, or to
all absolutely.
God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ
died for us, Romans 5.8. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have eternal life.
John 3.16. And this offer, is an offer of Gods love wherewith he loved us from
everlasting.

So he: but to the contrary, I say, That Gods eternal love is not here offered
to all, as he would have it; there can no such thing be deduced and drawn from
either of these places: for in the former St. Paul shows, what manner of
persons believers were in themselves, when Christ out of his love died for
them, they were not righteous, but sinners; in the latter, our Savior himself
shows, what it was that moved God to give his Son to death for us; it was his
surpassing, and incomparable love, and nothing else.

Now, how Mr. S, will frame an Argument, either from the Apostles, or from our
Saviors words against preparations before Faith, I know not, unless it be
thus. God loved all equally, loved them to make them partakers of Christ, and
of salvation by him; therefore in preaching the Gospel, nothing is to be
required of any, but all are to believe, that they shall be saved by Christ,
whether they be penitent for sin, or rejoice and delight in sin; and whether
they purpose, and resolve to leave sin, or to live in sin. Now I grant indeed,
That this Conclusion were to be admitted, if the antecedent whence it is
deduced were true, that is, if God did love all absolutely unto their eternal
salvation, and had no purpose to work any change or alteration in them, while
they live here. But this is palpably false, for whom God loves eternally, and
before all time, they receive in time through the gracious operation of his
Spiit, the necessary effects of this his love, that is contrition and
compunction of heart for sin, Faith in Christ for the forgiveness of sin,
conversion to God from all sin, and all other saving graces, to the
accomplishment of their their salvation. It Is false therefore, that sinners are
only to believe, that God loves them, and that they are reconciled unto him by
Christ's death, as Mr. D. and Mr. S. do teach, and that nothing else, but such a
bare Faith is to be required of them, that they may thereby know, and be
assured, that they are justified, and partakers of Christ. For God loves not
all unto salvation; but the Elect only, whom in time he brings by degrees to
the possession of that salvation, by preparing them for it in that manner, as
the Gospel teaches, and lets none lie still rotting in their sins, without
any true Faith, or Repentance, but only wicked reprobates, whom he suffers to
walk in the broad way, that leads unto destruction.

Object. 3. It exalts Grace more to receive broken hearted than
He farther urges, It exalts Grace more to receive a sinner, who has no
money, no price, no righteousness.

His meaning is, That it makes more to the glory of Gods grace, that he
receive sinners as sinners, without any sorrow for, or sense and feeling of
their sins, rather than humbled and brokenhearted sinners, that see and
perceive how miserable they are in themselves, and in what great need they do
stand of a Savior.

But I answer him, That makes most to the magnifying and exalting of Gods
grace, which he himself requires, and prescribes; and not which sinful men in
their carnal, and fleshly wisdom do fancy and like best, or which they judge to
be most for the setting forth of his grace. Now it is evident, that God
offers Christ to none, but to those that acknowledge their sins, and feel the
burden of them. Matthew. 11.5.28. Isa. 61.1, 2. Yea, even that very place which
Mr. S. alleges, proves against him, that some preparations go before Faith
in Christ, to wit, a thirsting after him, and his graces, which cannot be
unless a man feel his misery by sin, and see in what need he stands of
Christ; even as a man never thirsts corporally, until he is pained with heat,
and dryness, and feels in what need he stands of drink. These very words
therefore of the prophet Isay, Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and
milk without money and without price, are produced by him against himself. For
all are not here invited to come to Christ, and to be made partakers of his
graces, not sinners as sinners, as he will have it, that is sinners continuing
in their sins, without any purpose to leave them, yea not so much as
acknowledging their sins, and their misery by means of them: but first, such
sinners, who feeling their great need of Christ, do thirst after him; and
secondly, such as have no money, and therefore do offer no price for him; that
is, who do acknowledge that they have no merits of their own, nor can do any
thing to purchase, or procure Gods favor. Having thus wrested his weapon out
of his hands, and turned it against himself. I must now tell him, that whereas
he says, That it exalts grace more, to receive a sinner that has no money,
no price, no righteousness, that is, in his sense, all sorts of sinners,
though they do not so much as feel nor acknowledge their sins; rather then
those, that being cast down with the sight and sense of their sins, do
acknowledge they have no money, no price, nor no righhteousnesse of their own;
I must (I say) tell him, that he is much deceived in this; for first, it
stands not with Gods justice, and his hatred of sin, to pardon sinners
without working any change in them at all; but suffering them to continue, and
remain still in their sins. The holy Prophet David disclaimeth this, and
speaks against him when he says, Psalm. 5.4. Thou art not a God that has
pleasure in wickedness neither shall evil dwell with thee. The foolish shall
not stand in thy sight, thou hate all workers of iniquity.

Again, I say further, Gods grace is most exalted when sinners do most
acknowledge the riches of his grace, and are most thankful to him for it. Now
so are they, who do most feel the burden of their sins, and do most apprehend
their spiritual misery, as it is to be seen in the penitent woman, Luke 7. Luke
7.47.
the sight and sense of whose many and great sins made her greatly to love
Christ. But on the contrary, if God should pardon those that feel not their
sins, but are whole in their own conceit, they would either with the Pharisees,
ascribe their salvation more to their own works, then to Gods grace, or turn
the grace of God into lasciviousness, and wax wanton against Christ, as
Libertines and carnal Gospellers do, who rely so much on the grace of God, that
they have no care to live holily and righteously, to the glory of Gods grace,
but by their wicked works and deeds of darkness, do cause the name of God to
be blasphemed. Romans 2.24. 1 Timothy 6.1.

Object. 4. The Type of the brazen Serpent teaches us, that we must feel our
sins, and be pained with them, before
Another of Mr. S. his Objections in this, It Is right lifting up of Jesus
Christ upon the Cross, as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, not
for the healed to look upon,

But whom does he here reason against, not the ancient and Orthodox Protestant,
for the preparation which they require, to a sinners conversion, and to his
Faith in Christ, is that he do feel the spiritual sicknesses, and diseases of
his soul. Now shall we say, as he does, that this is to be healed. I trow, as
long as one feels himself sick, he is not healed. But I take it, his meaning
is, though by his words he does not so well express it, That the Israelites
that were stung with fiery Serpents, were to do nothing for the recovery of
their health, but to look up unto the brazen Serpent; therefore we also are
only by Faith to look up unto Christ, and to believe in him, that we may be
saved, without any other preparations. Now unto this Objection of his, I do
answer, First, that it is not to be expected, that any one Type should
absolutely shadow out all things, that were either to be done by Christ, or
that are necessarily to be performed by those that shall be saved by him.

This Type of the brazen Serpent does excellently prefigure all these things;

First, Our spiritual misery by sin, For as the Israelites

Secondly, As the brazen Serpent, exalted by Moses,

Thirdly, As the only means whereby the Israelites

Lastly, As the wounded Israelites that looked up unto shall not perish, but
have eternal life. All these things are excellently shaddowed, and set forth
(...) our eyes, in this most illustrious Type of (...): but otherwise it
typifieth not the mystery of (...) ^^viours incarnation by the immediate power
of the holy Ghost, nor the union of his two natures, nor his burial,
resurrection from the grave, ascension into Heaven, sitting at the right hand
of God, and coming thence to judge the world: yet all these are principal
Articles of our Christian Faith, and necessarily to be believed of us, as well
as our Saviors Passion upon the Cross, whereby he paid the price of our
redemption. We read not, neither is any mention made of the Israelites
thankfulness to God, when they were cured of their deadly wounds, which the
fiery serpents gave t em: but on the contrary, that they after this rebelled
against God: yet I presume it will not be denied by any, that we ought to be
thankful to God, for our redemption and salvation by Christ. But to let this
pass, I say further, that this type of the brazen Serpent, teaches us that we
must feel our sins, and be afflicted in mind, and pained with remorse of
conscience for them, before we can come to Christ, and by Faith lay hold of him
to our salvation; for it was the scalding and fiery venom, which those
Serpents infused into the bodies of such as were wounded by them, that hastened
them unto the brazen Serpent, which Moses had exalted; and that made them to
look up unto it, for the obtaining of help and health. If any had been
insensibly bitten by one of those Serpents, so that he had felt no smart, nor
no pain at all, he would have taken himself to have been well, and would never
have had any recourse to the brazen Serpent at all. And even in like sort, it
is the sense, and feeling of sin, and of the burden and misery of it, that
drives men unto Christ, and makes them to rely on him for salvation; for
such, as feel not their sins, do sleep securely in them, without any fear, and
do not perceive, that they stand in any great need of Christ* but do rest and
rely on themselves much more then they do on him. This Type therefore here
alleged, or alluded unto by Mr. S. m^^^^ for us, and against him. Such a
felicity he has to (...) that do confute his own Opinions, and (...).

Object. 5.




First, It presupposes, that they which are qualified with such previous
dispositions as we teach, do come unto Christ.

Secondly, That at that time in regard of these their preparations, they are no
foul sinners, nor guilty of damnation.

And thirdly, That they do therefore merit grace, and must necessarily be
accepted. All which are false suppositions, and not acknowledged by us, as has
been sufficiciently showed before.

Object. 6.
Moreover, he tells us, That it is most agreeable to The whole have no need
of the Physician, but the sick. Matthew. 9.12.13.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners unto Repentance.

To this Objection of his, I answer, Paul tells us, there are none righteous
no not one. Romans 3.19.
It were such justitiaries as the Scribes and Pharisees, that falsely supposed
themselves to be righteous, whom our Savior says, that he came not to call:
and yet such as these, Mr. S. will have to be the fittest of all other for
Christ, and for his grace. Now in opposition unto these hypocritical righteous
ones, we are, by sinners, whom Christ professes that he came to call, to
understand contrite and broken hearted sinners, that being terrified with the
judgments of the Law, do acknowledge, that they stand in great need of Christ
the heavenly Physician, and of every drop his blood, which he shed for them.
But of this I have spoken enough before.

Object. 7.
He goes on and says, All that ever received Christ, Corinthians, Ephesians,
Colossians, received him in a sinful condition, when they were unwashen,
darkness, dead in sins, enemies in their minds by wicked works.



Object. 8.


by sin, are they to whom Christ is offered in the Gospel, and that do come
unto him.

SECT. 6. Two Objections of Mr. D. answered.
THere are two Objections of Master D. which I formerly passed over at my first
reading of his Book, whereunto I have thought good now to return an answer.
First, Reconcil. of God to man, page 16.
Let us hear the Lord speaking of his own work upon the Creature, Isa. 57.18.
He went on frowardly in the way of his heart; I have seen his ways, and will
heal him; I will lead him also and restore comforts to him and to his
mourners. Whom will thou heal? O Lord, Whom will thou restore? Even him whose
ways I have seen. What are those ways? Even frowardness and perverseness. He
went on frowardly, in the way of his heart. See again Isa. 43.25. I, even I am
he, that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. Whose sins will the Lord blot out? Look we back unto the 22.
verse. Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, thou have been weary of me, O
Israel, Thou have made me to serve with thy sins. Thou have wearied me with
thine iniquities, verse 24. See, Thou have been weary of me, Yea thou have
wearied me, This is Jacobs qualification. This is Isreal's preparation. Then
follows, I even I am he, that blotteth out thy trangressions. As if the Lord
should say unto his people, as he speaks by the prophet Ezekiel. 36.22. Say unto
the house of Israel Thus says the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, O
house of Israel but for my holy names sake, which ye have profaned among the
heathen, whither ye went. See also Deuteronomy. 9.6. Isa. 48.9. alleged by him. And
then his conclusion is, This is all the qualification we bring unto God to win
his love and mercy.

etc. This is not Jacobs qualification, but a description of his perverse
disposition, being considered as he was in himself, to the magnifying of Gods
most rich mercy, and superabundant grace toward him in pardoning his sins. His
qualification precedent to his justification, was his humiliation, and
abenegation of himself, wrought in him by Gods Spirit, opening his eyes to see
his sins, and the great wrath that was due unto him for them. This was that
which through the gracious working of Gods Spirit, drew him unto Christ, the
promised redeemer of his people, when he was offered unto him, that he might be
saved through faith in him. But it was not this, nor any thing else that Jacob
did, or could do, that merited the pardon of his sins, or that moved and made
God to justify him: for we acknowledge that our justification is wholly of
grace, yea that this preparation is also of grace; yet not necessitating our
justification, as if it did always follow it. But of this enough has been said
before. Yet Mr. D, Dr. C, and others do so represent our doctrine, as if we
taught precedent qualifications to win Gods love, and to procure him to have
mercy upon us, and to forgive us our sins.

Reconcil. of God to man, page 31.
is this, John Frith whose Learning was by his adversary commended, whose
constancy and patience in his Martyrdom was admired, writes to this effect,
Thou may preach Hell and Damnation, and the rendering of a terrible account
to a severe Judge, seven years together, and yet not make one good Christian.
He that would make a good Christian, let the love of God be the first stone which
he lays for the foundation. preach nothing else but Hell and Damnation) not
convert one soul. For it are not the terrors of the law, but the glad tidings
of Salvation by Christ in the preaching of the Gospel, whereby the Spirit of
God works faith in us to our conversion and salvation, and stirs us up to
love and thankfulness toward God. Notwithstanding the terrors of the Law are
necessary, by way of preparation hereunto. For how can a man se of apprehend
the great love of God to him, in giving his Son to death for his Redemption? if
by the terrors of the law, he be not first made to see in what a woeful case
and condition he was by his sins, to wit, that he should have perished, and
been damned to unspeakable and unconceivable torments in Hell, if God out of
his surpassing love, pity, and compassion toward him, had not provided and
given him a Savior. Thus must we first be brought by the Law, and the
judgments and terrors thereof, to apprehend our own misery, before we can
acknowledge the depth of Gods mercy, and be inflamed with love toward him; and
stir up our selves unto thankfulness unto his Divine Majesty, for the great
and most gracious work of our redemption, and salvation by Christ. The
preaching then of Hell and damnation, and the rendering of a terrible account to
a severe Judge, is not the laying of the foundation neither of Faith, nor of
our justification and sanctification, whereby we are made good Christians; but
a digging deep, to remove the rubbish of self-confidence, and spiritual pride
and presumption; that so the foundation of our conversions, may be laid in the
Love of God, and of his comprehensible mercy toward us in Christ Jesus.

SECT. VII. Objections answered, and the truth in this Controversy cleared.
AS long as any colorable, specious, and plausible objections against the
truth remain unanswered, men who have been taken and deluded by them, will
hardly be brought to renounce their errors, no, not when the truth shall be
solidly taught, and confirmed from the alone ground of all Divine and
supernatural truth, the holy Scripture. Having therefore of late met with a
Book of very high esteem with many, entitled The exaltation of Christ in the
days of the Gospel, by T.C. and finding that the Author thereof does teach,
that men are not at all prepared for Christ, and Faith in him; by the preaching
of the Law, but by hearing of the Gospel only: I have thought good therefore
not to pass over in silence but to examine those things he delivers; and the
rather, because his reasons and allegations, do differ from those, which I have
before met with.

Exalt. of Christ. page 216. Edit. 3
First, he tells us, that though all are under the Law by nature; yet it is
the preaching of the Gospel that discovers it, that is, as he after explaineth
himself, that discovers unto them, that they are under the curse and
condemnation of the Law, See also before, page 112.
and so most miserable creatures. He teaches therefore that a man must first
in the preaching of the Gospel see Christ, and then by reflecting upon himself,
see his own misery, which otherwise is not to be seen, and discerned by the
Law. But in this he contradicts St. Paul, for he tells us that by the Law
comes the knowledge of sin. And he instanceth in himself, Romans 3.20. Romans 7.7.
and says, I had not known sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust,
except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet. Thus the Law shows us our
sins, yea and the punishment also, Deuteronomy. 27.26 Gal. 3.10,
that by them we have deserved when it says, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things, that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them. 2 Cor. 3.7.9
And hereupon it is that the Apostle calls it, the ministration of death, and
of condemnation. For as the Law at the promulgation and publishing thereof upon
Mount Sinai, was delivered with great terror; so it still of it self
terrifieth and astonisheth the consciences of sinners accusing them when they
do evil, as both St. Paul, Romans 2.15.
and every man's own experience teaches.

But let us take notice of the Arguments of Mr. C. whereby he endeavors to
make good that which he has taught.

First, he tells us, That a man never savingly sees his evil condition
without Christ. And again, That it is the Spirit of God that discovers sin
unto him. Now the preaching of the Law brings not this Spirit, but the
hearing of Faith, as witnesses St. Paul, Gal. 3.2.

But here first, I would know of him, why he says, John 17.3. Isa. 53.11. For
a man to know his evil condition by sin, is to know that damnation is due unto
him for his sin. Now many a man has attained to this knowledge; who was never
saved. Salvation therefore does not at all consist in this, but in a man's
flying unto Christ, and laying hold of him, when he sees how miserable his
condition is become through sin. Now whereas he alleges the Apostles words,
Gal. 3.2. to prove, that a man is not brought by the preaching of the Law, but
of Faith, to be made partaker of the Spirit, without which he cannot see his
miserable condition by sin.

I answer him, That the Apostle speaks there, partly of the miraculous gifts of
the Spirit, which were by God bestowed on none but those that had heard the
Gospel, and made profession of Faith, in Christ; and partly of the Spirit of
adoption, which also is peculiar to believers. Now thus indeed we do not
receive the Spirit by the preaching of the Law: but otherwise, Romans 8.15.
as the same Apostle gives us elsewhere to understand, we did by the Law
receive the Spirit of bondage to fear. His meaning is, that the Spirit of God,
which we received from him, illightning our minds with the true knowledge and
understanding of the Law, did fill our hearts with fears and terrors, and so
did put us as it were, in a state of bondage, at, or before our conversion unto
Faith in Christ. We have need therefore of the illumination of the Spirit, that
we may thoroughly understand the Law. For as long as men are left to themselves
their very knowledge of the Law, is but shallow and superficial, as it to be
seen in the Pharisees, and in all those, who are only civilly honest, which
sort of men are either not at all, or but a little troubled in their souls and
consciences with the fear of their sins or of hell and damnation.

Whereas then Mr. C. says, The Apostle was once alive without the Law, that
is, without the spiritual understanding of the Law, but when the Commandment
came sin revived, and he died, that is, when Christ had opened his eyes to see
into the spirit of the Law, (the spiritual sense thereof I trow he means). In
all this I do agree with him: but not in that which follows, when he adds,
That we come thus to know the spiritual understanding of the Law, only by the
preaching of the Gospel. For I have already proved the contrary, to wit, that
when the Law is preached, men come to understand it by the illumination of the
Spirit, opening their minds to see the true meaning of the several precepts
thereof.

Paul's conversion Acts 9, to prove that men come to know themselves, that is,
their misery by sin, by the preaching of Christ, and that the preaching of the
Law, does not prepare us for Jesus, that we may believe in him. For the
ministry by which Paul came to see himself, and to believe, was the voice of
Christ, I am Jesus of Nazareth.

Whereunto I answer, that Paul's conversion, was miraculous and extraordinary;
it cannot therefore be concluded from thence, that men are ordinarily brought
to Faith in Christ, or enlightened to see their miserable estate by sin, without
the preaching of the Law.

But he goes on forward, and says, Saul Acts 9. thought himself a very holy,
and happy man till he met Christ in the way. And bids us note, that Christ
taught him in the first place, the knowledge of himself, Who art thou Lord?
(says Saul) I am Jesus of Nazareth (says Christ) whom thou persecutest.
Christ did not tell him of his sin: O, thou art an accursed persecuting
creature, Do ask who I am? Thou had more need know thy self, etc. No, no,
he discovers Himself unto him. And this I know was Gods usual dealing in the
Gospel, those whom he taught, he taught them first to know Christ, and this
Christ our Prophet must teach thee if ever thou be taught.

But I would know, whether the Lord did not take another course with Adam, when
he was fallen? Sure I am, he first brought him to the sight and sense of his
sin and misery, by reproving him for the transgression of his Law, before he
comforted him, and raised him up with that Evangelical promise, The seed of the
woman shall break the head of the serpent. And our blessed Savior lays it
down for a general rule and direction, Luke 24.47. That repentance and
remission of sins must be preached in his name amongst all nations. First,
repentance, which cannot be without the knowledge of sin, and then remission of
sins, by Faith in Christ. Now as for the example of Saul's conversion, which Mr.
C. so much, and so often urges, it is not true which he says, as it were
triumphantly; "Christ did not tell him of his sin, O, thou art an accursed
persecuting creature, etc. For did he not plainly speak unto him and say, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? And again, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. It
is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. It Is evident, that he did as
manifestly, and as soon, if not before, tell him of his sin in persecuting him,
as he told him, that he was Jesus. We may conclude therefore from hence, that a
man must be brought to know himself, and his miserable estate and condition by
sin, either at the same time, or before that Christ is preached and offered
unto him. But of this more hereafter, only I will say this now, that Paul was
terrified and cast down indeed, by those terrible words of Christ, and by
beholding his glorious Majesty: but for the perfecting of his conversion,
Christ sent him to Ananias, by whom he was to be taught, and instructed what he
was to do. By him therefore he was taught all things necessary unto his
salvation, and so was ^^mforted, and raised up again by Faith in Christ from
his former terrors, and fears. I say therefore, as Mr. C. does, It is Christ
in the preaching of the Gospel, that is glad tidings for sinners, remission of
sins for believers; and this Gospel, this glad tidings cannot rightly be held
forth unto the world, but withal men must be showed that they are sinners, and
the emptiness of duties, and of all other foundations must be discovered, and
the danger of not accepting Christ. But I demand, whether this is not to be
done, by showing unto men their sins by the Law, and their disability to do any
thing of themselves, that is pleasing unto God, through the corruption that is
in them by the fall of Adam. For this impotency of doing good, and the great
wrath that is due unto us for our sins, the Law re ealeth and makes known unto
us; which when a sinner once apprehends, then the Gospel is to be preached,
and he is to be exhorted to lay hold of Jesus Christ by Faith,

But let us examine another of Mr. C's. Arguments, and see whether there be any
more force in that, Beloved says he, God has appointed the Spirit to be the
means in the preaching of the Gospel, to convince the world of sin. Joh. 16.9.
It is the Spirit of God that convinces the world of sin, and that in the
preaching of the Gospel.

But hereunto I answer, that our Savior says not, When the Comforter is
come, he will reprove the world of sin, because they believe not in me. Now,
what shall we say, that none believed in Christ before this coming of the
Spirit, and reproving of the world of unbelief? Verily no, for the Apostles
with many other did before this believe in him. For our Savior speaks here of
the coming of the Spirit in the miraculous gifts thereof, as he came upon the
Apostles, and other believers in the day of Pentecost, and afterward, until
those gifts ceased in the Church, when the Gospel had been by them sufficiently
confirmed. Besides, the world of which our Savior there speaks, though it
was convinced of sin by the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, yet it never
believed: for our Savior calls it the world, that believed not in him.

Lastly, If we should say, they were unbelievers and worldlings before, but
afterward believed, when they saw the miraculous gifts that were by Christ
poured down and bestowed on his Apostles and others, that reproved their
infidelity. yet it cannot hence be inferred, that all in all succeeding ages,
are thus to be converted and brought unto Faith in Christ. But of this more
hereafter, when I shall examine that which he alleges out of Acts 2.37;

In the next place, he reasons thus, All preparations and qualifications
whatsoever, which are not of Faith,

Here I would wish him first of all to consider, that by reasoning thus, he
strikes himself, as well as us. For he will not deny thar the hearing of the
Gospel goes before Faith; Now, what shall we hereupon conclude, that none but
believers are to heat the Gospel? I trow not. For then there will be no hope of
any man's conversion from infidelity, or incredulity, to Faith in Christ. But
that I may show the weakness of his reasoning, First, I grant the major
Proposition, Sin cannot prepare for Christ. The knowledge of sin may, but not
that which is absolutely, and altogether sin, or wherein nothing is to be found
but sin; for sin in this sense, is opposite to all goodness.

Now, whereas he assumeth in the minor Proposition, and says, But all
qualifications before Faith, are sin. Here I distinguish of sin, and say, that
it is so, vel per se, vel per accidens, either in it self, and its own nature:
or accidentally, because being otherwise good, through the corruption and
unbelief of him that commits it, it becomes sinful and evil, as it
proceeds from him. Now of this latter sort, is the hearing of the word, both of
Law and Gospel, and all preparations wrought before Faith, that is to say,
legal terrors, confession of sin, humiliation, hope of pardon, and the like.
For these are not evil, but good in themselves, and evil only by accident:
therefore in regard of the good that is in them, they through Gods grace do
prepare and dispose us unto our conversion, and unto Faith in Christ. I do
wonder therefore, that Mr. C. should say as he does, not only that all
preparations and qualifications going before Faith are sin: but that the
preaching of such before Faith is sin. Indeed it cannot but be great and gross
sin, to preach and to stir men up to adultery, whoredom, rash swearing, lying,
or to any thing that is simply, and in it self sinful and evil: but otherwise,
I think, no wise man will say, that parents ought not to teach their children
to know God, and themselves, to praise God, and to perform all necessary
duties, both to God and man, until they shall give good proof that they do
believe in Christ.

There remains now only the last of Mr. C. Arguments, which I shall briefly
dispatch. Acts 2.37. from beholding of Christ, to behold themselves, and makes
them cry out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? etc.

For answer hereunto, I say, Acts 2. were, by the miraculous gifts of the Holy
Ghost bestowed on the Apostles, convinced that Jesus whom they preached, was
the Christ. And because they had consented unto, and conspired his death,
hearing themselves accused of this by St. Peter, they were pricked in their
hearts, with fear and sorrow, knowing partly by the Law, whereof they were not
ignorant, and partly by the Miracles which they saw, that they were guilty of a
most hanious murder. But now, that no such miracles and wonders are wrought,
what ordinary way is there to convince men of sin, and of their danger thereby,
but by the preac^ing of the Law? For by the Law comes the knowledge of sin.
Romans 3.20.

Having thus examined Mr. C. Arguments, and manifested the invalidity of them,
I will shut up this matter, with showing, contrary to his Assertion, that
Christ is not always first to be preached, and that this is not the only way,
to bring m^n not only to Faith in Christ, but also to the knowledge of
themselves, and of their sins; and that therefore God never taught his people
otherwise. Unto this his Assertion, I do oppose that which is to be read in St.
Paul's Sermon unto the Athenians, Acts 17. wherein he begins, and preaches
the Law of nature unto them, and thereby convinces them of gross idolatry,
and then shows them the necessity of repentance, and preaches Christ unto
them. It is not true therefore that Christ is always first to be preached and
offered, and that men never come to see their sins, until they do believe in
Christ; but rather on the contrary, by seeing of their sins, they come to see
the necessity of Faith in Christ. We read Acts 2^. that Foelix the Governor of
the Jews under the Roman Emperor, sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the
Faith in Christ. And as he reasoned of righteousness and temperance, (which ar^
moral virtues, taught, and prescribed in the Law of nature) and of judgment to
come, Foelix (who was a most unrighteous and intemperate man) trembled.

Now, hence I infer, 1. That it cannot be concluded, that the Apostles did not
preach the moral Law, where it is said, that they preached Christ, or the Faith
in Christ.

2. That the knowledge of sin by the Law, is necessary to prepare men for Faith
in Christ. For, wherefore was it that Paul preached unto Foelix of
righteousness and temperance, but to bring him to the sight of his sins, in
which he lived contrary to those virtues, that so despairing of salvation in
himself, and being terrified with the judgment of God, he might be dri^en to
receive Christ by Faith, and to put the whole confidence of his salvation in
him, Yet, I do not deny, but that the children of God, after that Faith is
wrought in their hearts, do ordinarily come to a more full sight and
apprehension of their sins, that are contrary to moral equity and honesty: but
that is by a more perfect knowledge of the law whereby they see themselves guilty
of more sins against it, then they took notice of before, and of more impiety
in sinning against greater light: Even as the more they do grow in the
knowledge and undestanding of the Gospel the more they do see what sins they
are guilty of against the Gospel. Yea, and in general also, the more they do by
the Gospel see and apprehend Gods mercy toward them in Christ, the more
wretched sinners do they acknowledge themselves to have been.

The sum of all is this, Gods chi^dren are prepared unto Faith in Christ, not
always, (we say not so) nor only, by the preaching of the Law, and the terrors
thereof: but more immediately, and much more by the preaching of the Gospel, by
hearing whereof, they conceive some hope of pardon, and are thereby kept from
being swallowed up of desperation, and do desire and pray for the forgiveness
of their sins, and salvation by Christ, and do never cease meditating of the
gracious Promises of God in Christ, until at length Faith is by the Gospel, as
the proper instrument, or means thereof, wrought in their hear^s. For it is not
the Law, but the Gospel, that, as the Apostle says, is the power of God unto
salvation, Romans 1.16.
to every one that believes,

Again, it cannot be denied, but that men sometimes have been prepared unto
their conversion, and to Faith in Christ, by Gods Judgments, 2 Chro. 33.12, 13.
Luke 15.
wherewith he has visited them, and awakened their consciences, and by
meditating of the shortness, and uncertainty of their life here in this world,
and by other the like morives, and considerations. And it is manifest, that not
a few, but many have extraordinarily been prepared unto Faith in Christ, by
miracles, and strange works, Mark 16.20. John 11.45 and 20.31.
which have been wrought by God, for the confirmation of the Gospel.

Lastly, It is not to be denied, that God both can work Faith, yea, and that he
has extraordinarily, and most marvellously wrought it in some, without any
precedent qualifications, or preparations at all. To teach the contrary, is to
deny Gods power, Luke 1.44.
and to contradict the holy Scripture.

Quest. 8. Whether we are made the Sons of God, by Faith in Christ, or but
declared so to be?
Reconcil. of man to God. page 66. Gal. 3.20.
MR. D. his peremptory resolution is, We are not made the Sons of God by Faith;
for we were before reconciled unto him, and were his sons. And whereas S. Paul
says, ye are all the sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, he will have the
sense, and meaning hereof to be, That we are declared to be the sons of God by
Faith in Christ Jesus. But the Apostle says, you are; and not, are declared to
be the sons of God, though that be true also. He speaks therefore of the
essence of sonship, and not of the manifestation or appearance hereof, only.

Galathians that made profession of the Faith of Christ, the sons of God really?

Paul's words therefore must be understood per reduplicationem, to wit thus, you
are all the sons of God, that is, all of you who are the sons of God, are his
sons by Faith in Christ Jesus: Or else we are to say, that he speaks of them
according to the judgment of charity, when he says, ye are all the sons of
God; presuming them to be so; and then specifieth the means how they came to be
his sons, when he adds, by Faith in Christ Jesus.

But if they he will not admit of this Exposition, I would know of him, what it
is that makes a man to be a son? Is it not his parents begetting of him? Sure
I am that is fundamentum hujus relationis, the foundation of this relation. Now
St James tells us, That God has begotten us by the word of truth. Jam. 1.9.
1 Pet. 1.23.
St. Peter also says, that we are renati, born again, not of mortal seed, but
of immortal by the word of God. Whence it follows necessarily, that we are
not the sons of God, until we do hear his word, and are thereby converted to
the Faith and obedience of Christ.

But Mr. D. t^inketh to avoid and put off this also by saying, that the
Apostles do say, we are regenerated and born again by the word, because we are
declared so to be: and not, that we are in deed and in truth regenerated by the
word.

But this will not serve his turn: for Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of of God. Now, it is absurd to say, that a man is regenerated, while
he lives in infidelity, or incredulity, and is void of Faith.

Again, until men hear the word, their minds are blined with ignorance, and
their lives are full of impurity and uncleanness. And hereupon St. Paul says,
that God sent him unto the Gentiles, to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that is, by his preaching Gods word unto
them, which they had not heard before. Yea, our Savior's own Disciples were
unclean (as all men are by nature) until they heard the word, as those words of
Christ do testify, Now ye are clean through the word that I have spoken unto
you. They were not so therefore before, and how then could they be said to be
regenerated without the word, For by regeneration men are made partakers of a
new nature, which they had not before? St. Paul also speaking of the whole
Church of Christ in general, says, that he sanctifies and cleanses it with
the washing of water by the word. All therefore generally, and ordinarily
without the word, are unclean, and unregenerated.



The Holy Ghost (says he) declares sonship to be the cause of giving the
Spirit, when he says, Because ye are sons, Gal. 4.6.
God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba
Father. Seeing therefore a man cannot believe without the grace of the Spirit,
it follows necessarily, that we are the sons of God before we do believe.

John 1.13.
but of God, by the powerful operation of his Spirit: Even as our Savior
himself also teaches, when he says, Except a man be born of water and of the
Spirit, John 3.5.
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Thus the Spirit is not a consequent of our regeneration, whereby we are born
the sons of God, but a precedent cause thereof.

2. Again, the Spirit is also given, to increase Faith and holiness in us, and
to strengthen and establish us in grace, after we are regenerated. For as
Christ by his Spirit begins the good work of grace in us, so does he by his
Spirit perfect the same, Phil. 1.6. 2 Cor. 3.5.
and not we our selves by any power of our own.

Lastly, After we are born again, the Spirit is also given to comfort us, and
to assure us of our Adoption by crying in our hearts Abba Father.

Thus (as Mr. D. says) sonship, is in some sort the cause of giving the
Spirit. But otherwise we are not sons, before and without any work of the
Spirit at all: for he is the Author, or principal efficient cause of our being
regenerated, and born again the sons of God.

Another of Mr. D's. Objections is this, The Apostle says, that God the Father
has predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself.
We were not therefore begotten in time by the word, but it is an eternal grace.

Whereunto I answer, that he might as well infer, that God has chosen us unto
sanctification of the Spirit: it follows hence, not that we were actually and
really in our own persons sanctified from all eternity, as he reasons; but
that we shall be sanctified at that time which God has decreed and appointed.

But let us see how Mr. D. confirms this former exposition of his. These
places, says he, (that is, James 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23.) are to be understood of
the manifestation of adoption; not of the act of adoption it self. And that it
is so, is plain* God has begotten us again unto a lively hope; by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. A lively hope is the thing
whereunto we are begotten. It is ordinary in Scripture, to call the
manifestation of things by the name of the things themselves.

I grant, the Scripture, which the words do plainly import, except it be
contrary to the Analogy of Faith, or to good manners, or abhorrent to common
sense and reason, or to some other plain and manifest places of Scripture, none
of all which can be said of these two places of Scripture, Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet.
1.23. Those words therefore of both the Apostles, are to be taken in their
native sense as they found. Now whereas St. Peter says, that we are begotten
again to a lively hope, he shows in the words following, what this hope is,
when he says, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades
not away, reserved in Heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through
Faith unto salvation.

quid libet ex quo libet, chalk out of cheese, for there can nothing be
concluded hence, but that the inheritance of Heaven, is a c^nsequent of our
Adoption, according to that of St. Paul. If children then heirs, heirs of God,
and joynt-heirs with Christ.

Peter tells us, that we are begotten again through the resurrection of
Christ. When St. James therefore, and St. Peter do say, that we were begotten
by the word of God, this must needs be meant of the manifestation of our
Adoption, and not of the act of Adoption it self; for Christ was risen from the
dead, long before the Word was preached either to us, or to those Christians to
whom the Apostles wrote, and directed their Epistles.

Whereunto I answer, That neither will this prove the eternity of our Adoption,
as Mr. D. teaches it; For Christ rose again at that certain and determinate
time which God had decreed, and foretold, that is to say, the third day after
his Passion on the Cross. But not to make any use of this, whereas St. Peter
says, that we are begotten again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, the meaning hereof is not, that we were at that
time regenerated, or begotten again, when Christ rose from the dead, unless it
were virtually only: but that our regeneration, which is actually wrought, and
effected by Gods Word and Spirit, (as was the regeneration of all Gods
children, from the beginning of the world) depended on Christ's resurrection, as
on a virtual cause, or power producing it, in that time, and by those means
which God has appointed. For as St. Paul says to the Corinthians, If Christ
be not raised, your Faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins. Thus I have
answered Mr. D.'s Objections, and (as I take it) sufficiently cleared this
matter.

Quest. 9. Whether a man is to pray for the pardon of his sins, after he is
regenerated, and does believe and repent?
SECT. I. The Children of God do, and ought to pray for the pardon of their sins
I Have taken occasion to discuss this question, in regard of those many giddy
Sectaries, that do pertinaciously David was the Child of God in high favor
with him, as that Testimony, which the Lord gives of him does bear witness, I
have found David the Son of Jesse a man after mine own heart, which shall
fulfill all my will. Acts 13.23.
Notwithstanding he prayed heartily, not only for the pardon of those two
heinous sins, of adultery and murder, when he had been overtaken with them;
but of those other sins, whereof he had repented, and which were forgiven him
long before. For Psalm. 25.6, 7. he cries unto the Lord, and says, Remember O
Lord thy tender mercyes and thy loving kindness: for they have been ever of
old. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. And in many
other Psalms, does he petition the Lord for the pardon of his sins. Daniel
also a most worthy and renowned Servant of God, one that was greatly beloved,
makes confession of his own sins, as well as of the sins of the people, and
prays most heartily, for the pardon of them, saying, O Lord hear, O Lord
forgive. Dan. 9.10.20, 23.
Thus did these holy men, pray by the inspiration and instigation of Gods holy
Spirit; it follows necessarily therefore, that the Children of God both may,
and ought to pray for the pardon of their sins. For I hope none now living will
dare to say, that they are holier then David, or Daniel were, or that they are
in higher favor with God, or have more John taught his Disciples, Luke 11.4.
he said unto them, when ye pray say, Our Father which art in Heaven, --
forgive us our sins. It is manifest and most evident from hence, that it is our
blessed Saviors will and appointment, that those who are the true Children of
God (as his disciples were) should pray for the pardon of their sins.

SECT. II. There was forgiveness of sins before Christ's Passion.
BUt will you see, how these our adversaries do think to avoid the force of
these Testimonies.

They confess, (for so, a foul mouthed Sectary One that called me bald Rogue
bald Priest, and Baals priest; I think ten times over, and Minister of the
Devil. Doct. of John Baptist. Page 36. 37, 38.
did unto me) that Christ's Disciples at that time, and all the servants of God
under the Old Testament, were to pray for the pardon of their sins, because
Christ had not then paid the price of our Redemption, and purchased the pardon
of our sins by his Passion. Now here Mr. D. joyneth with them, and confirms
them in their error; For he says, that there was no pardon of sin, in the Old
Testament, because Christ had not then redeemed us. But against this Assertion
of his, I shall by Gods grace both prove that there was the same forgivness of
sins in the Old Testament, that is in the new; and then afterward I shall
answer his Arguments, which he alleges to the contrary, First the Scripture
it self of the Old Testament shows, not darkly nor obscurely, but plainly
and manifestly, not in a few but many places, that the sins of all that did in
those days truly repent, were blotted out, and forgiven by God. The truth of
this is to be seen in David; he no sooner repented of his sins of adultery and
murder, crying out in the anguish and bitterness of his soul, and saying, I
have sinned against the Lord, but presently the Prophet Nathan pronounced his
absolution, and said, 2 Samuel 12.13.
The Lord has put away thy sin. He has forgiven, he has put it away, says
Nathan, not he will put it away, when the Messiah shall come and lay down his
life for thy Redemption. The same also does David himself acknowledge, and
profess, saying, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, Psalm. 23.4, 5.
and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said, I will confess my transgressions
unto the Lord: and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. But what do I stand
upon a such particular examples? The Lord himself speaking of, and to, his
people in the Old Testament, says, I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my own sake, Esa. 43.25.
and will not remember thy sins. And by his Prophet Ezekiel, he proclaims a
general pardon for all, as well in those days, as in these, that would repent
and turn unto him, saying, Ezekiel. 18.20, 21.
The soul that sins, it shall dye: but if the wicked will turn from all his
sins, that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not dye. Hereupon the Prophet
Micah magnifieth the mercy of the Lord, and says, Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage. Micah 7.18.
The Protestants do hold against the Papists, that the souls of the ancient
Patriarchs and of the godly and faithful, that died before Christ's passion,
went after the dissolution of their bodies, not into limbus patrum, but into
Heaven. But surely this could not be, if their sins remained, and were not
forgiven them. For it is nothing but sin, that opens Hell, and shuts
Heaven. Let Mr. D. therefore advise himself, whether he will in this join with
the papists, or with the protestants. Sure I am, as many as took the
protestation which was put out by the Parliament bound themselves by a solemn
vow, to defend the protestant religion, against all popery and popish
innovations: but how well this is performed ^y many of the Sectaries* the event
shows. Thus have I manfested that there was remission of sins in the Old
Testament.

SECT. III. Objections Answered.
LEt us now examine Mr. D. reasons whereby he and diverse Sectaries do think to
prove the contrary. It is not possible (say both he and they) that those who
lived under the Old Testament, Heb. 7.22.
that is, then the Law was, to wit, because he became our surety to his Father,
and undertook to satisfy his justice for our sins, and to bring us to God.
Wherefore as the debtor is discharged from prison, when the suerty takes the
debt upon him, although he does not pay it presently; but binds himself to
satisfy it, at a set time agreed upon: So seeing the eternal Son of God,
became surety unto his Father for us, and took our spiritual debt upon him,
and bound himself to redeem us by his death, at that fullness of time, which
was decreed, and agreed upon by his Father and him: all those therefore that by
faith did rely upon the alsufficient sacrifice and satisfaction of Christ, from
the beginning of the World until his passion, had their sins pardoned, and
were saved by means of that their faith in him, as well as we are, who now
believe in him after he has suffered, and paid our debt. For this cause he is
called The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.18.
not only because he was in Gods decree and counsel from all eternity
appointed to be slain; or because he was from the beginning of the World slain
Mystically in the sacrifices that were offered: But in this regard principally
because the validity and virtue of his death did extend it self unto Adam, and
to all the elect of God, that lived at any time, or other, from the beginning
of World. Gal. 5.1.
which Paul called a yoke of bondage. And St, Peter says, That neither they
nor their Fathers were able to bear it but they not were in bondage to sin and
Satan. Acts 15.10.
For what godly heart can endure to hear, that Abraham the Father of the
faithful, or Isaac, or Jacob, or David; and the rest of those holy Patriarchs,
should be said to be in bondage to sin, or to be Satan's bondmen? As aborrent
also it is to Christian piety to say, as Mr. D. does, that they were under the
curse of the law, for then they should have been in the state of damnation, and
liable to Gods wrath. We confess indeed they were under the law; but how?
under the paedagogie or School-Mastery, not under the curse and condemnatory
sentence of it; for from that were they freed and delivered by their faith in
Christ to come, as we are now by our faith in the same Christ who is come.

But says he, Paul tells us that as many as are under the law, are under the
curse. No, he does not: Gal. 3.10.
but as many as are of the works of the law, that is, who seek and go about to
be justified by the works of the Law, Peter says, Acts 15.11.
As we do believe that we shall be saved through the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, so did they. Heb. 11.39.
as if the meaning of them were, that those under the Old Testament, were not
made partakers of forgiveness of sins, and salvation before Christ's coming.
Bur I have before proved, David speaks plainly, and says, Psalm, 32.1, 2.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. Whereas then the
Apostle says, they received not the promise, he speaks of the promise of
Christ's incarnation, and manifestation in the flesh, and his meaning is, that
that promise was not then accomplished, but differred until the days of the
New Testament, wherein we see those things, and hear those things, which
Abraham and the Prophets, and faithful people of God in those days, desired
to see, and hear, but could not, God providing better things for us, (as the
Apostle speaks in the next words) that they without us might not be made
perfect, that is, in the knowledge and faith of the full Revelation of the
Messiah, but held in the state and condition, as it were, of children in their
Minority.

Gabriel unto Daniel, Dan. 9.24.
Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon the holy City, to
finish the trangression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation
for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness. For from hence he
infers and concludes, that the sins of the people of God, were at that time
remaining, and that they were not reconciled to God. Isai. 53.10.
when (as Isaiah says) he was to make his soul an offering for sin: but not of
taking away sin and making reconciliation by actual remission and forgiveness
thereof: For thus all those were reconciled to God, and were discharged of
their sins, who before Christ's passion did expect his coming, and built the
hope and confidence of their Redemption, and salvation on him.

I do not remember (for I have not his book by me) any thing else, that Mr. D.
alleges to infringe the force of my two former reasons. I have nothing
therefore more to say unto him in this Question.

SECT. IIII. Two reasons more proving that the Children of God, are to pray for
the pardon of their Sins.
THirdly, therefore I do reason thus against the aforesaid Math. 7.7.
Ask (says our Savior) and you shall have. Here the promise is made to him
that asks. But on the contrary, ye have not, James 4.2.
because ye ask not, says St. James. James 1.7.
Now when men are unregenerate, they cannot pray in faith, and therefore, as
St. James says, shall obtain nothing of the Lord. And after they are
regenerated, and do believe, these men will not allow them to pray for the
pardon of their sins. According therefore to their doctrine, pardon of sin is
to be had, without any true prayer. The grossnesse, and absurdity of which
conceit who sees not, that is not stark blind in spiritual things? Fourthly
it has been Christ therein taught his Disciples to pray for the forgiveness
of their sins. It it a novellous conceit therefore, and upstart error, to
hold, That the Children of God, ought not to pray for the pardon of their Sins.

SECT. V. The several Causes, or reasons, why the Children of God, are to pray
for the pardon of their sins.
Heb. 10.38
Heb. 10.38. The just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. But, says the Apostle, We are not of them that
draw back unto perdition: but of them that believe, (perseverantly) to the
saving of the Soul. And before in the third Chapter, the same Apostle has told
us* See also Joh. 8.31.
verse 14. that we are made pertakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of
our confidence, sted-fast unto the end. After therefore we are justified, and
absolved from our sins, yet we are to pray still for the pardon of them,
because as Amesius, and other of the Learned protestants generally say,
Continuatio hujus gratiae est nobis necessaria, the continuance of this grace
is necessary for us. For as it is not to one individual act of faith only, so
neither of repentance nor of prayer; but to perseverance and continuance in all
these, that God has promised and granted pardon. This is to seen in David, for
after his sins were pardoned, and he the true Child of God, yet he prays
still, remember not the sins of my youth nor my transgressions. And after David
was pardoned, (for Nathan upon his repentance said unto him, the Lord has
taken away thy sin, 2. Sam. 12.13.) yet he prayed most earnestly for pardon,
Psalm. 51.

We are still to pray for the pardon of our sins, Ut sensus et manifestatio
hujus gratiae, magis magisque percipiatur, prout singularia peccata postulant,
that the sense and manifestation of this grace may be more and more evident
unto us, as our several sins do require. For so it is, there are hardly any of
Gods Children, whose consciences are not more troubled with the remembrance and
remorse of some of their sins then of others. It will be necessary for them
therefore to pray daily, as for the pardon of their other sins, so especially
of these, that so they may grow more and more assured of the pardon of them,
considering what gracious promises Christ has made to these their paayers.
Verily verily I say unto you, Joh. 16.23
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. And what
things soever ye desire when ye pray, Mar. 11.24
believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them, Sure I am, there is no
man living upon the face of the earth, that attaineth unto such a perfect
assurance of the remission of his sins, that he cannot have that assurance of
his increased. For all graces are here imperfect in us. 2 Pet. 3.18.
Whereupon we are all of us commanded to grow in grace. In this regard
therefore he that is most assured of the remission of his sins, has still need
to pray for the pardon of them. Thirdly, We do all of us daily commit new sins,
Thirdly.
we have need therefore daily to solicit the Lord for the pardon of them. Jam.
5.16.
St. James exhorts and stirs us up unto this, when he says, Confess your
sins one to another, and pray one for another. For I would know of these men,
what he would have us to pray for? Not unlikely they will say for increase of
grace to conquer and overcome our sins, and for health in time of sickness.
It Is true, no doubt: but not for these only, but for pardon of those sins of
ours, which do pull down Gods judgments upon us; for so he gives us to
understand when he says. Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of
the Church, and let them pray for him. And the prayer of faith shall save the
sick, and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Here first the
Apostle excepteth none, no no not the best Christian that is, but speaks
universally, and says, Is Any man sick, let him call for the Elders of the
Church, and let them pray for him. Secondly, he sets down a double
consequent of these their prayers, when he says, the prayer of faith shall
save the sick; and Secondly, if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven
him. It is most evident, and manifest therefore from hence, that prayer is to
be made for the forgivness, not only of the sins of those that are
unregenerate and unbelievers, as St. Stephen prayed for his persecutors,
saying, Lord lay not this sin to their Charge, Acts 7.60.
but as well also for the sins of believers.

Fourthly.
Lastly, we are daily to pray for the pardon of our sins, because the day of
judgment is not yet come, when Christ with his own mouth will pronounce
sentence of absolution on believers, and of condemnation on all unbelievers,
and ungodly men. There is none of us, I presume, that will say that he is
holier then Epaphroditus, or that has more assurance of his sins then he had;
Notwithstanding Paul, as much as he commends him, prays heartily for him,
that the Lord would show mercy unto him at that day, the day of judgment, in
which he should be presented, and appear before Christ. Now what means he
hereby, but that the Lord would be merciful unto him in blotting out his sins,
2* Tim. 1.18.
then, as St. Peter speaks, that is, in passing sentence of absolution upon
him, See Acts 3.19.
and in freeing him from the dreadful sentence of condemnation, which he will
then pass and pronounce on the ungodly: For that there shall then be, not only
an execution of the sentence already given in the word, but a real judgment,
the Scripture makes plain, Acts 17.31. God has appointed a day in the which
he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has Ordained,
2. Tim. 4.1.
that is, by Jesus Christ. And, I Charge thee therefore before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing,
and his kingdom. St. Peter also speaking of himself, and of the other Apostles,
says, that God commanded them to preach unto the people and to testify that
it is he, Acts 10.42.
that is, Jesus Christ, which was Ordained of God to be the judge of quick and
dead. Here, in the courts of this world, the judgment goes before, and the
execution follows after: the former is the act of the judge himself, the
other of his Ministers, that do it by his Authority, and never till the
judgment is past. So Christ himself will sit in judgment on all the world at
the latter day; Math. 25.31 Math. 13.41, 42.
but the execution of his judgment, he will commit to the Angels. As long
therefore as we live here, who sees not that we have all need to pray that our
sins may be pardoned, and that we may stand in judgment at that dreadful day,
when we shall appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, Psalm. 1.5.
and every one receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10.


SECT. VI. Another Objection, answered.
AFter I had thus finished this Question, a friend of mine acquainted me with
an argument drawn a Simili, from a similitude, which he heard a Soldier use,
to prove that he was not to pray for the pardon of his sins: it was this. If
one give me a garment, shall I still after I have it, petition and pray him to
give it me? It were absurd so to do. Seeing therefore God upon my repentance
and faith in Christ, has forgiven me my sins, it will be no less absurd in
me, still to pray for the pardon of them. Whereunto I answer, that an apt
similitude does excellently illustrate a matter after it is proved; but
otherwise there is little, or no force in it at all of it self to prove any
thing that is doubtful, or called into Question, especially, Si illo pede
claudicat if it do halt on that foot, wherein the force and strength of the
Argument lies. Now so fares it with this Similitude of his. For that garment
he speaks of, was absolutely given, and he put into possession of it, without
being further bound to the performance of any thing for the time to come,
unless it were to a duty of thankfulness: But our sins, are not forgiven us
absolutely by God, but upon condition that we do repent and believe in Christ,
and pray for the pardon of them: yea and this pardon is also granted, not to
one individual act of repentance, or of faith, and prayer: but to
perseverance, and continuance in all these, as long as we live here, as I have
showed already. We can have no assurance, nor no hope therefore of the
forgiveness of our sins, if we fall away from the faith, revolt to sin, or
leave off praying. Again, a garment is given but once for all, but our sins,
were first forgiven ab aeterno, from all eternity in Gods predestination;
Secondly, upon our repentance and faith in Christ, they are forgiven in verbo
Evangelii in Gods word, in his word of the Gospel.

And lastly, at Christ's coming we must all appear before his judgment seat, to
be judged openly before all the world, that the equity of his Justice may
appear, and be made manifest unto all; to the glory of God, the comfort of his
Saints, and the confusion of all the wicked. Until therefore we shall
personally appear before Christ, and be absolutely absolved by him: we have
need still to pray for the pardon of our sins.

Quest. 10. Whether it be heinous, and hateful impiety, for the Churches, and
Children of God, to fast and pray, that God would turn away his anger, and
indignation from them, when they lie under his judgments, or at other times,
when their consciences are terrified, and troubled with their sins. And whether
God may be said to be pacified and appeased by our fasting, and prayers, or by
any such things.
SECT. I. It is lawful for us to pray that God would turn away his anger from
us: And, how this is to be understood.
Mr. D. sharply reproves the practice of this, saying. How often have we
thought God like unto our selves? Recon: of God to man, page 36.
How many times have we imagined an angry God, a wrathful Majesty? And thought
to appease his indignation by fasting, by praying, by alms, by tears, and
such like things? O foolish man! if his wrath should not be before appeased,
what Creatures could stand in his sight? Because of this, he charge us to
have set up an Idol in our hearts throughout the Land. But I would know of him,
whether it be not safe for Christians, both to speak and pray in the language
of the holy Scriptures? Sure I am, David prays thus. Psalm. 6.1.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure. And Psalm. 79.5. he speaks and says, How long Lord will thou be
angry, for ever? shall thy jealously burn like fire? And then he prays, Pour
out thy wrath upon the heathen, that have not known thee, and upon the
kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. In Psalm. 85.3. He also speaks
unto God and says, Thou have taken away all thy wrath, thou have turned thy
self from the fierceness of thine anger. And then he prays and says, Turn
us O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease. Will thou
be angry with us for ever? Will thou draw out thine anger to all generations?
After the like manner, does David speak of Gods anger in diverse other Psalms.
Moses also told the Israelites, that the Lord was angry, and wroth with him for
their sakes. But, Deuteronomy. 1.2, 7, and 3, 26, and 4, 21.
not to allege any more the like sayings, whereof we meet with many in the
holy Scripture; does not the King of Ninive, both speak, and practice that, for
the averting of Gods heavy judgment from himself and his people which Mr. D.
greatly condemns in us, Joh. 3.8, 9.
the people of this Land? For he proclaimed a fast and commanded his people to
cry mightily unto God, and to turn every one from his evil way, and from the
violence that was in in his hands, Saying, who can tell if God w ll turn, and
repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? What? shall we
say, the King of Nineve did evil in speaking thus,? No, for this is related
here in the prophet, not by way of reproof, but of Commendation, and for our
imitation. We are not therefore to find fault with any for fasting and praying,
that God would turn away his wrath from them, and from the whole Land, at such
times, as this is, for so we should hinder, the peoples repentance, and make
them profane. But that they may not conceive amiss of Gods anger, we are to
teach them, that anger is in God, non per modum affectus, sed effectus, that is
to say, that by the anger of God, we are to understand, not any such turbulent
passion or affection, as is in us, when we are angry. For then God should not
be immutable and unchangable. For such passions do work a great change and
alteration, Mal. 36. Jam. 17.
both in the body, and in the mind and soul of man. Again, if God should be
moved, and disturbed as we are, when we are angry, then he should not be
perfectly blessed, because he would for that time, or at that present want
inward quietness, and contentment of mind. By the anger of God therefore, we
are to understand such effects of Gods justice, or such actions as anger
produces in us. Now these are reduced by Zanchius, and after him by Polanus;
unto these three heads. First all men when they are Romans 1.18.
Thus St. Paul says, The wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all
ungodliness, that is, says Zanchius, by effects it is manifest, what the will
of God, that dwells in heaven, is against all iniquity. Secondly by Gods
anger is also meant his terrifying and threatening of sinners, and denouncing
of judgments against them, whether it be by his word, or by portentuous, or
prodigious signs and tokens. In this sense does the King of Nineve speak,
when he says, Who knows if God will turn, and repent, and turn a way from
his fierce anger that is, ab executione suarum Comminationum, says Zanchius,
from executing of that fearful destruction on them, which by his prophet he
had denounced and threatened. Lastly, by Gods anger are meant also the
judgments, and punishments themselves, which he inflicteth on sinners, in which
sense the Apostle speaks, when he says, Thou treasurest up for thy self
wrath against the day of wrath, id est (says Zanchius) poenas in illud tempus,
quote Deus puniet, that is, punishments, against that time, in which God will
punish thee. And in the same sense and signification, is the anger, or wrath of
God to be understood, Math. 3.7. Ephesians. 5.6. Luke. 21.23. as Zanchius shows.

To lay down this matter, yet more fully. By Gods anger, we are sometimes to
understand the severity of his justice upon obstinate sinners, whom he
punishes without showing them any mercy. Thus David speaks of Gods anger,
when he says, O Lord rebuke me not in thy hot displeasure, that is, according
to the rigor of thy justice: Psalm. 6.1.
unless we shall say as Zanchius and Polanus do, that he prays that God
would not execute the threatenings of his word upon him. So also, whereas the
Lord says, I will not execute the fiercenes of mine anger, Psalm. 11.9.
I will not return to destroy Ephraim. By the fierceness of Gods anger here,
we may either understand the severity of his revenging justice, or his heaviest
judgments, or else those terrible threatenings, which he had denounced against
the ten Tribes, for their Idolatry, and other sins. And in the same sense he
speaks, Hos. 13.11. I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my
wrath.

Again by the anger of God in other places of the Scripture, we are to
understand the effects of Gods revenging justice, on the wicked, and of his
correcting justice on his own Children, both denounced in his word, and
executed in his punishments and corrections. Thus when Moses told the
Israelites, that the Lord was angry with him for their sakes, he spoke this,
because the Lord had reproved him for the words which he by their instigation
spoke hastily, at the waters of Meribah, and told him that he should not enter
into the Land of Canaan. And when the Lord says, that he swear unto the
rebellious Israelites in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest;
by his wrath here, is meant that destruction, which he had denounced against
them. Now by the anger of God in other places, are meant the effects both of
Gods revenging justice executed on the wicked, and of his correcting justice on
his own Children. An example of the former, we have in the unbelieving Jews, of
whom St. Paul says, wrath is come on them to the utmost, that is, 1 These. 2.16
Isa. 54.8.
extremity of punishment. And of the latter in the believing Jews. In a little
wrath I hide my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness I
will have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.

Thus have I briefly showed, what the Protestants do hold, and what they do
teach, concerning the anger of God, against which I presume Mr. D. will not
reply. No cause has he therefore, to find fault with us, for praying that God
would be merciful unto us, and turn away his wrath and indignation from us,
and from the whole Land; unless he will say, that it is not lawful for us to
speak Tropically, or Figuratively in our prayers, as the Scripture does.

SECT. II. How Gods wrath is Pacified.
THe next thing which I am to clear, is how God can be said to be pacified, and
appealed by fasting, and prayer. For Christ only has pacified his Fathers
wrath, by that propitiatory sacrifice of his, which he offered unto him for the
sins of all the elect. If any therefore shall take upon them by their prayers,
or by their fasting and tears to turn away Gods wrath from themselves, or from
the Land, instead of pacifying him, they shall provoke him so much the more, by
robbing Christ of the glory, that is due unto him. This is another thing (as I
conceive,) which Mr. D. in those words of his, which I alleged at the
beginning of this Question, does intend to charge us with. But hereunto I
answer briefly, that Gods wrath may be said, to be appeased two manner of
ways, 1. Stricte et proprie, in a more strict and proper sense, by
satisfaction made to his justice, Romans 3.25. Ephesians. 2.14. Col. 1.20. Romans 5.10.
and reconciled us unto him by his death. We do willingly therefore
acknowledge, that both the Papists, and all other that do think to satisfy God
for their sins, and so to pacify his wrath, by their prayers, fasting, and
weeping, and afflicting of themselves, with any such p^nall works, or
sufferings, do take upon them Christ's Office, and rob him of his glory: But the
Protestants are not guilty of this, but do condemn it, and speak against it; as
their works and writings do bear witness, Secondly, Gods wrath may be said to
be pacified late et improprie, in a large and in an improper sense, when such
duties are practiced and performed, upon the doing whereof, God does turn away
his indignation, that is, removes his judgments, not for the merit of the
works that are done, or as if by them, his justice were satisfied; but for
Christ's sake, who has merited pardon for such as Heb. 5.9.
obey him in doing the things which he requires; to whom therefore God has
promised that he will be gracious, and favorable. Thus is God, through Christ,
pacified toward sinners, when they repent and turn unto him, and pray, and
humble themselves before him according to his gracious promises, which he has
made unto them, Therefore also, now says the Lord, turn ye even to me, with
all your heart, and with fasting, Joel 2.12.13
and with weep^ng, and with mourning* and rent your hearts, and not your
garments, and turn to the Lord your God: For he is gracious and merciful, slow
to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. And Jer. 18.7,
8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom
to pluck up and to pull down and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I
have denounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thuought
to do not them.

See also Zach. 1.3. 1 Cor. 11.13. 1 Kings 8.33. The sum of all that has
been said, is this: Gods wrath is pacified upon our humiliation, repentance,
prayer, and faith in Gods promises; not for these acts or works of ours, but
for Christ's sake in whom we do believe, and whom we do obey: or else thus; Gods
wrath is not pacified By our fasting, and repentance, to speak properly (for
then we should be justified by works,) but When we repent, and pray, and turn
unto him: for as long as we live in sin, we are under Gods wrath.

SECT. III. Objections Answered.
Having thus finished what Mr. D. has given me accasion to say concerning this
Question; before I do proceed unto the next, I have thought good to answer
certain Objections, which I find urged by one to prove that God neither is, nor
can be angry with any of his Children: which if it were true, then indeed the
Children of God, should have no need to pray at any time or other, that God
would turn away his anger from them* or if they pray so, they shall take Gods
name in vain. The first of these Objections is this. God sees no iniquity in
his people, he cannot therefore be angry with them, for nothing offends him,
nor causes him to be angry but sin. Now to prove that God sees no iniquity in
his people, these Testimonies of holy Scripture are alleged. He has not
beheld iniqu^ty in Jacob, Number. 23.21
neither has he beheld perverseness in Israel. At that time (to w^t when they
shall be converted unto the Lord) the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for,
and there shall be none. Jer. 5.30.
Our blessed Savior also speaks thus unto the Church his spouse. Behold thou
art all fair my love, and there is no spot in thee. Cant. 4.7.
That I may answer these things in order, first I grant, that if God did not at
all see any sin in his people, he could not be angry with them; but the
Testimonies here alleged do not prove this; for first, the Lord is said, to
have beheld none iniquity in Jacob, and to have seen no perverseness in
Israel, to wit, at that time when Balaam uttered these words: non absolute, sed
comparative, not absolutely none at all, but none in comparison of those foul,
and fearful sins of Idolatry, sorcery, and the like abominations, to which the
Heathen were addicted; and whereunto Balaam by his wicked counsel, which he
gave afterward to Balack, drew many of the Israelites to their destruction,
(those I mean which committed adultery both spiritual and corporal) and hoped
by this means, to have ensnared them all, that so they might have been open to
Gods Judgments, and have been destroyed by the King of Moab. Again, the Lord is
here said, not to have beheld any iniquity in Jacob, nor to have seen
perverseness in Israel, with a revenging eye to condemn them, or to cast them
off for it, and to deliver them up as a prey into the hands of their malicious
enemies: but otherwise he saw all the iniquity, and all the evil that they did,
with the eye of his providence, from which nothing is concealed, nor lies did,
for as the Apole says All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him
with whom we have to do; Heb, 4.12.
And, as Solomon says, Pro. 15.3.
the eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil with a loathing of
it, and the good, with an approbation of it. Those therefore who hold that the
Lord does not at all behold any iniquity in his Children, must either deny
their sins, to be evil, or else ^ay that they do not sin at all, directly
contrary to most express, and plain places of holy Scripture. Ecles. 7.20.
For, as Solomon says, There is not a just man upon the earth, that does good,
and sins not. See also, Romans 3.10. James 3.2. 1. Joh. 1.8. Thus I have
answered the first Testimony of holy Scripture, admitting that the words are to
be translated, as they are commonly read in our English Bibles, and as they are
by this Author alleged: But the truth is, they are so rendered by some most
learned and judicious Interpreters, that there cannot so much as any show, or
color of an Objection be raised from them, to prove that God sees not any
iniquity in his Children. For thus do they translate them, he has not beheld
wrong against Jacob; nor has he seen grievance against Israel. For the
exposition and justification of which interpretation, I referr my reader to a
large, and most learned dissertation of Mr. Gatakers, upon this very place of
holy Scripture, which I saw not, until I had finished this Question.

Hujusmodi dicta, non sunt intelligenda de Simplci cognitione Dei, quasi non ea
amplius norit sed de cognitione judiciali ad paenam, Zauch lib 3. de natura
Dei, Chap. 2. q. 14.
The next Scripture that is alleged that is, Jer. 50.20. Where he says, At
that time the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none,
the meaning whereof is, that there shall be none to be imputed unto them,
because it shall be forgiven them, and the sins of Juda shall not be found,
that is, to be charged on them, or rise up against them to their condemnation,
because they shall be justified and absolved from them. In the same sense does
our Savior speak of his Church, Cant. 4.7.
Behold thou art* all fair my love and there is no spot in thee; for this is
not spoken of the spotles purity, and perfect beauty, or fairness of the
Church by inherent sanctification, but of perfect righteousness imputed unto
her in her justification: for although none of the Children of God be perfectly
fair in themselves, but defiled in part with many spots of sin while they live
here; yet being considered as they appear before Gods tribunal clothed with
Christ's righteousness, so they are all fair in Him, and there is no spot in
them, which is not washed away in his blood, in regard of the imputation, or
guilt thereof. Hereunto I add further, that the holy Scripture speaks
sometimes of the Church of Christ, not only as she begins to be purified
from sin here in this life, but as holiness shall be perfected in her in the
world to come, at what time she shall be all fair, not only by justification,
but internal sanctification also, so that no spot of sin shall at all adhere
unto her. Even now while Christ's spouse so journeth here on earth, he begins
by his word and spirit to sanctify and cleanse her from her spots and
impurities: but when her warfare shall be ended, he will present her unto
himself, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrincle, or any such thing, Ephesians.
5.26.27.
but holy, and without blemish.

The next thing which I find alleged to prove that the Children of God are not
to fast, nor pray, that God would turn away his indignation from them, are
certain places of Scripture, which say expressly that God is never angry with is
people, Isa. 27. Fury is not in me. Isa. 54.9.
As I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth, so
have I sworn that I will be no more wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. Whereunto
I answer that there is a two fold anger, the one of a revenging Judge, that
executes justice strictly according to men's deeds and deserts; the other of a
loving Father, who is angry with his Children, when they do evil, for their
correction and amendment. Of the former, the Lord speaks to his Church, when
he says, Fury is not in me, and I will be no more wroth with thee, nor rebuke
thee, that is, in wrathful revenge, to satisfy my justice on thee. For
otherwise the Lord says plainly, As many as I love I rebuke and Chasten, be
Zealous therefore and amend. Rev. 3.19.20.
Thus the Lord is angry with his own Children, with the anger of a Father, that
is, not out of hatred or any ill will, but out of mere love, tendering their
good, and reclaiming them from evil, that they may not perish, but be saved
eternally. So he was angry with Moses and Aaron at the waters of Meribah, as I
have showed before. And of this anger David speaks when he says. His anger
indureth but a moment. Psalm. 30.5.
And again, the Lord is merciful and gracious slow to anger, and plenteous in
mercy. He will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever.
Psalm. 103.8, 9.
After the same manner speaks also the Lord himself. In a little wrath I hid
my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting mercy will I have
compassion on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. It is evident that the Lord
speaks here, of his own Children, for his everlasting mercy belongs to them
and on them it is, that his anger remains but a moment. For on wicked
reprobates, it shall rest for ever; according to that Joh. 3.36. He that
believes not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Quest. 11. Whether God do correct his Children for their sins.
This Question I thought good to add unto the former, because it is of great
affinity with it, and the rather indeed have I done this, because an
Acquaintance of mine did lately, long after I had finished this Treatise, take
upon him to maintain, that God does never correct his Children for any sin,
that is committed by them; against whom I reasoned thus. God does either
correct his Children for sin; or for righteousness, for there is no mean
betwixt these two. For our actions, although being considered simply as they
are per se et sua natura, in themselves, and in their own nature, are many of
them indifferent, that is neither good nor evil morally: yet in actu exercito,
that is, being clothed with such circumstances, as they are when they are
practiced by us, so they are all either good or evil. Now, said I, God does not
correct any for righteousness, or well doing; therefore it is for their sins
and for their evil doings that he corrects his Children. But hereunto he
answered, that it is for righteousness that God corrects his Children, for
said he, God corrects them from their sins, and makes them to live
righteously. I perceived his meaning was, as if he should have said, God
corrects his Chi^dren for righteousness, not that righteousness which they
have done, but which he would have them to do. Now this I willingly yielded
unto him, that the terminus a quo of Gods corrections, or rather of our
sanctification which he works in us by his corrections, is sin; and the
terminus ad quem, is righteousness, that is, to speak popularly and plainly,
God by his chastisments drives us from sin unto righteousness. For as the
Apostle says, No chastening for the present seems to be joyous, Heb. 12.11.
but grievous, nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby. Thus the end of our
Heavenly Fathers Chasti^ements is to make us to leave our sins, and to follow
after righteousness. But does it follow hereupon that we are not corrected for
our sins, whereby we do provoke God, and make him to afflict us? If we should
never be overtaken, nor be at all defiled with any sin, he would never correct
us. We may truly therefore be said to be corrected for our sins, because sins
are they that do pull down Gods corrections upon us. But here mine adversary
replied and said, I say, says, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities, Isa. 50.5.6.
the Chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we
healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own
way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all. Or else punishment
is for the humiliation and reformation of the party offending, and such are
Gods corrections, whereby he nurtureth his Children for his own glory, and
their amendment. It is for our profit that we are thus corrected, as the
Apostle tells us; Heb. 12.10. Christ therefore by his passion has not
redeemed us from such Chastisements, but sanctifies them unto us.

After I had answered these Objections, I proceeded and proved unto him that
God corrects his Children for their sins. The arguments which I then used, I
shall now somewhat enlarge, not tying my self strictly to the order in which
they were propounded unto him. First of all then, I say, that the holy
Scripture in express words affirms that God corrects his Children for
their sins, for thus speaks the holy prophet David unto the Lord, This
Testimony is universal of all men, of all times.
Psalm. 39.11. When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity: thou make
his beauty to consume away like a moath. And presently he adds, surely every
man is vanity, in regard, he means, of Gods corrections, which do weaken and
waste him. He excepteth none out of this number; not the Children of God, more
then others. For it were his own afflictions that made him to utter these
words. For having said, I am consumed by the blow of thine hand, presently he
infers. When thou with rebukes do chasten man, thou make his beauty to
consume away. David also brings in Almighty God speaking thus of his
posterity, whereof it cannot be denied, but many were Gods Children, If his
Children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments: If they break my
statutes, and keep not my Commandments: then will I visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89.30.31.32. Now what is
this, but to correct them for their sins? And I pray you, did not Joseph's
brethren, when they suspected that they were brought into great hazard and
danger of their lives in the land of Egypt, acknowledge that this was Gods
punishment or correction on them for their sins? for thus they spoke one to
another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul, when he sought us, and we would not hear: therefore (they
mean for their sin in oppressing and betraying their Brother,) is the distress
come upon us, Genesis 42.21. When Job also says, Thou make me possess the sins
of my youth, what means he, but that God laid his hand heavy upon him, and
chastized him for the sins of his youth?

2. Besides these and many other testimonies that might be produced, I reason
thus, If the sins of Gods children be the cause of their corrections, then they
are corrected for their sins; for what is it to correct one for his sins, or
for his faults; but to correct him, because of such faults and offenses, as are
committed by him. Now the holy Scripture testifies, that Gods children are
corrected, because of their sins which they have committed, and not only to
keep them from sin pro futuro, for the time to come: therefore it cannot justly
be denied, that God corrects them for their sins. That their sins are the
cause of Gods corrections, these places of holy Scripture do evidence: first,
the Lord speaks to David by his Prophet Nathan, and says, The Sword shall
never depart from thine House, because thou have despised me, and have taken
the Wife of Vriah, See also Luke 1.20.
the Hittite to be thy Wife, 2 Samuel 12, 10. And afterward he says, Because by
this deed (by the murder of Uriah) thou have given great occasion, to the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee, shall
surely die, Verse. 14. That the death of David's child was a correction to him,
it cannot be denied. Now the cause of this correction is here said to be his
evil deed, or his sin which he had committed, it follows necessarily
therefore, that God corrects him for his sins, his sins past; and not from
sin only, that he might live righteously for the time to come; for the end of
David's corrections was not only his own humiliation and reformation, and the
restraining of others from the like sins, through the terror of Gods judgments
inflicted on him, but the vindication of Gods glory in the execution of
justice, and the manifestation of his hatred against those sins of David,
whereby he had made the enemies of God to blaspheme his holy name. These
corrections of David, as also the corrections of all Gods children, sunt actus
justitiae Divinae cum misericordia temperatae, are acts of Gods justice,
tempered with mercy; for God, seeing he will not spare, no not his dearest
children, such as David was, but sharply chastizeth them, hereby he openly
declares, that he is a just God, that will not wink at sin in any, though
otherwise this his justice is tempered with singular mercy toward the Elect,
because their afflictions are through Gods grace and goodness sanctified unto
them, and do turn to the furtherance of their salvation. That one end of Gods
correcting of his children, is the manifestation of his justice, and hatred
against sin, David himself acknowledges in his own particular, when he says,
Psalm. 51, 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight, that thou might be justified, that is, acknowledged to be just, when
thou speak (against me, and reprovest me) and be clear, that is, appear pure
and clear from all fault, when thou judge me by thy punishment and
corrections. David also, when Gods hand did lie heavy upon him by sore
sickness, did acknowledge that his sin was the cause of all this; for thus does
he complain unto God, Psalm. 38.7, 3.
There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither any rest in
my bones, because of my sin. But I shall not need to allege any more
testimonies to prove that David was corrected for his sins. For those whose
opinion I do now oppugn do grant that God did chastize David for his sins; but
they say, that David in these his sufferings, was a type of Christ. They hold
therefore, answer, but a mere evasion. For first, Though David were a type of
Christ in his sufferings, Saul, falsely slandered by Doeg and Saul's Courtiers,
and perfidiously and traitorously dealt withal by Achitophel and others,
whereof he complains in diverse of his Psalms, which the Evangelists do
allege, as fulfilled in Christ. Yet, it is not enough barely to say, but it
would be as solidly proved, that he was also a type of Christ in all those
evils, wherewith God visited him for his sins, in numbering the people, and for
the wrongs which he did to Uriah. What shall we say, that whereas David's Wives
were defiled before all Israel, and in the sight of the Sun, that this befell
him only as he was a Type of Christ? and not rather as a correction for his
sin, in defiling Vriahs Wife? To hold therefore, as these men do, that David
suffered only propter rationem typicam, that is, that he might typifie Christ's
sufferings, seems strange unto me; for seeing he was one of Gods Children, no
doubt the Lord disciplined him, as he does the rest of his Children; For what
Son is he, whom the Father chasteneth not? says the Apostle Heb. 12. David
therefore was chastized for his sins, not only as he was a type of Christ, (as
these men will have it) but as the rest of Gods Children are, for his
humiliation, and future reformation and repentance: as also that God by
scourging him, might manifest and make known his hatred of those sins, which he
had run into, and warn others to beware of them, as I have before showed. But
if I shall grant that all David's afflictions befell him as he was a type of
Christ, what will these men say to the sufferings of Asa, the King of Juda, 2 Chronicles. 16, 7, 8, 9. and of Miriam the Sister of Moses and Aaron, for both these
were chastened of God for their sins, Asa, because he trusted not in the Lord,
but relied on the King of Syria, for help against his enemies; and Miriam,
because she murmured against Moses. Will they say, that both these were in this
a type of Christ? Indeed I do willingly grant, that Asa was a type of Christ,
as he was the anointed King of Judah. But that otherwise, as he suffered for
want of confidence in God, and Miriam a woman in suffering for her murmuring,
should be a type of Christ, seems as yet somewhat strange unto me, until I
shall by these men be better instructed. And although I do grant, that Moses
was a type of Christ, as he did in some sort perform the Office of a Mediator,
between God and the people, yet (I think) it cannot be said, that whereas he
was excluded out of Canaan for his sin, that he committed at the waters of
Meribah, that he was in this a type of Christ, saving us by his sufferings; but
rather shadowed out the Law, which brings none to Heaven. In which regard
Joshua that brought the Israelites into Canaan, and not Moses, who for his sin
dyed in the Wilderness, was a type of Christ. But whatsoever is to be said of
Miriam, Asa, Aaron and Moses, I know they will not affirm, that the Corinthians
that came irreverently unto the Lords Supper, without due examination, and
preparation of themselves, were any type of Christ. Notwithstanding, St. Paul
tells us, That for this cause many of them were weak and sickly, and many of
them did sleep, that is, the sleep of death. It cannot be denied therefore,
that these were scourged and corrected for their sins. This is so evident, that
they are enforced to grant it, but they think to put it off thus.

Corinth, that did give their names unto Christ, and made an open profession of
faith in him, as the true believers did.

Now they tell us, that the Apostle speaks of these counterfeit, and not of
true believers, when he says, for this cause many are sick and weak among you,
and many sleep; for, say they, could such impious and wicked Beasts be the
members of Christ, who came drunk to the Lords Table?

Noah was, whom St. Peter calls a righteous man. But suppose that they were
all wicked hypocrites, that thus profaned the holy Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood: 2 Pet. 2.
yet seeing the Church and people of God at Corinth, tolerated them in their
Communion, and did not censure them for this foul fault: therefore Gods
judgment might break in among them all, by an epidemical disease; and take
away some, if not many of the better sort, as well as all the Israelites fled
before their enemies, and diverse of them were slain for the sin of A chan.
Josh. 7.
And that this was the case of the Corinthians, whom God visited some of them
with death, and others with sickness, and weakness: the words immediately
following in the Apostle do manifest when he says, for if we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged. But when we are judged, we are chastened of
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World. T^ese words do
evince, that St. Paul speaks in this place of true belee^ers, and not only
of counterfeit hypocrites.

First* This i^ evident from his scope, in uttering these words; which was to
comfort, not only those which were living, and yet lying under Gods
judgments; but others also for the death of their dear friends, who were thus
taken away, for profaning the holy Sacrament of Christ's blessed body and
blood. The former of these might think thus with themselves, seeing this our
sickness and weakness is a judgment of God upon us, what hope can we have in
him? And the latter might say, seeing God has taken away our friends in
judgment, alas, what is become of their souls? The Apostle to comfort them
against such sad thoughts as these, tells them, that this was indeed a
judgment upon them: but a judgment only of castigation for their
reformation, that so they might escape the judgment of eternal condemnation in
the world to come.

Again, St. Paul includes himself in the number of those that are thus judged.
For he says not, that those men only that came irreverently to the Lords
Table were judged: but when we are judged, (speaking of himself, and all
believers) we are chastened of the Lord.

Romans 8.1.
Thirdly, He informs us, how happy the end and issue of this judgment of
castigation is to all Gods children. It becomes a means (God sanctifying it
unto them for this end) to free them from condemnation: which is the portion,
and proper and peculiar privilege of the godly, and not common to them with
the wicked.

4. and lastly, Therefore he opposes the persons that are thus judged, unto
the world. It is not possible therefore, that St. Paul should speak only of
wicked hypocrites, when he says, For this cause many are sick, and weak among
you, and many sleep. For such wicked ones belong unto the World, and are no
true members of Christ, nor of his Church, which consists of Saints, that are
gathered out of the World.

3. and lastly, I would know of these men, whether a Father does not correct
his children, and a Schoolmaster his Scholars for their faults? To deny this,
is to contradict all men, and the truth it self. For a Child when he grows
wanton, and stubborn against his Father; and a Scholar when he plays the
trevant, and neglects his book, do both of them deserve the Rod of
correction. Their faults which they have committed, are causa meritoria, the
meriting cause of their correction, though the final cause, or the end of such
correction, is their reformation. And even so also by a like reason, do Gods
children, when they forget their duties, and wax wanton against their heavenly
Father, deserve to be corrected by him, for their amendment.

God corrects his children in love for their good.



For answer hereunto I say, that although the afflictions of Gods children are
good unto them in their end and issue, whereunto they are sanctified and
directed by God. In which regard, Gods Children do say with David, Heb. 12.11.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, for before I was afflicted, I
went astray, but now do I keep thy Law, Psalm. 119.

Notwithstanding, as the Apostle says, and as we feel in our own experience,
our afflictions in themselves are grievous, and bitter to the flesh. And
therefore as it is said of him that cannot rule his appetite, that he deserves
to fall into the hands of the Physician, who by bitter Pills, or potions
purges away the ill-humors, which his delicious Cups, and sweet morsels bred
in his body. So when Gods children do satisfy their carnal lusts, and surfeit
upon sin, they deserve the bitter pills of affliction, which when the heavenly
Physician of their souls shall administer unto them, they have cause with Job,
not only to be patient, and contented but thankfully to submit themselves unto
his corrections, and to say, Job 2.10.
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? Ye see then,
that the afflictions of Gods Children are evil in themselves, though good in
their end.

The force of this reason,

But so does not God to his children, for he is never angry with any of them,
because Christ has born all their sins, and pacified his Fathers wrath for
ever.

This Objection I shall not need here to answer, deals with us, as a Father
does with his children, as in other respects, so particularly in nurturing us
for our sins, when we offend him by them, as the Apostle expressly shows, Heb.
12.5, 6, 7, 8.

This that I have said, cannot but be of singular use unto the children of God,
when they are visited with his corrections. For if they believe that their sins
are (at least wise in part) a cause of their afflictions.

1. This will make them so much the more diligently to search and examine
themselves, that they may both find out their sins, and purge them out by
repentance, saying with the Jews, Lam. 3.40.
Lam. 3.40. Come let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

2. It will make them also to humble themselves so much the more before the
Lord, saying with the Prodigal, Luke 15. Father, I have sinned against Heaven,
and against thee, and I am no more worthy to be called thy Son.

3. It will make them also to pray the more fervently, and effectually to God,
for mercy and forgiveness as David did, being afflicted in mind with the sight
and sense of his sins, when Gods judgments were upon him, Psalm. 38.

4. It will make them to hate and abhor sin so much the more, and the more to
shun it for the time to come.

5. And lastly, As he in the time of the Law, that was pursued for murder,
which he had unwittingly and unwillingly committed, did fly hard to the Alter,
or to the City of refuge to save his life: so when a man acknowledges, that it
are his sins, that do cause God to pursue him with his judgments, it will make
him to fly the faster unto, and to lay the firmer hold on Jesus Christ, that
he may obtain forgiveness, and salvation by him. But when men do deny that
their sins are any cause of Gods corrections, then when they lie under his
judgments, they will neither search out their sins, nor humble themselves
before God for them, nor pray so much the more earnestly for the pardon of
them, nor repent and turn unto God from them. But on the contrary, such persons
(as we see it is both the Opinion, and the practice of many now at this day)
will say, that they need not, neither to repent, nor to pray for the pardon of
their sins, nor to make any confession of them, and so they take a course to
shut Heaven gates against themselves. For as St. John tells us, If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If we
confess our sins, 1 John 1.8, 9.
that is, with inward penitency and compunction of heart, and with a lively
hatred, and abhorring of them, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. To the same effect speaks
Solomon. Prove. 28.13.
He that covers his sins, (as every one does, who says, that he has no sin)
shall not prosper: but he that confesses, and forsakes them, shall find mercy.

Quest. 12. Whether a man may be assured of Salvation by his love to the
Brethren,
SECT. I. A Man may be assured of his Salvation by his Repentance.
TO this Mr. D. answers, When the soul is laden with the burden of sin, and
sense of misery, Confer. p. 18
it is sufficient for our assurance, to believe God in his promises, and we
read of nothing else. Act. 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. No doubt it is
true, that he who believes in God according to his promises, which in the
Gospel he has made unto us, I find (says he) but one only condition of
actual Reconciliation of man to God, p. 56. that is, as he explaineth himself,
whereby we know that God is reconciled to us, p. 51. Confer. between a sick
man, etc. p. 5.
shall obtain remission of sins and salvation; but these promises are not made
to any one that continues in sin, although he be never so much terrified, and
troubled with the fear of Hell: but to those only that repent, and turn unto
God. And hereupon it is, that the true Christian in believing repents, and
repenting believes. Thus Faith and Repentance are twisted together, as it
were, and indeed are never separated, as he himself acknowledges. Whereupon it
follows necessarily also, that a man may be assured of his salvation, by his
repentance. And this he dares not deny, but says, that it is a sure mark of
salvation, whatsoever fails.

But he has no sooner granted this, but in the next words he labors to rob
and bereave Christians of all the comfort, which their Repentance will afford
them; for he says, That a man cannot know his Repentance to be true, neither
by his hearty sorrow for his sins past, nor by his steadfast purpose to forsake
all sin, and to walk in all godliness.

First, He says, that Reprobates, as Esau, Genesis 27.1. and Judas, Math. 27.3.
repented, and sorrowed heartily for their sins. And (says he) doubtless all
that do despair, do heartily sorrow for their sins, as they that are swallowed
up with over much sorrow. But I answered him, that such do sorrow heartily in
deed, but nor for their sins; but for the punishment and damnation of them,
which they are afraid of. The Apostle therefore calls this Worldly Sorrow, 2
Cor. 7.10.
and says, that it causes death: but in the next words he tells us, that
godly sorrow (which is when a man after a godly manner is sorry for sin, because
it is sin, or because it is an offense against God, and a dishonor to him)
works repentance unto salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10.
never to be repented of. Whosoever therefore finds such godly sorrow in
himself, may thereby be assured of salvation. The like is to be said of him
that purposes, not by fits and flashes; but steadfastly to forsake all sin,
and to walk in all godliness. For seeing the heart, that is, the will, tanquam
Regina, as a Queen, commands all the inferior faculties of the soul, and
members of the body; It is certain therefore, that if a man be not diverted
from his purpose, If he be constant in his purpose, I say, for many times
sensual affections do rebel against the will, and do lead it away captive with
them. Act. 11.23. Heb. 13. Psalm. 119.6.
but be constant in it, he will perform it, whilst he is not let by outward
violence, which the soul, or the conscience in working holiness, never is. And
hereupon it was, that Barnabas, when he saw the grace of God, which he had
bestowed upon the Brethren at Antioch, exhorted them, that they would with
purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord. And the Apostle speaking of himself,
says, We know we have a good Conscience in all things, willing that is
resolving to live honestly. And hereby also did David assure himself of Gods
favor, when he said, Then shall I not be confounded, when I have respect unto
all Gods Commandments. That which he alleges to impeach this, Mat. 5.20.
Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. For their
righteousness was externa non interna justitia, outward only before men, but
the inward purity of the heart was wanting in them. For which cause our blessed
Savior, compared them to whited Sepulchers, and told them, that they did make
clean the outside of the Cup, and of the platter, whereas their inward part was
full of uncleanness. Besides this, Luke 11.39.
they tythed Mint, and Annise, and Cummin; but neglected the weightier matters
of the Law, as our Savior lays this to their charge. He is much mistaken
therefore, Mat. 23.25.
when he says, that the Scribes and Pharisees had a constant purpose to forsake
all sin, and to walk in all holiness.

But (says he) St. Paul a Pharise says of himself, Phil. 3.6.
that he before his conversion, was as touching the righteousness, which is of
the Law blameless.

The answer hereunto is, outward righteousness of the Law, as his enemies the
Pharisees understood it. His meaning therefore is, that he was unblameable in
the Opinion of the Jews, who were seduced by the Pharisees, and did as much as
they required of him, or that he was unblameable, in regard of his outward
co^versation before men: and what if St. Paul did think well of himself,
whilst he was a Pharise, and did persecute the Church of God, can none
therefore, no not those, who have received the spirit of God, whereby they know
the things that are given them of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.
be assured that they do in truth serve God according to all his Commandments?

SECT. II. Faith and Repentance are distinct Graces.
Confer. p. 19, 20. Answ. Synop. purioris Theologiae.
BUt he tells us wherefore he acknowledges true Repentance to be a sure mark
of salvation, to wit, because Repentance includes Faith as a part thereof.

Whereunto I answer, as the learned professors of Leyden, and other Protestants
do, that Repentance is sometimes taken generally, for the whole conversion of a
sinner from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, and so faith
is a part of it; but otherwise the holy Scripture speaks of Faith and
Repentance, as of two distinct graces. For so does St. Paul, when he says,
that he kept back from the Ephesians, Act. 20.21.
nothing that was profitable for them, but taught them repentance toward God;
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Whence I reason thus, Conf. p. 20.
those virtues, or those graces that are differenced by their objects, are
different virtues, but so are repentance and faith: therefore they differ
really, and non sicut totum, and pars, and not as the whole, and the part, Act.
2.37, 38.
the one whereof is included in the other. But says he, when the Jews asked,
what shall we do to be saved? Peter answered, Repent and be baptized, And when
the Jailer made the same Question, Paul answered, Act. 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved: therefore either
repentance must include faith, or else St. Peter gives not a full answer: yea
rather, say I, or else Mr. D. is deceived: for in that saying of St. Peter,
Faith is not included in the word Repent; but in the words following, And be
baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, in the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Although otherwise (as I have said before) I do not deny but
(...), Repentance, when it is used alone, and not opposed to faith, may
comprehend, or include in it, faith in Christ Jesus, as a part of our
conversion.

SECT. III. That Charity does not bind a man universally to give half his Goods
to the poor, as Zacheus did.
HE grants also, That Love to the Brethren is a sure and certain note of a
true Child of God, and of Salvation, is plainly taught, 1 John 3.4. which place
is vindicated from the false gloss which Mr. D. has set upon it, Page 234.
Confer. Page 7, 8.
that where unfeigned love to the Brethren is found, it may be a testimony of
grace received (but adds) that a man cannot love them, unless he do sell,
either the whole, or half of his possessions, and divide them among such of his
Brethren, as he knows to be poor.

But if this be an inseparable note of true charity, as he teaches, I dare
boldly say, he by this Doctrine of his, will much more trouble men's
Consciences, then we do by ours, and give them less assurance of Salvation: 1 John 3.14.
For he that loves not his Brother abides in death.

Now how many can he find in this Kingdom, that with Zacheus do give half their
goods to the poor, or that having Lands and possessions, do with those
primitive Christians sell them, and lay down at their Ministers, Act. 4.
or Pastors feet, the price of them, that it may be distributed amongst their
Brethren, as their necessity shall require? doubtless he will find but a few,
if any, that will do this. Now what, shall we exclude all the rest from the
state of grace, and consequently, from all hope of salvation? I dare not do so;
and yet I must needs say, seeing the faith that is available to salvation,
works by love, Gal. 5.6. the great want of love, in many forward professors
of the Gospel, may give them just cause to doubt of their salvation. Luke 19.
Act. 2.45. and 4.34, 35.
But that I may come nearer to Mr. D. although Zacheus at his conversion, gave
half his goods to the poor, and those that were possessors of Lands, sold them,
and laid down the money at the Apostles feet: yet the Lord no where binds us
by any precept to do the like; neither do their examples bind all to imitate
and follow them in this their practice. For God distributeth his graces
diversely, to some he gives very large hearts, and stirs them up to do more,
then others can ordinarily attain unto, who have received an inferior portion
of the spirit, 1 Pet. 4.10.
or gift of grace. And hereupon it is, that St. Peter exhorts, As every man
has received the gift, so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards
of the manifold grace of God.

And St. Paul exhorting the Corinthians to be liberal in their contributions to
the poor Saints at Jerusalem, does not call upon them to give half, or any
certain and determinate part of their goods unto them, although they were in
great necessity; but (says he) Every man as he purposes in his heart, so let
him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity, 2 Cor. 9.7.
for God loves a cheerful giver. There are sometimes more, and sometimes fewer
poor to be relieved by us, and sometimes their necessity is greater, and
sometimes less. Now according hereunto, are we to proportion our giving of
Alms, as the Casuists do teach very well, unto whom I refer Mr. D. for the
rectifying of his judgment; only this I will say, that unless it be in case of
extreme necessity, when the poor cannot otherwise be maintained, but will
perish for want of necessaries, a man is not bound to sell his possessions, and
to give the price unto them: in doing whereof, he should exhaust the Fountain
of his liberality, and be disabled from doing good in time to come. Yea should
this be generally practiced, it would be the overthrow of the Commonwealth:
but as St. Paul says, He is for to give, 2 Cor. 8.13.
not that other men may be eased, and he burdened; but what his abundance may
be a supply for their wants, that is, that he may supply their necessities, by
giving them that he may spare, without wasting and overthrowing of his Estate.

SECT. IV. Concerning Restitution of Goods unjustly gotten.
HE brings in also his dying convert, Confer. p. 22. at the end of it.
restoring fourfold unto those whom he had defrauded, as if those that have
wronged others were bound to restore fourfold, after the example of Zacheus.
But surely in this, he is much mistaken; for neither did the Law of Moses in
all cases require a fourfold satisfaction. It is true, Exodus 22.47.
he that stole a Sheep, if he did kill it, or sell it, was to restore fourfold;
but for an Ox so stolen and alienated, he was to restore five fold: but if the
theft were certainly found in his hand alive, whether it were Ox or Ass, or
Sheep; in this case, he was to restore only double. So if a Thief did steal out
of a man's house, money, or Stuff, and was found, and was convicted thereof, he
was to pay double: But in some other cases, the Law required less
satisfaction, as is to be seen.

It was Zacheus abundant piety therefore, Exodus 22.
that moved him to restore four fold, either because (as St. Paul speaks of
the repenting Corinthians) he would be revenged on himself, Levit. 6.
for the wrong and injuries which he had done; or because he would be sure to
make full satisfaction to those, whose money, or goods, 2 Cor. 7.11.
he had by false accusation taken from them, or for some other cause unknown
unto me.

All therefore that have defrauded, oppressed, or wronged others, are not bound
to imitate Zacheus in this. For the moral Law, or the Law of nature, which only
now under the Gospel, does bind all men, of all Nations, requires only
restitution of that which is unjustly taken from others; either in the same
identical thing, if it be not wasted or impaired in the value and worth of it:
or if it be either become worse then it was, when it was taken away, or be
lost, or sold, or otherwise alienated, then it is to be restored in the
equivalent, or full worth of it. And if the owner thereof sustained any
damage, or loss through the want of it, since the time that it was taken from
him, full satisfaction is to be made him for that also, that so he may be made
whole again, and be restored unto as good a state and condition, as he would
have been in, had he never been robbed, oppressed, or defrauded. Justitiae est
suum cuique reddere, it is the property of justice, to render to every man his
own. The Law of nature therefore binds those that have wronged others, to such
satisfaction as I have spoken of. For they cannot be said to have their own
rendered unto them, unless they receive both the thing that was unjustly taken
from them, and the profit which would have arisen from it; (the charges
deducted in managing, or employing of it) or if they could, or would have
turned it to no profit, had it never been taken, nor withheld from them, yet
satisfaction is to be made them, pro damno emergente, for the loss which they
have sustained through the want of it, if any such has befallen them. If such
restitution be not made paenitentia non agitur, sed fingitur, as St. Augustine
says, a man's repentance is not true, but counterfeit. For how can a man be
said to repent and forsake sin, as long as he keeps that wherein he has
sinned, by him. This Doctrine is delivered by Divines generally, as a certain
truth grounded on the Law of nature, Ezech. 18.7
and on the written word of God. But I have scarce met with any to my
remembrance, excepting Mr. D: that does but so much as intimate, or insinuate a
necessity of a four fold Restitution. For it was not the moral, but the
political, or judicial Law, that required of the Israelites, in some cases a
fourfold, in some other a five fold, or two fold Restitution. And as the
learned do well note, this was exacted, and prescribed, non per modum
satisfactionis, not by way of satisfaction, which would have been sufficiently
made in the equivalent, (as I said before) sed per modum paenae, but by way of
punishment, to terrify and restrain men from such wickedness, and injustice.
For which cause it was, that the punishment was aggravated, where the theft
tended greatly to the detriment and damage of the Commonwealth. For; for this
very cause it was, that he who stole an Ox, was to restore five fold; but he
that stole a Sheep, but four fold, to wit, because the decay of Oxen, would
have been a greater discommodity to the Israelites, then of their Sheep: for
they were forbidden to multiply Horses; we read therefore, little mention made
of them: but frequent, of their Oxen, Kine, Asses and Sheep. If their Oxen
therefore should have been taken from them, the tillage of their ground must
have failed, to say nothing that their Oxen also did draw their carriages, and
tread out their Corn, which Sheep could not do. For this Reason also it is,
that if the Ox, or the Sheep that were stolen, were found alive with the
Thief, he was to restore but two fold, because they might still be preserved,
and kept alive for the benefit of the Commonwealth.

SECT. V. A Man may be assured of Faith, and consequently, of Salvation by the
inseparable Effects of Sanctification.
BUt to leave this, I would know of him, when he offers Christ freely to all,
without any conditions, If he see many that live still in sin, without any
repentance, or reformation of life, hereby imbolden themselves to rely on
Christ for salvation, whether he will not tell them, that this their Faith is
nothing else, but carnal confidence, or presumption, which is a more dangerous
Rock, then that of desperation, which he charge us by our Doctrine to drive
men upon: Recon. of God to man, Page 64.
though falsely. For as St. Augustine says, in several places of his Homilies,
plures pereunt sperando, quam desperando, more do perish by presumption, then
by desperation. And here I will tell him, what both I my self, and some others
heard one speak, with great rejoicing, whose conversation was none of the best.
We never had the Gospel preached until now, Christ is freely offered unto all,
nothing is required of us, free Grace is preached. What will you say to those,
who hearing you preach thus, do turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, and
say, That they know they shall be saved by their Faith in Christ, who is freely
offered them, without any conditions? what you and those, who preach thus, will
say, I know not; but sure I am, St. Paul says to them, and to all, Prove your
selves, whether ye be in the Faith. And then he shows how this is to be done.
2 Cor. 13.5.
Know you not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
Reprobates? As if he should say, Whosoever they are that believe in Christ,
they have him dwelling in them by his Spirit: hereby therefore shall you know,
that ye are true believers, even by his spirit, whereof ye are made partakers.
For as St. John also says, Hereby we know, that he abides in us, 1 John 3.24.
by the Spirit that he has given us. He therefore, that upon good proof, and
experience, finds that the Spirit of God is in him, mortifying his carnal
lusts and affections, and renewing him in holiness, may be assured hereby, that
he is by Faith ingrafted into Christ, and that he shall be saved by him. For it
is not flesh and blood that works such an inward and universal change in us,
but the spirit of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. And of this St. John assures
us, when he says, This is our Victory that overcommeth the World even our
Faith. As if he should say, it is our Faith in Christ, 1 Ioh. 5.4.
(whereby we are made pertakers of the spirit of God, which he merited for us,
who believe in him) that makes us Conquerors of the World, that is of those
sinful lusts, that reign in worldly men, and not any power or strength of our
own. Where sin therefore is thus conquered, there is true faith; but in
whomsoever sin still reigns, it is in vain for him to boast of his faith, or
of the free grace of God; for as yet he can lay no claim thereto. Thus Mr. D. I
have proved, that our love to the Brethren, and other effects of the spirit,
which are never separated from true Faith, do bear witness to our Faith, and
testify the truth of it, not only before men, Confer. with a sick man. Page 8.
(as you say) but inwardly also to our souls and consciences, which you must
not deny, if you remember what you have written, concerning the reconciliation
of Man to God. page 57, 59, 60. for there you say, that joy in the Holy Ghost,
and the love of God, and of our Brethren, and new obedience, are inseparable
Companions to our reconciliation by Faith. Every one of these therefore must
needs assure us of our reconciliation to God, unless you will say, that a man
may know that he has faith, but cannot know, either that he rejoices in God,
or that he loves God and his Children, or that he obeys his word and
Commandments, of which I can see no reason, seeing faith is as spiritual,
supernatural, and as hard to be known, as any of these. For my part, I cannot
conceive, how the souls of those that are reconciled unto God, should have such
abundant joy, as you speak of, be filled even with floods of comfort, and have
no knowledge, nor feeling thereof at all. And though the true love of God
cannot always so easily be seen, and discerned by every one in whose heart it
is, as such superabundant joy and rejoicing may: yet if he that loves God
could not know that he does so, our Savior would not have said unto Peter,
Love thou me? neither could Peter have answered, as he did, Yea Lord, thou
know that I love thee: ^^h. 21.15. ^sal. 116.1.
Nor could David so confidently have said, as he does, I love the Lord, because
he has heard my voice and my supplications. Now as a true Christian may know
that he loves God, so may he also that he truly repents, and lives not
according to his fleshly lusts, but according to Gods Commandments, and is
therefore his Servant. For else how could Job have said, Job 42.6. Psalm. 116.6.
that he abborred himself, and repented in dust and ashes? Or how could David
have said, Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and the Son of thine
Handmaid? It will be worth the while also, to take further notice what Mr. D.
has written concerning the love of God, and the keeping of his Commandments.
This Garment of love (says he) is like the Garment of diverse colors,
wherewithal the Kings Daughters which were Virgins, were apparelled.

If a woman be seen in the street, without a party colored Garment, it is
concluded, that she is either none of the Kings daughters, or at least no
Virgin: so is that Ornament of love, I say, that thing wherewith all the people
of God, reconciled to him, are adorned: if we see a soul altogether stripped of
this Ornament, we conclude they are not in the number of Gods people, at least
not reconciled. Therefore the Holy Ghost concludes, He that loves not, knows
not God, 1 Ioh. 4.8. And as on the affirmative he pronounces, Grace be on all
them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24. So also on the
negative, If any love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha,
1 Cor. 16.22. Now with the love of God is joined the keeping of his
Commandments, as an inseparable effect thereof. This is the love of God, that
we keep his Commandments, 1 John 5.3. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. 1
John 14, 15. If a man love me, he will keep my words, Verse. 23. Christ entering
into the soul, shall drive out whatsoever is profane, and draw up the soul by
the cords of love, unto new obedience. And to this place we refer hatred of
sin, love of virtue, a godly sorrow for transgression committed, revenge upon
our selves, for the things that are past, and a jealous care for that which is
to come.

Thus far Mr. D. From all which, I pray you, may not I infer and conclude, both
negatively, that he who lives in sin and loves the World, and the things
thereof, is destitute of the true love of God, and as yet, can have no
assurance of salvation? and affirmatively, that if a man can find, that he
sincerely and unfainedly loves God, and testifies the truth hereof, by
obedience unto his Commandments, he may hereby, (and not by faith only, as Mr.
D. will have it) be assured of Gods love, and of his own eternal salvation by
Jesus Christ? Doubtless, St. Peter would have us thus to conclude, 2 Pet. 1.5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and resolve upon it; for he bids us make our Calling and Election sure, by
the practice of other virtues, as well as of Faith; and consequently, gives us
to understand, that assurance of salvation is to be had, not from Faith only,
but from charity also, and from brotherly love, and all those other Virtues and
Graces that are joined with it; and by the Apostle in that place, particularly
rehearsed, and reckoned up. For it must needs be granted, that those who are
assured of their election, are thereby also assured of their salvation; seeing
it is not possible, that any of the Elect should perish, Math. 24.24. For Gods
decrees are immutable, his counsel shall stand, and he will do all his will and
pleasure, Isa. 46.10.

SECT. VI. Objections answered, and Doubts resolved.
THere remains nothing now, but that I answer certain Reasons of Mr. D. which
I have not yet touched, whereby he goes about to prove, that our works of
piety, or charity, cannot possibly assure us of salvation, when faith lies
hid, that we cannot see that we believe, by the inward testimony of our
Conscience.

Object.

Convers. J. Baptist. p. 51.


The first of them is this, That which makes me doubt of my Faith, will make me
doubt of the sincerity of my works. No, it will not; for the cause many times
lies hid, when the effect discovers it self, and is obvious to sight and
sense.

God, and to please him in all things: he may gather, that he is not destitute
of Faith, though he cannot so clearly see it, nor behold it directly, and
immediately in it self, or in its own proper acts.

Again, whereas he says, That which makes him doubt of his faith, will make
him doubt, not of his work; but of the sincerity of it.

agentis seu operantis, of the person that does the work; the other operis, of
the work that is done.

1. The sincerity of the person consists in the true intention of his mind, or
heart, and so it is opposed to hypocrisy. Now whether a man does his works in
sincerity and truth, or but in hypocrisy, his own Conscience will tell him.

2. The sincerity of the work, is when it is true and real, and not imaginary,
or counterfeit.

Now if sincerity be taken in this sense, there is apparent reason, why many a
believer doubts more of the sincerity of his faith, then of his works; to
wit, because his faith is assaulted with strong, yea, and now and then, with
hideous, and with fearful tentations, which do shake it, and make him to doubt
of the truth of it; whereas he may have no such cause to doubt of the truth of
his works. Even as, though not the same man, yet some other for the same cause,
may doubt more of the truth and sincerity of some of his virtues, actions and
works, then of others.

As for example, of his chastity, rather then of his liberality and justice,
because lascivious thoughts, do now and then rise in his mind, although he
takes no delight in them, but resists them, and grieveth, and condemns
himself for them. Whereas he is not so assaulted in the exercise of other
vettues, which makes him less to doubt of the truth and sincerity of them.

Lastly, Whereas he says, That which makes me By retorning the Objection.
will make me doubt of the sincerity of my works. I must tell him, That if this
reason of his be any thing worth, then neither will his faith give him any
assurance of his salvation, when he doubts of the sincerity of his works, or
of his love to God and Man; Gal. 5.6.
for the true justifying and saving faith works by love. But contrary
hereunto he tells us, (as you heard before) that when the soul is laden with
the burden of sin, and sense of misery, it is sufficient for our assurance to
believe God in his promises, according to that, Act. 16.21.
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.



Heb. 11.6.
But as fire on the hearth cannot be seen, when it lies covered under ashes:
so is the faith of Gods dear Children many times so covered, by reason of
doubts, that arise in their minds, or the dimness of their spiritual eyesight,
that they cannot see it. Yet I hope Mr. D. will not say, that all their works
in this case are unsound, or that they, or others, shall do well to think so of
them, as long as their Consciences do tell them, that whatsoever they do, they
do it in sincerity, and in the singleness of their hearts, and not as
time-servers, or men-pleasers.



He that is acted only by the Spirit of bondage, does love sin still; and
whatsoever good he does, Act. 15.9.
it is only for fear, and not out of love to God, Heb. 9.14.
that he may glorify him.
quoad materiale, according to the matter of them, yet not quoad formale, that
is, according to the purity and sanctity of them, for it is faith that
purifieth the heart, as St. Peter says. And as another Apostle tells us, It
is faith in the blood of Christ, that purifieth the Conscience from dead works,
to serve the living God. Men in deed may be restrained from acting sin for a
time, by the terror and fear of Gods judgments, which the spirit of bondage
works in them; but when that fear is gone, or when it is but forgotten, as
usually it is in their mirth and meriments, then they break out again, and
commit the same sins which they did before with greediness. The sum of all then
is this, it is faith and the filial fear of God, and not the spirit of bondage,
that makes men hold out in a constant course of obedience to all Gods
Commandments. And it is faith that purifieth the heart, and inflameth it with
the love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ. No fear of punishment, nor terror
of Hell, can mortify sin, or make it odious and loathsome. For notwithstanding
these fears, the love of sin, and vicious affections will still reside, and
remain in the soul.

SECT. VII. The Conclusion.
THus have I answered his Objections; wherefore to conclude this matter, this I
say, That where a man doubts of his faith, especially in time of tentation,
yet he may have some assurance from his works, that he is not altogether
without faith. And on the other side, a man's faith when it is grounded on the
promises of the Gospel, that is, when he rests and relyeth on Jesus Christ,
not only for the pardon of his sins, but for the spirit of sanctification, and
endevoreth to obey God in all things, may assure him of both these, although he
doubts of the sincerity, and truth of some of his works, by reason of the
relics of the flesh, or of that carnal corruption, that does adhere as yet
unto them. But the best assurance of all other is, when a man upon proof and
examination finds that both his faith and works, are upright before God, that
is sincere and sound, though subject to many infirmities, and imperfections, 2
Pet. 1.5. to 12. See this Question handled again.

Quest. 13. Whether the Gospel may properly be said to be a Covenant, as that
of the Law was?
SECT. I. The Gospel is properly a Covenant.
Mr. S. his peremptory resolution and determination is this, God makes no
Covenant properly under the Gospel, as he did at first. Man is not restored in
such a way of Covenant and condition as he was lost; but more freely, and more
by grace, and mercy, that is, as he explaineth himself, by free promise,
without binding us to any conditions. He will have the Gospel therefore to be
called a Covenant, non proprie, not properly, (for as he acknowledges in every
Covenant properly so called, there are conditions) sed late, but in a large
sense, or acception: as the Lord calls his promise, that he will never
destroy the World with a flood, by the name of his Covenant. But against this
assertion of his I shall by Gods Grace make it evident, that the Gospel is
properly a Covenant, not a Covenant of works indeed, as the Law was: yet as the
Protestants have hitherto called it, and as it is indeed, the Covenant of Grace.

First, I reason thus, the promises of the Gospel, or of the new Testament are
not absolute, but conditional.

Mr. S. therefore, will he, nill he, must grant, that the Gospel is properly a
Covenant; for he acknowledges that to be a Covenant, Genesis 9. See also Mat.
6.14. and. 18.3. Joh. 8.24.
which requires conditions, or wherein men are bound to the performance of
conditions. Its true indeed, Mr. S. and our new teachers, do confidently
avouch, that the Gospel offers salvation unto all, without any conditions,
but this is apparently false, as these Scriptures following do evidence. Romans
8.13.
If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Behold therefore the goodness,
and severity of God: Romans 11.22
to them which fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in
his goodness: Col. 1.22.
otherwise thou shall be cut off. Christ has reconciled you in the body of his
flesh, 1 Timothy 2.15.
through death to present you holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his
sight, if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled; and be not moved away
from the hope of the Gospel. The Woman being deceived was in the transgression,
notwithstanding, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
she shall be saved in Childbearing, if they continue in faith, and charity,
and holiness, with sobriety. If we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with
him. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him: 2 Timothy 2.20
if we deny him, he will also deny us. In a great house, there are not only
Vessels of Gold, and of Silver, but also of Wood, and of Earth; and some to
honor, and some to dishonor. Heb. 3.14.
If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a Vessel unto honor,
sanctified, and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work. We
are made pertakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence
steadfast unto the end. 1 John 1.7.
If we walk in light, as he (that is, God the Father) is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sins. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Verse. 9.
Behold I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come into him, and will sup with him, and he with me. In all
these, Rev. 3.20.
and in many other places of holy Scripture, salvation is offered us not
simply, and absolutely, whether we believe or no, and whether we forsake sin,
and obey God, or no; but if we do such, and such things, as the Lord requires
of us, that is, upon condition of our faith and obedience. This is so evident,
that Mr. S. is forced to acknowledge, that there are conditions required in the
Gospel, and that it is a Covenant; But he thinks to put it off with this
evasion.

1. He says, That Christ is the only covenanted person. The Covenant is made
with him, and not with us.

And 2. That he has satisfied all the conditions thereof for us, that he has
repented, and that he was mortified for us. But let us examine these things,
and see what truth there is in them.

SECT. II. The Covenant of Grace is made not only with Christ, but with us
also, who do believe in him.
FIrst of all then, whereas he says, the Covenant is made with Christ,
therefore not with us. He might as well say, the Surety here amongst men, is
bound to pay the debt: therefore not the principal debtor himself, whereas it
is well known, that both the debtor and his sureties, do many times all of
them, stand bound together unto the Creditor. Now so do both Christ and we
stand bound together, in the Covenant of grace to God the Father, but after a
far different manner. For the Covenant of salvation is made with Christ, as
with our Mediator, and surety, who undertook to satisfy the justice of God for
our sins, and to bring us again to God, from whom we were revolted and gone
astray, that so we may serve him, and glorify him, according to our bounden
duty.

It is made with us also, as with the peculiar people, whom Christ has
purchased unto God, who by Covenant do bind our selves to believe in Christ,
and to glorify him, and his Father for the work of our Redemption. That the
Covenant of the Gospel is thus made, not only with Christ our head, and our
surety; but with us also that are his members, is most evident from those words
of the Lord, wherein both the persons with whom the Covenant is made, and the
form thereof is related and expressed. This is the Covenant that I will make
with the House of Israel, Jer. 31.34. and 32, 33. Heb. 8.8.9, 10, 11, 12.
says the Lord (with the spiritual Israel of all Nations, not the carnal
Israel) after those days I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them
in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people,
etc. We see here with whom this new Covenant of the Gospel is made, with the
house of Israel: now the house of Israel is not persona singularis, one
individual person, as Christ is, sed totum aggregatum, but a multitude united
together, as the Church of God is.

2. The Lord also Ezech. 16.8, 9. tells us, that he entered into Covenant with
the Israelites, when he found them defiled in their filthiness, which cannot be
spoken of Christ, and then washed their blood from them, which must be
understood of the Covenant of grace, not of works. The Covenant of grace
therefore was not made with Christ only, but with all his members also, who in
their natural condition, are such as were the Israelites here described.

3. We read also Genesis 17.7. Genesis 17.9.
That the Covenant of grace was made with Abraham, and all his seed: It was not
made therefore with Christ only. Yea, which is more, God said unto Abraham,
Thou shall keep my Covenant, thou and thy seed after thee, in their
generations. This Co^enant therefore was not only a gracious promise of
salvation on Gods part; but Abraham and his seed were also bound by it, to do
something, that is, Genesis 17.1.
to believe in the promised Messiah, and to glorify God for their salvation by
him. But here it will be said, Abraham and his seed were commanded to keep, was
that all their males should be circumcised the eighth day. It is true; barely;
but in regard of the mystical signification thereof, whereupon the Lord spoke
unto the Israelites, who were circumcised in the flesh and said, Circumcise
therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stif-necked, Deuteronomy. 10.16.
Where this spiritual Circumcision was neglected, the Covenant whereof it was a
token, was not kept but broken, as that complaint which the Lord takes up
concerning the carnal Israelites, plainly shows, All these Nations (to wit,
all the Heathen Nations there reckoned up) are uncircumcised, and all the house
of Israel, Jer. 9.26.
are uncircumcised in their heart. The Apostle also tells us, that that is
not circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but which is in the heart, Romans
2.28, 29.

4. When David also says, All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto
such as keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies. Psalm. 25.10.
And again, The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness, Psalm. 103.17, 18.
( justitia promissionum, his righteousness in fulfilling his promises) unto
Childrens Children; To such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember
his Commandments to do them. I would know of what Covenant, and of what
testimonies and commandments it is, that David here speaks. Doubtless not of
the legal Covenant; for that is not a Covenant of mercy, but of justice, that
exacteth all that is required in it, without remitting any thing, or showing
any mercy unto those that do transgress it. Deuteronomy. 27.26. It is of the
Evangelical Covenant therefore, that David speaks, when he says, that God
will be merciful unto those that keep his Covenant. Now I cannot conceive, how
we cannot be said to keep this Covenant, and the Testimonies and Commandments
thereof, if the Covenant of the Gospel were made only with Christ, and we were
bound to nothing, nor nothing were required of us by it, as a part of this
Covenant belonging to us. For were it so, then we could be said, neither to
keep it, nor to break it, no more then mankind can be said to keep the
covenant, that God made with Noah, Genesis 9.11.
that he would no more destroy the Earth with a Flood. Gods absolute promise to
Noah concerning this his mercy, is here called his covenant. It is God himself
therefore, who faithfully performs and keeps this covenant, throughout all
generations. But it cannot be said to have been kept by Noah, or any of his
posterity, who by this Covenant were bound to nothing.

5. To these former Testimonies, may be added those words of the Lord, to the
Israelites, Exodus 19.5. where, after he had told them, what great things he had
done for them, he subjoyneth. Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed,
and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people; for all the Earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of
Priests, and an holy Nation. Here the Lord has promised great things unto his
people; but it is upon condition, that they obey him and keep his Covenant.

If it be said, That this was spoken to the carnal Israelites, and therefore
belongs not to us.

I confess indeed, That it was spoken, not only to the Elect, but to the whole
Nation of the Israelites: Israel of God, or the called of God of all Nations:
whence it follows, that believers now under the Gospel, are confederate with
God, and therefore are to keep the covenant of the Gospel, that they may be a
peculiar people, and a royal Priesthood unto God; 1 Pet. 1.9.
for so St. Peter applies this promise unto all true believers, as unto those
to whom all the blessings of the covenant do belong. Nec enim alios quam
faederatos, and faederis conditionem servantes, decrevit Deus beatitudinis
facere participes; for neither has God decreed, to make any other partakers of
blessedness, than those that are confederate with him, and that keep the
condition of the covenant, as says the most learned and judicious Rivetus
writing on these very words of the Lord unto the Israelites.

6. I do also reason thus, As the Law is the covenant of works, or at least
wise, as the covenant of works is revealed in the Law: So the gospel reveals,
and makes known unto us the covenant of grace, or of salvation, by the mere
mercy of God, through Jesus Christ. As the Law therefore binding us to the
perfect obedience thereof, if we will be saved, and otherwise denouncing
damnation, if we transgress it, does hereby show, wherein the covenant of works
consists. So seeing the gospel does not offer remission of sins, and
salvation by Christ unto all, nor unto any absolutely; but unto those only that
do repent, and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.15. and obey Christ, Heb. 5.9. It
follows therefore, that the Gospel binds us to the obedience thereof, as to
our part of the covenant of grace: yet so, that we are to do the things which
the Gospel requires, not by our own strength, as the Law injoyneth, Sed
subsidio gratiae divinae, a Christo pronobis partae; but by the assistance of
Gods grace, which Christ has purchased for us. So that even in this regard,
the Gospel is a covenant of grace, as well as in respect of our free
justification, and eternal salvation in Heaven: because our salvation, from the
beginning unto the end thereof is of grace, and not of nature; or by any power
or strength of our own free will. For all the powers of our souls are in
bondage to sin and Satan, until they be freed by Christ, as our Savior
himself gives us to understand, when he says, If the Son shall set you free,
ye shall be free indeed, Joh. 8.26. And St. Paul tells us, Col. 1.13. That it
is not we our selves, by any power of our own; but God of the riches of his
grace, who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into
the Kingdom of his dear Son.

Thus the very works, or acts of Faith, Repentance, and new obedience which we
are bound unto in the Gospel, are effects of Gods grace in us. We presume not
therefore, to do them by any power of our own, but do covenant the performance
of them, by the grace of God in Jesus Christ, diligently using the means that
are prescribed us in the Gospel, for the building of us up in grace, and
waiting upon God for a blessing on them.

7. And lastly, When the people of God in the old Testament, had revolted from
him by Idolatry, and other foul sins: We read, that when they repented, 2 King.
23.
they bound themselves by Covenant, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his
Commandments, and his testimonies, and his Statutes. Now shall we say, that
they renewed the legal covenant. We have no reason to think so; for they knew
it was impossible for them to keep it. They covenanted therefore, to keep Gods
Commandments evangelically, whereunto they had before bound themselves, when
they were circumcised; yea, and not only so, but were born under this covenant,
being descended from Abraham, and the ancient Patriarchs, with whom and their
Seed, the Lord entered into covenant. It was this covenant of the Gospel; (for
such was the covenant which the Lord made with Abraham, as is to be seen, Gal.
3.17, 18.) that the Israelites, when they repented, and returned unto the Lord
from Idolatry, renewed with him.

These things which I have thus alleged, do make it manifest, both that the
covenant of grace is properly a covenant, and that it is made, not only with
Christ our head, but with every one of us that are his members, who by this
covenant are bound to faith in Christ, and new obedience, that so we may
glorify God, and be saved eternally, through his rich mercy in Jesus Christ.

Against this that I have said, S. undertaketh to prove, that the covenant is
made with Christ only; for so St. Paul says, To Abraham and his seed, Gal.
3.16.
were the promises made. He says not, to seeds, as of many, but as of one, And
to his seed, which is Christ.

But, how he can prove hence, and deduced from these words; for the Apostle
says, That the promises were made to Abraham, and to his seed, which is
Christ. To Christ indeed only, as to the Mediator, in whom the covenant is
confirmed of God, as the Apostle explaineth himself in the next words: but,
otherwise to Abraham the Father of the faithful; and consequently, to all that
tread in his steps, as to those to whom forgiveness of sins, and the other
benefits and blessings purchased by Christ, and promised in the covenant, do
appertain and belong.

This will be the more manifest, and evident unto us, if we do consider, what
St. Paul means by the promises, which were made to Abraham and his seed. The
words indeed are difficult, and therefore diversely understood by the learned.

The most common exposition is, that by the promises are meant, that promise of
the Lord to Abraham, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed,
And that the Apostle speaks, numero plurali, in the plural number; because
this promise was at several times repeated, and made unto Abraham. Now it is
evident, that the seed here spoken of, is Christ; for in him only it is, that
all the Nations of the Earth are blessed. But it does not hereupon follow, that
the covenant is made only with him. For from these very words, we may infer
against Mr. S. that all Christ's members are comprehended in the covenant, as
well as he, though after another manner, and in another sort. For the promise
is made unto Christ only, that he shall be the Author of blessedness unto all
Nations; but unto them, that they shall be blessed in him. Now I would know how
all Nations shall be blessed in Christ? verily not so, as if no one person of
any Nation were to be excluded; for then all the World should be saved, and
none should be damned.

The meaning therefore of this gracious promise, must needs be that all Nations
should be blessed in Christ, not absolutely; but according to the conditions
expressed, and laid down in the Gospel, wherein the covenant of grace is fully
opened, and unfolded. Or that Elect, who are to be gathered out of all Nations,
shall be blessed in Christ, who only fulfill the conditions of the covenant.

There is another exposition of these words of the Apostle, and that is, that
by the promises of which St. Paul here speaks, we are to understand the
promise which the Lord at several times made unto Abraham, that he would give
unto him, and to his seed, the Land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession,
as a type of the eternal inheritance of Heaven, whereof it was an assurance
unto them. That whereby Estius, and other learned men, are led and induced to
renounce the former exposition, and to embrace this latter, is, because St.
Paul without any necessity, does twice repeat this word [And] saying to
Abraham, and his seed, were the promises made. He says not, and to seeds as of
many; but as of one, and to thy seed. For the sense would have been as complete
and full, say they, if the word [And] had been left out, and he had said, he
says not of seeds as of many, but as of one, to thy seed. They think
therefore, that St. Paul has no reference to that promise, In thy seed shall
all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, where this word [And] is not found;
but to these words, To thee, and to thy seed, will I give the Land of Canaan:
unto which St. Paul, by repeating this word [And] there expressed, seems to
relate. But, if we shall admit of this Exposition, it will no way advantage Mr.
S. For Piscator, and those that follow it, as also St. Augustine, (as Estius
tells us) by Abraham's seed, do understand, not Christ in propria persona sua,
in his own person only, sed Christum mysticum, Cor. 12.12.
but mystical Christ, as Piscator speaks, that is, Christ and his members, as
St. Paul also does, when he says, As the body is one, and has many members,
and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body, so also is
Christ, that is to say, Christ and his members:

Piscator gives two Reasons, why these words of the Apostle, [which seed is
Christ] are not to be understood properly, to wit, of Christ's person only.

First (says he) the Apostles scope is against it, which is to prove, that
eternal life is given unto believers, for Christ's sake, and that according to
the promises which he made unto Abraham, as appears from the fourteenth Verse.

Again, This absurdity is against it, that eternal life should be given to
Christ only.

I have thus laid down the several expositions of these words of the Apostle,
that it may appear the more evidently, that it cannot from hence be collected,
that the covenant was made only with Christ, and not with his members. For
otherwise, if I shall speak what I think, I am fully persuaded, that St. Paul
in saying, To Abraham and his seed, which is Christ, were the promises made,
has reference to that gracious evangelical promise, in thy Seed shall all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed. This is the promise (or the covenant as St.
Paul speaks in the foregoing words,) which the Lord made with Abraham, as S.
Peter plainly gives us to understand, in those words of his unto the
Israelites. Act. 3.25.
Ye are the children of the covenant, which God made with our Fathers, saying
unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kinreds of the Earth be blessed.
Where you see St. Peter expresses the word [And] even in this promise, as it
is also set down, Genesis 22.18. where the Lord speaks to Abraham, and says, In
blessing I will bless thee, etc. And in thy seed shall all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed. Thus the foundation of the latter Exposition before spoken
of, is removed, and falls to the ground.

Now from these words of St. Peter, it may also be plainly proved against Mr.
S. that the covenant of salvation is not made only with Christ: For wherefore
does he say unto the Israelites, Ye are the children of the covenant, which God
made with the Fathers; but because this covenant belonged unto them, and they
were comprehended in it.

SECT. III. Christ did not repent, and believe for us, but we must perform
these conditions our selves.
LEt us now see, whether Christ have fulfilled all the conditions of the
covenant of the Gospel for us: Whether he has believed, repented, and was
mortified, and obeyed the Gospel for us. We acknowledge with St. Paul, that
Christ is the end of the Law, Romans 10.4.
for righteousness unto us, and that we are justified before God by his
obedience. We acknowledge also, that the spots of sin, that adhere to our works
of sanctification, are washed away in his blood; and so not only our persons,
but our works also become acceptable to God, not for any merit, or intrinsical
holiness, or worthiness of their own; but as St. Peter says, by Jesus Christ:
1 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 7.14.
in whose blood the Saints of God have washed their Robes of righteousness and
holiness, and made them white.

All this we do willingly grant; but that Christ should perform for us those
very duties of faith and repentance, and mortification, which are required of
us in the Gospel, seems to me very strange. For as we are discharged from
fulfilling the Law, to be justified thereby, because Christ has thus fulfilled
it for us; so if Christ have believed and repented for us, will it not follow
hereupon, that God will not require these duties of us, or that he will not
condemn us, though we neglect and omit them; no more than he will, because we
transgress his Law, and do not perfectly fulfill it to be thereby justified.
When the Scripture says that Christ died for us, is not the meaning hereof,
that he died nostra vice in our stead, and so by his death has redeemed us
from death, and damnation everlasting? so when David said, Would God I had died
for thee, my Son Absolon, his meaning was, that he desired to have died in
Absolons stead, that he might by his own death, have freed Absolon from death.
In like manner therefore, if we shall say, that Christ believed, repented, and
was mortified for us, the meaning hereof will be, that he performed all these
duties in our stead, and so has freed and discharged us from them. What other
construction these words will bear, I know not; but sure I am, that many are
imboldened by them, too much to neglect the practice of repentance, and the
duties of sanctification and holiness. But not to stand any longer upon this, I
would know how it can be justified, that Christ either believed, or repented,
or was mortified for us?

For first, When Mr. S. says, that Christ believed for us, he speaks not of
the legal faith, or confidence in God (for thus Christ believed for us, seeing
for us he fulfilled the whole Law; nor of the faith and confidence that Christ
had in God his Father, that he would uphold and strengthen him, to perform the
great work of our Redemption; but of justifying faith, which is, that whereby
we rely on Christ, for the pardon of our sins. Now this justifying faith, est
in nobis subjective, non in Christo is in us, as in its proper subject, not in
Christ. And this both the Prophet Habakuk, Hab. 2.4.
and the Apostle St. Paul do teach us, when they say, Justus fide sua vivet,
the just shall live by his own faith, and not by the faith of another.

Gal. 2.16.
The true believers therefore say not, Christ has believed for us; but we have
believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ,
and not by the works of the Law. But if it should be granted, that Christ
believed for us, that we by that faith of his, might be justified: how shall we
salve that other saying of his? how shall we make it good, that Christ repented
for us? for repentance always presupposes sin: it is a turning from sin, unto
righteousness. Such is the repentance, which the Lord in his Gospel required of
us. Now what Christian ears can endure to hear, that Christ should be said to
have turned from sin unto righteousness. Christ was never overtaken with any
sin, he never turned from God: therefore he cannot be said to have turned from
sin unto God, as we do when we are converted. Nor can he be said to have been
mortified for us; for there was no flesh, nor none of the old man in him, that
required any mortification.

SECT. IV. How Christ is made unto us Sanctification.
BUt let us see now, how Mr. S. endeavors to prove and make good, that Christ
has fulfilled all the conditions of the Gospel for us.

The Apostle (says he) teaches, 1 Cor. 1.20.
Whatsoever holy duties therefore of faith, or new obedience are required of us
in the Gospel, Christ has fulfilled them for us.

Thus I have urged, and enforced his Argument to his greatest advantage, as I
suppose.

For answer whereunto I say, Imputative, by way of imputation. 2. Meritorie, by
way of merit. 3. Effective, efficiently, or effectually working it in us. The
first of these Mr. S. makes choice of and pitcheth upon. For he will have
Christ's holy obedience, to be imputed unto us for our sanctification. Now I
grant, that it is imputed unto us indeed, Romans 5.19.
but for our justification, not for our sanctification. For as St. Paul says,
by the obedience of one (that is of Jesus Christ) many are justified, or made
righteous.

Again, If Christ's holiness should be imputed unto us, for our sanctification,
then sanctification should not be inherent in us; but external, and without us,
as our justification is.

And lastly, Then there should be no real difference between our justification
and sanctification, neither should they be different graces, but altogether the
same. For wherein consists our justification, but in the imputation of
Christ's holy obedience unto us. Now if our sanctification do consist in this
also, Heb. 10.29. and 13.12.
what real difference will there be between them? I do indeed acknowledge, that
the holy Scripture does now and then make no real difference between
sanctification and justification. For whereas the Apostle says ordinarily,
that we are justified by the blood of Christ, it is said, that we are
sanctified by his blood. Where I conceive, that sanctification, is either put
for justification, or at the least, that justification is included in it, as it
must needs be, if we shall say that the meaning of the Apostle is, that the
blood of Christ has merited both our justification and our sanctification.

2. In this sense I do willingly grant, that Christ is made unto us
sanctification, that is, by the merit of his passion purchasing it, and by his
blood washing away the spots of sin, that do adhere to our sanctification.

3 And lastly, I do also acknowledge (as all Orthodox Protestants do) that
Christ is our sanctification, not only meritoriee, by way of merit, sed
effective; but efficiently also, because by his spirit, which he has purchased
of his Father, he does sanctify us, or effect and work holiness in us. And
thus (as I take it) I have cleared the Apostles meaning, and made it manifest,
that he has no intent to teach, that Christ believed for us, and obeyed the
Gospel for us, in that sense, as Mr. S. takes his words, when he says, That
Christ is made unto us of God sanctification.

SECT: 5. Although the promises of the Gospel are offered unto sinners, yet
they have no right, nor interest in them, unless they do receive them.
LEt us now examine another of Mr. S. his Arguments, whereby he goes about to
prove, that the promises of the Gospel do belong to sinners, as sinners, and
that there is no condition of faith, nor of repentance required of them, that
they may be partakers of remission of sins, and of salvation through Christ.

What (says he) were the Churches of the Corinthians, Ephesians, Colossians;
and what was Paul, before Christ came to him? were they sinners, or qualified?
And what were all that believed, before they believed? Ephesians. 2.12.
They were strangers from the Covenants of promise, and so should have
remained, and continued for ever, had they rejected them, as did the Jews, and
some other Citizens of Antioch in Pisidia, when Paul and Barnabas preached,
Act. 13.46.
and offered Christ unto them.

Briefly therefore I do reason thus. Promises do belong to those, to whom they
are made, and not to any other: but the promises of the Gospel, concerning
remission of sins, and eternal salvation in Heaven, are made to those that
either do for the present, or shall hereafter repent, and believe in Christ,
and not to any other: therefore none have any right to these promises, but such
believers and repentant sinners. Object.

This was written before Mr. S. his death.




It may be Mr. S. or some other, will here reply, and say, are the promises of
the Gospel then to be offered to none, but to those that do repent and believe?

Yes, They are to be offered unto all, neither Infidels, nor any other sinners
excluded: but not absolutely, sed sub condition fidei and resipiscentiae; but
upon condition, that they do repent, Mar. 16, 16 Act. 3.19.
and believe, if they will have their sins blotted out, and be saved through
the mercy of God in Christ.

Thus indeed, promissiones Evangelij sunt universales condition and
promulgatione, sed non applicatione, the promises of the Gospel are to be
preached, and propounded unto all; but all do not appropriate, and apply them
to themselves, nor interest themselves in them.

Now wherefore is this? but as I said before, because the promises are not
absolute, but conditional. For were they absolute, and no condition at all were
required, then one man should have as great an interest in them, and as good
right to them, as another, whether he were believer, or unbeliever.

SECT. VI. How the promises of the Gospel, or of the new Testament, are said to
be better then the promises of the old, or of the Law.
Lev. 18.5.
hoc fac and vives, do this, and thou shall live.

Heb. 8.6.
The promises of the Gospel therefore, seeing (as the Apostle says) they are
better then those of the Law, are absolute, and not conditional.

Moses, made with the Israelites. Now by this former covenant, if he means
the covenant of grace, as it was administered unto the Israelites of old, under
the Law of Moses, and by this latter and better covenant, the same covenant of
grace, as it is plainly laid down in the Gospel: the promises of this latter
covenant are better then those of the former.

First, Because they are clearly delivered in express and plain words, whereas
those were darkly shadowed out under types and figures, and dimly represented
in obscure Prophecies.

Secondly, Because there is a greater measure of the spirit, and of the graces
thereof, both promised and exhibited, now under the new Testament, since the
coming of Christ in the flesh, then was formerly in the old Testament: This
may well be the meaning of the Apostle. But if we shall say, that he does in
these words of his compare together, the covenant of works, and the covenant of
grace, then I say, that the promises of the Gospel are better promises, then
are the promises of the covenant of works.

First, Because remission of sins is promised in the Gospel, which is not to be
had by the Law. For whosoever fulfilleth not all the Commandments thereof,
Deuteronomy. 27.26.
it shuts him up under the everlasting wrath, and curse of God, without any
hope of pardon.

Again, The promises of the Gospel, are said to be better then those of the
Law, because the Gospel promises grace, whereby we are enabled to perform the
conditions thereof, which the Law does not. For the Law only forbids sin,
and commands that which is holy, and just, and good, but ministers no power
to perform that which it requires; but in the new covenant of the Gospel, the
Lord promises, that he will write his Laws in our hearts, and put his spirit
within us, Heb. 8.
and cause us to keep his Commandments, and to do them. Thus by the grace of
God in Christ, we are strengthened, and enabled to keep the covenant of the
Gospel: whereas it is altogether impossible for us, so to keep the Law, as to
be justified and saved thereby.

SECT. VII. The learned Protestants do hold, the promises of the Gospel not to
be absolute, but conditional.
THere is one Objection more, which I think good to remove, and that is this.
The learned Protestants, as by name Bucanus, Locis Com. Theol.
and some others, make this main difference between the Law and the Gospel,
that the promises of the Law were conditional; but the promises of the Gospel
sunt gratuitae, are free promises. It may seem therefore, that Mr. S. and those
that teach, as he does, do preach true Protestant Doctrine, and that we which
teach otherwise, have revolted, and departed from the Protestant Religion, at
leastwise in this particular.

Bucanus explaineth himself, and shows what he means by the conditions,
which he speaks of, to wit, such as are causae, causes of the blessings that
are promised. Whereas therefore the Gospel says, si credideris, if thou shall
believe, particula [si] non est (...): this particle if, is not a note of a
cause, but of a consequence, says he. Now this we do willingly grant, that
remission of sins, and salvation are freely promised in the Gospel, and that
our faith and repentance are no causes of them.

Bucanus therefore teaches altogether as we do; for in the next words he
says, that our faith or our believing non est causa, vel meritum, sed modus
vel instrumentum, sine quo non potest fieri applicatio beneficiorum Christi, is
not a cause or merit, but a means or instrument, without which there can be no
application of Christ's benefits unto us. And if this be not enough, he says
afterward in express words, that Jeremy calls the Law of Moses, being
considered by it self, and in it self, the legal and old Covenant, because it
was the covenant of our creation, whereby the Lord required of us perfect
obedience, to be performed by our own strength; but the Gospel a new, or a free
covenant, sub condition fidei, ex gratuito favore ab ipso nobis donandae, upon
the condition of faith, to be freely given us by him.

Thus Bucanus (who in his common places has abridged, and drawn into a short
sum both Calvin, and the principal and best of the Protestant writers, that
were before him) shows how we are to understand them, if any of them any
where or other do say, that the promises of the Gospel are not conditional, as
those of the Law were. And for further confirmation, that the Protestants do
teach, that salvation is offered us in the Gospel, non simpliciter and
absolute, sed sub condition fidei and resipiscentiae, not simply and
absolutely, but upon condition of our faith and repentance, I will also
allege, Volum. 2. These. Theol. Loc. 4.
what Pis^^tor and Pareus, two of the most principal Protestant Doctors do
write.

First of all then, Piscator setting down the difference between the Law and
the Gospel, has these words,

The covenant of the Law is, whereby the Lord of old promised unto the
Israelites, all sorts of temporal blessings, and eternal life it self, upon
condition of perfect obedience, to be performed by them to his Law, by their
own strength: and on the contrary, threatened sundry and diverse curses, and
eternal death it self, to all that should transgress, but even one Commandment
of the Law; and they on the other side, promised that obedience unto God. The
sanction, or ratification of this covenant is described, Exodus 24.

The covenant of grace is that whereby God has promised his gracious favor
for ever, to all that believe in Christ, upon condition indeed of that their
faith, and sincere piety, or new obedience joined with it: notwithstanding of
neither, to be performed as by the believers own strength; but as by that free
favor to be bestowed on them by him; and they on the other side, being
assisted by Gods grace, do promise faith and obedience unto him.

^olleg. 1. de lvang. et gratia, p. 21.
Pareus also setting down the difference between the Law and the Gospel,
amongst other things has these words. The Law promises life, with condition
of a man's own righteousness: the Gospel promises the same, with condition of
repentance, and faith in Christ. This might be sufficient, notwithstanding,
because the same Pareus does excellently in another place express and unfold
the conditions of the covenant of grace, I will therefore here transcribe, and
translate that which he there says, into English, that all those who are
illiterate and unlearned amongst us, as well as others, may see and perceive,
that the Doctrine formerly taught by us here in England, is the very same which
the learned Protestants also beyond Sea have taught, from which our new
illuminated teachers have revolted and departed; and therefore in this
particular, are but half Protestants, if so much. His words are these.

Colleg. theol. 2. de faed. Dei, part 2.
There were three conditions of the covenant of grace, without which there could
have been no peace between God and Man.

The first was, That some one should be a purchaser or procurer of this peace,
that is, a Mediator, who upon a way agreed upon, should make peace between God
and man. That way was, that he should proceed, or come forth from God unto
mankind, not only as an herald, or as a Messenger between them (for he could
not come forth from men) declaring Gods will concerning peace; but that he
should both pacify Gods wrath, by the dignity of his person, merit and
intercession, and that he should also by his divine efficacy, confer upon men
grace, righteousness, and life eternal by him obtained for them. The former of
these was necessary, in regard of Gods justice and truth: the latter, in regard
of men's imbecility. The second condition was, That God for the intercession,
satisfaction, and merit of the Mediator, should receive sinners into his grace
or favor of enemies, should make them his friends, and Sons, and bless them
with eternal joy and happiness with himself. The third condition was, that men
should acknowledge this comprehensive grace of God toward them, receive by
faith the benefits purchased by the Mediator, offered and given in the Gospel,
and be thankful unto God, in all holy obedience. Let every one that reads
these things, see and consider, whether it be Protestant Doctrine, to teach,
that there are on our part no conditions at all in the covenant of grace; but
that all the conditions thereof belong unto Christ, as Mr. S. will have it.

SECT. VIII. That the promising, or passing over of a thing, not absolutely,
but upon a condition, does not infer merit in him that performs the
condition; but is only a bar to the enjoying of the thing promised, whilst
the condition is not performed.
But against this that has been said,

But no such thing follows hereupon; Sol.
for we are bound to serve, and to obey God, both by right of Creation, and of
Redemption. Now what may not God require of us, that which is his own? yea, and
upon condition also of our Faith and Repentance, if we will be partakers of the
reward which he freely promises unto our obedience? Methinks this should not
be denied, especially seeing it is for our good, that God does offer salvation
unto us, upon such conditions; for hereby we are stirred up to use the means of
our salvation, the more carefully and diligently, that so we may be both for
the present assured, and hereafter pertakers of the thing promised, to our
endless comfort.

Again, God in his Gospel requires no other conditions of us, but what we in
duty are bound to perform: now what! can we be said to merit any thing by doing
of our duty? I trow not; for our Savior teaches us, when we have done all
that is required of us, yet to say, that we are unprofitable Servants, we have
but done that which in duty we were bound to do, Luke 17.10. Moreover, God has
elected and chosen us to the means, as well as to the end, for by the means we
come to the end. And hereupon it is, that the end that is, eternal salvation is
not promised absolutely, but upon condition of the means that lead unto it,
that is, of Faith and Repentance, which God of his grace works in us, and we
by the grace of God are to perform, because we are elected unto them, as well
as to the end it self, which is our eternal salvation by Christ. Now that which
we thus obtain by the free election of God, and for the merit of Christ, and
not by any power of our own, but by the work of his grace, it would be too much
pride in us, to think that we do any way merit it: by this that has been said,
it appears, that the thing which is made over unto us, upon a condition, non
transit in meritum, does not become meritorious upon our performance of that
condition, unless it be res indebita, a thing to be done by us, whereunto we
are not bound; and unless also there be some proportion and equality, between
it and the reward: otherwise a condition is only a bar to the receiving and
enjoying of the thing promised, until it be fulfilled; or if the condition be
not fulfilled at all by us, or in the time appointed, and set down, then we
loose the thing promised, and deprive our selves of it.

A Gentleman (as I heard some few years since from a Servant of his) did
promise to give unto the Vicar, in an impropriate Rectory, that belonged unto
him 40 l. per annum, if he would receive it as his free gift, and testify this
under his hand.

Now I demand, whether this requiring of him to receive it as a free gift, did
turn it into a merit? Doubtless, it did not; for unless the Vicar would under
his hand, acknowledge that he received it as a free gift, he was to forfeit it,
and to lose it, as indeed he did: not because he did think that he should have
merited some thing, if he had fulfilled this condition; but out of pertinacy
and stomach, because his predecessor had more; or out of the pride of his
heart, contemning this gift, as too small and mean, for a man of that worth,
which he took himself to be.

Now the same is to be said concerning eternal life, which God offers unto
us, upon condition of our faith and repentance; for the exacting of this
condition, does neither make eternal life, to be any whit the less the free
gift of God; nor does it any whit diminish, or destroy our bond of thankfulness
to God, for this his unspeakable and unconceivable blessing and benefit.

SECT. IX. Although Salvation is not promised to any, but upon condition of
Faith and Repentance; yet the Lord has absolutely promised to his Elect Grace,
to perform both these.
YEt notwithstanding, Because I would not willingly conceal any part of the
truth, I do freely grant, that the promises of the Lord, are in some sort
absolute, that is, in respect of the grace promised by God unto his people,
whereby they may be enabled to keep his Covenant, and his Commandments, or in
respect of his spirit, which he has promised them.

With Dr. Field therefore, and other learned Protestants I say, that the
promises of the Gospel are absolute, in respect of the means; but conditional,
in regard of the end. Their meaning is, that salvation which is the end of our
hope, is no where offered us; but upon condition of our Faith and Repentance.
Where these therefore are wanting, there can be no hope of salvation. But
because it is not in our power, to repent and believe, the Lord therefore has
promised his Elect absolutely, that he will put his spirit within them, Zech.
36.27.
and write his Law in their hearts, and cause them to walk in his Statutes, and
to keep his judgments; and do them



They are indeed in that sense, or in that respect and regard which I have
specified: and more then this cannot be inferred, nor rightly concluded from
these words.

SECT. X. How the Evangelical Covenant may be said to be made with all the
visible members of the Church.
I Will only add one thing more, and that is this. Although the Lord does
promise his Spirit unto his Elect only, whereby they are enabled to obey the
Gospel, and to lay hold of salvation: yet he does enter into a conditional
covenant with all the visible members of his Church. For as all that were
circumcised of old were taken into covenant with God, not only the Israelites,
but proselytes also of the Gentiles, and their seed: so unto all, both Jews
and Gentiles, that do join themselves unto the Church, and are baptized: does
God promise and covenant salvation upon condition, that they do repent and
believe in Christ; and they for their parts, do restipulate and bind themselves
to perform the same. As many therefore of these as do conform themselves unto
the world, and live still in sin and unbelief are Covenant-breakers, and their
Baptism becomes, no Baptism unto them: Even as Circumcision of old, was
made uncircumcision unto those that lived wickedly, Romans 2.25.
and did not keep covenant with God. Not only believing Parents therefore
themselves, but their seed also are taken into covenant with God; and hereupon
it is, that the Children of believers are called holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. that is,
sanctitate faederali, by a federal sanctity, or holiness, whereby they are
dedicated, and consecrated unto God, (even as the Vessels of the Temple, and
the Priests and Levites and Tithes, and all consecrated things were called
holy, not in regard of internal, but external holiness, being set apart for the
most holy God, and his service.) Thus as all the Israelites of old, Parents and
their Children, were taken into Covenant with God, and circumcised, and
therefore called an holy Nation, Exodus 19.6. so all believers now, and their
Children, are reputed and reckoned within the covenant of the Gospel, and are
therefore baptized, and by their Baptism consecrated unto God, and bound to
obey him, and to serve him, as an holy people. It is manifest therefore, that
as God did with the Israelites of old, so he does now enter into a conditional
covenant with all the visible members of the Church, that is, with all that
make profession of the faith of Christ, and of obedience to his Gospel, and
with their seed. And this does St. Paul plainly give us to understand, Romans
11.17. where speaking of believers of the Gentiles, he says, that they were
taken out of their own wild Olive Tree, and grafted into the true Olive Tree,
and made pertakers of the Root and fatness thereof. For what means he hereby,
but that the Church of the Gentiles is by God joined unto the Church of the
Israelites, or rather made one Church and people with them, and invested with
the self-same privileges.

As the Israelites and their Children therefore were of old taken into covenant
with God, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12, 13. so are we now and our Children.

SECT. XI. The absurdities which do ensue and follow upon their assertion, who
do deny the Gospel to be a Covenant.
THus (as I take it) I have sufficiently corroborated and confirmed my first
Reason, or Argument against the exceptions taken, and objections made against
it by Mr. S. and others. I have made it evident, that there are conditions
required of us in the Gospel: it follows therefore necessarily from his own
words, that the Gospel in regard of us, as well as of Christ, is really and
properly a Covenant.

Now for the conclusion, and shutting up of this present question and
controversy, I will put Mr. S. in mind of some of those absurdities, which he
and all those do thrust themselves upon, who deny the Gospel to be a covenant,
in regard of us, and affirm it to be nothing else, but an absolute promise of
salvation by Christ.

First, From hence it will follow, that neither Simon Magus, nor any other
Apostates, no nor any Christians that live dissolutely, or flagitiously, after
their Baptism, are to be accused, or charged with any breach of Covenant
against God, no more then Infidels, or Heathens that never heard of Christ at
all.

Secondly, It will also as necessarily follow from hence, that not only others,
but even the primitive and most ancient Christians, ever since the days of the
Apostles, have dealt impiously, who received none into their Communion by
Baptism, but those that first renounced the world, the flesh, and the Devil,
and bound themselves by a solemn vow, promise or covenant to believe in Christ,
and to serve God, and to walk before him, in the ways of his Commandments,
all the days of their life.

Lastly, From hence also it follows, that it is not lawful for Christians to
enter into covenant with God, because this would be superstition, and
will worship, having no foundation in the Gospel. And so it will follow also,
that Mr. S. and as many as are of his Opinion, if they have taken the
Parliament Covenant, have dissembled and played the Hypocrites, both with God
and Man. For if the Law only be a Covenant in regard of us, and not the Gospel,
then men's binding themselves to God by covenant, was lawful under the Law; but
not under the Gospel.

Quest. 14. Whether those Ministers that do offer remission of sins, and
salvation by Christ, not to all absolutely; but upon condition that they do
repent, and believe in Christ, be legal teachers? And whether by this their
Doctrine they do make the Gospel a Covenant of works, as the Law is?
SECT. I. The Law neither teaches nor accepts of Faith and Repentance, but
requires perfect obedience to all the Commandments thereof. He therefore
preaches not legally, but evangelically, that offers pardon to those that
repent and believe.
Mr. S. and our new illuminated preachers, do accuse us, and charge us, who
preach as the Protestant, and all Orthodox teachers have ever done, that we are
legal teachers, because we do not with them offer remission of sins, and
salvation to all absolutely, and without any conditions; but tell men (as the
Apostles do) that they must repent and believe in Christ, that their sins may
be blotted out, and that they may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.





Now we on the contrary do teach, that we are saved only and altogether by the
grace of God, through the merits and satisfaction of Jesus Christ. And we say,
that works are necessary to our justification, at leastwise, to the continuance
of it, after a far inferior manner, that is, necessitate presentiae, non
efficientiae, as duties necessarily accompanying it, and going with it; not as
any causes meriting, or working it. Thus whereas the Law requires works, as
causes of our justification, and salvation, we require Faith, Repentance, and
such works or duties, as the Gospel teaches, only as necessary conditions,
without which we cannot be saved. For (as I have proved in the former Question)
the Gospel indeed offers salvation unto all by Christ; but not absolutely,
but upon condition of their faith, and repentance. Where faith therefore in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and repentance are wanting, it is in vain for men to believe
that they are reconciled unto God, or that they are in the state of salvation,
which is the Doctrine now taught by Mr. D, Mr. S. and many others. Whereas
these men then do think, that all conditions are legal, they are herein
deceived. For the difference between the Law and the Gospel, is not that the
one requires conditions to be performed, and the other none at all, which were
it so, then the Gospel should be a Doctrine of licentiousness, and carnal
liberty; but in this, that the Law offers salvation unto none, but unto those
that do perfectly fulfill it, without failing in any the least duty therein
required and commanded; but the Gospel offers pardon of all sins, and
transgressions unto all that believe in Christ, and rise up out of their sins,
by repentance when they are fallen, and do not still lie in them.

Thus the Law is a covenant of works, because it promises salvation to none,
but to those that do the works therein prescribed and commanded; Romans 10.8.
but the Gospel is a covenant of faith, or as St. Paul calls it, the word of
faith, because it promises forgiveness of sins, and salvation to all those
that renouncing themselves, and their own works, do rely only upon Christ for
salvation, according to the promises of his Gospel.

SECT. II. Both repentance, and all manner of good works, are commanded and
required in the Gospel.
THis that I have already said, might be sufficient for an answer unto this
Question: notwithstanding, because many at this day by hearing of our late new
Preachers, and reading of their Books, have their minds and understandings so
vitiated, and depraved, that whenever they hear us teach the necessity of
repentance unto salvation, or hear us press the practice and performance of
good works, upon men's Consciences, presently they think that we are enemies
unto the grace of God, and do preach nothing but the Law. (For so indeed some
few years since, when one heard me tell my hearers, that as long as any one of
them did live in sin, and not practice repentance, it was in vain for him to
believe, that his sins were forgiven, and that he should at the coming of
Christ to judgment rise again in his own body, to live eternally with Christ.

After he was returned home from the Church, he spoke aloud in the hearing of
diverse, and said, here is nothing but preaching of the Law, preaching of
Repentance. Repent and ye shall be saved, repent, and Heaven Gates shall be set
open for you. To the intent therefore, that such poor seduced souls may be
brought to see their error, I will handle this matter a little more fully.

First of all then, It is certain, that the Law requires perfect obedience of
us unto all the Commandments thereof, and will not accept of any repentance,
if we fall but into any one sin, or fail in any one duty; but concludes, and
shuts us up under the curse of God. The Doctrine of Repentance therefore (as
these men think) is not legal, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
but merely Evangelical. And therefore when Christ taught the people
repentance, it is said, that he preached not the Law, but the Gospel. Now it is
manifest and evident also, Mar. 1.15.
that all manner of good works, which are the fruits and effects of repentance,
are required and commanded in the Gospel, as well as in the Law. For St. Paul
tells us, that we are Gods workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which he has appointed, that we
should walk in them. When St. Paul says here, that we are created in Christ
Jesus, unto good works; it is certain, that this is the voice, not of the Law,
but of the Gospel. For the Law neither speaks of our new Creation in Christ
Jesus, that is, of our Regeneration, neither makes any mention of Christ at
all. Christus enim non est revelationis naturalis sicut est lex, Romans 2.14.
sed supernaturalis. It is not the Law, but the Gospel, that reveals Christ
unto us. It is therefore the Gospel also, and not the Law, that informs us,
and tells us, that Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
and purify a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works.

And seeing this is one end of Christ's passion, for as much as he has
delivered us out of the hands of our enemies, that we might serve God without
fear in holiness and righteousness, Luke 1.74, 75.
before him all the days of our life, And did therefore bear our sins in his
own body on the Tree, that we being dead to sin, should live to righteousness:
hereupon St. Paul wrote unto Titus, and said, This is a faithful saying, and
these things I will, 1 Pet. 2.24.
that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, Tit. 1.8.
might be careful to maintain good works. And afterward, in that Chapter,
Verse. 14. He writes thus unto him, Let ours also learn to maintain good works,
for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.

In all these, and many other places of the Gospel, are good works required of
us. Yea, I will say more, they are required as necessary to our eternal
salvation in Heaven, though not by way of merit, yet as a condition necessarily
to be performed by us, Ephesians. 2.10.
and as the way wherein we are to walk to Heaven. For our Savior has told us
plainly, Mat. 5.20.
That except our righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, we shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

These things which I have thus alleged, being rightly considered, any one may
see, that they do not preach the Gospel rightly and truly, who do not press
the necessity of good works, on the Consciences of their hearers.

SECT. III. Why the Gospel, seeing it prescribes and requires works, is not
to be called a Covenant of works, as well as the Law? Or how it can be said, to
be the Covenant of Grace?
BUt not unlikely, some one or other, will here say, what difference is there
then in this particular, between the Law and the Gospel, if both do urge the
necessity of good works? or why is not the Gospel to be called a Covenant of
works, and not of grace, as well as the Law? I will show you the reason hereof.

1. The Law is called the Covenant of works, because works are therein
required, as causes antecedent to our justification and salvation; or as that
whereby, and for which we are to be justified: now, so are they not in the
Covenant of the Gospel, as has been sufficiently showed before.

2. Again, The Law is also called the covenant of works, because works are
therein commanded, and required; but no power nor ability is ministered and
given to perform them: but the Gospel is the ministration of the spirit. 2 Cor.
3.8.
For it does not only command us to repent, and to bring forth the fruits of
repentance, which are good works; but shows how we may be enabled to do this,
to wit, by faith in Christ, who has merited not only forgiveness of sins; but
the spirit of sanctification for all that do believe in him. Gal. 3.14.
The Gospel therefore is a Covenant, not of works, but of grace; not only
because it teaches, that we are justified not of works, but of grace; but
because by faith in the promises thereof, we do obtain grace to repent, and to
do all those things, which it requires of us.

Lastly, The Gospel is truly said, to be the covenant of grace, because it is
such a covenant, as is not only begun, and entered into, but altogether
ratified, and consummated by grace.

For first, It was merely and only of grace and mercy, that God after we had
broken, and dissolved the former covenant of works, or of the Law, was pleased
to enter into a new covenant of salvation with us: the form whereof is revealed
in the Gospel.

Secondly, (as I said before) it is merely of his grace, that God inableth us
to perform the conditions of this new covenant, to wit, Faith and Repentance,
which otherwise would become impossible unto us; for we are as unable of our
selves to repent, and believe in Christ, as we are to fulfill the whole Law. Its
true, Faith and Repentance are in themselves easier conditions, than the
universal and most perfect obedience which the Law requires. But otherwise,
As, it is as impossible for a man, when he is dead to lift up a straw, as an
Ox: so, while we are dead in trespasses and sins (as we are all by nature,
Ephesians. 2, 3.
and of our selves) it is as impossible for us to believe, and obey the Gospel,
as it is for us to fulfill the Law, until we be quickened by the spirit of
Christ.

Thirdly, It is of grace that we are kept and upheld by the power of God, from
falling away from him, or that he keeps us firm and fast in his Covenant; for
otherwise, if he should leave us to our selves, but a day, or an hour, we
should break, and altogether dissolve the covenant of the Gospel, as we did the
legal covenant.

Lastly, It is of grace, and not for any merit, or desert of ours, that we are
in part for the present, Ephesians. 2, 8. Tit. 3.5.
and shall hereafter perfectly and fully be made partakers of the benefits and
blessings that are conveyed and passed over unto us, in the covenant of the
Gospel, that is to say, of justification, adoption, sanctification, and
glorification, or eternal happiness in Heaven. Thus the new covenant of the
Gospel is wholly of grace, and therefore deservedly, it is called the covenant
of grace and not of works, as is the Law. Now seeing all these things are
acknowledged, professed, and constantly taught by us, what cause has Mr. S. or
any other, to say, that we turn the Gospel into a covenant of works, or to
allege against us, that saying of the Apostle, Romans 11.6.
if it be of works, it is no more of grace. Its true indeed, if we did make
works any cause of our salvation, then we should make the Gospel a covenant of
works, as the Law was; but this we do not, but require them as necessary
conditions to be performed by us, in way of thankfulness to God, for our
salvation by Christ, and for other necessary uses, and not to merit any thing
by them.

Quest. 15. Whether the Orthodox Protestant Ministers, who teach men to believe
in Christ, and to repent, that they may obtain remission of sins, and salvation
by Christ; or those who offer Christ and Remission of sins to all, without
requiring any thing of them, either Faith or Repentance, or ^e^ obedience, do
preach Christ the more truly, and more to the edification, and consolation of
their hear^rs?
SECT. I. Where is showed, which is the right way of preaching the G^spel.
IT is most certain, that those who preach the Gospel, as Christ himself, and
his Apostles did, are they who preach Christ, not only most truly, but most to
the edification, and consolation of their hearers. Now so do not they, who
offer Christ and Salvation by him, to sinners as sinners; or to sinners,
without any condition, either of Faith or Repentance; but who teach men to
repent, and believe in Christ, that they may be saved; or which offer Christ
and Salvation by him to all, the greatest sinners not excepted, if they will
lay hold of him, and his merits by Faith, and turn from their sins, and
practice Repentance. That our Savior did thus preach the Gospel, St. Mark
assures us, Chap. 1.14.15. For there he says, that after John was put in
prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the ^ospel of the Kingdom of God,
and saying, the time is at hand, repent ye, and believe the Gospel.

I know not what they will here reply, John had before preached the Gospel to
the Galileans, and that they had received it. Now they do not deny, but grant
and teach, that after that men have received the Gospel, then Faith, and
Repentance, and new obedience are to be pressed upon them; but not when Christ
is first offered, and tendered unto them.

But John's preachings may be a sufficient confutation of such conceits, and
surmises as this; Math. 3.2. And thus when the Apostles were sent by Christ, to
preach the Gospel to the Jews: it is also said of them, that they went out,
and preached, that men should repent; yea, Mar. 6.12.
contrary to the Opinion and practice of our new teachers, we are told, Heb.
6.1. that the Apostles, when they planted Churches, began and laid the
foundation in the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance. And indeed that which is
elsewhere written, and recorded of the Apostles preaching of Christ, and his
Gospel, does sufficiently evince and testify, that they offered not remission
of sins, and salvation by Christ to all absolutely, without any conditions; but
exhorted men to repent and believe in Christ, that they might obtain pardon of
their sins, and be saved by him. Thus when certain, who were pricked in their
hearts, by hearing Peter preach, Act 2.37.
said unto him, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall
we do? Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the
name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. The same St. Peter also,
having reproved the Jews for consenting to Christ's death, and showed them who
he was: in the next place he lets them understand, what they were to do,
that they might be saved by him, Repent ye therefore, and be converted, Act.
3.19.
that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come
from the presence of the Lord. When the Jailer also being terrified, and
troubled in his mind with the fear of Gods judgments, Act. 16.30, 31.
came to Paul and Silas, and said to them, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. And St.
Paul says, that he being called and sent of God, Act. 26.20.
showed both to Jews and Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to God,
and do works meet for repentance. These things which I have thus alleged, do
manifest and make it evident, that the Apostles did never offer salvation unto
any, but upon condition of their repentance, and faith in Christ. Now that all
other Ministers of the Gospel ought to do the like, those words of our Savior,
do sufficiently inform us, when he says, That repentance, and remission of
sins should be preached in his name among all Nations. Luc. 24.47.
Not remission of sins singly, and a part by it self (as our neotericks will
have it) but repentance and remission of sins together.

Thus did Christ, and thus did his Apostles preach; and thus has Christ
ordained, that all other should preach: We may be assured therefore, that this
is the best, or rather the only way of preaching the Gospel. For were there any
better, we cannot otherwise think, but that Christ would both have followed it
himself, and have enjoined all his Ministers to do the same.

SECT. II. Where is showed, which is the most profitable way of preaching the
Gospel.
THis that I have said, might be a sufficient Answer to the former Question,
and to all the several parts and branches of it. Notwithstanding, because the
novellists do cry out against us, and say that with our many years preaching,
we have converted few, or none; but by urging such a necessity of repentance,
to the obtaining of salvation, (as we do) do terrify and trouble many, and
drive them into desperation: therefore I will now, by Gods gracious assistance,
prove unto them, that our Doctrine is more likely to convert sinners, and to
comfort them being converted, then theirs.

To speak first of the former.

We do indeed denounce Gods judgments against men, while they live in sin, and
are led by their carnal lusts, telling them that they must repent, and amend
their lives, if they will have any hope of salvation by Christ. Thus do we deal
with obstinate sinners, endeavoring to save them with fear, that is, with the
terror of Gods judgments, as St. Jude commands us. Jud. Verse. 22, 23.
If such preaching do no way at all conduce to a sinners conversion, why does
he say, On some have compassion, making a difference; and others save with
fear, pulling them out of the fire. But they tell us, that we lay too hard a
task upon men, and that they have no power,

Its true, they have not of themselves; but it does not follow hereupon,

1. For the Spirit of God works with, and by his word, when it is preached,
and makes it effectual, at one time or other, to as many as are ordained to
eternal life. The Law indeed only terrifies sinners, but converteth none; Act.
13.48. 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9.
for which cause the Apostle calls it the Ministry of death and of
condemnation; but the Gospel he calls the Ministry of the spirit, because God
sends down his spirit into the hearts of the Elect, while the Gospel is
ministered, and preached unto them; for so we read of Cornelius and his
Companions, Act. 10.44.
that while Peter preached the Holy Ghost fell on all that heard the word. And
while Lydia heard Paul preach, the Lord by his spirit opened her heart, and
converted her to the faith of Christ. Thus is the spirit given in the Ministry
of the word, Act. 16.14.
and makes it effectual to work Faith and Repentance in the Elect, when these
duties are preached, and pressed upon them.

2. Again, We have this comfort, that Christ has merited for those that do
believe in him, 1 Cor. 1.36.
not only the pardon of their sins, but the spirit to sanctify them, and to
work repentance in them. Act. 5.31.
We are not therefore to set upon the work of repentance in our own strength;
for then we are sure to be soyled, and shall prevail nothing; but we are to
rely on Christ for his spirit, and for his grace, Gal. 3.14.
that we may thereby be enabled to do those things, which he requires of us.
For we receive the promise of the spirit (that is, the spirit of God which
Christ has merited for us, and God has promised us) by Faith. Thus though we
be never so weak of our selves, yet as St. Paul says, Phil. 4.13.
we are able to do all things (that God requires of us) through Christ which
strengthens us.

3. And lastly, We have this comfort also, that by our prayers we may obtain
not only other inferior gifts, but the Holy Ghost himself, Luck. 11.13.
the Author of all sanctifying grace, as our Savior assures us hereof.
Albeit then, we be never so unable of our selves to repent, and to bring forth
the lively effects and fruits thereof, yet by our prayers offered up unto God,
in the name of Christ, we may obtain power to do all these things. Such strong
consolation have we against the difficulty of repentance.

Now all these things being well considered, let any indifferent man judge,
whether are like to bring men out of their sins, and to bring on their
conversion, they that by their Doctrine do stir them up to labor and strive
against sin, and to call upon God for grace, whereby they may be enabled to
subdue it, relying not on their own strength, but on Christ's merits, who has
purchased the spirit of God for them, or they that will have men, even while
they live in profane swearing, drunkenness, whordom, or any other the like
impieties or impurities, Reconcil. of God to man, p. 40, 41, 42
to believe that their sins are pardoned, and that they are reconciled unto
God, and in the state of salvation, which is Mr. D. his Doctrine preached and
much applauded by many. There is not any one that considers rightly hereof,
and perceives what the necessary, and unavoidable consequences hereof are; but
he will say, that this is to lay a foundation for pre umption and carnal
security. And indeed this is the very use, which many have made of this
Doctrine already. For though they live in sin, and are led capti^e by their
sensual lusts, as formerly they were; yet hearing these m^n offer Christ unto
all, without requiring any thing of them either faith repentance, or any
reformation of their sinful li^es, re^^ing them that grace is freely offered in
the Gospe^, without any conditions, and free^y to be taken and recei^ed of all:
hereupon they are confident that they shall be saved by Christ, though they
li^e like libertines, and cast off all care of reforming their wicked ways and
works. It is too late now after they have thus preached free grace unto them,
according to this n^w way of theirs, to tell them, that if they do finally
continue in infidelity, and impenitency, they shall be damned. For their former
Doctrine has made them secure, in^omuch, that they do now resolve (as one did
of late ha^ing read a certain Treatise of Mr. S.) that they will no more
hearken unto any judgments, or terrors, threatened and denounced against sin,
as they had formerly done. And well may they resolve thus with themselves, if
it be true which Mr. S. teaches, to wit, that God in the Gospel does
absolutely offer remission of sins, and salvation by Christ, to all without any
condition, yea to sinners, as sinners. For it is most certain, that God will
fulfill and perform all his absolute promises, to all those to whom they are
offered and made, neither can their infidelity, or their wickedness frustrate
the performance of them. He promised absolutely, and without any condition,
Genesis 8.22.
that while the earth remains, Seed-time and Harvest, and cold and he^t, and
Summer and Winter, and day and night, shall not cease.

Genesis 9.9.
He promised also as absolutely, that the World should never more be destroyed
with a Flood, and that he would set his Bow in a Cloud, for a sign, and in
assurance hereof.

Now these promises of his, he has ever since constantly performed, throughout
all Generations, though the World has been never so wicked. God did as
absolutely promise Christ, and accordingly sent him into the World, in a most
corrupt time, to renew all things. Thus the wickedness, or the infidelity of
man cannot frustrate, nor disannul the promises of God, that are absolute.
Wherefore if the promises of life and salvation by Christ unto all, to whom he
is offered, and preached, be absolute, and without any condition: how can final
impenitency, or infidelity (as Mr. D. tells us) cause any to forfeit, and
frustrate them to their damnation?

But let us see how our adversaries go about to prove, that their Doctrine is
more likely to gain sinners to God, and to bring them to repentance, and
amendment of life then ours is?



God, and will out of thankfulness toward him for his mercy, renounce the
World, and his own lusts, and consecrate himself unto his service.

For first, The true believer by his faith in Christ, Joh. 7.38.
does obtain grace, and power, and strength to love God, and to obey him.

And secondly, That faith of his, upon serious and due meditation and
consideration* first, of his own eternal misery by sin; and secondly, of Gods
wonderful mercy toward him in Christ, (who suffered his most bitter passion
for his redemption; and passing by many others, does offer salvation freely
unto him) will inflame his heart with the love of God, and excite and stir him
up to the obedience of his Commandments. But a false faith produces no such
gracious effects, but nourishes and nusleth men in carnal security, as we see
in many, who fay they believe in Christ, and trust to be saved by him, as well
as the best, and yet live still in their sins, and never go about to reform
themselves.

Now such is the faith, which Mr. D. and his Companions do teach; for they will
have men to believe, that their sins are pardoned, and that they are reconciled
to God, before they go about to rise out of them by repentance, which faith of
theirs is no true, but a false faith; for as I have before proved, repentance
and remission of sins, do always go together. Where there is no repentance
therefore, there can be no remission of sins. All therefore that such a faith
can do, is but to stir up those, who do thus falsely persuade themselves that
their sins are pardoned, to love God for his mercy toward them, and to obey
him (which it seldom or indeed never does;) but grace it obtains none, to
crucify sin in them, and to sanctify them; and therefore though they should
strive never so much to serve God, and to obey him according to all his
Commandments, yet it is not possible that they should do this, because there
is no principle of grace, nor no spiritual life in them.

SECT. III. Wherein is showed who do preach Christ most comfortably.
BY this that has been said, any one that is not possessed with prejudice, may
easily see and perceive, whether the Protestant way of preaching the Gospel, or
the new way taken up here of late in England, be like to bring forth better
fruits, and to prove more profitable, and more pertinent to the edification of
the hearers.

To leave this therefore, it remains now in the last place to be discussed,
whether of these two ways, makes more for the comfort of men's souls and
consciences. Whereunto thus I answer, That is solid and true comfort, which is
grounded on Gods infallible word, and not on men's fancies, that are deceiptful.
But such is the comfort which the old and Orthodox Protestant Doctrine affords
the hearers thereof, and not the Doctrine of our Novelists. For we teach (as
the Gospel does) that though men have been never so great sinners in times
past, yet that all those sins of theirs are forgiven by God and blotted out
when they do repent and believe in Christ.

We exhort therefore, all that do thus repent and believe, to be of a good
comfort, and not to be terrified with any fear, but to rest assured that they
shall undoubtedly be saved, through the mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

Thus do we comfort true believers, with the unfallible and unfailable promises
of Gods word, which are the only safe and sure ground of comfort.

D. speak. Yet they say, that they can have no assurance hereof, until they
believe.

Thus they teach men to believe, not that they may be justified, but that they
may be assured of their justification, and salvation by believing.

Now I do willingly acknowledge that true faith, John says, He that believes
has the witness, that is, 1 John 5.10.
of his adoption, and consequently of his salvation in himself. But the faith
which these men do teach, is nothing else but a fancy. For they will have
wicked men, D. his Conf. p. 20. 21.
even when they do continue in their sins, to believe that these sins of theirs
are pardoned; and tell them, that by believing this, they are assured of their
justification before God, and of salvation. Now this is not true faith, but
detestable, and most damnable presumption. For faith is to believe the promi es
of God, and to rely upon them, Psalm. 119.41, 42.
as on its foundation.

Now I would know, whether God have any where made any promise of forgiveness
to men, while they continue in their sins? surely no; but on the contrary, he
threatens them by his Prophet David, and says, That he will wound the hairy
scalpe of such as go on forward in their wickedness. Psalm. 68.21.
And our Savior himself told his hearers, That except they did repent, they
should all perish. It is not possible therefore, for any to believe, (truly,
Luc. 13.3.
I mean) that their sins are pardoned until they do repent. Or if, even then
while they continue in sin, they will needs persuade themselves, as many do,
that their sins are pardoned, and forgiven through Gods mercy, and Christ's
merits, this is nothing else but presumption. Those therefore that preach thus,
instead of comforting their hearers (as they persuade them, and make them to
believe) do nothing else, but delude and deceive them. For true justifying
faith, is not for a sinner, whilst he continues in his sins, to believe that
they are pardoned, which is false; but to rely upon Christ, for the pardon of
them, according to the promises of his Gospel, and not according to his own
fancy, and fond imagination, as Libertines and carnal Gospellers do. That this
is that faith, whereby we obtain pardon of our sins, and are justified before
Gods tribunal, St. Paul makes manifest and plain, when he says, All have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23, 24, 25.
being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation by faith in his blood. It
is not then our believing that our sins are pardoned, whereby we are justified;
but it is our faith in Christ's blood, that is, our relying on the merits of his
death and passion, whereby we obtain the pardon of them: even as many did in
like manner, by faith in Christ obtain the health of their bodies from our
Savior, when they were miraculously cured by him. Mah. 8.13.


For when our Savior required faith of them, saying, Mar. 9.23.
be it unto thee, according to thy faith; Or, if thou can^t believe, all things
are possible to him that believes, what is meant here by faith? or what were
they to believe? That they were already made whole by Christ? No, for that was
false: but that Christ was of that power, that he could, and so gracious and
good, that he would heal them, and hereupon to rely, and put their trust and
confidence in him, that he would cure them. This was their faith, whereby they
obtained the health of their bodies from Christ, as is yet further to be seen
in the Canaanitish Woman. Mat. 9.21.
For she said in her self, (that is in her heart she believed and was
persuaded) If I may but touch the hem of his Garment, I shall be whole, not I
am already but I shall be whole. That this was the faith whereby she obtained
the health of her body, our Saviors words to her do assure us. For he turned
him to her, and said Daughter, be of good comfort thy faith has made thee
whole. Even so in like manner did we, when we were dead in our sins, obtain the
spiritual health of our souls, not by believing that our sins were pardoned;
but by persuading our selves that God of his rich mercy would pardon them,
according to the gracious promises, which he has made unto us in his Gospel,
and by relying upon him for the pardon of them. For as Christ required faith of
them for the obtaining of their bodily health; so also does he of us, for the
spiritual health of our souls. As they therefore were cured of their corporal
maladies, by relying on Christ, according to his word: so shall we be saved
eternally, by relying on Christ, according to the promises of his Gospel.

SECT. IV. Two Objections answered.
AGainst this that I have said, I find two Objections raised, which I do think
good to remove, that they may not lie as stumbling blocks in the way of any
well-minded people, to endanger them upon error.

First, Some do reason thus, If a man cannot believe that his sins are
pardoned, until he do repent, then Repentance shall go before faith, which they
hold as an absurdity; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14.23
says St. Paul.

And again, He tells us, That without faith; Heb. 11.6.
it is impossible to please God.

But hereunto I answer, That although Repentance goes before that act of
faith, whereby a man believes that his sins are pardoned: yet it does not
follow hereupon, that it goes before all faith in general, no nor yet before
justifying and saving faith. For if I shall speak Logically and properly, there
are (as I conceive) no less then four several acts of faith; but I do make
choice rather to speak popularly, and therefore I will contract two of them
into one.

The first act of faith, is for a man to believe, that the whole word of God is
true, or that I may speak more particularly to the matter in hand, it is for
him to believe, that Jesus Christ, being sent of his Father, has perfectly
wrought and accomplished our salvation, and that he does offer this salvation
unto all those, who do repent and believe in him. This act of faith does not
only go before repentance, but before all other acts of faith also. For if a
man do not believe, both that Christ has absolutely, and perfectly
accomplished our redemption and salvation, and that he does also offer the
salvation which he has purchased unto all that do repent, and believe in him,
he will have no encouragement, neither will it be possible for him, either to
repent, or believe, and to rest and rely on Christ for salvation. This is that
faith which is commonly called fides dogmatica, vel historica, doctrinal, or
historical faith, because it goes not beyond the faith of the Doctrine, or of
the History of the Bible. Now this, though it be absolutely necessary unto
salvation, yet it is not saving faith because it justifies no man, nor gives
to any man any interest, or right unto salvation.

2. The second act of faith is, That a man do not despair, though his sins be
never so many, or never so great; but believe, or persuade himself, that God of
his mercy through Christ will pardon them, and so cast himself upon Christ; or
that he do trust upon Christ for salvation, according to the promises of the
Gospel. This is saving faith; or it is that act of faith, whereby we are
justified and saved, as St. Paul gives us to understand in those words of his
(which I have already alleged) Romans 3.23, 24, 25. All have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood. Behold, it is faith in Christ's blood,
that is in his death and passion whereby God becomes propitious, that is,
gracious and merciful unto us; and consequently whereby we are justified, and
saved. Now this act of faith, is in nature before repentance, though in time it
go with it.

I will make this plain by a familiar comparison. Sol est natura prior lumine
ex illo orto. The Sun is in nature before the light that springs, and
proceeds from it; because in nature the cause is always before the effect:
but the Sun and its light are simul tempore, together in time. For as soon as
the Sun was created, and placed by God in the Firmament, at the very same
instant, did it illighten the World.

And even so in like manner faith in Christ, is in nature before repentance;
but they go together in time. For seeing there is no promise of pardon made to
any one in the Gospel, while he continues in sin, it follows necessarily
therefore that true justifying faith cannot be separated from repentance, no
more then saving repentance can be without such a true faith. And this (as I
take it) is the cause, why remission of sins and salvation are in some places
of holy Scripture, attributed to repentance, and in some other to says, to
wit, because faith and repentance are as it were twisted and infolded the one
in the other. For neither can a man repent without faith, nor can he believe in
Christ, for the pardon of his sins, unless his faith did stir up repentance in
him, and a settled purpose to forsake all sin. For as long as a man lives in
sin, he has no promise from God to ground his faith upon.

The true Christian therefore in believing repents, and in repenting
believes: these are two inseparable Companions, and as it were twins, that are
bread and born together. Although then that act of faith whereby we do believe
in Christ, is in nature before repentance, as the cause is before the effect:
yet there is no priority, nor posteriority of time between them; Faith is the
first wheel in the Clock, that moves all the rest. Mr. Panb. Vind. Great.
for a man cannot believe in Christ for salvation, according to the promises of
the Gospel, unless this faith of his do excite and stir him up to the practice
of repentance.

The third and last act of faith, is that whereby a man believes that his sins
are blotted out and forgiven, and that he is in the state of salvation.

The former is called a direct act, because it makes a man to look directly
upon Christ, and to cast himself upon him for salvation.

This latter is called a reflexed act, because a Christian reflecting and
looking back upon himself and his own soul, sees faith and repentance wrought
in him; and hereupon concludes that his sins are pardoned, and that he now is
the Child of God, and an Heir of Heaven: This he believes, because he sees
the conditions accomplished in him, to which God has promised remission of
sins and salvation, that is to say, faith and repentance.

Thus whereas the former act of faith, whereby a man does truly believe in
Christ, makes him partaker of the remission of sins, and gives him right, and
a true title to the Kingdom of Heaven: this latter assures him of this, and
breeds and begets great peace, quietness, and comfort in his heart and
conscience.

Now this last act of faith, whereby a man thus believes that his sins are
pardoned, and is assured of his salvation, does not go before, but follows
after repentance. For until a man sees and perceives that he has forsaken
sin, and that he does repent, he cannot confidently believe that his sins are
pardoned, nor can he have any firm assurance of salvation, because he has no
word of promise from God, whereon to ground that faith and assurance of his.

Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 1.15
that Christ came into the World to save sinners: behold say these men, he came
to save sinners, not repentant sinners; and hereupon they infer and conclude,
that a man before he repents, even at that very time, when he lives in sin,
ought to believe that his sins are pardoned, and that he is in the state of
salvation.

But I answer, fallacia consequentis, with a fallacious consequence. For when,
or how does Christ save sinners? verily, Mat. 9.12.
not while they do continue in sin without repentance; for he himself tells
us, that he calls them to repentance, and so saves them. But for a man to
continue in sin, and yet to be saved, are (...) things that will not consist
nor stand together, for this implies a manifest contradiction. Thus then it
is, Christ saves sinners by freeing and delivering them, both from the gilt of
their sins, and from the tyranny and dominion of sin, by faith in his blood,
and by the power of his spirit. For so St. Paul having rehearsed and reckoned
up many foul, and filthy, and fearful sins, wherewith the Corinthians had
spotted and polluted themselves in times past, before their conversion to the
faith of Christ, presently adds, But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 1
Cor. 6.11.
but ye are justified in the blood of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God.

It is the greatest folly and madness in the World therefore, for a man to
believe that his sins are pardoned, and that he is in the state of salvation,
as long as he continues and remains an impenitent, and unreformed sinner:
for the Angel of the Lord that was sent unto Joseph, the espoused Husband of
the blessed Virgin Mary, tells us how we are saved by Christ, Act. 3.26.2.
He shall save his people from their sins. He does not say, He shall save his
people in their sins, that is while they live and lie in them; But he shall
save them from their sins, that is, by freeing and delivering them from them.
Whereof St. Peter also assures us, in that saying of his to the Jews, God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from his iniquities.

2. That I may make this matter yet more plain, and remove all ambiguity: this
I add further, that when St. Paul says, This is a faithful saying, and worthy
of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners, he
speaks not de partiali, sed totali salute, not of salvation in part, but of
that whole salvation, which Christ has purchased for us, and works in us,
and bestows upon us, that is to say, not of the pardon of our sins only, but
as well also of our sanctification, and of all other things that do any way or
other concur to the perfecting of our salvation. For Christ does not save us in
part, but most perfectly. He has purchased for us, not only our justification,
but our adoption, sanctification, redemption from Hell, and glorification in
Heaven. And hereupon it is, 1 Cor. 1.30.
that St. Paul says, He is made unto us of God wisdom, justice,
sanctification, and redemption. We must therefore rely upon Christ by faith for
all these, and not separate any one of them from the rest, as carnal
Protestants do, who believe in Christ for the forgiveness of their sins, and
for their salvation in Heaven; but not for grace, whereby to mortify their
sinful lusts, and to live holily.

Now wha, Can this faith of theirs save them? no surely, for Christ's merits
must not be separated and divided, no more then his person. Christ in his
Gospel offers both himself and all his merits unto us. He therefore that
receives him as man, but not as God, that receives him as his Priest to
reconcile him unto God, and to save him from Hell; but not as his King to
command him, and to reign over him, that receives him for his justification,
but not for his sanctification, sets up a false Christ unto himself, and
shall receive no salvation from him at all.

SECT. V. A twofold Corollary, or conclusion deduced and drawn from the former
answers.
BY this that I have said, in answer to the two former objections, it may
appear, that faith is to be considered, either more strictly, as it relates to
our justification; or more largely, as it has reference to our whole salvation.

1. To believe in Christ, to our justification, is (as I have said before) for
us to rely upon him, for the pardon of our sins, not according to our own
fancies and imaginations, but according to the gracious promises of his Gospel.
For so St. Paul calls the Gospel verbum fidei, Romans 10.8.
the word of faith, that is, the word of faith which we preach; as if he should
have said, That Gospel, which we the Apostles of Christ, and other his faithful
Ministers do preach, is the word of faith. Now wherefore is it that Paul does
call the Gospel the word of faith?

Is it not first, Because faith is bred and begotten in our hearts, by the
hearing of the Gospel?

And secondly, Because it is built and grounded on the Gospel as on its
foundation? For our Savior himself also tells us, That the faith which he
requires of us, is the faith of the Gospel, or it is for us to believe the
Gospel.

Now I have proved already, Mar. 1.15. Psalm. 130.5. Psalm. 119.42
that Christ in his Gospel does no where offer pardon to such as continue in
sin, but only to those that repent, and turn unto him from their evil ways.
And hereupon St. Peter having convicted the Jews of great and gross impiety
against God, and his Son Christ Jesus, afterward exhorts them, and says,
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, etc. And at the end
of that Chapter, Act. 3.19.
he tells the Jews, (as we have already heard) that God sent his Son to
save them (not by suffering them to continue in their sins; but) by turning
every one of them from their iniquities.

This I have the more largely insisted on, that none may, neither fancy, that
their sins are pardoned, while they do live in them without repentance; nor yet
rely upon Christ, for the pardon of them, unless they do stir up themselves to
the practice of repentance.

Secondly, If Faith be considered more largely, as it has reference to our
whole salvation, so (as I have said before) we are to rely upon Christ, not for
the pardon of our sins, and for our redemption and deliverance from Hell only;
Joh. 7.38.
but as well also for our sanctification, and for all things, which do
accomplish and consummate our salvation; for all these are we to rely upon
Christ, in the use of all those means which he has prescribed us, such as are
the reading, hearing, meditating of Gods word, laying of it up in our hearts,
and the applying of it to our souls, with prayer, godly conference, striving
against sin, endeavoring to do the things which God commands, and the like.
For God will not have us to be idle, but to use such means, as he has
appointed for the furtherance of our salvation, and to depend upon him for his
blessing on them, Isa. 38.18.
which he will not deny, but in due time vouchsafe us: for as the holy Prophet
says, Blessed are all they that wait for him.

For the clearing of what has been said, I will briefly answer an Objection or
two, that I have lately met with.

First, There are those that reason thus, The faith which Christ requires in
the Gospel, that we may be saved by him, must needs include more in it then
trust and confidence in his blood; for such faith or confidence is an affection
of the sensitive part, or faculty of the Soul, therefore no sure note of
salvation.

Hereunto I answer, That affections are not only in the sensitive appetite, but
also in the will; for wherefore else is it, that the will is said to be
appetitus rationalis, si nil appetat? And is not love an affection of the soul?
yet every one is commanded to love the Lord his God with all his heart, with
all his soul, with all his strength, and with all his mind, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Luke
20.27. that is, with the superior, as well as the inferior faculties of the
soul.

The other Objection which I have met with is this. Christ justifies us as our
King, absolving and acquitting us from the sentence of condemnation, which we
by our sins had deserved, and not only as our Priest, by his blood, which he
shed for us, when he offered up himself as a sacrifice of sweet smelling savor
unto his Father.

Unto this I answer, That Christ justifies us per modum meriti, by way of
merit, as our great high Priest, offering up himself as a propitiatory
sacrifice unto his Father for us. But he justifies us as our King, and our
supreme judge, by absolving us from our sins, and pronouncing us righteous for
the merit of his blood and obedience, whereby he became obedient unto his
Father unto death, even the death of the Cross, and so fulfilled the Law for
us. Whereas then St. Paul says, (and we also with him) that we are justified
freely, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation through faith in his blood: the meaning hereof is, that we
do rely on Christ's death and passion, as the only means whereby Gods wrath is
appeased, and our salvation purchased. But all this nothing hinders, but we
may, and do willingly grant and hold, as an undoubted truth, that we must
receive Christ, not only as our Priest, to be reconciled unto God by him; but
as well also as our Prophet, to be taught the will of God by him, and as our
King to reign over us, if we would be saved by him, and live for ever.

SECT. VI. More Objections answe^ed, and some Cases of Conscience resolved.
THese things I have thus discussed the more largely, that men may not deceive
themselves with a false faith, which can never bring any true comfort to their
souls; but in the end, will plunge them into perdition everlasting. Now there
remains nothing but that I answer such other Objections, and resolve such
doubts, as are raised against this Doctrine: whereas then we do teach the
Children of God, to reason thus for their comfort, Whosoever repents, and
believes in Christ, his sins are pardoned by God, and he shall undoubtedly be
saved; but I do thus repent and believe, therefore my sins are pardoned, and I
shall through Gods mercy be eternally saved.

This Objection proves only, that we cannot be justified by our repentance,
and by our obedience; but not that we cannot by them, as by signs and tokens,
be assured of our justification and salvation.
and many ways defective: there is no comfort therefore to be taken in them;
for such impure works as these, cannot stand in Gods sight. Nothing can please
him, but that which is pure and perfect.

1 Chronicles. 29.17. Psalm. 32.2.
and not in hypocrisy. For as David says, The Lord loves uprightness. And
therefore in another place, he pronounces him blessed, In whose spirit there
is no guile.

2. Again, Christ washes away the impurity that adhereth to our actions in his
blood. For so we read, that the Saints of God have washed, not only themselves,
but their robes, Rev. 7.14.
that is, their works of righteousne^s, and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb. And hereupon it is, that St. Peter incourageth us to offer up our
spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praises, and new obedience, 1 Pet. 2.5.
and tells us, that they are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

3. And lastly, It cannot but be also a great comfort unto us, that whereas the
Law condemns us, for every transgression and disobedience of ours; yet the
Lord of his rich mercy in Jesus Christ, is pleased to accept of our service,
when we do not lie still in our sins, after we are fallen; but do rise again by
repentance, and endeavor to obey him, according to all his Commandments. If
any man were bound upon a great penalty, to go to any place or other without
stumbling, or falling, if he do but once trip and stumble in his journey, he
incurs that penalty: and even so in like manner, because the Law requires
universal obedience of us, and curses us, if we break but any one Commandment
thereof: therefore if we should commit but one sin in all our life, there were
no hope of salvation by the Law; but a fearful expectation of judgment and
wrath everlasting. But now seeing Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law; and, although he commands us to walk before him in all the ways of his
Commandments, is yet pleased to pardon our falls, if we do not lie still, and
welter and wallow in the puddle of our sins, as many do; but rise again by
repentance. O what a comfort may this be unto us? For even as a little Child
that is weak, and begins to go, may truly be said to walk to such or such a
place, although he takes many a fall, if he do not lie still, but rise again
presently, and never cease going, until he come thither: so although, as St.
James says, Jam. 3.2.
we do in many things offend all, that is, take many falls while we are in our
journey toward Heaven: yet if we do not lie still in any sin, but rise up
again speedily by repentance, and proceed in our obedience to Gods
Commandments, we may truly be said to walk in the way of righteousness, and
shall in the end come to Heaven, through the mercy of God in Christ Jesus.

But it may here be said,

Isaiah does, Isa. 50.10.
Who is there among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
Servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? Let him trust in the name
of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

Thus I have showed how the Children of God are to be dealt with, that they may
receive comfort from the holy and heavenly Doctrine of Christ, which is taught
by all Orthodox Protestants.



their deserved condemnation; and when they have done this, let them set upon
their sins, as David did on the great Goliath, not in their own strength, but in
the name of the Lord, that is, in faith and confidence, 1 Samuel 17.
that God through Christ, will make them conquerors of all the infernal powers
of darkness, if they do not voluntarily cast away their Weapons, and resign and
yield themselves captives to their lusts; but fight and strive against them, in
a constant use of the means of their conversion and salvation, with prayer.

We read in the fifth of St. John's Gospel, that a multitude of impotent people,
of blind, halt, and withered, lay by the Pool of Bethesda, waiting for the
moving of the waters. For an Angel went down at a certain season into the Pool,
and troubled the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water,
stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.

After the like manner, ought all sorts of sinners to rely upon Christ, in the
use of the means of grace, waiting for the powerful working of the spirit in
their hearts, whereby they may be freed from the servitude of their carnal
lusts, and enabled to serve God acceptably, according to his word and will.
Thus may the wickedest sinners that are, through Gods grace, convert and turn
this Doctrine to their comfort.

But if any one shall here say,

To such a one I say, Let Mr. D. and his Novellists, minded men should
presumptuously hope for mercy, while they continue in their sins, and have no
purpose to reform their lives, I must tell them, that the comfort which Mr. D.
and such others do reach out unto them with the one hand, Doct. of J. Baptist
page 27.
they dash and overthrow it with the other. For having taught their hearers,
that they are justified, and reconciled to God before they do believe even
while they live in their sins. Yet Recon. of God to man, Page 32, 33. Ib. p.
44. Recon. of man to God, p. 60, 61.
afterward they tell them, that a final infidelity will damn them; and that if
they do not love God, and leave sin, they can have no hope of Heaven.

Good Christian Reader, I have, I think, met with, and confuted the most
material errors, which Mr. D. has scattered here and there, in his three
Treatises, especially those wherein he does oppugn the Orthodox, and ancient
Protestant Doctrine.

There are indeed besides these, diverse novellous, most strange* and forced
expositions of Scripture, to be found in those Treatises, whereof I will only
give thee a taste, by instancing in a few of them.

Mat. 6.14.
First of all then, whereas our Savior says, If you forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your
trespasses. Recon. of God to man. p. 25
He says, that forgiveness is here to be taken, not properly, but for the
manifestation of forgiveness. As if our Savior should have said, Except ye
forgive men, neither will your heavenly Father so fully declare, and manifest
himself unto your Consciences. A worthy Exposition! for will it not hence
follow, that a man may have his sins pardoned, and forgiven by God, though he
never forgive those that offend him: but this will not be so evident to his
Conscience? Yet for confirmation of this his Exposition, he alleges those
words of our Savior, Luc. 7.47.
unto the penitent woman. Her sins which are many are forgiven, for she loved
much.

And hereupon infers, and says, forgiveness in this place includes the
manifestation of forgiveness.

But I answer, Forgiveness is here taken really, and properly, and her great
and abundant love to Christ, was the evidence, and manifestation thereof. As if
I should say, The Sun is risen; for it shines upon the wall. In this speech
the meaning is, that the Sun is really risen, though perhaps that might not be
the very first moment of the rising thereof, when this was spoken; and the Suns
shining upon the wall is made a sign, or an evidence and manifestation thereof.
And even so in like manner, when our Savior says, Her sins which are many are
forgiven her, his meaning was, that they were really forgiven, though not at
that instant only, but from the first moment of her conversion. And he makes
this manifest, by his next words, from her abundant love, which she so many
ways showed and expressed toward him, saying, For she loved much.

I know Mr. D. will not here say with the Papists, that her love to Christ, was
the cause that he pardoned and forgave her her sins; but that he drew an
Argument from thence to prove, and to evidence that her sins were forgiven. And
so this conjunction causal (for) est causa consequentiae, non consequentis* is
only the cause of the consequence in his Argument, or in his reasoning; but not
of the thing it self, whereof he speaks, that is, of the pardon of her sins.
He would prove also from the judgment of Protestant Interpreters, that our
Savior speaks not of remission of sins really, but of the manifestation
thereof, because when we pray in the fifth Petition of the Lords Prayer,
Forgive us our trespasses: they make this to be the meaning hereof* that the
Children of God, whose sins are already pardoned, do pray for more assurance
thereof. But I have showed already Quest. 9. that they make this to be the
meaning thereof only in part, and not the full sense of that Petition, as Mr.
D. would have it.

Recon. of God to man. page 43.
Another place of Scripture, which he perverteth, and corrupts by a novellous
and strange Exposition, are those words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; Be not deceived,
neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. The meaning hereof he will have to be, that they shall not
enter into the Kingdom of God here on Earth, which is his Church. But in
expounding these words thus, he comes far short of the meaning of the
Apostle; for albeit it is most certain, that the unrighteous are no true
members of the Church, though they be in it for a time; yet the Scripture when
it speaks of the inheritance which Christ has purchased for his Saints, from
which the unrighteous are excluded, refers the possession thereof, not to
this World, where we sojourn for a time, as Pilgrims in a strange Country; but
to that happy life that is to come. Thus our Savior at the day of judgment,
will say unto his Elect people, and righteous Servants. Mat. 25.34
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the world, St. Paul also tells us, that flesh and blood shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.
neither shall corruption inherit incorruption.

Which words it were absurd, to refer unto the Kingdom of grace, or to say,
that the Apostle excludes all such out of the Church here on earth, who carry
about them corruptible flesh and blood. St. Peter also in plain words, so
speaks of the inheritance of Heaven, as of a thing, the possession whereof is
not to be had in this life, but in the World to come. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has
begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.3,
4, 4.
through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. When St.
Paul therefore says, that Fornicators, Adulterers, and such unrighteous
persons shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, his meaning is, that they shall
never enter into the glorious Kingdom of Heaven, but be excluded thence, and be
cast into Hell.

3. As strangely does he expound those words of the Apostle, Heb. 12.14. Recon.
of God to man, p. 43, 44.
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, that is (says he) with spiritual
eyes, or with the eyes of faith: whereas the Apostle speaks not here in
praesenti, of that Vision, or seeing of the Lord, which is to be had in this
present World; but in futuro, of our seeing of him hereafter, to our endless
comfort in his Kingdom, and in his glory, in the same sense as St. John does, 1 John 3.2. We know, that when Christ shall appear, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is. Most false therefore it is, (which Mr. D. says) To see
God, and to inherit the Kingdom of God, are nothing else but to believe in God,
and in his Son Jesus Christ. When we come to Heaven, faith in Christ shall
cease, and yet we shall not cease then to see God.

Another place of holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 13.13. Confer. with a sick man. page
7. 1 Ioh. 3.14.
which he grossly perverteth with a false Exposition, and so goes about to
deprive the godly of the comfort, which they take from it, are those words of
St. John, We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
Brethren. Many good souls have acknowledged, that when all other grounds of
comfort have failed them, or at the least, when in time of temptation, they
have not been able to apprehend any comfort from any thing else: yet these
words of the Apostle have upheld them from despairing of their Estate, because
their Consciences did testify unto them, that they did unfainedly love, and
ardently affect all that are godly. Now this comfort also Mr. D. denies them.
Confer. p. 9. I do (says he) for the present believe, that St. John does
principally speak of our assurance, whereby we know one another to be the
Children of God. And Conf. p. 8. He tells us, that it is before man, that our
love bears witness to our Faith.
For he says, that St. John's meaning is not, that a man may know by his love
to the Brethren, that he himself particularly is in the state of grace; but
that the faithful in general, by means of the love which they professed, and
showed one to another, were well persuaded one of another, and believed by the
judgment of charity, that they were all the Children of God. But this
Exposition of his, crosses the main scope and drift, or the purpose and
intention of the Apostle, in writing this Epistle, which was to comfort the
faithful, by showing them what signs and tokens, and particular evidences they
had of the forgiveness of their sins, and of their salvation by Christ; for so
he says, Chap. 5.13. These things have I written unto you (whereof their love
to the Brethren was one) that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye
may know, that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the
Son of God, that is, perseverantly unto the end.

What will Mr. D. except against this? Will he say, as Estius and the Papists
do, that the Apostles meaning is not, that every, or any ordinary faithful man
knows certainly, that he is translated from death to life, and therefore in
the state of salvation? but that he speaks generally in the person of all the
faithful, and is thus to be understood? We Christians know by an assured faith,
that all good faithful people (of which number we severally trust that we are)
are translated from death to life. But surely this Exposition of his, est nimis
jejuna, is too hungry and lean. For what comfort will it be to any one, to
know certainly, that all good Christians, and true believers, are translated
from death to life, as long as he knows not, whether he himself be of that
number, but doubts hereof?

Again, Shall we think, or can we persuade our selves, that St. John wrote so
large an Epistle, and used so many Arguments, only to make known unto the
faithful, that all good Christians, or that all good faithful people have their
sins pardoned, and are in the state of salvation, which they never doubted of.

Its certain, That St. John in writing this Epistle, had a farther intent, and
that is to make it evident unto us, by many infallible signs and tokens, how
we may know, that we are the Children of God, and that we are translated from
death to life, which is a matter of greatest comfort, and rejoicing to a
Christian heart, that can be.

Mr. D. indeed (for I would not willingly do him any wrong) acknowledges that
true charity is an assured sign or mark of grace received; but for all that,
Cor a s page
he holds that a Christian cannot certainly know, that he has charity,
whereby he may be assured, that he is the Child of God. But herein he joyneth
with the Papists. For they say, as Estius does, quantum de dilectione fraterna
certi sumus, tantum and de isto, look how much we are assured of our love to
the Brethren; so much are we assured of that also: he means, that we are
translated from death to life, whereof he spoke before. Now he has told us,
that this cannot certainly be known of us, and so his meaning is, as also Mr.
D. that we cannot certainly, but conjecturally only know, that we love the
Brethren.

Thus both Mr. D. and they, would make St. John a silly and sorry disputant, as
if he would prove ignotum per ignotius, that which is unknown to us, by another
thing, which is as much, or more unknown; for how can we know that we have
passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren? if we have no more
certain knowledge of this, then of the former. Our conjectural hope that we
love the Brethren, will only breed, and beget in us an Opinion that we are
translated from death to life, but no knowledge thereof at all. But on the
contrary St. John says not, We hope, we conjecture, or we think; but we know
that we have passed from death to life. And he proves it as effectu, tanquam
signo hujus infallibili, by an effect of this translation, as an infallible
sign thereof; because (says he) we love the Brethren.

Thus he makes our love of the Brethren, an evidence that we are in the state
of salvation. And hereupon St. Augustine writing on these words says, redeat
unusquisque ad cor suum: Si ibi invenerit charitatem fraternam, securus sit,
quia transiit a morte ad vitam. Let every one return unto his own heart: if he
does there find brotherly charity, let him be secure, because he has passed
from death to life.

Surely St. Augustine would never have spoken thus, if he had thought, that a
Christian can have no certain knowledge of his love to the Brethren. For it is
not an uncertain hope, or an opinion grounded on conjectures, that can breed
and beget any security in the soul.

Thus Christian Reader, I have given thee a taste of Mr. D. his faculty, in
expounding of the Scriptures after his fancy. More of his detorted Expositions,
I cannot acquaint thee with, because I neither remember any more, nor have his
Book by me, it being restored to the owner, by him that lent it me long since.
And indeed, I should both trouble my self, and the Reader, in rehearsing any
more of them; and this Treatise would swell, and grow into too great a bulk,
whereby the weaker sort of Christians might be deterred, and discouraged from
reading of it; for whose sake principally, I have penned and published it, that
they may be settled and stablished in the truth, which has been formerly taught
them, and not be carried away with the deceiptfulness of novellous errors.

Here I made an end long since, and thought to have proceeded no further; but
upon a second review of Mr. D. his three Treatises, I started these Questions
following, which having discussed, and determined, I do here add unto the
former, hoping that they will not be altogether unacceptable, unto not a few
good Christians; because the most of them may give some satisfaction unto them,
in diverse doubts and scruples of Conscience, wherewith their souls are
exercised.

Quest. 16. WHether all that are called of God, and consequently that are his
Children, have always, and at all times their hearts ravished, and replenished
with surpassing joy and comfort?

Quest. 17. Whether the Repentance which the Prophets taught and exhorted their
hearers unto in the old Testament, be the same which is taught in the new?

Quest. 18. Whether there was any actual forgiveness of sin in the old
Testament?

Quest. 19. Whether there be not many things to be done by us, before we can be
saved?

Quest. 20. Whether a man may not have a steadfast hope in God, that he shall
be saved, who has a care to keep Gods Law, to do all things commanded, and to
shun all things forbidden, to the uttermost of his power?

Quest. 21. Whether a desire to believe be faith it self?

Quest. 22. Whether he that uses the means of salvation constantly, may not
confidently expect, and hope to be saved through Gods mercy in Christ?

Quest. 23. Whether every one that he may be assured of the forgiveness of his
sins, and of his salvation, is, without reason, or against reason, to believe
that his sins are pardoned, and that God has given him eternal life?

Quest. 24. Whether he that has oppressed, defrauded, or otherwise wronged his
Neighbor in his goods, and outward Estate, can believe that his sins are
pardoned, before he has made him restitution and satisfaction?

Quest. 25. Whether the way for a wicked man to overcome and leave his sins, be
for him to believe that his sins are pardoned, and forgiven him?

Quest. 26. Whether every one that truly believes in Christ, be assured of
salvation?

Quest. 27. Whether every one, who in his Conscience is not assured of his
reconciliation to God, and of his own salvation, be a wicked man?

Quest. 28. Whether a man can take no comfort in any of Gods promises, unless
he be first assured of his Faith?

FINIS.

