map of Dunkirk

1. The Town of Dunkirk is very well fortified, full of Soldiers, and
furnished with all Warlike Habiliments.

2. The great Sandy Hills near Dunkirk are taken into a very large and Strong
Citadel, well furnished with all manner of Artillery, and other Necessaries.

3. The French King has Cut a New Trench through the Splinter Sands, one Mile
in length, for a Harbor for his Men of War, and has by Art, and Vast Expense,
so far Advanced the Work, that it will at present, upon the Head of the Tide,
Receive a Hundred Men of War, of Forty Five Guns apeece, and when finished, 150
Ships of Seventy Guns apeece, may enter at the Top of Tide, and be safely
secured from Storms, and all Enemies whatsoever.

4. The French King is Raising a Castle in the Sea, at the Mouth of the New
Harbor, on which will be Planted 200 Pieces of Cannon, when finished, to
secure his Men of War in this New Mole.

5. This Great and Prodigious Work has been Four Years in Action, and in One
Year more it may be finished; and at present there may be Employed in and about
the Work, and preparing Materials 14000 Persons.

6. The Town of Dunkirk is at present a Free Port, and much Land is laying out
to build upon, to Enlarge the Town.

7. When the Harbor and Castle in the Sea is finished, the Mole will be secure
from Sands choking it, the West-wind driving the Sands, and lodging it against
the West Side of the Harbor; and the Flashes of Water drawn out of the Rivers
above the Town, forces out all Sands that come in at the Mouth of the Harbor.

Query 1. If the Harbor at Dunkirk be finished, Whether the Strength of
England and Holland by Sea can destroy it?

Q. 2. If the Harbor of Dunkirk were finished, Whether Holland will not be
forced upon necessity to join with the French?

Q. 3. If the Harbor of Dunkirk were finished, Whether their Men of War from
Dunkirk will not be in half Sea in Four Hours, in the Downs in Ten Hours, in
the Mouth of the Thames in Sixteen Hours?

Q. 4. If the Harbor of Dunkirk were finished, Whether England can be without
Two Hundred Men of War to justify the Honor of the Crown and Trade?

Q. 5. If the Harbor of Dunkirk were finished, Whether Dunkirk in few years
may not become London, and London Dunkirk, as Amsterdam is now become Antwerp,
and Antwerp Dam, and all by the Command of the Lilo Fort, fixed upon the River
Skeld, which has so hindered Trade from Advancing to Antwerp, that at present
Grass grows in four of five parts of that Exchange?

Q. 6. If it be not convenient for all Merchants Trading to Dunkirk, to Order
all Masters of their Vessels to observe from time to time how this great Work
Advances; and to take the depth of the New Harbor from one end to the other,
and deliver it in Writing to ^^^ir Owners?

Q. 7. Whether it be not the Interest of those in Authority, seriously to
consider of this great Affair, and to use all means that may conduce to the
Obviating of this great Work, before it be too late?

Q. 8. Whether the Harbor of Dunkirk may be destroyed, and rendered useless
before it be finished?

When Lilo Fort upon the Skeld was made
With speed from Antwerp then departed Trade,
And Holland now that Fort does still maintain,
Which has to Amsterdam increast much gain.
Beware now London, ere it be too late,
For fear lest thou do taste of Antwerp's Fate.
But use all means, with might and main,
To keep the Seas for Merchants gain.
The Town and Citadel of Dunkirk, with the New Harbor for Ships and Castle in
the Sea, was Surveyed the 23d of May Anno 1681. By ANDREW YARRANTON, Author of
the First and Second Part of England's* Improvement by Sea and Land.

