THE YEAR of WONDERS: OR, The glorious Rising of the fifth Monarch: Showing the
greatness of that freeborn Prince, who shall Reign and govern; and what shall
happen upon his Coronation

Deduced from the Eclipse of the Sun, March 29. 1652.

Together with the Effects thereof; And a Prophecy touching the change of this
present Government, in 1653; the manner thereof, the great wars that shall
ensue, the time prefixed for their continuance, and afterward an everlasting
peace to be established; Also, a Description of the strange sights that will be
seen in the Air on Monday next; (at which time there will be a great darkness
for the space of 3 hours) predicting, a woeful calamity for London; and many
prove headless for their Rebellion: the murdering of the K. of France; and the
great things that will befall the K. of Scots: the hanging of the great Turk in
a Bow-string; and the stabbing of the Pope of Rome by an Englishman. With many
other remarkable Predictions (never before published) touching the running of
the streets with blood, and burning whole Cities, Towns, and Villages.



London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.

THE GOLDENAGE: OR, The glorious Rising of the fifth Monarch: Showing the
Greatness of that Prince, who shall reign and govern; and what shall antecede
and happen upon His Coronation.
Deduced from the direful Effects of the great Eclipse of the Sun, March 29.
1652.
AS the Stars of Heaven, are the most excellent Characters of the Divinity,
Power, Wisdom, and Glory of their Creator, in that they are written and engraven
by the finger of God himself (the Father of Lights;) so amongst the Celestial
phainomena the Doctrine of Eclipses takes precedence, because that from their
Observations, the primary foundations of the whole body of Astronomy are
confirmed, evinced, and demonstrated. For, seeing that the Sun is eclipsed, we
conclude the cause thereof to be the interposition of the Moon betwixt him and
the Farth, and the cause of the Moons Eclipse, the interposition of the Earth
betwixt her Body and the Suns. This Eclipse will pull down the pride of
Magistrates, who are grown to such a terrible hight, that it is their glory to
insult and act wickedly. Mars is chief Lord thereof; and you shall see what a
kind of creature he is: He is a hot and dry, firy-burning Planet; an angry
conquering creature, destructive to nature: He is so angry, that he will hear
no reason: the Priest with his Rhetoric in the Pulpit cannot move him; neither
does he regard the Lawyer that pleads at the Bar: all the Sophistry in Oxford
and Cambridge will not be able to qualify his anger in the effects of this
Eclipse, but are all like to feel his fury: He lays out all his strength in
what he does, or in what he delights to do: his natural disposition is to set
people together by the ears: I may say of him, as Virgil said of A^ecto,

The dearest knots of friendship he unties,
And utterly subverts whole Families
With dismal funerals, and bitter wrath:
A thousand names, a thousand arts he has
To break sweet peace: by his impetuous charms,
The Youth desire, and crave, and handle arms.
The whole Nation of Europe is in a mutiny; and they have as much patience as a
nest of Wasps. The Merchants Trading is bad; he scarce knows into what Country
to trade; and when he does, he loses his ships by Sea. The world is mad, and
servants turn masters: and what will the end be? Kings and great men are
undone: the Lawyer leaves prating, and falls to freting. Learned Guido says,
That all the evil that is done (and that is not a little) will be done under,
pretense of Religion: which how true it has proved already in England, every
one that has but wit enough to eat an egg knows. The Sea devoureth a great
part of Holland, Zealand, and Flanders.

Dreadful streamings are seen in the air, strange Satrre^, new Comets will
probably be visible about 10 of the clock, muck like unto the ensuing Figure;



Which signifies (as Campanella says) Hot infirmities, acute diseases, wars
and dissentions between Kings and their people, and between one King and
another, let them remember what Aesop said of the Mouse and the Frog; who
whilst they were busy in fight, came a Kyte and carried them both away. Look
to it, Princes of Europe: there will appear upon the Wing, within these 4
years, a Kyte that will serve you the same sauce. Beasts of great valor, and
various in color, will appear in the Air: The beginning of the year will be
very fruitful; but heat and dryness consume the fruits of the Earth before the
Harvest. As for the Quartile of Jupiter and Mars, which happens in Feb. 1653. I
shall speak nothing, but refer you to the ensuing Verses upon that month; and
they are these:

Mars lays his knap-sack by, and stoutly draws,
His trusty ^ilbow to prescribe us Laws,
Jove claims his privilege, and Mars his power;
Both wran le hard, and each on other lour.
At length Jove yields, and Mars assumes the chair;
Votes his own person noble, doings fair.
Learned Guifus says, That the Eclipse of the Sun threatens destruction to the
fruits of the Earth, kills the fruit in the bud, kills sheep and other cattle;
great Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, are either banished, imprisoned, or put
to death. Princes and their Subjects agree like Cats and Dogs, first they
snarl, and then bite; great Armies, terrible Wars, slaughters of men, burning
of Towns, Theft, Rapins, Depopulations, Fire, and the Sword raigns Lord
paramount in the Nations threatened by this Eclips: Neither shall the Women want
their share; for such of them as are with child shall be too subject to
miscary; both men and women are subject to acute Fevers, or other Epidemical
diseases; the air is hot, blasting, and burning; dearth of Corn is threatened;
Change of Government, both in Principalities and Commonwealths: let Experience
be Judge; Time will tell truth, when I may not: If the new River-water had been
brought from Ware to London in lead, it had come clear; but being brought in
earth, it is muddy. But I must not find you a tale and ears too; therefore I
will leave this Nation to pick English out of it. This Eclips also threatens to
make Kings and Magistrates Goal-birds, terribly afflicting them; and some of
them whom God pleases lose their heads (more is the pity) and then they feel
the lighter; others are hanged, and they cannot feel at all: it is as wretched a
time for Kings as ever the Sun saw. The Soldiers will be in arms against their
Governors, right or wrong; for a Sword and a Gun are two prevailing arguments.
All the miseries the sword can bring upon a people, and they are not a few,
will have influence upon this Eclips; and the goods of rich men, who have tired
their unlucky and Commonwealth destroying brains, will be extorted by
violence. The bodies of men are troubled with Choler: Towns and Cities are
consumed by fire, and ruined by the soldiery; Murder and Thee very are as
familiar, as Butterflies in April: The soldiers sword will prove sharper then
the scholars wit.

So great and direful are the effects of this Eclipse, that it far exceeds that
in Anno 1540, where the Sun was almost totally darkened; as may appear by the
ensuing Type, or Figures;



This Eclipse happened in Aries; as that of the 29 instant, and immediately
followed a parching hot and dry summer, insomuch that deep Rivers were
fordable, and great ones dried up: the very heat of the Sun set fire to Woods;
burned the King of Echemias Palace, and fired a great part of Germany.

Yet notwithstanding, this was not so great and formidable, as that on the 29
will be; the sight whereof will terrify all mortal eyes, and indeed it will
prove the greatest that we had this many centuries of years; nay, ever since
the Son of Righteousness suffered on the Cross, when there was darkness over
the face of the whole Earth. And the truth is, a general pestilence is
threatened to Europe, of which England is like sadly to participate; neither
shall Holland want its share. The places subject to the effects of this
Eclipse, are England, France, Germany, Swedeland, Poland, Denmark, Silesia,
Syria, the holy Land, Palestina, Russia, Ireland, Holland, Zealand, Loram,
Franconia, etc.

Of Towns and Cities, York, Hull, Naples, Ancenia, Florence, and most of the
sea-Towns in Asia the less, Oxford, Caunt, Venice; together with many others;
and indeed the effects will be generally felt over all Europe in one measure or
other; so that I may say of Europe concerning the effects of this Eclipse, as
Mr. Thomas May Esquire, once did of Mauritania, a little before the battle at
Thapsus, only a little altering the words,

All Monarchy it quite will overthrow,
More wrack alas its sad effects will do,
Then after-ages can repair with speed;
And Beasts possess the seats of Nations dead,
Where feared Monarks once gave laws to men
Shall Lions reign, and Tigers make their Den.
The slimy Serpent all alone shall crawl,
And wanting men, shall be no plague at all.
Solar Eclipses have been ever fatal to Kings and Magistrates, they cannot
agree, but only in one thing, and that is oppressing the people: O pure! they
are old dogs at that, and the poor groan under it. Arise o God and help them!
Lawyers and Clergymen are displaced and imprisoned, and some made shorter by
the head. A new sect of Heretics arise, which makes me admire how worse can be
invented then are already. Private murders and poyfonings are like to be very
rife: look to it ye great ones in authority, have a care of your selves, lest
some of you be sent to take a supper apud inferos, before you are aware of it;
It Is a scurvy fashion, I do not like it.

What the effects of this Eclipse are like to produce to every particular
Nation in Europe.
1 IT being taken for granted, that the effects begin to operate jul. 1652, and
decline in the year 1655, you may by this know the time of the sufferings of
Europe; an Epidemical disease, called madness, possesses the brains of the
Princes thereof; the 5. Monarchy of the World is coming, and the effects of
this Eclipse make way for him: but he is no Scotch-man, no nor English, it is he
before whose coming, The Heathen shall rage, and the people imagine a vain
thing; the Kings of the earth shall set themselves together against him, etc.
His Rise will be great, his Coronation glorious, and he shall rule all Nations
in the world. Read the second Psalm through out, and you shall see both what
shall antecede his Coronation, and what shall follow it. This is the Monarchy
that I expect; yet I expect it not in the effect of this Eclipse, for this
shall only make way for the fifth Monarchy; and when you see all Europe
together by the ears, when you see Kings mad, and their subjects stubborn, then
think of these things, and know that he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry.

2 The Germans are as bad together by the ears as they were in the days of
that conquering Queen of Sweden. Bohemia suffers extremely; the truth of it is,
I doubt the poor Emperor will be totally routed.

3 As for England, I cannot sing a quictus est to them as yet, within a few
years I shall; Thou have but one storm to endure, bear that with patience, I
hope thy Wars aae almost at an end. Thou will in the year 1653. be molested
with a consuming pestilence, and troubles, with a change of Government at one
and the same time; In making thy choice of thy next Representative, take
counsel of God; For assure thy self of this, thou shall find my words true, as
when the Sun is upon the Meridian, thou shall never be free from plagues,
either of War, Pestilence, or Famine, till thou do submit to such a
Government as God intends for thee; the cries of the poor, whom thou do
tyranically defraud of their birthrights, are heard in the ears of our Lord God
Almighty. Be pleased to read every morning the 26 Chap. of Levit. It Is worth
your observation. Our present Governors (who have transmografide Monarchy into
a Free State) must not esteem themselves exempted (more then other States) from
the effects thereof. For soon after this eclipse great men shall suffer
infamous deaths, and we shall generally find men mad to undo themselves; the
Prince of planets, the Eye of the World, and the Glory of the Heavens, is
eclipsed just upon his Throne, the sight whereof will terrify all mortal Eyes,
for we shall see the Stars shine as in a Winters night, and strange and
wonderful sights and apparitions (such as our forefathers never beheld) will
be seen in the Air, to the astonishment of all mankind. Many Astrologers
calculate that the effiects of this dreadful eclipse will have a great
influence upon the K. of Spain; and the K. of Scots (the first, great and
potent: the second, poor and despised) and threatens them with sudden deaths;
From which, good Lord deliver us all.

4 The Jesuits set all Europe together by the ears, let Padua in Italy beware
of Aug. 1653. lest either the sword, earth quake, or pestilence, destroy it. Ah
poor University! I mourn for thee, so much good have thou done to the world in
general. Bombardy is quite and clean destroyed, and beasts possess the seats of
dead people. The Pope has got the impudence to outface Heaven, to see if his
bulls can outroar the thunder.

5 The Turks fall into a part of Italy, which makes his Holiness to tremble;
but he knows how to leave St. Peter's keys, and take St. Paul's sword in hand:
the truth is, his fear is more then his harm: its not the Turk shall pull down
the Pope, and yet he must fall: Near unto which time, another dreadful eclipse
of the Sun will be seen, whose Conjunction will be in Mars: The sight whereof
will be very terrible to behold, and not much differing from that of the 29 of
March; as is evident by the ensuing Figure.



6 The effects of this eclipse Mar. 29. shall show themselves first of all in
their colors in France: strange massacres desperate Tumults, fire and sword
molests that Kingdom; it is his own fault, he carries himself as like a Tyrant
over his subjects, as a Pome-water is like an apple: if about the later end of
this year 1652, that poor King is not either knocked on the head, or forced to
leave his Kingdom, say I am so ignorant, that I know not a Star from a
Hop-pole; let him beware of his Jesuits, especially the College of Sorborn for
fear they have learned a Scotch-trick, to sell him to his adversaries for money.

7 Let not that noble and valiant soul the Prince of Conde aspire to that
kingdom: God has a determination to blast aspiring brains. If ever that
valiant and wise Prince come to reign, it shall be, aut nequicquam, aut
nequaquam, either not at all, or in vain: Ours was the first Monarchy that was
brought to an end, and France shall be the next; the Heavens have decreed it,
and its in vain for man to kick against the pricks. Two years shall not pass
over thy head, o France, but thy Monarch shall come to its fatal and final
catastrophe, and leave thy ruined Nation in such a pickle, that thy pleasant
and fruitful Land shall be reduced to such a barrenness, for the wickedness of
those that dwell therein, that this present Age shall not live to see it
recruited.

8 Thou famous City of Venice look ta thy self, I fear before the year be
clapsed, the Turk will have possession of thee: it would grieve a man's heart to
see the streets run down with blood; I wish I may be found a false Prophet in
this; yet whether I be or not, it would do thee no harm to make thy peace with
God.

9 Its almost a wonder I have forgot the Hollander all this while, who shall
neither be the last nor the least sufferer in this Eclipse, a body would have
thought that Nation had been wise, had they not committed themselves to the
protection of the King of France; but when France shall be together by the
ears, and more blood spilt there then Wine pressed, then may the Dutchmen say,
as the Emperor once did, when he trusted to the Pope for some great courtesy,
which he thought would make him and his heirs for ever, the Pope plays the man
and dies (not because he was weary of this wicked World, and made have to be
in another, for he always loved this World with all his heart, else he had
never built a Tabernacle in it) the Emperor hearing of the Popes death, now
says he, My cake is dough, I never thought of the Popes dying before. And just
in such a pickle will Holland be, when her protecting King is fled for his
life: Her necessities will be very great; none will succor, nor many pity her:
by reason of her near alliance to the false Scot.

10 The Monasteries of Germany are like to be made no Monasteries during the
effects of this Eclipse. Truly, by that time the year 1654 be elapsed, popery
will breath its last in Germany. God in Heaven grant they set up the Truth in
its stead; that, like other Nations, they do not (with Aesops fish) leap out of
the drying pan into the fire.

11 During the effects of this Eclipse in England, either at, or before the
beginning of the year 1655, (the wiser my brethren of the Communalty carry
themselves, for ought I know or believe, the sooner it may be effected) the
Government will come into the hands of the people, and everlasting peace shall
we enjoy, and never more War afflict us. And if we may trust to a piece of Art
Caball stick) in August 1655, Rome falls, and Jesus Christ the Prince of
Peace may reign amongst Us.

Many people aspire high, and look upon the Scotch-King to invade England once
more, as one of the Kings of Denmark did, after 8 years banishment; but Learned
Mr. Lilly has prophesied, That he shall never more set footing on English
ground; that he shall (poor Gentleman) be exposed to great wants; and that he
shall receive a stab (or a cup of poison, instead of a brown-bowl of spiced
Ale) in 1653.

12 London, beware of a pestilence 1653; get able Physicians: And though many
men tell thee of thy final Catastrophe, and fright thee with Mother Shiptons
Prophecy, which, if it come to pass upon thee at all, it will be in the year,
1668. Labor thou to be one of the Elect of God, and hold up but thy head till
the later end of the year 1665, and I am confident, both thy danger and
destruction is past. I could tell the sad things that shall afflict thee in the
year 1653. But when Phaeton foretold of a great fire that should burn up the
greatest part of Italy, they got the honest soul, and accused him for setting
the World on fire, and drowned him in the River Po.

And happily should I tell London the truth, I might be inhumanely dealt withal
my self; for this is an age in which Obsequ^um amicos, veritas odium parit.

It Is flattery that gets men friends:
Tell but the truth, all friendship ends.
13 The rest of the Princes of Europe must fall as sure as a club: and next to
France, Poland is like to go to pot: Denmark and Sweden happily next; and
happily Sweden may come to ruin before Denmark especially if the Queen light
of such a Husband as probably she may: Let the child of that valiant Father
beware of an unfortunate Match about the beginning of 1653. if not, the ruin
of that Kingdom may happen about the beginning 1^54.

14 The Floren^^nes are as full of Tumults as a Wood is full of Trees: The
Cossaecks fall into Christendom with fire and sword, and I doubt upon the
Territories of Italy.

15 The King of Spain is quite and clean routed out of the West Indies; as he
has formerly there made slaves of other people, (nay, he would have served the
Bab^ons so too, could they have but spoken) so in 1^54. the Natives of the
place shall be rid of this, and find another, and yet scarce a better.

16 The Nations of Europe flutter to save their Kings, which never did them
good, nor never will; even like a Bird brought up in a Cage, that regards not
liberty, because it never knew what it was. I remember a pretty story in
Aesops, Fables, which I care not greatly if I recite; The Frogs desired a King
of Jupiter, neither would they be pleased unless they had one: Jupiter (to
satisfy them) threw down a great beam into the water, which after it had
astonished them a while, they began to grow bold with it, and leapt upon it,
yea and despised it too, be use it was patient: They fall a croaking to
Jupiter again; and they must have a stout King that could fight, I marry must
they; Jupiter, to satisfy their importunity, sends them the Stork, who
stalking about the Pool, as the Frogs came to do obey fance to him, he eat them
up. I leave every rational man to make the moral of it, it is plain enough.

17 An Earthquake is like much to annoy Italy, the peoples madness, and the
Jesuits knavery much more. Italy! Italy! that ancient Nation where the Poets
say Saturn once ruled when he turned Leveller and brought up the Golden Age, I
am sorry for thy sufferings, but cannot help them.

18 In the year 1653, about the 3. of April, the Sun will again be eclipsed,
but not totally darkened, as appears by the ensuing Figure,



The effects of this eclipse will be a change of Government in England: many
prove headless for betraying their Trust; a just Reward for Rebellion. About
the end of this Eclipse will appear a blazing Star and Comet, the which
promises the downfall of Tyrants both in Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

19 A fire threatens Constantinople, so does Dissension, and something worse
then either; the great Turk is either slain, or runs away for his life, if a
bow-string stops not his journey: you would laugh to see the Tartarian invade
Turkey much about the year 1654. I promise him if he do, he will go near to
carry it. I would to God he would learn to be so wise as the noble Tamerlane,
who is never to be mentioned without an Epethite of Honor.

20 In the year 1654, England begins to grow quiet; that is good news: she
enjoys her desired Liberty, which she has spent so much blood for: the time is
now coming, that the Commoner shall be a Freeman, and no longer remain in
bondage either to Kings or Parliaments. The Soldier is casting off the burden
from them; and they promise him a noble Gratuity; but I wish there may be a
real performance, and no more delays: And as a caution by the way, I shall
here incite a couple of Verses, made by an Officer of the Army.

Our God and Soldiers we alike adore,
Even in the brink of danger, not before.
After deliverance they are alike requited,
Our God's forgotten, and our Soldiers slighted.
FINIS.

