large portrait of Charles II with small royal blazon Carolus II Rex
J.D. Sculp.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

a school THE COMPLETE ENGLISH SCHOOL

Teaching to Spell Read and Write ENGLISH Exattly:

By E. Young School Master in London.



The Complete English-Scholar, IN Spelling, Reading, and Writing: CONTAINING
Plain and Easy Directions for Spelling, and Reading English, according to the
present Pronunciation.

With several Tables of Common words and proper Names in the Bible and
elsewhere, from one to Six and Seven Syllables, both in whole words and divided
into Syllables.

And Directions for True Writing of English, with several Copies of the most
usual Hands Engraven in Copper.

Also Examples of the different Writing and Pronouncing of the same words in
the English Tongue.

Lastly, how to Spell Words as are alike in Sound, but differ in their Sense
and Spelling; with the Use of all Stops and Points in Spelling and Writing, and
the Interpretation of English Christian Names, and many other things of Use to
Learners.

By E. Young, Schoolmaster in London.

The Fourth Edition, Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Alsop at the George at the lower end of Cornhil over
against the Stocks-Market. 1680.

(...) but if you add a Vowel to each of them, then they make by adding a to
the first glad, e to the second Bless, i to the third sing, o to the fourth
Lord u to the fifth Pluck.

A Consonant between two Vowels is usually joined to the latter; as, be-fore,
re-ward.

When a Consonant is doubled in the middle of a word, as, Ladder, Differ, one
Letter is joined to the first Syllable and the other to the latter, thus
Lad-der, dif-fer.

And so it is also, if two Consonans come between two Vowels, as in sel-dom
trm-pet, because ld, and mp are not proper to begin any word.

But if three Consonants which are proper to begin a word come between two
Vowels, then the Consonants must not be separated, but must be joined to the
Vowel following, as con-strain-ed, not cons-trai-ned nor con-str-ained, because
str are proper to begin a word.

These Consonants of two Letters may also begin wods, c r dr dw fl fr ga kn pl
pa sc sh sl sp st sk sm sn sq sw th tr tw wh wr.

There are also Consonants of three Letters with which words may be begun, Scr
phr str squ spr shr thr thw spl.

Dipthongs are proper or improper. The proper dipthongs are eight, ai, ei, oi,
au, eu, ou, ee, oo,; The improper dipthongs are six, ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow;
they differ not much in sound. but differ very much in writing; for the proper
dipthongs are to be used in the beginning and middle, as in Giste,, fair, Air,
either; but when you have the same sounds in the ending of a word, you must
write ay, ey, oy, as prey, may, joy,

In the Alphabet of Letters here are some that have made these Observations.
That there are eight mute or dumb Letters. which are B. C. D. G. P. Q. T.
because they are forced to borrow the Vowel E at the end, to help their sound.

There are eight Semi-vowels or half Vowels, namely F. L. M. N. R. S. X. Z. all
which begin their sound with E, and end in themselves.

M. P. in his Vocal Organ distinguishes the several Letters thus: B. f, m. p.
ph. v. are Lip-Consonants. Ce.chapterge.je.s.sh. z. are Teeth-Consonants.
D.l.n.r.t.th. are Tongue-Consonants. C. g. k. q. x. are Palate-Consonants. Gh.
h. ng. y. are Throat-Consonants.

It is observed by some, that there are Eighteen Diphthongs in our English
Tongue as you may see in the words subjoyned, which words are most of them
either derived from the Hebrew or have affinity with the Latin.

portrait of Abraham A.a. A-bra-ham

Abraham



portrait of Balaam B.b. Ba-la-am

Balaam



portrait of Corah C.c. Co-rah

Corah



portrait of David D.d. Da-vid

David



portrait of Elijah E.e. E-ly-as

Elyas



portrait of Felix F.f. Fe-lix

Felix



portrait of Goliath G.g Go-li-ah

Goliath



portrait of Herod H.h. He-rod

Herod



portrait of Joseph J.i. Jo-seph

Joseph



portrait of Kore K.k. Ko-re

Kore



portrait of Lydia L.l. Lyd-di-a

Lyddia



portrait of Moses M m Mo-ses

Moses





portrait of Noah N.n. No-ah-

Noah



portrait of Obadiah O.o. O-ba-di-ah

Obadiah



portrait of St. Paul P.p. Paul-

Paul.



portrait of Esther Q.q. Queen Esther

Queen Esther



portrait of Rahab R.r Ra-hab

Rahab



portrait of Saul S.s. Saul-

Saul



portrait of Thomas T.t. Tho-mas

Thomas



portrait of Uriah Vu. V-ri-ah

Vriah



portrait of a woman W.w Wid-dow

Widow



portrait of Xerxes X.x. Xer-xes

Xerxes



portrait of a man Y.y. Young Man

Young Man



portrait of Zacchaeus Z.z. Za-che-us

Zacheus







aa. as in Paal, Isaac. ai. Fair, despair. au. Laud, applaud. ea. Ease, please.
ee. Free, bleed. ei. Receive, weight, eo. Jeopardy, Geometry, George. eu.
Rheum, Eustace. ie. Field, Friend. oa. Boat, Goal. oe. Toe, shoe, Phoenix,
foelicity. oi. Void, join. oo. Good, food. ou. Blood, gourd. ua. Guard, quake.
ue. Guerdon. ui. Quire, build. uo. Quoth.


There are also these ten Triphthongs which contain three Vowels sounded
together in one word, as eau, in Beauty; ieu, in lieue, adieu, view; nai in
quail, acquaint; nee. in Queen; uea in queasic, squeak, queen; uoi, in quoit,
quoif; aw, in Law, Bawd, Daw; ew, in Dew, new, stews; ow, in now, know, how.

The Lords Prayer.
Our Fa-ther, which art in Hea-ven, Hal-low-ed be thy Name; Thy King-dom come;
Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Hea-ven; Give us this day our dai-ly
Bread; and for-give us our Tres-pas-ses, as we for-give them that tres-pass
a-gainst us; and lead us not into Tempta-ti-on; but de-li-ver us from e-vil:
for thine is the Kingdom, Pow-er and Glory, for e-ver and e-ver, A-men.

The Creed or Chri-sti-an Be-lief.
I Be-lieve in God the Fa-ther Almigh-ty, Ma-ker of Hea-ven and Earth, and in
Je-sus Christ his on-ly Son our Lord, who was con-ceiv-ed by the Ho-ly Ghost,
born of the Vir-gin Ma-ry, suf-fe-red un-der Pon-ti-us Pi-late, was
cru-ci-fi-ed, dead and bu-ri-ed; he de-scend-ed in-to Hell, the third day he
a-rose a-gain from the dead, he a-scend-ed in-to Hea-ven, and sit-teth on the
right hand of God the Fa-ther Al-migh-ty, from thence he shall come to judge
both the quick and the dead; I be-lieve in the Ho-ly Ghost, the Ho-ly
Ca-tho-lick Church, the Com-mu-ni-on of Saints, the for-giveness of Sins, the
Re-sur-rec-ti-on of the Bo-dy, and the Life e-ver-last-ing. A-men.

The Ten Com-mand-ments.
ANd God spoke these words, say-ing,

I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Epypt, out of the
House of Bon-dage.

1. Thou shall have no o-ther Gods be-fore me.

2. Thou shall not make un-to thy self a-ny Gra-ven I-mage, or the like-ness of
a-ny thing that is in Hea-ven a-bove, or that is in the Earth be-neath, or that
is in the wa-ter un-der the Earth, thou shall not bow down thy self to them,
nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a jea-lous God, vi-si-ting the
i-ni-quity of the Fa-thers u-pon their Chil-dren un-to the third and fourth
ge-ne-ra-ti-on of them that hate me, and shew-ing mer-cy unto thou-sands of
them that love me and keep my Com-mand-ments.

3. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guilt-less that ta-keth his Name in vain.

4. Re-mem-ber the Sab-bath day to keep it ho-ly, six days shall thou la-bour
and do all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sab-bath of the Lord thy God,
in it thou shall not do a-ny work, Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daugh-ter, thy
man-ser-vant, nor thy maid-ser-vant, nor thy Cat-tel, nor thy Stran-ger that is
with-in thy gates; for in six days the Lord made Hea-ven and Earth, the Sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the se-venth day; where-fore the Lord
bles-sed the Sab-bath day and hal-low-ed it.

5. Honor thy Fa-ther and thy Mo-ther, that thy days may be long up-on the
Land which the Lord thy God gi-veth thee.

6. Thou shall not kill.

7. Thou shall not com-mit A-dul-tery.

8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false wit-ness a-gainst thy Neigh-bour.

10. Thou shall not co-vet thy Meigh-bours House, thou shall not co-vet thy
Neigh-bours Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maid-ser-vant, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neigh-bours.

Psalm 1.
BLes-sed is the Man that walk-eth not in the Counsel of the un-god-ly, nor
stand-eth in the way of Sin-ners, nor sit-teth in the Seat of the scorn-ful.

But his de-light is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he me-di-tate
Day and Night.

And he shall be like a Tree plant-ed by the Ri-vers of wa-ter, that bring-eth
forth his fruit in his sea-son; his Leaf al-so shall not wi-ther, and
what-so-e-ver he does, shall pros-per.

The un-godly are not so, but are like the Chaff which the wind dri-veth a-way.

There-fore the un-god-ly shall not stand in the judge-ment; nor sin-ners in
the Con-gre-ga-ti-on of the Righ-te-ous,

For the Lord know-eth the way of the Righ-te-ous, but the way of the un-god-ly
shall pe-rish.

St. Matthew, Chapter 1.
1. THe Book of the Ge-ne-ra-ti-on of Je-sus Christ the Son of Da-vid, the Son
of A-braham.

2. A-bra-ham be-gat I-sa-ac, and I-sa-ac be-gat Ja-cob, and Ja-cob be-gat
Ju-das and his Brethren.

3. And Ju-das be-gat Pha-rez and Za-ra of Tha-mar, and Pha-rez be-gat Ezrom,
and Ez-rom be-gat A-ram.

4. And A-ram be-gat A-mi-na-dab, and A-mi-na-dab be-gat Na-as-son, and
Na-as-son be-gat Sal-mon.

5. And Sal-mon be-gat Bo-oz of Ra-chab, and Bo-oz be-gat O-bed of Ruth, and
O-bed be-gat Jes-se.

6. And Jes-se begat Da-vid the King, and Da-vid the King be-gat So-lo-mon, of
her that had been the Wife of V-ri-as.

7. And So-lo-mon be-gat Ro-bo-ham, and Ro-bo-ham be-gat A-bi-a, and A-bi-a
be-gat A-sa.

8. And A-sa be-gat Jo-so-phat, and Jo-so-phat be-gat Jo-ram, and Joram be-gat
Ozi-as.

9. And O-zi-as be-gat Jo-a-tham, and Jo-a-tham be-gat A-chas, and A-chas
be-gat E-ze-ki-as.

10. And E-ze-ki-as be-gat Ma-nas-ses, and Ma-nas-es, be-gat A-mon, and A-mon
be-gat Jo-si-as.

11. And Jo-si-as be-gat Je-cho-ni-as, and his Brethren a-bout the time they
were car-ri-ed a-way to Ba-by-lon.

12. And af-ter they were brought to Ba-by-lon Je-cho-ni-as be-gat
Sa-la-thi-el, and Sa-la-thi-el be-gat Zo-ro-ba-bel.

13. And Zo-ro-ba-bel be-gat A-bi-ud, and A-bi-ud be-gat E-li-a-kim, and
E-li-a-kim be-gat A-zor.

14. And A-zor be-gat Sa-doc, and Sa-doc be-gat A-chim, and Achim be-gat
E-li-ud.

15. And E-li-ud be-gat E-li-a-zer, and E-li-a-zer be-gat Mat-than, and
Mat-than be-gat Ja-cob.

16. And Ja-cob be-gat Jo-seph the Hus-band of Ma-ry, of whom was born Jesus,
who is cal-led Christ.

17. So all the ge-ne-ra-ti-ons from A-bra-ham to Da-vid are four-teen
ge-ne-ra-ti-ons. And from Da-vid to the car-ry-ing a-way in-to Ba-by-lon are
four-teen ge-ne-ra-ti-ons. And from the car-ry-ing a-way in-to Ba-by-lon un-to
Christ are four-teen ge-ne-ra-ti-ons.

The first Epistle of Saint John, the second Chapter.
1. MY little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if
any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous.

2. And he is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the
sins of the whole world.

3. And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments.

4. He that says he knows him, and keeps not his Commandments is a liar,
and the Truth is not in him.

5. But whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected,
hereby know we that we are in him.

6. He that says he abides in him; ought himself also to walk even as he
walked.

7. Brethren I write no new Commandment unto you, but an old Commandment which
ye had from the beginning; the old Commandment is the word which ye have heard
from the beginning.

8. Again a new Commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him, and
in you, because the darkness is past, and the true light now shines.

9. He that says he is in the Light, and hates his brother, is in darkness
even until now.

10. He that loves his brother abides in the Light, and there is no occasion
of stumbling in him.

11. But he that hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness,
and knows not whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes.

Brief Scriptural Sentences, put Alphabetically for the Use of Learners.
A a A wise son hear-eth his Fa-thers In-struc-ti-on, but a scorn-er hear-eth
not re-buke.

B. b Boast not thy self of to mor-row, for thou know-est not what a day may
bring forth.

C. c Chil-dren o-bey your Pa-rents in all things, for that is well-pleas-ing
un-to the Lord.

D. d Do not they err that de-vise e-vil? but mer-cy and truth shall be to them
that de-vise good.

E. e Enter not in-to the path of the wick-ed, and go not in the way of e-vil
men, for no oc-ca-si-on of ta-king heed is to be let pass.

F. f Fear God and keep his Com-mand-ments, for this is the whole du-ty of man.

G. g Great is the Lord and great-ly to be prais-ed, and his great-ness is
un-search-a-ble.

H. h Hear Coun-sel and re-ceive In-struc-tion, that thou may-est be wise in
thy lat-ter end.

I. i It is pleas-ant to the just to do Judg-ment, but de-struc-ti-on shall be
to the work-ers of i-ni-qui-ty.

K. k Keep the com-mand-ments and live, and the Law as the Ap-ple of thine Eye.

L. l Lord what is man that thou take knowledge of him, or the Son of man that
thou make account of him?

M. m Man is like to vanity, his days are as a sha-dow that passes away.

N. n Naked come we out of our Mothers Womb, and naked shall we return.

O o Only by pride comes contention, but with the well-advised is wisdom.

P. p Pride goes before Destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.

Q. q Quench not the Spirit, prove all things and hold fast that which is good.

R. r Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come
not wherein thou shall say I have no pleasure in them.

S s. Serve the Lord with Fear, and Rejoice with Trembling.

T. t Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but Righteousness delivers from
Death.

V. v Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

W. x Who so loves instruction loves knowledge; but he that hates Reproof is
Brutish.

Y. y Yield not your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but
yield your selves unto God as those that are alive from the dead.

Z. z Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her Converts with Righteousness.

Psalm 119
1. NOt those that talk, but such as walk
in Gods pure Laws; Not those,
Who turn aside, but do abide
In them, are blessed and chose.
2. Not they that know, but such as do
His Testaments, are blessed,
That keep his word, that seek the Lord
With Hearts that cannot rest.
3. There is no sin that these live in,
They walk in holy way,
4. They are intent and diligent
His Precepts to obey.
5. Unfeignedly I wish and cry,
O that my ways were such,
That thou would lead where I should tread:
(Fain would I please thee much.)
6. I would not choose, neither refuse
Any command of thine,
Deserved blame, or feared shame
Shall never become mine,
Let me discern and wisely learn
Thy Laws and Judgments true:
From heart profound will I resound
Thy worthy Praises due.
8. And then I may resolve, and say,
Thy Laws I will observe:
Do thou but stand at my Right Hand,
And I shall never swerve.
The Lamentation of David over Saul and Jonathan 2 Samuel 1 Chap. verse. 19.
THe Beauty of Israel is slain
upon the places high.
How are the Mighty fallen down!
in Gath this never cry,
Nor tell't in streets of Askelon,
lest Philistines rejoice:
Lest daugh-ers of the Uncircumsised
Make a Triumphant noise.
Ye Mountains high of Gilboa
let there be never dew:
Let neither rain, nor Fields again
of Offerings be on you.
For there the Shield of the Mighty's lost,
and vildly put to the foil;
The Shield of Saul as he had not
anointed been with Oil.
Jonathans bow turned not back
From the blood of the Slain;
Nor from the Mighties fat, Saul's sword
returned not in vain.
Lovely and pleasant in their lives
were Saul and Jonathan;
And in their death and latest breath
was no division.
They swifter were than Eagles, far
stranger than Lions stout:
Ye daughters fair of Israel, spare
not for Saul to weep out.
Who clothed you with Scarlet, aad
with all that might delight;
Who put on Ornaments of Gold
On your Apparel bright.
In the midst of the Fight how are
the Mighty fallen down,
Oh Jonathan how wast thou slain
in the place of Renown!
O thou my brother Jonathan
I am distressed for thee;
A pleasant kind Companion
thou have been unto me.
Thy love to me was wonderful,
past that of women far:
How are the Mighty fallen, and how
are lost the Men of War!
There are several words that have some Letters in them that are not sounded or
pronounced, and yet must be used when the same words are written.
AS A. in some words; as we pronounce Pharo, but must write Pharaoh, and so in
Isaac, Canaan, etc.

B. in some, for we must write Dumb, thumb, lamb, womb, doubt, debt; but we
pronounce them, dum, thum, lam, wom, dout, det, etc.

C. Written between a Vowel and K is not pronounced; as in black, check, sick,
lock, truck, etc.

C. Written after s is not pronounced, as in descent, conscience, disciple,
ascent, etc.

C. Before a, o, oo, commonly sounds like K: as cat, court, custom, color,
cook: but C before e, i, y, or ee, sounds like s: as censer, city, cider
cypress, exceed, proceed.

Chapter in words purely English, have a peculiar sound with them, both before and
after Vowels. Before a Vowel, in chance, cheap, chine, choke, churl: after a
Vowel in ach, reach, rich, roch, such: But in words of a Hebrew or Greek
derivation Ch sounds like K, as in Che-der-la-o-mer, A-chan, La chish,
Mal-chus: and so also in the end of words: as Be-ro-dach, Mel-chi-ze-dech,
An-ti-och, Baruch: but still except Ra-chel, Che-ru-bin, Ty-chi-cus: as also
words compounded of Arch, as Arch-bi-shop, Ar-chi-tect.

D. is not pronounced in badge, hedge, bridge, lodge, judge, friend-ship,
handmaid, wed-nes-day.

E is usually written, but not pronounced in the end of a word, as in horse,
breathe, virtue, and is usually added not so much for necessity as beauty: But
you must always except some words of a foreign Derivation as E-pi-to-me,
Jes-se, Ju-bi-le and others.

But e is never pronounced in the end of any English word but in these ye, me,
be, we, he: But yet e is necessarily added to some words, or else it will alter
the sense, as to write flaming fire, o must be added, lest it be taken for a
fir tree: and so, It made me mad, e is useful, though not pronounced: and so in
mile, quire, ride, fare, to distinguish them from mill, quit, rid, far: and so
in others. Sometimes e is added at the end of a word to change the sound, as in
face, grace, which without e, would sound as fac, grac: e softeneth the sound
of g in age, stage, etc. It is usual when a word ends in i, o, or u, to add e
at the end, but it is indifferent whether it be added or omitted. When words
end with a double Consonant they must not have an e after them, as hall, ball,
call, wall, all, fall, etc.

If E be written at the end of a word after r, or l, it comes before them in
the pronouncing: as able is pronounced abel, Temple, Tempel, nitre, niter,
crackle, crackel.

G is not pronounced in sign, reign, phlegm, design, assign, but yet must be
written.

Gh is sounded like ff, in laugh, cough, enough, etc. G has sometimes a hard
sound, as in gain, gold, good, and sometimes a flat sound, as in Ginger, and
therefore if a, o, or u, follow this flat sound, it must be written with I, as
Joseph, Judith, James, not Goseph, Gudith, Games: but when the sound has i
next, it is written with G, as Ginger, but when E follows, it is to be written
with I, except these words following gesture, gender, generation, gentility,
geometry, genealogy, gem, gentil, and some proper names.

Gh is not often pronounced in any word, as light, bright might, right, they
are sounded lite, brite, mite, rite: and so in high, Almighty, thigh, nigh, gh
are not sounded.

H is written, but yet not sounded in many words, as Christ, Thomas, Rhetoric,
Rheum, Scholar, scheme; but they are pronounced as Crist, Tomas, Retorick,
Reume, Scolar, sceme: also the sound of H is lost at the end of some words, as
Shiloh, Hezekiah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others.

I is not sounded in adieu, juice, fruit, Parliament, carriage, cousin fashion,
etc.

I before r sounds like u, as thirst, third, fir, bird, thirty; and I Consonant
before a Vowel is sounded as G, and written differently from an i vowel, as
joy, judge, etc.

K seems not to be sounded in back, deck, sick, thick, rock, buck, pack, etc.

L sounds not in half, ealf, stalk, salve, alms, balm, salmon, falcon, Lincoln,
Bristol, Holborn, folk: but l is always pronounced in ale, scale, gale, and
others.

In words of one Syllable l is usually doubled, as ball, bell, bill, bull: but
if a Consonant be added at the end, it loses a Syllable, as shall, wilt, etc.
Words of above one Syllable end in a single l, as sinful, evil, etc.

N is not sounded in Solemn, condemn, Hymn, Autumn, contemn, column, etc. yet
they must be written thus with an n at the end to show their derivation from
the Latin.

O is not pronounced in youth, damosel, courage, Jailer, People, Jeopardy,
scourge, nourish, young, etc.

P is not sounded in Tempt, Receipt, Symptom, Psalm, Simpson, Redemption,
Sumptuous, etc.

Ph is sounded sometimes like F, as in Triumph, Phebe, Sulphur, Orphan, Philip,
Philemon, etc. But if Ph be in two Syllables, then it is otherwise, as in
Shep-herd, Clap-ham.

Q is always followed by u, whenever it is written, although u add nothing to
the sound thereof, as in Queen, quaker, quill, question, etc. Qu sounds like K
in liquor, Exchequer, etc.

S is not sounded, but always written in Isle, Viscount, Island, etc. There is
s long, and s short, and you must always write s long in the beginning and
middle of words, as son soul, blossom, blessing; and s short in the ending, as
Sisters, Sons, Mothers, Husbands, lands, etc. except into words that are
alterable, viz. Nouns singular into plural, or verbs into another person, as
cause, causes, disburse, disbursest, disburseth; also S so sounds like Z in
some words, as easy, bosom, etc.

Ti before a Vowel commonly sounds like si, as it patience, persecution,
nation, Oration, etc. but if s go before it, then it is sounded as it is writ
as in Question, Combustion, Bestial, or as it is in Titus; and so after the
same manner you must pronounce those words that end in ty, as Crafty, Lofty,
Pity, and so also loftier, loftiest.

V Consonant should differ from a V Vowel, and should be pronounced as value
vain, vengeance, verily, vice, vine, voice, vultur, etc.

V Vowel is not sounded in guard, guest, guile, buy, build, conduit, circuit,
etc. u is always joined with Q, as Quail, quick, quiet, neither is u sounded in
Savior, Scrupulous, etc.

W after O is not sounded, as in grow, slow, yellow, shadow, widow; nor in
wretch, write, wrath, etc.

Y is not pronounced in Monkey, Key, Chimney, kidney, journey, pulley; if a
word end in i we make it commonly y, as cry, reply, misery, mercy, etc.

S is pronounced like Z in some words, as lose, abuse, use, sins, Sons, etc.

Now though there may be reason for many of these superfluous Letters, because
they show from whence the words are derived, yet it might be wished they were
written as they are spoken, which would make it easier both to strangers and
our selves also. There is a brief Table at the end to show you the difference
that there is in writing and pronouncing many words.

SInce Points, Stops, or Notes used by the learned in writing, are not the
least part of Orthography, or the right manner of writing, I thought good to
give an account of them in brief, and they are these.

A Comma (,) Semicolon (;) Colon (:) A full-point (.) Asterism (*) A note of
Admiration (!) A note of Interrogation (?) A Parenthesis () Obelisk Hyphen (-)
An Index
1. A Comma is a note of convenient silence, or rather a breathing time to that
which succeeds, marked thus --,

As for Example, Loves companions be unquiet longings, fond comforts, faint
discomforts, hopes, jealousies, carefulness.

2. A Semicolon is a pause somewhat longer than a Comma, and thus noted --;

Example, Her witty persuasions had wise answers; her eloquence recompensed
with sweetness; her threatenings repelled with disdain.

3. A Colon is a middle distinction between a Comma and a full stop in the
middle of a sentence, marked thus --:

Example, If I speak nothing, I choke my self, and am in no way of relief: if
simply, neglected: if confused, not understood: If I express any thing very
lively of what I truly feel, this is a token forsooth my thoughts are too much
at leisure.

4. A Period is a perfect or full Point, to put at the end of a complete
Sentence, marked thus --.

Example, Lines cannot blush, so as modesty admits a freedom to my pen, which
would be taxed immodesty being delivered by the Tongue.

5. A note of Exclamation or Admiration is thus noted --!

Example, Oh endless endeavors! O vain glorious ignorance!

6. A note of Interrogation thus --?

Example, What shall I do? whither shall I flee? whom shall I blame? what shall
I pretend --?

7. A Parenthesis is shutting a sentence between two half moons, which
notwithstanding, the discourse remains entire, noted thus ()

Example. Tell me ingenuously (if there be any ingenuity in you) whether you
did not know it.

8. Index thus is to note from the margin what is remarkable.

9. Obelisk noted thus always refers from the matter to the Margin.

10. Asterism thus marked * when any part of a Sentence is lost or wanting.

11. Hyphen marked thus (-) is a note of Connection, as sometimes Housekeeping.

numerous copper-plate examples of proper handwriting step-by-step instructions
for drawing letters Breaks of mixed Secretary Letters.
^ a ^ b ^ d ^ e ^ f ^ g ^ h ^ i ^ k ^ l ^ m ^ n ^ o ^ p ^ q ^ r ^ s ^ s ^ v ^
u ^ w ^ x ^ y ^ z a b i d d e e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t v u w x y z and



handwritten alphabet A a b c d ^ e ^ f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z
and: Glory to God



handwritten capital letters A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V U X Y Z



handwritten sentence Avoid ill Company and Sloth
By which to ruin men are brought
Choose still to walk in virtues ways
Doubtless to Honor to will thee raise.


handwritten letters in italic Italick
A a b cc d e f g ^ h i k l m n o p q r s t v u w x y z and Laus Deo

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z

Ever be mindful of thy End
Forbear all ill: Thy life amend.


handwritten letters in romans Roman
A a b c d ^ e f gg hh i k k l m n o p p q r s s t st st v v u w w x y y z z
and and

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z and

Great is the Glory that is won
Having the Pens Perfection




Moral Precepts and Instructions for Youth, which may also serve for Copies to
Write out.
A Wise man ought to be content though poor,
He Is only rich that does desire no more.
Be well advised, and wary Counsel take,
Ere thou do any action undertake.
Close in thy bosom lock up thy intents,
For he that knows thy purpose, best prevents.
Defend the Truth, for that who will not dye,
A Coward is, and gives himself the lie.
Ever thy credit keep, it is quickly gone,
Being got by many actions, lost by one.
Fly drunkenness, whose vile incontinence
Takes away both the Reason and the Sense.
Grateful unto thy Friends be, so thou wilt gain
Their second help, if thou should need again.
Hear much, but little speak; a wise man fears,
And will not use his Tongue so much as Ears.
Judge not between two Friends, but rather see,
If thou can bring them friendly to agree.
Keep thy self humble, Pride has ruined many.
The proud man's seldom well beloved of any.
Live well, and then how soon so e're thou dye,
Thou art of age to claim eternity.
Make spare in youth, lest age should find thee poor,
When time is past, and thou can spare no more.
Never to gather wealth through fraud presume,
A little evil got, will much consume.
Over thy reason let not Lust prevail;
'Twill misery on thee, and thine intail.
Praise not thy self, nor thy own worth, nor be
The first that knows thy own sufficiency.
Quietly learn all crosses to endure,
Repining does more misery procure.
Refrain much talk: you seldom hear of any,
Undone by hearing, but by speaking many.
So live with man as if Gods curious Eye,
Did every where into thine Actions prye.
To all alike be courteous, meek, and kind
A winning carriage, with indifferent mind
Use patience what e're haps, though bad it be,
Take it for good, and 'twill be so to thee.
Who spends too much may want, and so complain,
But he spends best, that spares to spend again.
Xerxes with Tears surveys his mighty host,
Thinking how so on they would all be dead and lost.
Yesterday's past, to morrow's none of thine,
To day thy life to virtuous Acts incline.
Zealously practice what is good, and then,
Great will be thy reward in bliss. Amen.
Of those Holy Men that were supposed to be the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures
of the Old Testament.
1. MOses the Son of Amram, the Son of Levi, was called by of the God when he
was Forty years Old, to be the Leader of the Children of Israel. He wrote the
Book of Genesis about 800 Years after the Flood. He spoke by a large measure of
Gods Spirit, of many things that were done two thousand four hundred and
fourteen years before he was Born. He also Wrote Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
and Deuteronomy.

2. Joshua, and Eleazer the High Priest, are supposed to have Penned the Book
of Joshua, who Governed Israel Victoriously 17. Years, and died in the 110 Year
of his Age.

3. Samuel is supposed to have Penned the Books of Judges and Ruth.

4. The first and second Book of Samuel, were Written by Samuel the Seer,
Nathan the Prophet, and Gad the Seer.

5. The first and second Books of Kings were Penned by Nathan the Prophet,
Ahiah the Shilonite, Iddo thee Seer, Jonah the Prophet, and Semeia.

6. The first and second Book of the Chronicles, were Writ by Iddo the Seer,
and Semeia.

7. The Book of Ezra was written by Ezra the Priest.

8. He also wrote the Book of Nehemiah and therefore in the Hebrew they are put
both together.

9. The Book of Esther was Written by the Chronicler of Ahasuerus, and was
taken out of the Records of the Medes and Persians

10. Job was of Kin to Abraham, and outlived Moses, for he lived 140 years
after his Temptation. The Penman is not exactly Recorded.

11. The Psalms were penned by diverse, as David, Moses, Asaph, and others, they
were collected by Esdras.

12. The Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Solomon's Song, were written by Solomon,
after his Conversion.

13. Isaiah the Son of Amos prophesied in the days of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz,
Hezekiah, and Manasses.

14. Jeremiah Son to Helkiah the Priest, prophesied in the days of Josias,
Jehoiakim and Zedekiah.

15. Ezekiel was a Priest in Babylon, five years of Jehoiakins Captivity.

16. Daniel was a Captive in Babylon, and prophesied under Nebuchadnezzer, Evil
Merodach, and Belshazzer.

17. Hosea prophesied in the days of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings
of Judah.

18. Joel prophesied in the days of Vzziah, and Jeroboam.

19. Amos was a poor simple Shepherd, and prophesied at the same time with Joel.

20. Obadiah prophesied against Edom, at the time the Palace of the Temple and
City was set on fire.

21. Jonah prophesied in the days of Amasiah and Jeroboam,

22. Nahum prophesied in the days of Hezekiah King of Judah, Vzziah King of
Israel, and Salmanazar King of Assyria.

23 Habakkuk prophesied about the same time.

24. Zephaniah prophesied in the days of Josiah the Son of Amon.

25. Haggai, Zacchariah, and Malachy the Prophets, were appointed after the
Captivity to comfort the people, and wrote all about the same time.

Of the New Testament.
1. S. Matthew wrote his Gospel eight years after Christ's Ascension.

2. S. Mark wrote ten years after Christ's Ascension.

3. S. Luke wrote fifteen years after Christ's Ascension.

4. S. John wrote 32 years after Christ's Ascension.

5. The Acts of the Apostles were written by S. Luke.

6. The Epistle to the Romans was written by S. Paul, as also the two to the
Corinthians, those to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Timothy, Titus,
Philemon, and the Hebrews, as the Learned allow.

7. James the Son of Alphaeus, the Brother of Jude, called also the Brother of
our Lord, Wrote his Epistle.

8. St. Peter one of the Chief of the Apostles Wrote two Epistles.

9. St. John the Son of Zebedee, beloved of Christ, Wrote three Epistles, and
the Revelation.

10. Jude one of the Apostles Writ his Epistle.

The Names and Order of all the Books of the Old and New Testament.
Genesis has Chapters 50 Exodus 40 Leviticus 27 Numbers 36 Leuteronomie 34
Joshua 24 J^dges 21 Ruth 4 I Samuel 31 II Samuel 24 I Kings 22 II Kings 25 I
Chronicles 29 II Chronicles 36 Era 10 Nehemiah 13 Esther 10 Job 42 Psalms 150
The Proverbs has Chapt. 31 Ecclesiastes 1^ The Song of Solomon (...) Isaiah
(...) Jeremiah (...) Lamentations (...) Ezekiel (...) Daniel (...) Hosea (...)
Joel (...) Amo^ (...) Ob^ (...) Jo^ (...) M^ (...) (...)
The Books of the (...)
Matthew has Chapters 2^ Mark (...) Luke (...) John (...) The (...) (...)
Words of one Syllable.
(...)

^
(...) ^east (...) bought bound bow bowl (...) bruise bruit build built bunch
burnt burst buy bud bush
C
Cage cake calf calve ^ame ^anst ^tch ^ve (...) chance change charge chase
chaste chaws cheat check cheek cheer cheese chest chew chide chief child chinks
chirp chip (...) churl churn clark clave claws clay clean cleanse clear cleft
cleave clift climb clipped cloak cloth cloth clods close (...) (...) co^ co^^
co^ cow^ cra^ crav^ creek creep crew crime crook cross crouch crowd cruise
crum^s crush care curse
D
Dare date daw^ dance daw^ dead deaf deal deal^ dear (...) dine dirt dish ditch
done door dote doubt dove dough down ^ank d^e draught draw drawn dread dream
dreg dregs drew dry drink drive dross drove drough drown drunk due duke dumb
dung dust durst dwarf dwell dwelt (...)
(...)

eat edge egg eight else err ewe eye
F
Face fade fail fain faint fair faith false fame fare fault fear feast feed
feel feet fence fetch few field fierce fifth fight file filth fine fire first
fish (...) flax flea fled fledst fleece flee flesh flew fly flight flint flip
flock floor floats flood flow flower flute foal foes fold folk foam food fool
foord foot force forks forth fought foul fowl found four frail frame fraud
(...) fringe frogs from front frost fruit
G
Gain gate gave gay gaze ghost give glad glass glean glede gnash gnat gnaw goad
goat God gone good gore gourd grace graft grain grand grant grape grass grave
gray grease great (...) grew grief grieve grim grind groan grope gross grove
ground grow grown grudge guard guest guide guile gulf gush
H
Ha had hail hair hale hare haste hatch hate has haunt hawk hay^ here head
heal health heap heard hear hearth (...) heave hedge heed heel height heir
helve hence herb (...) ^re hew hide high hire hiss hoar hold hole home hoods
hoof hook hope horse host home hour house how howl huge hurl husk hymn
I
^aw i will ink inn i^ join joint itch judge juice just
K
Kid keep kept key kick kind kine king kiss kite knead knee kneel knew knife
knight knit knock knob know known
L
Lace lack lade lake lamb lame lamp lance lanc^ (...) late laud laugh law lay
laid lead leaf lean learn least leave leeks lees leese left length less lewd
lice lick lie life lift light like lime line live loaf loan lock lodge loft
long look loops loose lose (...) loins lump lust lie
M
Made maid make march mark mast mate maw meal meat mean meek meet mess mete
mice midst might milch milk mine mire mirth miss mite mock more moist mole month
moon (...) mouse move mouth much mulct mule muse must myrh
N
Nail name nag naught nay neck need near nigh new next neigh night nine ninth
noise noon north nose note none nurse
O
Oar (...)
P
^n ^air pale palm pangs pass past paste pa^e path paw peace pearl perp pence
pick piece pierce pinch pine pipe piss pitch pla^e (...) pledge plough pluck
plunge point pole pomp ponds pool poor porch pound print proof proud prune
psalm puff pulse pure purge purse
Q
Quails quake queen quench quick quite
R
Race rage rail rain raise ran range rank raze rash raw reach read realm reap
rear reeds reign reins rend rich rye right ride ripe rise rites roat robe rock
rode roe roof room root ropes rose rough roll round rouse row rue rule rump
S
Sack safe said sail saint says sake sale same sat save saw say scab scales
scant scald scarce school scoff scorch scord scourge scrape scribe scroul sea
seal seam search seat seize sect seed seek seem seen sees self sense serve sew
shade shaft shake shame wape share sharp shave sheaf shear shread sheath sheep
sheet show shield shine shock shod shone shoe shook shoot shore shorn short
shout should shrunk shred shrines shroud shrubs sick side siege sieve sift sigh
sight sign silk since sink sith six sixth size skin sky skill skip skirt
skull slack slain slang slave slay sleep slept slight slew slice slide slime
sling slow small smart smell smite smith smoke smooth smote snail snare snatch
snout snow soft soil sold sole some soon soap sore sought soul sound south sown
sour soil space spoke spare spark speak spear speech speed spelt spend spew
spice spy spies spite spoil spoiled spokes spoon sport spouse spouts sprang
spread sprigs spring sprouts sprung spung square stacks staff stain start
stairs stakes stalk stamp stanch stand stank stare staves stay stead steal
stealth steel steep stem stern stick stiff still sting stink stock stole stone
stood stool stoop stop store stork storm stout straight strain struck straw
strew stream street strength stretch strife strike string stripe strip strive
stroke strong struck strove struck studs stuff stump stunk such suck sue suit
sum sung sunk sure swan swear swarm sweat sweet swell swept swim swine swoon
sword sworn sweept
T
Tail take tale talk tame tare task taste taught taunt teach tear tears teeth
tempt tenth ten tend term tile thank that thieves theft theirs thence there
these they thief thigh thine thing think third thirst thongs thorn through
those though thought three thread thresh threw thrice throat throne throng
throw thrown thrum thrust thumb thus tie tierce time tire tithe toe toil told
tomb tongs tongues tongue took tool tooth torch torn toss touch tow town trade
train trance trap tread tree trench tripe try trod trough troop trow truce
true trump trust truth turn twain twelfth twelve twice twigs twins two twine
V
Vail vain vale vaunt vein vent vex view vile vine voice void vow urge use
W
Wade wail wait wake walk want ward ware warm warp wash waste watch wave wax
weak wealth wean wear weave wedge weeds weep week weigh weight wench wept were
whale wheat wheel whelp whence where which while white whole whom whore whose
why wide wife wiles wine wink wipe wise wish witch withs wives wolf womb wont
wood woof wool word work world worm worse worst worth wove would wound wrap
wrath wreath wrest wring write wrong wrote wroth wrought wrung
Y
Yarn ye yeen year yield yell yern yoke yours yew young youth you yield
Z
Zeal
Words of two Syllables both whole and divided into Syllables.
A A A-base Abase ab-hor abhor a-bide abide ab-iect abject a-ble able a-board
aboard a-bode abode a-bove above a-bound abound a-broad abroad ab-sence absence
ab-sent absent ab-stain abstain absurd absurd a-buse abuse ac-cept accept
ac-cess access ac-cord accord ac-count account ac-cuse accuse ac-quaint
acquaint ac-quit acquit a-cre acre ad-ding adding ad-der adder ad-jure adjure
ad-orn adorn ad-vance advance ad-vise advise a-far afar af-fairs affairs
af-fect affect af-firm affirm af-flict afflict af-ford afford af-fright
affright a-foot afoot a-fore before a-fraid afraid a-fresh afresh af-ter after
a-gainst against a-gate agate a-ged aged a-gree agree a-ground aground a-gue
ague aid-ed aideth ail-eth aileth air-ed aired al-arm alarm a-like alike a-live
alive al-low allow al-lure allure al-mond almond al-most almost a-loft aloft
a-lone alone a-long along a-loof aloof a-loud alaud al-pha alpha al-ter alter
al-tar altar al-though although al-ways always a-maze amaze am-bush amber
am-bush ambush a-mend amend a-merce amerce a-miss amiss a-mong among an-kle
ankles an-chor anchor an-gel angel an-ger anger an-gle angle an-gred angered
an-gry angry an-guish anguish a-nise anise a-noint anoint a-non anon ans-wer
answer an-vil anvil a-ny any a-pace apace apart apart ap-peal appeal ap-pear
appear ap-pease appease ap-ple apple ap-ply apply ap-point appoint ap-pronch
approach ap-prove approve a-pron apron ar-ray array ar-cher archer ar-gue argue
a-rise arise ar-my army ar-mour armor a-rose arose ar-row arrow a-scend ascend
a-scent ascent a-scribe ascribe ash-es ashes ash-pans ashpans a-side aside
ask-ed asked ask-est ask a-sleep asleep as-sault assault as-say assay
as-sent assent as-sign assign as-sist assist as-sure assure as-swage assuage
a-stray astray a-thirst athirst at-tain attain at-tend attend at-tent attent
at-tire attire a-venge avenge a-verse averse aug-ment augment a-vouch avouch
a-void avoid au-stere austere au-thor author a-wake awake a-ware aware a-woke
awoke aim-ing aiming

B B Bab-ler Babbler backbone backbone back-bite backbite backside backside
back-slide backslide back-ward backward bad-ness badness badg-er badger bak-er
baker bald-ness baldness bal-lance balance band-ed banded ban-ner banner
ba-nish banish ban-quec banquet bap-tism baptism bap-tist baptist bap-tize
baptize bar-ber barber barefoot barefoot bar-ley barley bar-rel barrel bar-ren
barren bas-ket basket ba-son basin ba-stard bastard bat-tel battle bea-con
beacon bear-ers bearers beat-en beaten beau-ty beauty be-came became be-come
become bee-tle beetle be-fal befall be-fore before be-gan began be-gat begat
be-get beget beg-ged begged beg-ger beggar be-guile beguile be-half behalf
be-have behave be-head behead be-held beheld be-hind behind be-hold behold
be-hoove behoove be-ing being be-lieve believe be-lief belief be-ly belly
bel-low bellow bel-lows bellows bel-ly belly be-long belong be-moan bemoan
bench-es benches be-neath beneath be-reave bereave be-ryl beryl ber-ries
berries be-seech beseech be-set beset be-side beside be-siege besiege be-som
besom be-sought besought be-stead bestead be-stir bestir be-stow bestow be-take
betake be-think bethink be-times betimes be-tray betray be-troth betroth
bet-ter better beu-lah beulah be-wail bewail be-ware beware be-witch bewitch
be-wray bewray be-yond beyond bib ber bibber bid-den bidden bil-lows billows
bind-eth binds bi-shop bishop bit-ter bitter bit-tern bittern black-er
blacker black-ness blackness blame-less blameless blank-et blanket blas-pheme
blaspheme blear-ing blearing blem-ish blemish bles-sed blessed blue-ness
blueness blind-ness blindness blou-dy bloody bloom-ed bloomed blos-som blossom
bo-dy body boil-ed boiled bold-ly boldly bold-ness boldness bol-ster bolster
bond-age bondage bon-nets bonnets bor-der border bor-row borrow bo-som bosom
bos-ses bosses bot-tle bottle bot-tom bottom boun-ty bounty bow-ed bowed
bow-eth boweth bow-els bowels bowl-ed bowled brace-let bracelet brak-est
brakest bram-ble bramble brand-ish brandish bra-zen brazen brawl-er brawler
break-er breaker breech-es breeches breed-ing breeding bre-thren brethren
bri-ar briar bri-dle bridle brief-ly briefly bright-ness brightness brim-stone
brimstone bring-eth brings brit-tle brittle brok-en broken bro-ther brother
brought-est broughtest broil-ed broiled bruis-ed bruised bub-leth bubleth
buck-et bucket buck-ler buckler buf-fet buffet build-ed builded bul-lock
bullock bul-rush bulrush bul-warks bulwarks bun-dle bundle bur-den burden
burg-lers burglers bu-ry bury burn-ed burned burst-ing bursting bush-el bushel
bush-es bushes bu-sie busy but-ler butler but-ter butter but-tocks buttocks
buy-er buyer

C C Cab-bins Cabbins cal-led called cam-el camel cam-est came cam-phire
camphire can-dle candle cap-tive captive care-less careless car-case carcass
car-nal carnal car-ry carry cart-rope cartrope carv-ed carved case-ment
casement cast-ing casting cas-tle castle catch-eth catches cat-tle cattle
caus-ed caused caus-es causes cau-sey causey ceas-ed ceased ce-dar cedar
cel-lars cellars cen-ser censer cen-sure censure cer-tain certain chaf-ed
chafed chal-lenge challenge cham-ber chamber charg-ed charged chan-nel channel
chap-man chapman chap-pel chapel charg-ed charged charm-ed charmed cha-sten
chasten cha-stize chastize chat-ter chatter check-er checker cheer-ful cheerful
cher-ish cherish chest-nut chestnut chick-ens chickens chief-ly chiefly
chil-dren children chim-ney chimney choic-est choicest cho-ler choler chos-en
chosen cry-stal crystal church-es churches churl-ish churlish churn-ing
churning chus-est chusest ceil-ed ceiled cir-cle circle cir-cuit circuit
ci-stern cistern ci-ty city clam-our clamor clean-ness cleanness clean-sed
cleansed clear-ly clearly cleav-eth cleaves climb-ed climbed cloath-ed
clothed clo set closet clou-dy cloudy clo-ven cloven clout-ed clouted clus-ter
cluster coach-es coaches coc-kle cockle cof-fer coffer cof-fin coffin col-lar
collar col-ledge college col-lops collops co-lour color come-ly comely
com-eth comes com-fort comfort com-mand command com-mend commend com-mit
commit com-mon common com-mune commune com-pact compact com-pass compass
com-pel compel com-plain complain com-pleat complete com-pound compound
con-ceal conceal con-ceit conceit con-ceive conceive con-cern concern con-cord
concord con-course concourse con-demn condemn con-duct conduct con-duit conduit
con-fess confess con-firm confirm con-flict conflict con-found confound co-ny
cony con-quer conquer con-sent consent con-sist consist con-strain constrain
con-spire conspire con-sult consult con-sume consume con-tain contain con-temn
contemn con-tempt contempt con-tend contend con-tent content con-test contest
con-trite contrite con-vent convent con-vert convert con-vey convey con-vict
convict con-vince convince cool-ing cooling co-py copy cop-ing coping cop-per
copper cor-ban corban co-ral coral cor-ner corner cornet cornet cor-rect
correct cor-rupt corrupt cost-ly costly cot-tage cottage couch-eth coucheth
co-ver cover co-vet covet coun-sel counsel count-ed counted coun-try country
cou-ple couple cou-rage courage crak-ling crackling crack-ness crackness
craf-ty crafty crafts-man craftsman cra-ved craved cre-ate created crea-ture
creature cree-ping creeping cree-ple creeple cry-ed cried cry-est cryest
cry-ing crying crim son crimson crisp-ing crisping crook-backt crookbackt
crook-ed crooked crown-ing crowing crown-ed crowned crud-led crudled cru-el
cruel crush-ed crushed cu-bit cubit cuc-kow cuckoo cum-bred cumbred cum-min
cummin cun-ning cunning curd-ed curded curl-ed curled cur-rant current cur-sed
cursed cour-tain courtain cus-tom custom cut-test cuttest cym-bal cymbal
cy-press cypress

D D Dag-ger Dagger dain-ty dainty dam-mage damage dam-ned damned dand-led
dandled dan-ger danger dark-ly darkly dark-en darken dark-ness darkness
dar-ling darling dash-ed dashed daugh-ter daughter danc-ed danced dawn-ing
dawning dea-con deacon dead-ly deadly deal-est dealest dear-ly dearly de-base
debase de-bate debate deb-ter debtor de-cay decay de-cease decease de-ceit
deceit de-ceive deceive de-cent decent deck-ed decked de-clare declare de-cline
decline de-cree decree deem-ed deemed de-fame defame de-feat defeat de-fect
defect de-fence defense de-fend defend de-fer defer de-fie defy de-file defile
de-fraud defraud de-gree degree de-lay delay de-light delight de-mand demand
de-ny deny de-nounce denounce de-part depart de-pend depend de-pose depose
de-prive deprive de-pute depute de-ride deride de-sart desert de-scend descend
de-scent descent de-scribe describe de-scry descry de-sert desert de-serve
deserve de-sire desire de-spair despair de-spise despise de-spite despite
de-stroy destroy de-tain detain de-test detest de-vice device de-vil devil
de-vise devise de-vote devote de-vour devour de-vout devout di-al dial di-ed
died di-et diet dif-fer differ dig-ged dug dim-ness dimness di-ned dined
din-ner dinner dip-ped dipped di-rect direct dir-ty dirty dis-cern discern
dis-charge discharge dis-close disclose dis-cord discord dis-creet discreet
dis-dain disdain dis-ease disease dis-grace disgrace dis-guise disguise dish-es
dishes dis-joyn disjoyn dis-may dismay dis-miss dismis dis-patch dispatch
dis-pence dispense dis-perse disperse dis-play display displease displease
dis-pose dispose dis-pute dispute dis-sent dissent dis-solve dissolve di-staff
distaff di-stant stistant di-stil distill di-stinct distinct di-stract distract
di-stress distress ditch-es ditches di-vers diverse di-vide divide di-vine
divine di-vorce di-vorce doc-tor doctor doc-trine doctrine do-er doer dou-ble
dou-ble doubt-ful doubtful dow-ry dowry dra-gon dragon draw-er drawer dread-ful
dreadful dream-er dreamer dres-sed dressed drew-est drewest dri-ed dried
drink-er drinker dri-ven driven drop-sy dropsy drow-ned drowned drun-kard
drunkard duke-dom dukedom dul-ness dullness du-ty duty dwel-ling dwelling

E E Ea-gle Eagle ear-ly early ear-nest earnest earth-en earthen ea-sy easy
eat-er eater eat-ing eating e-cho echo ef-fect effect el-bows elbows el-der
elder e-lect elect em-pire empire em-ploy employ emp-ty empty en-camp encamp
en-close enclose end-ed ended en-dure endure en-dow endow en-flame inflame
en-joy enjoy en-large enlarge e-nough enough en-sign ensign en-sue ensue
en-tice entice en-trance entrance en-vy envy e-qual equal e-rect erect er-rand
errand er-rour error e-scape escape e-schew eschew e-spy espy e-spouse espouse
e-state estate e-strange estrange e-vent event e-ver ever e-vil evil ex-ceed
exceed ex-change exchange ex-cept except ex-cel excel ex-cess excess ex-ile
exile ex-pect expect ex-pel expel ex-press express ex-tend extend ex-tol extol
eyesight eyesight

F F Fa-bles Fables fa-ces faces fa-deth fades fail-eth fails faith-ful
faithful fail-ing failing fals-hood falsehood fa-mous famous fa-mine famine
fat-ness fatness fa-ther father faul-ty faulty fa-vour favor fee-ble feeble
fel-low fellow fen-ced fenced fer-vent fervent fet-ters fetters fuel fuel
fierce-nes fierceness fight-er fighter fi-gure figure fil-thy filthy finger
finger fin-nish finish firebrand firebrand first-ling firstling fish-er fisher
fixed fixed flat-ter flatter flesh-ly fleshly flou-rish flourish flow-er flower
flut-ter flutter fod-der fodder fol-low follow fool-ish foolish for-bare
forbear forecast forecast forehead forehead fore-run forerun fore-warn
forewarn for-give forgive for-nace furnace for-sake forsake for-ward forward
fow-ler fowler foun-tain fountain fur-bish furbish frag-ments fragments
free-dom freedom fre-quent frequent friend-ship friendship frow-ard froward
frus-trate frustrate ful-fil fulfill fur-long furlong fur-nish furnish fur-row
furrow fur-ther further

G G Gad-dest Gaddest gainsay gainsay gal-lant gallant gal-lows gallows
gar-land garland gar-ment garment gar-ner garner ga-ther gather gen-tle gentie
ges-ture gesture gi-ant giant gir-dle girdle glad-ness gladness glean-ing
gleaning glo-ry glory glut-ton glutton god-dess goddess go-ings goings gol-den
golden goldsmiths goldsmith good-ness goodness gos-pel gospel go-vern govern
graf-ted grafted gra-vel gravel gra-ven graven gree-dy greedy green-ness
greenness griev-ous grievous grind-er grinder groan-ing groaning grudg-ing
grudging guil-ty guilty guilt-less guiltless

H H ha-bit habit hai-ry hairy hal-low hallow ham-mer hammer han-dle handle
hang-ing hanging hap-pen happen hap-py happy hard-ness hardness har-lot harlot
harm-less harmless har-vest harvest ha-tred hatred ha-ven haven haugh-ty
haughty heal-ing healing hear-ing hearing hea-ven heaven he-brew hebrew
hei-nous heinous help-er helper hew-er hewer hid-ing hiding him-self himself
hire-ling hireling ho-ly holy ho-nest honest ho-nour honor ho-ny honey hor-rour
horror household household hum-ble humble hun-gry hungry hun-ter hunter
hus-band husband hys-sop hyssop

I I Ja-cent Jacent jang-ling jangling jay-lor jailer jest-ing jesting jea-lous
jealous i-dol idol i-mage image im-brace embrace im-plead implead im-pute
impute in-cense incense in-cest incest in-chant inchant in-crease increase
in-fant infant in-form inform in-joyn enjoin in-quire inquire in-spire inspire
in-tent intent in-treat entreat in-vent invent in-vite invite in-ward inward
jour-ny journey joy-ful joyful judg-ment judgment jus-tice justice just-ly justly

K K Keep-er Keeper kid-nies kidneys kind-ness kindness kin-dle kindle king-dom
kingdom kin-dred kindred kins-man kinsman know-ledge knowledge ker-nel kernel
ket-tle kettle kis-sed kissed king-ly kingly kind-ly kindly kick-ed kicked
kil-ling killing kings-folk kingsfolk knead-ed kneaded knit-ting knitting
know-ing knowing know-est know knock-ed knocked

L L La-bour Labor la-den laden la-ment lament la-dy lady lad-der ladder
la-dle ladle lan-guish languish laugh-ter laughter law-ful lawful law-yer
lawyer lean-ness leanness learn-ing learning leav-en leaven leas-ing leasing
lean-ing leaning lec-ture lecture le-per leper let-ter letter le-vite levite
le-vy levy leud-ness leudness light-ness lightness light-ly lightly light-en
lighten line-ing lineing like-ness likeness li-mit limit lin-age lineage lin-ger
linger lin-nen linen lit-tle little liv-ing living loath-some loathsome
lodg-ing lodging lof-ty lofty lord-ship lordship love-ly lovely lo-ving loving
low-ly lowly lus-ty lusty ly-ar liar

M M Mad-ness Madness maid-en maiden maim-ed maimed main-tain maintain mak-er
maker ma-lice malice mankind mankind ma-ny many man-na manna man-ner manner
man-tle mantle mark-et market ma-rine marine mar-vel marvel ma-son mason
mean-ing meaning mea-sure measure med-dle meddle meek-ness meekness mem-ber
member mer-chant merchant mer-cy mercy mer-ry merry mes-sage message midwife
midwife migh-ty mighty mil-stone millstone min-stril minstril mir-rour mirror
mis-chief mischief mis-tris mistress mis-use misuse mix-ed mixed mock-er mocker
mo-dest modest molt-en molten mo-ment moment mo-ny money mon-ster monster
morn-ing morning mor-gage morgage mor-sel morsel mor-tal mortal mo-ther mother
moun-tain mountain mour-ner mourner mur-der murder mur-mur murmur mu-sick
music mus-ter muster mut-ter mutter

N N Na-ked Naked na-tive native na-ture nature na-vel navel na-vy navy nap-kin
napkin nar-row narrow naugh-ty naughty nee-dy needy neg-lect neglect neigh-bour
neighbor ne-phew nephew net-tle nettle ne-ver never nim-ble nimble no-ble
noble no-strils nostrils new-ness newness nig-gard niggard no-ted noted
no-thing nothing no-tice notice no-vice novice nou-rish nourish nour-ture
nourture noi-sed noised noy-some noisome num-ber number nur-sing nursing

O O O-bey Obey ob-ject object ob-scure obscure ob-tain obtain ob-serve observe
o-dor odor of-fend offend of-fer offer of-fice office off spring offspring
of-ten often old-er older own-er owner on ly only o-pen open op-pose oppose
or-dain ordain or-der order or-gan organ o-ther other o-ven oven outcast
outcast outside outside own-er owner oynt-ment ointment oi-ly oily o-live
olive on-ward outward o-nyx onyx

P P Pain-ful Painful pain-ted painted pa-lace palace pale-ness paleness pal-sy
palsy par-don pardon pa-rents parents par-lour parlour part-ly partly part-ner
partner pas-sage passage pas-tor pastor pat-tern pattern peel-ed peeled pen-ny
penny peo-ple people per-ceive perceive per-fect perfect per-form perform
per-fume perfume per-haps perhaps pe-rish perish per-mit permit per-plex
perplex per-son person per-swade persuade per-tain pertain per-verse perverse
per-vert pervert pil-grim pilgrim pil-lar pillar pillow pillow pi-lot pilot
pitch-er pitcher pla-gued plagued plain-ly plainly plain-ness plainness
plan-ting planting plat-ter platter plead-ing pleading plea-sant pleasant
plea-sure pleasure pledg-es pledges plen-ty plenty plowed plowed pluck-ing
plucking pol-lute pollute pon-der ponder poy-son poison prac-tice practice
pra-ting prating pray-er prayer preach-ing preaching pre-cept precept pre-fer
prefer pre-pare prepare pre-sence presence pre-serve preserve pre-sume presume
pre-tence pretense pre-vail prevail pre-vent prevent prick-ing pricking
prin-ces princes pri-son prison pri-vate private pro-ceed proceed pro-claim
proclaim pro-cure procure pro-fess profess pro-fit profit pro-long prolong
pro-mise promise pro-mote promote pro-nounce pronounce pro-phane profane
pro-phet prophet pros-per prosper pro-test protest proud-ly proudly pro-vide
provide pru-dence prudence pub-lick public pub-lish publish puf-fed puffed
pul-pit pulpit pu-nish punish pur-chase purchase pure-ly purely purg-ing
purging pur-ple purple pur-pose purpose pur-sue pursue pour-tray pourtray

Q Q Qua-king Quaking qui-ver quiver quar-rel quarrel quar-ter quarter
quench-ing quenching quick-ly quickly qui-et quiet quick-en quicken quit-ted
quitted que-ry query quar-ry quarry quicksands quicksands qua-ver quaver
quilt-ed quilted quaint-ly quaintly

R R Ra-ging Raging rail-ing railing rai-ment raiment rain-ed rained rainbow
rainbow ran-some ransom rash-ly rashly ra-ther rather ra-vish ravish read-ing
reading rea-dy ready reap-ed reaped rea-sons reasons re-bel rebel re-buke
rebuke re-ceive receive reck-on reckon re cord record re-count recount re-deem
redeem re-fine refine re-frain refrain re-fresh refresh re-fuge refuge re-fuse
refuse re-gard regard re-ject reject reign-ed reigned re-joice rejoice re-lease
release re-lieve relieve re-ly rely re-main remain re-mit remit rem-nant
remnant re-move remove ren-der render re-new renew re-nounce renounce re-nown
renown re-nue renew re-pair repair re-peat repeat re-pent repent re-ply reply
re-port report re-proach reproach re-proof reproof re-quest request re-quire
require re-quite requite re-sign resign re-serve reserve re-sist resist re-sort
resort re-solv resolve re-spect respect re-store restore re-strain restrain
re-tain retain re-tire retire re-turn return re-veal reveal re-venge re-venge
re-vile revile re-vive revive re-volt revolt re-ward reward rich-es riches
rid-dle riddle ri-der rider ri-fle rifle right-ly rightly ri-gour rigor ri-ot
riot ri-ver river rob-ber robber ro-man roman root-ed rooted ro-vers rovers
rough-ly roughly roy-al royal rud-dy ruddy ru-in ruin ru-mour rumor ru-ler
ruler rush-ing rushing rus-ty rusty

S S Sab-bath Sabbath sack-but sackbut sackcloth sackcloth sad-ness sadness
safe-ty safety safeguard safeguard sam-ple sample salt-ness saltness sa-lute
salute san-dals sandals sa-tan satan san-dy sandy sa-tyr satyr sa-ving saving
sa-vour savor say-ing saying scan-dal scandal scarce-ness scarceness scar-let
scarlet scat-ter scatter scald-ed scalded scep-ter scepter scho-lar scholar
sci-ence science scof-fer scoffer scorn-er scorner scorn-ful scornful
scourg-ing scourging scrap-ing scraping scrip-ture scripture scur-vey scurvy
sea-son season se-cret secret se-duce seduce se-lah selah sel-ler seller
sel-vedge selvedge sen-se^ senses sen-tence sentence ser-vant servant ser-vice
service set-tle settle se-venth seventh se-ver sever sha-dow shadow sha-dy
shady sha-king shaking sham-bles shambles shame-ful shameful sharp-en sharpen
shear-er shearer shel-ter shelter she-riff sheriff shear-ing shearing
shipwreck shipwreck short-ned shortened short-ly shortly shoul-der shoulder
shout-ing shouting sick-ness sickness sigh-ing sighing si-lent silent sil-ver
silver sim-ple simple sin-cere sincere si-news sinews sin-ful sinful sin-gle
single sing-ing singing sin-ner sinner sis-ter sister slan-der slander
slaugh-ter slaughter sloth-ful slothful smel-ling smelling snoar-ing snoaring
so-ber sober sod-der sodder soft-ly softly so-journ sojourn so-lace solace
so-lemn solemn speck-led speckled speech-less speechless spend-ing spending
spew-ing spewing spo-ken spoken sport-ing sporting spoil-ing spoiling
spread-ing spreading spring-ing springing sprin-kle sprinkle stand-ard standard
sta-tute statute sted-fast steadfast sting-ing stinging sto-mack stomach sto-ny
stony stand-ing standing sto-ry story stout-ness stoutness strait-en straiten
strang-er stranger strength-en strengthen strik-er striker stub-born stubborn
sub-iect subject suc-cess success suf-fice suffice sweep-ing sweeping swel-ling
swelling

T T Ta-ble Table ta-bret tabret ta-lent talent tar-ry tarry tast-ing tasting
tat-ler tatler tax-ing taxing teach-er teacher tem-per temper tem-pest tempest
tem-ple temple temp-ter tempter ten-der tender te-nour tenor thank-ful
thankful there-fore therefore thrif-ty thrifty this-tle thistle threat-en
threaten thresh-ing threshing thresh-old threshold thum-mim thummim thun-der
thunder ti-dings tidings til-lage tillage tim-ber timber tink-ling tinkling
tit-tle tittle to-ken token tor-ment torment tos-sing tossing tow-er tower
traf-fick traffic train-ed trained tray-tor traitor tram-ple trample trans-fer
transfer trans-form transform trans-gress transgress tran-slate translate
tra-vel travel trea-son treason trea-sure treasure tram-ple trample tres-pass
trespass try-al trial tri-bute tribute tric-kle trickle tri-umph triumph
trou-ble trouble tru-ly truly trum-pet trumpet trus-ty trusty tu-mult tumult
turn-ing turning tu-tor tutor twilight twilight ti-dings tidings ty-rant tyrant

V V Vain-ly Vainly va-lour valor va-lue value va-nish vanish ve-nom venom
ven-ture venture ves-sel vessel ves-try vestry vex-ing vexing view-ing viewing
vile-ness vileness vil-lage village vineyard vineyard vin-tage vintage vi-ol
viol vi-per viper vir-gin virgin vis-age visage vi-sit visit un-clean unclean
un-do undo u-nite unite un-just unjust un-kind unkind un-known unknown un-til
until un-wise unwise vo-lume volume vo-mit vomit voy-age voyage up-braid
upbraid up-hold uphold up-right upright up-roar uproar up-ward upward ur-gent
urgent u-surp usurp ut-most utmost ut-ter utter use-ful useful

W W Wa-fer Wafer wag-es wages wag-gon wagon wail-ing wailing wait-ing waiting
wak-ing waking walk-ing walking wal-let wallet wal-low wallow wan-der wander
want-ing wanting wan-ton wanton warn-ing warning war-fare warfare wash-ing
washing watch-ing watching wa-ter water wa-ver waver weak-ness weakness
weal-thy wealthy wean-ed weaned wea-pon weapon wea-ry weary wed-ding wedding
weep-ing weeping weigh-ty weighty welfare welfare whet-ting whetting whol-some
wholesome whol-ly wholly whore-dom whoredom wick-ed wicked wid-dow widow will
full wilful wil-ling willing win-dow window wink-ing winking wip-ing wiping
wis-dom wisdom witchcraft witchcraft wish-ing wishing withdraw withdraw
wi-ther wither with-in within without without with-stand withstand wit-ness
witness wit-ty witty wiz-ard wizard wo-ful woeful wo-man woman won-der wonder
workman workman world-ly worldly wormwood wormwood wor-ship worship wor-thy
worthy wound-ed wounded wrest-ing wresting wretch-ed wretched wrin-kles
wrinkles writ-ten written wrong-ing wronging wrong-ful wrongful wrath-ful
wrathful wring-ing wringing

Y Y Year-ly Yearly youth-ful youthful yel-low yellow youn-ger younger

Z Z Zea-lous Zealous

Words of three Sylables, both whole and divided into Sylables.
A A A-ba-sed Abased a-ba-ted abate ab-hor-ring abhorring ab-hor-red abhorred
ab-or-tive abortive a-bo-lish abolish a-bound-ing abounding a-bun-dance
abundance ab-sti-nence abstinence ac-cep-ted accepted ac-cep-tance acceptance
ac-com-plish accomplish ac-cu-sed accused a-dorn-ed adorned ad-vi-sed advised
ad-vanc-ed advanced ad-ju-red adjured af-fa-ded affaded af-fect-ed affected
af-firmed affirmed af-fright-ed affrighted a-gre-ed agreed a-larm-ed alarmed
al-low-ed allowed al-lu-red allured al-ter-ed altered a-ma-zed amazed a-mend-ed
amended an-cho-red anchored a-noint-ed anointed an-swer-ed answered ap-peal-ed
appealed ap-pear-ed appeared ap-peas-ed appeased ap-point-ed appointed
ap-pli-ed applied ap-proach-ed approached ar-ray-ed arrayed a-scend-ed ascended
a-scrib-ed ascribed as-sault-ed assaulted as-sign-ed assigned as-sist-ed
assisted as-su-red assured as-swag-ed assuaged at-tain-ed attained at-tend-ed
attended a-ti-ring atiring a-veng-ing ave^^ing aug-ment-ed augmented a-vouch-ed
avouched a-wa-ked awaked

B B Back-bi-ting Backbiting back-sli-der backslider back-ward-ly backwardly
ba-nish-ed banished bap-tiz-ing baptizing bar-ba-rous barbarous bar-ren-ness
barrenness beau-ti-ful beautiful be-got-ten begotten be-guil-ed beguiled
be-head-ed beheaded be-hold-ing beholding be-liev-ing believing be-long-ed
belonged bel-low-ing bellowing be-liev-ed believed be-moan-ing bemoaning
be-reav-ed bereaved be-seech-ing beseeching be-sieg-ed besieged be-tray-ing
betraying be-troath-ed betroathed blas-phem-er blasphemer bor-row-ed borrowed
bran-dish-ing brandishing

C C Can-ker-ed Cankered car-bun-cle carbuncle care-ful-ness carefulness
car-ca-ses carcases care-less-ness carelessness car-n^l-ly carnally car-pen-ter
carpenter car-ri-age carriage car-^i-ed carried cen-su-red censured
chal-leng-ing challenging chast-en-ing chastening cha-stiz-ing chastizing
cheer-ful-ly cheerfully che-rish-ing cherishing chur-lish-ly churlishly
cla-mour-ing clamouring clou-di-ness cloudiness com-li-ness comeliness
com-for-ted comforted com-mand-ed commanded com-mit-ted committed com-mon-ly
commonly com-pel-led compelled com-plain-ing complaining com-pound-ing
compounding con-demn-ed condemned con-duct-ing conducting con-fes-sing
confessing con-quer-ing conquering cor-rect-ing correcting cost-li-ness
costliness co-ver-ing covering cre-a-ted created con-ver-ted converted
con-firm-ing confirming cor-^upt-ed corrupted

D D Dam-na-ble Damnable da-mo-sel damosel dan-ge-rous dangerous dark-en-ed
darkened de-ceas-ed deceased de-ceit-ful- deceitful de-ceiv-ed deceived
de-cent-ly decently de-cla-red declared de-fa-ming defaming de-fend-ed defended
de-fil-ed defiled de-fraud-ing defrauding de-lay-ed delayed de-light-ing
delighting de-mand-ed demanded de-ny-ing denying de-pri-ved deprived
de-scend-ing descending de-serv-ed deserved de-spair-ing despairing de-spi-sing
despising de-stroy-ed destroyed de-tain-ed de-tai-ned dif-fer-ing differing
dis-charg-ed discharged di-rect-ing directing di-scern-ing discerning
dis-dain-ing disdaining dis-gra-ced disgraced dis-guis-ed disguised
di-stract-ed distracted distres-sed distressed di-spo-sing disposing
dread-ful-ness dreadfulness doubt-ful-ly doubtfully di-vor-cing divorcing
dis-sol-ved dissolved drunk-en-ness drunkenness di-vi-ner diviner di-vor-ced
divorced dread-ful-ly dreadfully dul-ci-mer dulcimer dun-ge-on dungeon
du-ra-ble durable

E E Ear-nest-ly Earnestly earth-li-ness earthliness e-di-fie edify ef-fect-ed
effected e-lect-ed elected e-le-ments elements e-lo-quent eloquent em-bol-den
embolden em-brac-ing embracing em-broid-er embroider e-mi-nent eminent
em-ploy-ment employment em-pti-ness emptiness en-cli-ning enclining en-camp-ing
encamping en-clo-sed enclosed en-count-er encounter en-cou-rage encourage
en-dam-age endamage en-dan-ger endanger en-dea-vour endeavor en-du-ring
enduring e-ne-my enemy en-mi-ty enmity enfl-a-ming enflaming en-gage-ment
engagement en-gra-ver engraver en-large-ment enlargement en-light-en enlighten
en-sam-ple ensample en-tice-ment enticement en-ter-tain entertain en-ter-ing
entering en-trap-ping entrapping en-ter-prise enterprise en-vi-ous envious
en-vi-ron environ e-pi-cure epicure e-pi-stle epistle e-qui-ty equity
e-scap-ing escaping e-schew-ing eschewing e-spou-sals espousals e-sta-blish
establish e-sti-mate estimate e-ter-nal eternal e-ver-more evermore e-vi-dence
evidence ex-act-er exacter ex-a-mine examine ex-ceed-ing exceeding ex-cel-lent
excellent ex-chang-er exchanger ex-clu-ded excluded ex-cu-sing excusing
ex-hor-ting exhorting ex-or-cist exorcist ex-pect-ing expecting ex-pel-led
expelled ex-pen-ces expenses ex-pi-red expired ex-pound-ed expounded ex-pres-ly
expressly ex-tend-ed extended ex-tol-led extolled

F F Fa-cul-ty Faculty faith-ful-ly faithfully feign-ed-ly feignedly fa-mous-ly
famously fa-mi-ly family fa-ther-less fatherless fa-vou-rite favorite
fear-ful-ly fearfully fee-ble-ness feebleness fel-low-ship fellowship
fer-vent-ly fervently fil-thi-ness filthiness flat-ter-er flatterer
flesh-li-ness fleshliness flou-rish-ing flourishing fool-ish-ness foolishness
for-bear-ing forbearing for-reign-er forreigner for-feit-ed forfeited
for-get-ful forgetful for-give-ness forgiveness for-got-ten forgotten
for-sak-ing forsaking fro-ward-ness frowardness fron-ti-ers frontiers
fruit-ful-ness fruitfulness fur-ni-ture furniture fur-bish-ing furbishing

G G Gal-le-ries Galleries gar-di-ner gardener gar-nish-ing garnishing
ga-ther-ing gathering ga-sing-stock gasingstock ge-ne-ral general gen-tle-ness
gentleness gar-ri-son garrison glo-ri-fie glorify glo-ri-ous glorious
glut-to-ny gluttony gloom-i-ness gloominess god-li-ness godliness go-ver-nor
governor gras-hop-per grasshopper gra-vi-ty gravity gree-di-ness greediness
griev-ous-ly grievously grudg-ing-ly grudgingly guile-ful-ly guilefully
guil-ti-ness guiltiness guilt-les-ly guiltlesly

H H Hal-low-ed Hallowed hard-en-ing hardening ha-sten-ing hastening
hate-ful-ly hatefully haugh-ti-ness haughtiness health-ful-ly healthfully
heark-en-ed hearkened hea-ven-ly heavenly hea-vi-ness heaviness hei-nous-ly
heinously here-af-ter hereafter here-to-fore heretofore he-re-tick heretic
he-ri-tage heritage ho-li-ness holiness ho-ne-sty honesty hor-ri-bly horribly
hum-ble-ness humbleness hus-band-ry husbandry hy-po-crite hypocrite

I I Jest-ing-ly Jestingly jea-lou-sy jealously ig-no-rance ignorance i-ma-gine
imagine i-mi-tate imitate im-mor-tal immortal im-part-ing imparting im-ploy-ed
employed im-po-sed imposed im-po-tent impotent im-pu-dent impudent im-pu-ted
imputed im-mer-sed immersed in-chan-ter inchanter in-creas-ing increasing
in-di-ting inditing in-fa-mous infamous in-fi-del infidel in-fi-nite infinite
in-flu-ence influence in-form-er informer in-graft-ed ingrafted in-ha bite
inhabit in-he-rit inherit in-larg-ment inlargment in-light-en inlighten
in-no-cent innocent in-spi-^ed inspired in-stant-ly instantly in-struct-ed
instructed in-tang-led entangled in-tend-ed intended in-trea-ty entreaty
in-ter-est interest in-vent-er inventer in-vi-ting inviting in-ward-ly inwardly
joy-ful-ly joyfully joru-ney-ing journeying ju-bi-lee jubil^e i-vo-ry ivory
ju-sti-fy justify

K K Kind-nes-ses Kindnesses know-ing-ly knowingly

L L La-bour-er Labourer la-men-ted lamented lan-guish-ing languishing
law-ful-ly lawfully law-giv-er lawgiver learn-ed-ly learnedly le-pro-sy leprosy
li-be-ral liberal li-ber-ty liberty light-en-ing lightening love-li-ness
loveliness low-li-ness lowliness lu-sti-ness lustiness lurk-ing-ly lurkingly
le-che-ry lechery

M M Ma-gi-strate Magistrate mag-ni-fy magnify ma-je-sty majesty main-te-nance
maintenance ma-ni-fest manifest ma-ni-fold manifold ma-ri-ner mariner
mar-vel-lous mavelous mea-sur-ing measuring me-di-cine medicine me-di-tate
meditate me-mo-ry memory men-ti-on mention mer-ci-ful merciful mes-sen-ger
messenger migh-ti-ly mightily mi-ni-ster minister mi-ra-cle miracle mer-ri-ment
merriment mis-chiev-ous mischievous mis-car-ry miscarry mi-se-ry misery
mo-de-rate moderate mo-de-sty modesty mol-li-fy mollify move-a-ble moveable
mor-ti-fie mortify mul-ti-ply multiply mul-ti-tude multitude mur-der-er
murderer mur-mur-ing murmuring mu-si-cal musical mu-ster-eth mustereth mu-tu-al
mutual my-ste-ry mystery

N N Na-ked-ness Nakedness na-ti-on nation na-tu-ral natural naugh-ti-ness
naughtiness neg-li-gent negligent neigh-bour-ly neighbourly nig-gard-ly
niggardly no-ble-ness nobleness no-ta-ble notable nou-rish-ing nourishing
noi-som-ness noisomness nur-se-ry nursery no-vel-ty novelty num-ber-ing
numbering nu-tri-ment nutriment

O O O-bey-s^nce Obeisance of-fer-ing offering ob-serv-ing observing ob-tain-ed
obtained oc-cu-py occupy o-di-ous odious of-fen-sive offensive of-fend-ed
offended ob-sti-nate obstinate o-pen-ly openly o-pe-rate operate op-po-sing
opposing op-pres-sing oppressing o-ra-cle oracle o-ra-tor orator or-dain-ing
ordaining or-der-ly orderly or-din-ance ordinance or-na-ment ornament
o-ver-charge overcharge o-ver-come overcome o-ver-see oversee o-ver-sight
oversight o-ver-take overtake o-ver-throw overthrow out-go-ing outgoing
out-lan-dish outlandish out-stretch-ed outstretced out ward-ly outwardly

P P Pa-ci-fy Pacify pain-ful-ly painfully pa-ra-ble parable pa-ra-dise
paradise par-ta-ker par-ta-ker par-ti-al partial pas-sen-ger passenger
pas-so-ver passover pas-si-on passion pa-ti-ence patience pa-tri-arch patriarch
peace-able peaceable pen-ti-cost penticost pe-nu-ry penury per-fect-ly
perfectly per, fu-med perfumed pe-ri-lous perilous pe-ri-shing perishing
per-ju-red perjured per-mit-ting permitting per-plex-ed perplexed per-se-cute
persecute per-se-vere persevere per-swaded peswaded per-vers-ly perverssly
pe-sti-lence pestilence pha-ri-see pharisee pi-e-ty piety pil-gri-mage
pilgrimage pi-ti-ful pitiful plea-sant-ly pleasantly plen-te-ous plenteous
pos-ses-sor poss ssor pos-si-ble possible po-ten-tate potentate po-ver-ty
poverty pow-er-ful powerful pre-ci-ous precious pre-pa-red prepared pre-sent-ly
presently pre-ser-ved preserved pre-si-dent president pre-vail-ing prevailing
pre-vent-ed prevented prin-ci-pal principal pri-so-ner prisoner pri-vi-ly
privily pro-ceed-ing proceeding providence providence pro-fit-ed profitted
pro-fes-sing professing pro-long-ing prolonging pro-mi-sed promised pro-se-lyte
proselyte pros-pe-rous prosperous pro-sti-tute prostitute pro-ven-der provender
pro-claim-ing pro-claim-ing psal-te-ry psaltery pub-li-can publican
pu-nish-ment punishment pur-cha-sing purchasing pu-ri-fy purify pur-po-sing
purposing pur-suing pursuing

Q Q Qua-li-ty Quality quar-ter-ing quartering qui-et-ing quieting qui-et-ness
quietness qui-et-ly quietly quick-en-ing quickening

R R Ran-som-ing Ransoming ra-ven-ous ravenous ra-vish-ment ravishment
rea-di-ness readiness rea-son-ing reasoning re-bel-ling rebelling re-bu-ked
rebuked re-ceiv-ing receiving re-com-mend recommend re-con-cile reconcile
re-cor-der recorder re-co-ver recover re-count-ing recounting re-deem-er
redeemer re-form-ed reformed re-fresh-ing refreshing re-fu-sing refusing
re-gard-ed regarded re-gi-on region re-gi-ster register re-hear-sal rehearsal
re-main-der remainder re-me-dy remedy re-mem-ber remember re-pair-er repairer
re-pen-tance repentance re-port-ed reported re-pro-bate reprobate re-proach-ful
reproachful re-prov-ed reproved re-si-due residue re-veal-ed revealed
re-vi-ling reviling re-vi-ving reviving re-vol-ter revolter ri-o-tous riotous
ring-lead-er ringleader rob-be-ry robbery rot-ten-ness rottenness ru-di-ments
rudiments roy-al-ty royalty

S S Sa-cra-ment Sacrament sa-cri-fice sacrifice sa-cri-ledge sacrilege
sa-lu-ting saluting san-cti-fy sanctify sa-tis-fy satisfy sa-vi-our savior
sa-vou-ry savoury schis-ma-tick schismatic scorn-ful-ly scornfully scor-pi-on
scorpion se-cret-ly secretly se-cure-ly securely se-du-ced seduced se-pa-rate
separate se-pul-cher sepulcher ser-vi-tude servitude se-ve-ral several
shame-ful-ly shamefully shel-ter-ing sheltering sig-ni-fy signify si-lent-ly
silently si-mi-le simile sin-gle-ness singleness si-tu-ate situate sin-ful-ly
sinfully slan-der-ed slandered slip-pe-ry slippery sloath-ful-ness
sloathfulness so-ber-ness soberness so-journ-ing sojourning so-lemn-ly solemnly
sooth-say-er soothsayer sor-cer-er sorcerer sor-row-ful sorrowful spe-ci-al
special spee-di-ly speedily stam-mer-er stammerer sted-fast-ly steadfastly
sub-scrib-ing subscribing sub-ver-ted subverted suc-cour-er succourer
suf-fer-ing suffering suit-a-ble suitable sur-feit-ing surfeiting su-ste-nance
sustenance swal-low-ing swallowing sy-na-gogue synagogue

T T Task-ma-ster Taskmaster tem-pe-rance temperance tem-po-ral temporal
ten-der-ness tenderness ter-ri-ble terrible ter-ri-fie terrify te-sta-ment
testament te-sti-fie testify te-sta-tor testator thun-der-ing thundering
to-ge-ther together tor-men-tor tormentor tot-ter-ing tottering tra-vel-ler
traveller trea-su-ry treasury tres-pas-ses trespasses tri-umph-ing triumphing
ty-ran-ny tyranny tru-sti-ness trustiness

V V Va-ga-bond Vagabond va-li-ant valiant va-lu-ed valued va-ni-ty vanity
va-ri-ance variance ve-he-ment vehement ve-ri-ty verity vi-cto-ry victory
vi-ctu-al victual vi-gi-lant vigilant vi-la-ny vilany vi-ne-gar vinegar
vi-o-late violate vi-o-lence violence vi-si-ble visible vi-si-on vision
un-a-ble unable un-a-wares unawares un-be-lief unbelief un-cer-tain uncertain
un-clean-ness uncleanness un-come-ly uncomely un-co-ver uncover un-der-stand
understand un-der-take undertake un-feign-ed unfeigned un-faith-ful unfaithful
un-fruit-ful unfruitful un-god-ly ungodly un-ho-ly unholy u-ni-ty unity
un-learn-ed unlearned un-kind-ness unkindness un-law-ful unlawful un-mind-ful
unmindful un-ru-ly unruly un-seem-ly unseemly un-skil-ful unskilful un-wor-thy
unworthy up-hold-en upholden up-right-ly uprightly u-surp-er usurper
ut-ter-ance utterance ut-ter-ly utterly ut-ter-most uttermost

W W Wal-low-ing Wallowing wan-der-er wanderer war-ri-our warrior way-fa-ring
wayfaring wea-ri-ness weariness wea-ri-some wearisome whis-per-ing whispering
wick ed-ness wickedness wil-der-ness wilderness wi-li-ly wilily wil-ling-ly
willingly wit-nes-sing witnessing won-der-ful wonderful wor-ship-per worshipper
wor-thi-ly worthily wrong-ful-ly wrongfully wi-ther-ed withered

Y Y Youth-ful-ly Youthfully

Z Z Zeal-ous-ly Zealously

Words of four Syllables both whole and divided into Syllables.
A A A-bi-li-ty Ability a-bo-lish-ed abolished a-bo-mi-nate abominate
a-bun-dant-ly abundantly ab-ro-ga-ted abrogated a-bor-tive-ness abortiveness
ac-cep-ta-ble acceptable ac-com-plish-ed accomplished ac-com-pa-ny accompany
ac-know-ledg-ment acknowledgment ac-ti-vi-ty activity ad-di-ti-on addition
ad-mi-ni-ster administer a-dop-ti-on adoption ad-ven-tu-red adventured
ad-ver-si-ty adversity a-dul-te-ry adultery af-fec-ti-on affection af-fi-ni-ty
affinity af-flic-ti-on affliction al-le-go-ry allegory an-swer-a-ble answerable
an-ti-qui-ty antiquity a-po-sta-sie apostasy ap-per-tain-ing appertaining
a-stro-lo-ger astrologer a-stro-no-my astronomy

B B Bar-ba-rian Barbarian be-a-ti-tudes beatitudes beau-ti-ful-ly beautifully
be-ne-vo-lence benevolence blas-phe-ming-ly blasphemingly boun-ti-ful-ly
bountifully bur-den-some-ness burdensomeness

C C Ca-la-mi-ty Calamity cap-ti-vi-ty captivity car-na-li-ty carnality
ca-ter-pil-ler caterpiller ca-te-chi-sing catechizing ce-le-bra-ting
celebrating ce-re-mo-ny ceremony con-fes-si-on confession cen-tu-ri-on
centurion cha-ri-ta-ble charitable con ti-nen-cy continency cir-cum-ci-sed
circumcised cir-cum-spect ly circumspectly col-lec-ti-on collection
com-for-ta-ble comfortable com-man-de-ment commandment com-mis-si-on
commission com-mu-ni-on communion com-pa-ni-on companion com-pa-ri-son
comparison com-pas-si-on compassion con-cu-pi-sence concupiscence
con-fi-dent-ly confidently con-fu-si-on confusion con-sump-ti-on consumption
con-tro-ver-sy controversy cor-re-cti-on correction cor-rup-ti-on corruption
co-ve-tous-ness covetousness con-ti-nu-al continual con-ti-nent-ly continently
coun-ter-feit-ing counterfeiting

D D Dam-na-ti-on Damnation de-ceit-ful-ness deceitfulness de-di-ca-ted
dedicated de-bi-li-tate debilitate de-lec-ta-ble delectable de-li-ve-rer
deliverer de-lu-si-on delusion de-sire-a-ble desirable de-struc-ti-on
destruction dif-fi-cul-ty difficulty dis-com-fi-ture discomfiture
dis-con-tent-ed discontented dis-or-der-ly disorderly dis-qui-et-ness
disquietness dis-sen-ti-on dissension di-stri-bu-ting distributing do-mi-ni-on
dominion

E E E-di-fy-ing Edifying ef-fec-tu-al effectual ef-fe-mi-nal effeminal
e-lec-ti-on election em-broi-de-rer embroiderer en-ter-tain-ment entertainment
en-ter-pri-ses enterprises en-vi-ro-ned environed e-qua-li-ty equality
e-ter-nal-ly eternally e-van-ge-list evangelist e-ver-last-ing everlasting
ex-cel-len-cy excellency ex-pe-di-ent expedient ex-tor-ti-on extortion

F F Fa-mi-li-ar Familiar fa-ci-li-ty facility fa-vou-ra-ble favorable
fi-de-li-ty fidelity foun-da-ti-on foundation fu-ri-ous-ly furiously
for-get-ful-ness forgetfulness

G G Glo-ri-ous-ly Gloriously gra-ci-ous-ly graciously ge-ne-rat-ing generating
glo-ri-fy-ing glorifying ge-ne-rous-ly generously

H H Hal-le-lu-jah Hallelujah hos-pi-ta-ble hospitable hu-ma-ni-ty humanity
hu-mi-li-ty humility ho-nou-ra-ble honorable hy-po-cri-sy hypocrisy
hy-po-the-sis hypothesis

I I Ig-no-mi-ny Ignominy il-lu-mi-nate illuminate im-ma-nu-el immanuel
i-mi-ta-ting imitating i-ma-gi-ned imagined im-mu-ta-ble immutable
im-pe-di-ment impediment im-pla-ca-ble implacable in-con-ti-nent incontinent
in-cor-rup-ted incorrupted in-cre-di-ble incredible in-cu-ra-ble incurable
in-dif-fe-rent indifferent in-fal-li-ble infallible in-fir-mi-ty infirmity
in-he-ri-tance inheritance in-struc-ti-on instruction in-ter-ces-sor
intercessor in-ter-pre-ter interpreter in-ven-ti-on invention in-vi-si-ble
invisible

L L La-bo-ri-ous Laborious la-men-ta-ble lamentable li-be-ral-ly liberally
lux-u-ri-ous luxurious la-sci-vi-ous lascivious le-vi-ti-cal levitical
le-vi-a-than leviathan

M M Ma-le-fac-tor Malefactor ma-li-ci-ous malicious ma-ni-fest-ed manifested
mar-ve-lous-ly marvelously me-mo-ri-al memorial mer-ci-ful-ly mercifully
mi-se-ra-ble miserable mor-ta-li-ty mortality mul-ti-ply-ing multiplying
mo-de-rate-ly moderately mag-ni-fi-cence magnificence mu-si-ti-an musician

N N Na-ti-vi-ty Nativity na-tu-ral-ly naturally neg-li-gent-ly negligently
ne-ver-the-less nevertheless not-with-stand-ing notwithstanding no-bi-li-ty
nobility nu-me-ri-cal numerical

O O O-be-di-ence Obedience ob-la-ti-on oblation oc-ca-si-on occasion
om-ni-po-tent omnipotent o-pi-ni-on opinion op-pres-si-on oppression
o-ver-se-er overseer out-ra-gi-ous outrageous o-ver-charg-ed overcharged

P P Pa-ci-fi-ed Pacified par-ti-cu-lar particular pa-ti-ent-ly patiently
per-ad-ven-ture peradventure pe-cu-li-ar peculiar per-pe-tu-al perpetual
per-plex-i-ty perplexity per-se-cu-tor persecutor phy-si-ti-an physician
pi-ti-ful-ly pitifully plen-ti-ful-ly plentifully pol-lu-ti-on pollution
pre-de-sti-nate predestinate pre-sum-tu-ous presumptuous pro-ge-ni-tor
progenitor pros-pe-ri-ty prosperity pro-por-ti-on proportion

Q Q Qua-ter-ni-on Quaternion que-sti-on-ing questioning qua-li-fi-ed qualified

R R Re-demp-ti-on Redemption rea-son-a-ble reasonable re-com-mended
recommended re-con-ci-ling reconciling re-ge-ne-rate regenerate re-li-gi-on
religion re-mis-si-on remission re-bel-li-on rebellion re-co-ver-ed recovered

S S Sal-va-ti-on Salvation sanc-tuary sanctuary se-cu-ri-ty security
se-di-ti-on sedition se-ve-ral-ly severally si-mi-li-tude similitude
sim-pli-ci-ty simplicity sin-ce-ri-ty sincerity so-bri-e-ty sobriety
spi-ri-tu-al spiritual sub-jec-ti-on subjection suf-fi-ci-ent sufficient
sus-pi-ci-on suspicion

T T Ta-ber-na-cle Tabernacle tem-pes-tu-ous tempestuous tem-pta-ti-on
temptation ter-re-stri-al terrestrial te-sti-mo-ny testimony to-le-ra-ble
tolerable trans-gres-si-on transgression tra-di-ti-on tradition tran-quil-li-ty
tranquillity tri-bu-ta-ry tributary

V V Va-li-ant-ly Valiantly va-ri-a-ble variable ve-he-ment-ly vehemently
vir-tu-ous-ly virtuously vic-to-ri-ous victorious un-ad-vi-sed unadvised
un-de-fi-led undefiled un-der-standing understanding un-god-li-ness ungodliness
un-pre-pa-red unprepared un-mer-ciful unmerciful un-sa-vou-ry unsavory
vo-ca-ti-on vocation vo-lun-ta-ry voluntary

W W Wea-ri-som-ness Wearisomeness won-der-ful-ly wonderfully

Words of five Syllables both whole and divided into Syllables.
A A A-bo-mi-na-ble Abominable ac-cep-ta-ti-on acceptance ac-cu-sa-ti-on
accusation ad-mi-ra-ti-on admiration a-du-la-ti-on adulation a-li-e-na-ted
alienated al-le-go-ri-cal allegorical ac-com-pa-ni-ed accompanied
am-bi-ti-ous-ly ambitiously a-po-the-ca-ry apothecary ap-pur-te-nan-ces
appurtenances

B B Be-ne-dic-ti-on Benediction be-a-ti-fi-cal beatifical be-ne-fi-ci-al
beneficial be-ne-vo-lent-ly benevolently

C C Ce-re-mo-ni-al Ceremonial cir-cum-ci-si-on circumcision co-gi-ta-ti-on
cogitation com-pre-hen-si-on comprehension con-fe-de-ra-cy confederacy
con-fir-ma-ti-on confirmation con-fis-ca-ti-on confiscation con-se-cra-ti-on
consecration con-so-la-ti-on consolation con-ten-ta-ti-on contentation
con-ti-nu-al-ly continually con-ve-ni-ent-ly conveniently con-ver-sa-ti-on
conversation cu-ri-o-si-ty curiosity chri-sti-a-ni-ty christianity
con-spi-cu-ous-ly conspicuously cir-cum-spec-ti-on circumspection

D D De-ceiv-a-ble-ness Deceiveableness de-spe-ra-ti-on desperation
de-di-ca-ti-on dedication de-cla-ra-ti-on declaration de-so-la-ti-on desolation
dis-in-he-rit-ing disinheriting di-vi-na-ti-on divination do-mi-na-ti-on
domination de-li-be-rate-ly deliberately

E E Ex-pec-ta-ti-on Expectation ex-hor-ta-ti-on exhortation ex-em-pli-fi-ed
exemplified ex-com-mu-ni-cate excommunicate ex-tor-ti-o-ner extortioner

F F Fa-vour-a-ble-ness Favourableness for-ni-ca-ti-on fornication
fu-mi-ga-ti-on fumigation fer-men-ta-ti-on fermentation

G G Ge-ne-ra-ti-on Generation ge-ne-a-lo-gie genealogy

H H Ha-bi-ta-ti-on Habitation hos-pi-ta-li-ty hospitality hy-po-cri-ti-cal
hypocritical har-mo-ni-ous-ly harmoniously

I I Im-me-di-ate-ly Immediately im-mor-ta-li-ty immortality i-mi-ta-ti-on
imitation in-con-ti-nen-cy incontinency im-po-si-ti-on imposition
im-por-tu-ni-ty importunity in-ter-ces-si-on intercession in-nu-me-ra-ble
innumerable in-ter-mis-si-on intermission ju-ris-dic-ti-on jurisdiction
in-vi-ta-ti-on invitation in-for-ma-ti-on information in-fi-de-li-ty infidelity

L L La-men-ta-ti-on Lamentation la-bo-ri-ous-ness labouriousness
li-be-ra-li-ty liberality la-sci-vi-ous-ly lasciviously lux-u-ri-ous-ly
luxuriously

M M Me-di-ta-ti-on Meditation mi-ni-stra-ti-on ministration mo-de-ra-ti-on
moderation mis-con-struc-ti-on misconstruction

N N No-bi-li-ta-ting Nobilitating non-con-for-mi-ty nonconformity

O O Oc-cu-pa-ti-on Occupation om-ni-po-ten-cy omnipotency o-pe-ra-ti-on
operation op-por-tu-ni-ty opportunity ob-ser-va-ti-on observation
or-di-na-ti-on ordination or-na-men-tal-ly ornamentally

P P Par-ti-a-li-ty Partiality par-ti-cu-lar-ly particularly per-pe-tu-al-ly
perpetually per-se-cu-ti-on persecution pe-sti-len-ti-al pestilential
per-mu-ta-ti-on permutation prin-ci-pa-li-ty principality pre-ser-va-ti-on
preservation pres-by-te-ri-an presbyterian po-li-ti-cal-ly politically
pre-pa-ra-ti-on preparation pre-sen-ta-ti-on presentation pre-sump-tu-ous-ly
presumptuously pro-cla-ma-ti-on proclamation pro-vi-den-ti-al providential
pub-li-ca-ti-on publication pro-vo-ca-ti-on provocation

Q Q Que-sti-on-a-ble Questionable quin-te-sen-ti-al quintessential

R R Re-li-gi-ous-ly Religiously re-so-lu-ti-on resolution re-pu-ta-ti-on
reputation re-col-lec-ti-on recollection re-sur-rec-ti-on resurrection
re-ve-la-ti-on revelation re-ve-ren-ti-al reverential re-lax-a-ti-on relaxation
Sa-lu-ta-ti-on Salutation sa-tis-fac-ti-on satisfaction se-pa-ra-ti-on
separation spi-ri-tu-al-ly spiritually suf-fi-ci-en-cy sufficiency
su-per-sti-ti-on superstition sup-pli-ca-ti-on supplication sup-plan-ta-ti-on
supplantation su-per-scri-pti-on superscription sup-po-si-ti-on supposition
sup-po-si-to-ry suppository

T T Tem-po-ra-li-ty Temporality trans-for-ma-ti-on transformation
tri-bu-la-ti-on tribulation ty-ran-ni-cal-ly tyrannically

V V Va-ri-a-ble-ness Variableness vex-a-ti-ous-ly vexatiously vi-o-la-ti-on
violation vi-si-ta-ti-on visitation un-ac-cus-tom-ed unaccustomed
vic-to-ri-ous-ly victoriously un-ad-vi-sed-ly unadvisedly un-cir-cum-ci-sed
uncircumcised un-pro-fi-ta-ble unprofitable un-rea-son-a-ble unreasonable
un-com-for-ta-ble uncomfortable vo-lun-ta-ri-ly voluntarily un-se-pa-ra-ble
unseparable u-ni-for-mi-ty uniformity un-ne-ces-sa-ry unnecessary
un-pre-pa-red-ness unpreparedness un-mer-ci-ful-ly unmercifully

Words of six and seven Syllables both whole and divided into Syllables.
A A A-bo-mi-na-ti-on Abomination ab-bre-vi-a-ti-on abbreviation
all-suf-fi-ci-en-cy allsufficiency ac-com-mo-da-ti-on accommodation
ac-ce-le-ra-ti-on acceleration ac-cu-mu-la-ti-on accumulation

B B Be-a-ti-fi-ca-ti-on Beatification

C C Con-si-de-ra-ti-on Consideration con-sub-stan-ti-a-ti-on consubstantiation
co-es-sen-ti-al-ly coessentially

D D Dis-si-mu-la-ti-on Dissimulation de-li-be-ra-ti-on deliberation
de-ge-ne-ra-ti-on degeneration de-ter-mi-na-ti-on determination
de-no-mi-na-ti-on denomination

E E E-di-fi-ca-ti-on Edification ex-com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on excommunication
ex-a-mi-na-ti-on examination ex-tra-or-di-na-ry extraordinary
ex-tra-ju-di-ci-al extrajudicial

F F Fa-mi-li-a-ri-ty Familiarity fruc-ti-fi-ca-ti-on fructification
for-ti-fi-ca-ti-on fortification

G G Glo-ri-fi-ca-ti-on Glorification Hu-mi-li-a-ti-on Humiliation
hy-po-cri-ti-cal-ly hypocritically I-ma-gi-na-ti-on Imagination
il-lu-mi-na-ti-on illumination in-suf-fi-ci-en-cy insufficiency
im-pro-pri-a-ti-on impropriation in-sen-si-bi-li-ty insensibility
im-mu-ta-bi-li-ty immutability in-com-pre-hen-si-ble incomprehensible
in-ter-pre-ta-ti-on interpretation ju-sti-fi-ca-ti-on justification
Ma-ni-fes-ta-ti-on Manifestation ma-the-ma-ti-ci-an mathematician
mo-di-fi-ca-ti-on modification mul-ti-pli-ca-ti-on multiplication
Na-tu-ra-li-za-ti-on Naturalization Pa-ci-fi-ca-ti-on Pacification
pro-pi-ti-a-ti-on propitiation pu-ri-fi-ca-ti-on purification
phi-lo-so-phi-cal-ly philosophically pre-des-ti-na-ti-on predestination
Qua-li-fi-ca-ti-on Qualification Re-pre-sen-ta-ti-on Representation
re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on reconciliation re-nun-ci-a-ti-on renunciation
re-ta-li-a-ti-on retaliation Sanc-ti-fi-ca-ti-on Sanctification
su-pe-ri-o-ri-ty superiority Tran-sub-stan-ti-a-ti-on Transubstantiation
U-ni-ver-sa-li-ty Universality un-re-con-cile-a-ble unreconcileable

Proper Names of one Syllable.
A
Ai Ain Aix Anue Ast
B
Bar Bass Bath Bell Blanch Bonne Boys Brie Brill Burge Buz
C
Caen Cain Charles Christ Cis Claude Cleve Chub Chun Creet Culme Cush Cuth
D
Dane Dan Delf Diep Dole Dort Dreux Dru
E
Elbe Ems Er Eve
F
Fer Fez France Fulk
G
Gad Gath Ganle Gaunt Gog Greece Groll Guise
H
Hague Ham Hod Hor Hugh Hull Hulst Hur
I
John James Jane Joane Job John Joice Jove Ir Jude
K
Kent Kish Kor
L
Lisle Lot Lod Luke Luz Lyme Lyn
M
Main Mars Mark Maud Medes Mentz Metz Meuse Mons
N
Nants Ner Nice Nile Nob Nod Number
O
Og Owre
P
Pai Pan Pau Paul Pierce Phut Pull Put
R
Ralph Reu Rhodes Rhine Roan Rome Ruth Rye
S
Saul Seine Seth Shaul Shem Spain Spaw Spire Stains Stoke Sur Swede
T
Tay Thames Thebes Tou Toul Tours Trent Troy Tweed Turk Tire
U
Ur Uz
W
Wales Ware Wells Wilts Worms
Y
York
Z
Zair Zer Zif Zin Zir Zouch Zuph Zur
Proper Names of two Syllables, both whole and divided into Syllables.
A-bel Abel ab-ner abner a-dam adam a-dah adah a-gag agag a-gur agur a-hab ahab
a-sa asa a-chan a-chan am-non amnon a-mos amos a-saph asaph a-shur ashur a-ram
aram a-haz ahaz a-mon amon an-drew andrew Ba-lam Balam ba-lak balak ba-bel
babel bil-hah bilhah ba-rak barak bo-az boaz be-zed bezed be-zak bezak ba-rah
barah Ca-leb Caleb car-mel carmel car-mi carmi ce-phas cephas cle-mens clemens
cos-bi cosbi cu-san cusan che-rub cherub Da-than Dathan da-vid david del-phos
delphos di-nah dinah dor-cas dorcas do-eg doeg dib-lah diblah de-mas demas
da-shan dashan E-ber Eber e-den eden e-der eder ed-ward edward el-len ellen
el-lis ellis e-dom edom el-dad eldad e-noch enoch e-tham etham est-her esther
ez-ra ezra esh-col eshcol Fran-cis Francis fal-mouth falmouth fen-wick fenwick
Ga-al Gaal ga-lal galal ga-zu gazu gi-nath ginath go-mer gomer go-mel gomel
Ha-dad Hadad ha-gab hagab ham-den hamden ha-mul hamul ha-rim harim hat-til
hattil hen-ry henry hi-ram hiram hi-el hiel ho-tham hotham ho-bad hobad hu-shi
hushi hul-da hulda huz-oth huzoth he-lah helah hu-shim hushim ho-desh hodesh
Ja-cob Jacob ja-bal jabal ja-besh jabesh ja-el jael ja-kin jakin ja-phet japhet
jo-seph joseph i-thri ithri jeph-tha jephtha jok-tan joktan jo-tham jotham
ish-tob ishtob i-shai ishai ju-bal jubal jo-nah jonah i-phrah iphrah jeph-let
jephlet Ka-hath Kahath kainan kainan ke-der keder ke-dem kedem ko-zah kozah
Lew-is Lewis la-ban laban lon-don london le-vi levi lem-nos lemnos le-ah leah
lo-bin lobin la-mech lamech Ma-ry Mary mar-tha martha ma-gog magog ma-dan madan
mil-chah milchah me-sheck mesheck mi-cah micah mil-colm milcolm mu-ley muley
mu-ster muster mi-chal michal Na-bal Nabal na-dab nadab na-than nathan na-hum
nahum nim-rod nimrod ne-pheg nepheg no-ah noah nag-gai naggai na-gah nagah
O-bed Obed o-bel obel o-mar omar o-nan onan o-phri ophri or-nan ornan or-pah
orpah o-thin othin o-nen onen Patrick Patrick pal-mer palmer pa-lal palal
psy-che psyche pal-ti palti pha-raoh pharaoh pe-leg peleg phi-col phicol pu-ah
puah pe-resh peresh Ri-chard Richard ro-bert robert rich-mond richmond rad-dai
raddai ra-hab rahab ra-ham raham rahel rahel ra-pha rapha ra-chel rachel Rachab
Rachab Reu-ben Reuben Re-hum Rehum Ribai Ribai Rib-kah Ribkah Ru-mah Rumah
Ri-pha Ripha Ro-gel Rogel Rutland Rutland Sal-tah Saltah Sa-rah Sarah Se-ba
Seba Se-lim Selim Sha-chir Shachir Shal-lum Shallum Sham-gar Shamgar Shechem
Shechem Sha-phan Shaphan Sha-phat Shaphat She-ber Sheber Shiph-zan Shipshan
Shubna Shubna Shumi Shumi So-dom Sodom Shu-shan Sushan Shobnah Shobnah
Shadretch Shadretch Tal-mai Talmai Tal-mud Talmud Tru-roe Truroe Tal-mon Talmon
Tilnah Tilnah Ta-phath Taphath Top-lar Toplar To-phet Tophet To-ah Toah To-hu
Tohu To-bit Tobit Tu-bal Tubal Vach-ti Vachti Vop-si Vopsi U-ri Uri Ve-les
Veles U-thai Uthai U-ral Ural Uz-zah Uzzah U-krain Ukrain Za-bad Zabad Ze-mes
Zemes Za-dok Zadok Zambra Zambra Zidon Zidon Zion Zion Ze-resh Zeresh Ze-phi
Zephi Zimri Zimri Zo-pheth Zopheth Ze-ek Zeek

Proper Names of three Syllables both whole and divided into Syllables.
A-bra-ham Abraham Ab-de el Abdeel Ab-di-ah Abdiah A-bag-tha Abagtha A bi-a
Abia A-bi-am Abiam A-bi-da Abida A-bi-dan Abidan A-bi-el Abiel A-bi-gal Abigal
A-bi-hail Abihail A-bi-hu Abihu A-bi-hud Abihud A-bi-ram Abiram A-bi-shag
Abishag A-chai-a Achaia A-dri-el Adriel A-dul-lam Adullam A-ga-bus Agabus
A-hi-jam Ahijam A-hi-jah Ahijah A-hi-moth Ahimoth A-hi-or Ahior a-hi lab Ahilab
a-hi-kam ahikam a-ho-lab aholab A-fri-ca africa A-mo-rites amorites au-stri-a
austria a-si-a asia a-sa-hel asahel a-mi-thi amithi am-mi-el ammiel az-ma-reth
azmareth a-grip-pa agrippa a-ske-lon askelon ash-ta-roth ashtaroth a-se-nath
asenath a-re-tas aretas a-ri-el ariel a-pol-lo apollo

B B Ba-la-am Balaam ba-a-sha beasha bar-na-bas barnabas ben-ja-min benjamin
be-no-ni benoni be-li-al belial beth-sai-da bethsaida beth-le-em bethleem
bel-sha-zar belshazzer be-na-jah benajah be-he-moth behemoth ben-had-dad
benhaddad ben-zo-beth benzobeth bethshe-mesh bethshemesh bar-jo-nah barjonah
ba-la-dan baladan be-e-ri beeri bar-zil-lai barzillai ba-rab-bas barabbas
beth-a-ven bethaven beth-ar-bel betharbel beth-pa-zer bethpazer bi-thi-ah
bithiah bi-ne-a binea beth-ra-pha bethrapha beth-hog-lah bethhoglah buk-ki-a
bukkia bu-a-ra buara bech-e-zel bethezel beth-ga-der bethgader bo-che-zu
bochezu ba-ra-thon barathon be-li-sa belisa be-le-an belean beth-nim-rah
bethnimrah be-tho-ram bethoram be-the-mek bethemek beth-re-chob bethrechob
bel-ze-bob beelzebub be-to-dim betodim

C C Ca-na-an Canaan ca-mo-mil camomil car-mar-then carmarthen car-le-on
carleon ca-ro-lus carolus cen-chre-a cenchrea cal-va-ry calvary car-che-mish
carchemish car-she-na carshena ca-shu-lim cashulim cin-ne-reth cinnereth
clau-di-a claudia che-mu-rin chemerin cai-a-phas caiaphas cle-o-phas cleophas
cli-ti-phon clitiphon co-los-se colosse chi-li-ad chiliad chi-che-ster
chichester co-ni-ah coniah cho-ra-zin chorazin chin-ne-reth chinnereth
che-ma-rin chemarin colho-zeth colhozeth che-sa-son chesalon che-lu-ba cheluba
cu-pi-do cupido che-na-ni chenani

D D Da-li-lah Dalilah da-ci-a dacia da-vi-lah davila da-ma-ris damaris
da-ni-el daniel de-bo-rah deborah da-mas-cus damascus da-ri-us darius
demo-pho-on demophoon dy-di-mus dydimus do-do-na dodona dru-fil-la drufiilla
di-a-na diana di-za-hud dizahud di-mo-nab dimonab di-bon-gad dibongad do-da-min
dodamin

E E El-cha-nan Elchanan el-bo-rough elborough e-li-jah elijah e-li-sha elisha
el-na-than elnathan e-li-hu elihu en-hak-kore enhakkore en-ro-gel enrogel
e-phe-sus ephesus e-phra-im ephraim eu-phra-tes euphrates en-rim-mon enrimmon
eph-pha-tha ephphatha ex-or-cists exorcists em-mish-pat emmishphat esh-ta-ol
eshtaol e-leu-zai eleuzai e-le-phaz elephaz el-ho-shite elhoshite e-sai-ah
esaiah el-mo-ded elmoded e-ra-stus erastus e-li-mas elimas el-cha-non elchanon
esh-ba-ah eshbaah

G G Ga-bri-el Gabriel gal-ba-num galbanum ge-ha-zi gehazi ga-da-rens gadarens
go-li-ath goliath ger-ge-sens gergesens gi-de-on gideon ga-li-le galile
gi-le-ad gilead go-mor-rha gomorrha go-li-ah goliath glo-ces-ter gloucester
ge-ri-tim gerizm gi-be-on gibeon ge-ne-sis genesis gi-zo-nite gizonite
gol-go-tha gol-go-tha gemini gemini

H H Ha-bak-kuk Habakkuk he-re-ford hereford ha-da-shah hadashah ha-na-ni
hanani har-bo-na harbona han-na-thon hannathon ha-za-el hazael ho-se-a hosea
ho-san-na hosanna ho-she-a hoshea ha-vi-lah havilah hil-ki-ah hilkiah
ha-voth-jair havothjair ha-shu-ba hashuba hid-dekel hiddekel ho-ro-nite
horonite hash-mo-nah hashmonah hu-sha-thite hushathite

I I Ja-a-zar Jaazzar ja-bu-el jabuel ju-de-a judea ju-pi-ter jupiter i-ta-ly
italy je-ze-bel jezebel jo-si-ah josiah ju-li-an julian i-cha-bod ichabod
je-ho-vah jehovah je-ho-ram jehoram jo-se-phus josephus je-ze-bel jezebel
jo-se-phat josephat jo-na-than jonathan I-sai-ah Isaiah ish-bo-sheh ishbosheth
is-sa-char issachar jo-na-dab jonadab jo-shu-a joshua jo-an-na joanna
je-phun-neth jephunneth je-re-my jeremy je-su-it jesuit ju-li-us julius
ju-bi-le jubilee ju-de-a judea ju-ni-us junius is-ra-el israel in-che-queen
inchequeen ish-ma-el ishmael je-du-thun jeduthun

K K Ka-mu-el Kamuel kad-mi-el kadmiel kab-ze-el kabzeel ku-sh-jah kushjah
ke-tu-rah keturah kil-le-grew killegrew kil-ken-ny kilkenny ki-shi-on kishion
ke-de-moth kedemoth kib-za-im kibzaim kir-ha-resh kirharesh

L L Li-by-a Libya ly-di-a lydia la-za-rus lazarus le-ba-non lebanon le-mu-el
lemuel lu-ci-fer lucifer lei-cest-er leicester lin-coln-shire lincolnshire
lo-am-mi loammi lo-do-wick lodowick lu-ci-us lucius lar-pi-doth larpidoth
leb-be-us lebbeus

M M Mag-da-len Magdalen mar-qui-sate marquisate ma-a-rath maarath ma-a-sai
maasai ma-ha-la mahala ma-ha-rai maharai mor-de-cai mordecai mat-thi-as
matthias mi-le-tum miletum ma-la-chi malachi me-ra-ri merari me-ri-beh meribeh
mo-roc-co morocco me-shul-lam meshullam mi-cha-el michael ma-nas-seh manasseh
man-tu-a mantua mid-dle-sex middlesex mi-ri-am miriam ma-no-ah manoah
mish-ma-mah mishmamah miz-ra-im mizraim mi-sha-el mishael me-li-lot melilot
mer-ca-tor mercator ma-na-hem manahem mik-ne-jah miknejah mes-si-as messiah
ma-nu-el manuel

N N Na-a-man Naamen naph-ta-li naphtali nar-cis-sus narcissus na-ba-joth
nabajoth ne-hush-tan nehushtan ni-cho-las nicholas ni-ne-veh nineveth ne-ri-ah
neriah neph-to-ah nephtoah na-a-mah naamah na-za-reth nazareth negi-noth
neginoth ne-hi-lah nehilah ne-pha-sim nephasim ne-zi-ah neziah

O O Oth-ni-el Othniel oz-zi-el ozziel o-lym-pus olympus o-li-o olio o-li-ver
oliver o-ri-on orion o-pen-ford openford

P P Pa-a-ras Paaras pa-gi-el pagiel pal-le-el palleel pa-tri-arch patriarch
pal-me-rin palmerin pa-thru-fin pathrufin pe-nin-nah peninnah phi-le-mon
philemon pub-li-us publius phi-lippi philippi per-si-a persia pe-nu-el penuel
phil-ne-has phinehas pen-den-nis pendennis po-ti-phar potiphar pris-cil-la
priscilla pri-de-aux prideaux pon-ti-us pontius phi-li-stines philistines
pro-se-lyte proselyte phri-gi-a phryrigia pha-ro-ah pharaoh per-ri-zites
perrizites pen-te-cost pentecost

R R Ro-dol-phus Rodolphus rupertus rupertus rab-sha-keh rabshakeh ra-ma-ses
ramases re-bekah rebekah ro-che-ster rochester ra-phael raphael rab-bo-ni
rabboni rhe-gi-um rhegium ro-ge-lim rogelim re-pha-jah rephajah ra-ma-jah
ramajah rus-si-a russia ro-bo-rough roborough

S S Sa-mu-el Samuel san-bal-lat sanballat sa-be-ans sabeans sy-ri-a syria
su-san-na susanna she-ma-jah shemajah shi-me-i shimei sham-mua shammua
shez-bazer shebazzer si-me-on simeon so-mer-set somerset sals-burry salsbury
she-lo-mick shelomick she-ra-jah sheraiah she-ba-rim shebarim sab-ba-thi
sabbathi So-sthe-nes Sosthenes syn-ty-che syntyche ste-pha-nus stephanus
syl-va-nus sylvanus shib-bo-leth shibboleth sar-do-nyx sardonyx sa-rep ta
sarepta se-ra-phins seraphins ser-gi-us sergius

T T Ta-be-el Tabeel to-bi-ah tobiah tu-bal-kain tubalkain to-gar-mah togarmah
ti-ri-a tiria te-ho-a tehoa tad-ca-ster tadcaster te-ma-nite temanite
te-ra-phim teaaphim tel-me-lah telmelah tah-pan-tus tahpantus try-phe-na
tryphena try-pho-sa tryphosa ty-ri-a tyria thad-de-us thaddeus ter-tul-lus
tertullus tro-phi-mus trophimus ty-chi-cus tychicus thra-ci-a thracia
thes-sa-ly thessaly ter-ti-us tertius

U U Uz-ri-a Uzria U-ri-ah Uriah Vi-tel-lus Vitellus Va-ni-ah Vaniah U-phar-sin
Upharsin U-ti-ca Utica U-ri-el Uriel

Z Z Ze-cha-ry zachary Ze-pha-ny zephany Za-che-us zacheus Ze-bu-lon zebulon
Ze-bo-im zeboim Zip-po-rah zipporah Zid-hi-ah zidhiah Zu-ri-el zuriel
Zo-he-loth zoheloth Zal-mun-na zalmunna Ze-bu-a zebua Ze-bi-a zebia Za-bi-na
zabina Zeb-di-el zebdiel Ze-re-da zereda Ze-mi-ra zemira Za-a-van zaavan
Zi-bi-a zibia Ze-no-phon zenophon Za-re-tan zaretan ze-ma-rite zemarite

Proper Names of four Sylables both whole and divided into Sylables.
A A A-bi-a-thar Abiathar a-bed-ne-go abednego a-me-ri-ca america a-pu-lei-us
apuleius a-bi-me-lech abimelech a-tha-li-ah athaliah a-za-ri-ah azariah
a-do-ni-jah adonijah a-bi-na-dab abinadab a-bi-ez-er abiezer a-do-ni-cam
adonicam a-ma-si-a amasia a-mi-na-dab aminadab a-ra-bi-a arabia a-lex-ander
alexander a-ta-li-ah a-talia ar-tax-er-xes artaxerxes a-za-ri-ah azariah

B B Be-shu-li-a Beshulia ba-al-ze-phon baalzephon ba-albe-rith baalberith
be-el-ze-bub beelzebub be-er-she-ba beersheba be-ra-chi-ah berachia
beth-a-ra-ba betharaba beth-a-ba-rah bethabarah bo-a-ner-ges boanerges
bar-ti-me-us bartimeus bar-zil-la-i barzillai bar-ba-ri-an barbarian

C C Cle-o-pa-tra Cleopatra can-ter-bu-ry canterbury cy-re-ni-us cyrenius
co-ne-ni-ah coneniah cen-tu-rion centurion ce-lo-sy-ri-a celosyria co-lo-ni-a
colonia ce-na-ni-nah cenaninah

D D Dal-ma-ti-a Dalmatia do-ro-sen-sko dorosensko de-mo-cri-tus democritus
di-o-tre-phes diotrephes de-ca-po-lis decapolis do-ro-the-a dorothea
do-si-the-as dositheas dib-la-tha-im diblathaim dab-ma-nu-tha dabmanutha

E E E-ze-ki-el Ezekiel E-le-a-zar Eliazar E-li-a-kim Eliakim E-ben-e-zer
Ebenezer E-li-za-beth Elizabeth E-li-sha-ma Elishama e-li-a-saph eliasaph
e-ze-ki-ah ezekiah eu-ro-cly-don euroclydon e-li-e-nai elienai e-neg-la-im
eneglaim e-zar-had-don ezarhaddon esh-te-mo-a eshtemoa e-li-e-zer eliezer
e-li-ca-dah elicadah en-di-my-on endimyon e-li-phe-leh elipheleh e-li-ca-tha
elicatha

G G Gen-ne-sa-ret Gennesaret ga-la-ti-a galatia gi-le-a-dite gileadite
ga-ma-li-el gamaliel ge-de-li-ah gedeliah geth-se-ma-ne gethsemane
gir-ra-he-pher girrahepher

H H He-ro-di-as Herodias He-ze-ki-ah Hezekiah her-mo-ge-nes hermogenes
ha-na-ni-ah hananiah hor-ha-gid-gad horhagidgad he-tru-ri-a hetruria
hel-ve-ti-a helvetia hy-me-ne-us hymeneus har-cha-li-ah hachaliah ho-bo-ni-ah
hoboniah har-ha-bi-ah harhabiah ho-ra-na-im horanaim

I I I-co-ni-um Iconium il-ly-ri-a illyria je-ko-ni-ah jekoniah je-ho-a-dan
jehoadan je-ho-a-har jehoahar im-ma-nu-el immanuel je-re-mi-ah jeremiah
je-ho-ja-da jehojada ig-na-ti-us ignatius iz-za-bel-la izzabella i-ro-ni-a
ironia je-ru-sa-lem jerusalem jun-se-ni-a junsenia je-hab-ze-el jekabzeel
je-za-ni-ah jezaniah

K K Ke-der-minster kederminster ke-ren-happuk kerenhappuk ke-he-la-thah
kehelathah kir-he-re-seth kirhereseth

L L La-vi-ni-a Lavinia le-vi-a-than leviathan

M M Mel-chi-ze-dek Melchizedek mat-ta-ni-ah Mattaniah ma-a-zi-ah Maaziah
mer-cu-ri-us Mercurius me-thu-sa-lem Methusalem ma-ra-na-tha Maranatha
mat-ta-thi-ah Mattathiah

N N Na-tha-na-el Nathanael Ne-a-po-lis Neapolis Ni-co-po-lis Nicopolis
Ni-co-de-mus Nicodemus Ne-he-mi-ah Nehemiah Ne-tha-ni-ah Nethaniah No-ah-di-ah
Noahdiah Ne-to-pha-thi Netophathi Ne-ha-li-el Nehaliel

O O O-tha-li-ah Othaliah O-ba-di-ah Obadiah O-za-zi-ah Ozaziah O-bed-e-dom
Obededom O-he-mo-ed Ohemoed

P P Pto-lo-me-us Ptolomeus Pi-si-di-a Pisidia Pe-la-ti-ah Pelatiah
Pi-lo-lo-gus Pilologus Po-ti-phe-rah Potipherah Pa-le-sti-na Palestina

R R Re-e-la-jah Reelajah Re-ho-bo-am Rehoboam Re-ma-li-ah Remaliah Re-ha-bi-ah
Rehabiah Re-ma-tha-im Remathaim

S S Sen-na-che-rib Sennacherib Sa-ma-ria Samaria Se-le-mi-a Selemia
She-ar-ja-shub Shearjashub She-ba-ni-ah Shebaniah She-ca-ni-ah Shecaniah
She-pa-thi-a Shepathia Sam-ge-ne-bo Samgenebo

T T The-o-phi-lus Theophilus Thy-a-ti-ra Thyatira Ti-be-ri-as Tiberias
Tro-gyl-li-um Trogyllium Te-ba-li-ah Tebaliah The-o-do-rus Theodorus
Ve-spa-si-an Vespasian Vi-tel-li-us Vitellius Vic-to-ri-a Victoria Ze-pha-ni-ah
Zephaniah Za-cha-ri-ah Zachariah Ze-ro-ba-bel Zerobabel Ze-de-ki-ah Zedekiah
Ze-lo-phe-had Zelophehad Ze-ma-ra-im Zemaraim Za-a-na-im Zaanaim Ze-re-da-tha
Zeredatha Zu-ri-shad-da Zurishadda

Proper Names of Five and Six Syllables both whole and Divided into Syllables.
A A A-lex-an-dri-a Alexandria A-do-ni-be-zek Adonibezek A-ha-su-e-rus
Ahasuerus A-bel-miz-ra-im Abelmizraim A-dra-myt-ti-um Adramyttium A-pol-lo-ni-a
Apollonia A-do-mi-ne-keb Adominekeb

B B Ba-al-pe-ra-zim Baalperazim Beth-ba-al-me-on Bethbaalmeon Be-e-li-a-da
Beeliada Ba-al-she-li-za Baalshaliza Ba-a-lath-be-or Baalathbeor

C C Che-der-la-o-mer Chederlaomer

D D Deu-te-ro-no-my Deuteronomy

E E E-di-be-o-lech Edibeolech e-vil-me-ro-dach Evilmerodach e-li-ho-e-na-i
Elihoenai

G G Gi-be-la-ra-im Gebelaraim Ge-de-ro-tha-im Gederothaim

H H Hel-cath-ha-zu-rim Helcathhazurim he-ra-la-za-ru-us Heralazuruus
he-li-o-po-lis Heliopolis ha-ber-ge-on-tes Habergeontes ha ze-zon-ta-mer
Hazezontamer

I I Je-ho-va-ni-si Jehovanisi Je-ho-va-shal-lom Jehovashallom Je-be-re-he-ah
Jebereheah

K K Ki-ri-a-tha-im Kiriathaim Ki-ri-ath-ar-ba Kiriatharba Ki-re-a-the-ba-al
Kireathebaal

M M Me-so-po-ta-mi-a Mesopotamia Ma-ce-do-ni-a Macedonia Me-she-ra-be-el
Mesherabeel

N N Ne-bu-chad-nez-zar Nebuchadnezzar

O O O-ne-so-pho-rus Onesophorus

P P Phi-la-del-phi-a Philadelphia

R R Ri-zan-ti-lip-put Rizantillipput

T T Ta-li-tha-cu-mi Talithacumi Thes-sa-lo-ni-ca Thessalonica
Ta-a-nath-shi-loth Taanathshiloth

Because in the English (as well as in other Languages) there are many words
spoken diversely from what they are written, which do much puzzle Children and
Foreigners, here are subjoyned Examples of some few common words (since many
would be tedious) to direct you in the different pronouncing and writing of
them.
Pronounced Written A A A-Mun Almodd An-gur anger an-ser answer al-tho although
a-purn apron a-ry awry a-ron Aaron ad-mi-er admire a-shun action ad-dish-un
addition ang-cur anchor a-va-rish-us avaritious am-bish-us ambitious an-chent
ancient ank-shus anxious ap-po-sish-un apposition ar-ti-fish-al artificial
ac-qui-er acquire ab-so-lu-shun absolution au-stin augustine as-so-shot
associate at-ti-er attire ang-guish anguish ank-si-e-ty anxiety au-da-shus
audacious ap-pa-rish-un apparition

B B Biz-zy busy be-k'n beacon but'n button bang-quet banquet brek-fast
breakfast be-ne-fish-al beneficial bas'n basin bitt'n bitten beat'n beaten
bris-to bristol bak'n bacon betok'n betoken blang-ket blanket bam-ber-ry
banbury by-zan-shum byzantium bang-ger bangor brok'n broken bri-d'l bridle,
brit-t'l brittle by-er buyer bramb'l bramble

C C Can-d'l Candle cock'l cockle col-leg college con-vins convince Sur-jun
surgeon com-furt comfort con-fesh-un confession cap-shus captious
con-fu-shun confusion Surk-it circuit cup-p'l couple cur-rage courage cur-ten
curtain cun-dit conduit cun-ny coney ches-nut chestnut con-spi-er conspire
con-dish-un condition chos'n chosen cen-ter center crim-sin crimson cur-ty-us
courteous chris-chan-i-ty christianity cuv-e-tus covetous con-shence conscience
con-stur construe cris-mus christmas co-ches coaches cun-try country
cum-pan-yun companion con-fesh-un confession clo-v'n cloven car-ren carrion
ca-p'n capon cu-re-yus curious cu-s'n cosen cot-t'n cotton con-fuzhun confusion
con-ven-shun convention con-cep-shun conception con-junk-shun conjunction
cau-shun caution col-lek-shun collection cath-ern catharine con-ger-rer
conjurer cush-en cushion cun-sta-b'l constable con-fek-sho-ner confectioner
cum-mish-un commission cir-cum-cis-un circumcision chas'n chasten cul-len
cologne ca-prish-us capricious cum-pash-un compassion cirk'l circle cas-sel
castle cook-coo cuckoo chois-est choicest con-shen-shus conscientious clime-ed
climbed cat-tel cattle cer-ten certain kol-ler choler krys-tal crystal si-far
cipher

D D De-seve Deceive duz'n dozen de-si-er desire dix-na-ry dictionary
di-vis-yon division drunk'n drunken dark'n darken dam-na-shun damnation
du-ra-shun duration di-rek-shun direction de-struk-shun destruction de-vo-shun
devotion di-mund diamond dow-ty doughty dam-sun damason dan-el daniel
dis-cresh-un discretion de-lush-us delicious driv'd driven dun-gin dungeon
di-gresh-un digression dam-zel damosel de-lu-shun delusion di-o-nys-yus
dionysius dire-ful direful de-riz-yun derision de-ciz-yun decision di-versh-un
diversion di-stink-shun distinction dis-sip'l disciple

E E E-lec-shun Election ^qui-er esquire e-nuff enough ev-a-zhun evasion ex-ort
exhort ex-po-sish-un exposition eev'n even a-lev'n eleven em-ty empty en-vi-run
environ ex-pi-er expire ex-e-cu-shun execution eu-nuke eunuch e-rup-shun
eruption ec-zac-shun exaction ex-tor-shun extortion e-ze-kel ezekiel
es-sen-si-al essential e-ster easter Ec-log eclogue en-qui-er enquire Ing-land
England Ing-lish English eev'l evil ep-pi-taf epitaph em-mu-lus emulous
ex-pa-shate expatiate

F F Fa-mus Famous flag-gin flaggon fash-un fashion fack-shun faction fauk-ner
falconer friend friend fa-vur favor fa-mil-yar familiar fi-er fire frak-shun
fraction foun-da-shun foundation fast'n fasten fru-ish-un fruition
for-ni-ca-shun fornication fip-pence five pence friv-i-lus frivolous fur-me-te
frumenty feb-ra-ry february flur-rish flourish feeld field fruit. fruit

G G Jai-ler Jailer gra-shus gracious greev-us grievous gorg-us gorgeous
gar-ris'n garrison gott'n gotten gold'n golden gin-ny guiney gen-e-ra-shun
generation gal-a-shans galatians glos-ter gloucester given given gil-ty guilry
gage-ing gauging gal-lus gallows

H H He-then Heathen hol-lo hallow hau-ty haughty ho-nor honor hev'n heaven
hand'l handle han-ke-cher handkerchief hy-rar-ky hierarchy hi-er-ling hireling
hun-gur hunger um-phry humphry hark'n hearken hap'n happen hern heron hav'n
haven ho-burn Holburn ha-bi-ta-shun habitation ho-ry hoary ha-pen-ny halfpenny
head head hor-ror horror je-rum hierom hu-mur humor humb'l humble

I I Id'l idle im-pi-us impious in-treag intrigue in-tru-shun intrusion
in-fla-ma-shun inflammation in-fu-shun infusion i-do-la-try idolatry in-qui-er
inquire in-spi-er inspire in-ti-er entire in-dite-ment indictment
in-qui-sish-un inquisition in-ter-mish-un intermission in-suf-fish-ent
insufficient jur-ny journey je-lus jealous in-ven-shun invention in-scrip-shun
inscription in-struc-shun instruction in-ten-shun intention im-per-fecshun
imperfection in-ter-sesh-un intercession

K K Kath-ern Katharine ker-cher kerchief

L L Ling-ger Linger lu-ker lucre leng-th'n lengthen lit'n lighten ly-sha lysia
lus-ter luster la-men-ta-shun lamentation les'n lessen lesson liar lyre lun-dun
london ling-con lincoln lang-guish languish litt'l little lik'n liken lar-rance
lawrence lu-shus lucius lis'n listen lang-guig language lu-cre-sha lucretia
lang-ca-sheer lancashire lu-shan lucian ler-pool leverpool

M M My-te Mighty med-sin medicine mi-ter mitre mee-ter meetre munth month
mi-er mi-re mar-rig marriage mun-ny money molt'n molten mez-ure measure
mor-gage mortgage mu-sish-an musician ma-lish-us malicious mar-shal martial
mea-zl's measels mar-chant merchant mas'n mason mau-gur maugre men-shun mention
mo-shun motion man-shun mansion micl-mus michaelmas mon-strus monstrous myr-t'l
myrtle mid-nigte midnight mis-chev-ous mischievous moorn mourn mas-sa-ker
massacre mis-priz-yun misprision mung-key monkey mant'l mantle mung-ril mongrel

N N Ney-ber Neighbor ne-fu nephew nur-rish nourish nau-ty naughty nur-tur
nourture ni-ter nitre nav'l navel nup-shal nuptial nom-na-tive nominative
na-shun nation nu-sance nuisance no-shun notion ne-ther neither noy-sum noisome

O O Off-fis Office of'n often o-pin-yun opinion o-ra-shun oration un-yun onion
o-shan ocean ob-jek-shun objection oc-ca-shun occasion ob-leeg oblige
of-fish-us officious om-nish-ent omniscient ob-nok-shus obnoxious o-mish-un
omission open open op-presh-un oppression or-di-na-shun ordination op-e-ra-shun
operation o-sher osier ob-la-shun oblation awt ought

P P Fash-un Passion pee-ter peter pidg-in pigeon pers-nal personal per-dish-un
perdition poles-church paul's-church per-sha persia pest'l pestle po-shon
potion pen-shon pension ples-yure pleasure pard'n pardon per-nish-us pernishous
peep'l people pore-shun portion purp'l purple pu-er pure pres-pus precious
pro-ve-cy prophecy pro-vis-shun provision pro-phesh-un profession po-sesh-un
possession predg-u-dis prejudice pon-shus pontius pe-tish-un petition pan-yer
panier par-la-ment parliament phy-sish-an physician pro-mo-shun promotion
pro-por-shun proportion por-shus portius pa-shence patience per-mish-un
permission per-swa-shun persuasion pa-vil-yun pavillion pro-tek-shun protection
po-ten-shal potential preest-hood priesthood po-lu-shun pollution plan-ta-shun
plantation pro-log prologue pen-uth penniworth

Q Q Questuyun Question quick'n quicken quier quire qua-drang'l quadrangle
quo-shent quotient quo-ta-shun quotation

R R Rey-ned Reigned ruff-ly roughly re-lidg-un religion ri-chus righteous
reck'n reckon reas'n reason reas'n raisin rash-un-al rational ran-dy-vooz
rendezvous risen risen rav'n raven rodg-ger roger re-seit receipt rafe ralf
re-jek-shun rejection re-la-shun relation re-ver-shun reversion re-dem-shun
redemption ri-gur-us. rigorous ros'n rosin rib-en riband re-cept-ak'l
receptacle re-pe-ti-shun repetition re-ti-er retire re-qui-er require ru-in-us
ruinous re-sem-b'l resemble res-ku rescue

S S Sism Schism se-pul-ker sepulcher so-ger soldier sam-mum salmon span-nel
spaniel steev'n stephen stur-jun sturgeon sa'l-ty subtilty suf-fishent
sufficient sus-pisi-un suspicion sweet'n sweeten smitt'n smitten stash-o-ner
stationer suc-cesh-un succession sa-shate satiate stiff'n stiffen spi-er spire
spesh-al special se-dish-un sedition short'n shorten spa-shus spacious spok'n
spoken stolen stolen swol'n swollen so-shab'l sociable scul-yun scullion sev'n
seven sniv'l snivel si-er sire seas'n-abl seasonable sa-shate satiate
suth-rick southwark strong-gur stronger spe-shus specious shoo-ger sugar
saff-urn saffron south-say-er soothsayer sear-yus-ly seriously scorp-yun
scorpion strait-way streightway sta-shun station saul-va-shun salvation
sa-lu-ta-shun salutation sub-ver-shun subversion si-tu-a-shun situation
span-yard spaniard sed-dule schedule sub-mish-un submission scur-ging scourging
sug-gest-pun suggestion skel-e-ton sceleton sang-guin sanguine sis-ma-ti-k
schismatic skep-ti-cism skepticism sepa-ra-shun separation slau-ter slaughter
sing'l single samp'l sample simp'l simple sett'l settle sute-ab'l suitable sine
sign site sight saut sought strag'l stragle snaf'l snaffle sad'l sadle swad'l
swadle squab'l squabble strad'l straddle

T T Tack'l Tackle tang'l tangle ti-er tire trip-l triple trez-ure treasure
the-a-tre theater trick'l trickle treas'n treason tu-ish-un tuition trunchin
truncheon tok'n token treac'l treacle tems thames ter-shan tertian tra-di-shun
tradition tri-an-g'l triangle ting-ker tinker thret'n threaten thick'n thicken
tup-pence two pence tem-ta-shun temptation trans-la-shun translation
to-le-ra-shun toleration tax-a-shun taxation tramp'l trample temp'l temple
troub'l trouble ten-or tenor titt'l tittle tab'l table thawt thought tennet
thanet tus-ca-ny thuscany to-ard toward thri-pence threepence thist'l thistle
tom-mas thomas tom-son thomson ter-shus tertius turt'l turtle trif'l trifle
trick'l trickle tu-tor tutour ter-ror terror troub'l trouble traf-fick
traffic te-trark tetrach twen-teth twentieth tu-mor tumor tea-dy-us tedious
tu-mul-ty-ous tumultuous ty-ran-us tyranous tor-ter torture tung tongue

V V Vitt'ls Victuals vo-ca-shun vocation vis-yun vision vens'n venison
vi-count viscount vex-sa-shun vexation vy-edg voyage va-lur valor ven-ter
venture vol-ume volumn vish-yate vitiate va-lu-ant valiant viz-i-ta-ti-un
visitation var-ges verjuice vang-quish vanquish ver-mil-yun vermilion vout-safe
vouchsafe var-det verdict ven-dib'l vendible va-pur vapor

U U Un-youn Onion unk-shun unction un-to-ard untoward

W W Wait Weight rech-ed wretched we-pon weapon wire wier ritt'n written
wus-ter worcester wum-mun woman wens-day wednesday ward'n warden weez'l weazel
waggen wagon wak'n waken wim-men women wov'n woven wil-yum william weak'n
weaken rong-ful wrongful res-ler wrestler ris-ban wristband ry-neckt wrynecked
shurm worm wundur wonder wor-ling wordling ward'n warden whit'n whiten whis'l
whistle wimp'l wimple rang'l wrangle rung wrung rink'l wrinkle howl-sum
wholesome resting wresting rawthful wrathful rig'l wriggle raw wrought rawth
wrath woom womb woold would rench wrench ras'l wrestle way weigh reath wreath
reak wreak reck wreck

Y Y Young-ger Younger yem-mun yeoman youth-ful youthful

An Alphabetical Table of Words which have the like Sound and Pronunciation,
but are of a different sense and spelling.
A
Able, sufficient Abel, a man's name A bell, to ring Acern, of an Oak Acre of
Land Achor the name of a Valley Accidence for Children Accidents, chances
Account, reckoning Account, esteem Air, the Sky Heir, to an Estate Are glad or
sorry All, as all men Ale, a drink Awl for Shoemakers Ail trouble Alley, a
narrow place Ally, associate Allay, to assuage Allowed, approved of Aloud to
speak so Altar, for Sacrifice Alter, to change Angel, a Spirit Angle, a term in
Geometry Angle for fish Annual yearly Annal, a Chronicle Arrows to shoot withal
Arass, rich hangings Harass, to weary and toil Aunt, the Fathers Sister Ant, or
Pismire Ay me, woe is me Ay, for ever Array, a Battle in Array Array, to cloth
Ark, built by Noah Archbishop Arrant, notorious Errand, business to go about
Attach, to take hold on Attaque, to face about Ash, a Tree Ass, a Beast Ask or
inquire Appear, to be seen A Peer or Lord of the Realm A Pear, a fruit so
called Assent, consenting Ascent of a Hill Ascent or smell Appeal, to petition
A Peal, to ring on Bells Amaze, to frighten A Mace carried before the Lord
Major. Acts, Laws or Statutes Ax, to cleave wood Ask, or inquire Asp, a
venomous Serpent Hasp for a door Augre, to bore holes Augur, a fortune tellers
Austere, severe, fierce Oyster, a shelfish
B
Babble, to talk foolishly Bauble, a toy for Children Babel the Tower of Babel
Bays, of the Bay Tree Baiz, cloth so called Ball, to play with Baal a heathen
Idol Bawl, to cry Barbara, a proper name Barbary, name of a Country Barberries
Trees Bough of a Tree Pow, to shoot Bow, to bend down Boar, a swine Bore, to
make a hole Belly, part of the Body Belie, to speak falsely Berry of elder Bury,
the dead Bear, a wild Beast Beer, to drink Bare, naked, plain Bier, a Coffin.
C
Caul, suet Call, to call any one Cawl, for Perriwigs Callis, a Towns name
Chalice, the Cup in the Sacram. Centanry, an herb Century, a hundred years
Centry, a Soldier on the watch Carryer, to carry Goods Carreer, full speed
Cauldron, to boil in Chauldron of Coals Censer, for Incense Censor, a Roman
Officer Censure, to judge Claws of a Bird Clause, a Sentence Common, waste Land
Commune to talk together Commons, House of Parliament Collar of a doublet
Choler, anger, wrath Collier, that sells Coal Color, blue, red, green, etc.
Current money Current, a running stream Corinths, a fruit Churse, rough Coarse,
a dead body Cymbal, a musical instrument Symbal. a mark, or sign Conceive with
Child Conceive, to imagine Cithern, for music Citron, fruit so called
D
Damn, to Condemn Dam, stopping water Dame, or Mistress Dear, of great price
Deer, of the woods Dyer, of cloths Duke a Title of Honor Duck, a fowl Demure,
sober, modest Demur, to doubt Descent, Pedigree Decent, handsome, comely
Dissent, to differ, disagree Dew, on the grass Due, or owing Do, a Rabbit
Dough, for bread Do, any thing Dun, a color Done, a thing done Digest, to
concoct Digest, to put in method Deed, an Indenture Dead, departed this life
Dolphin, a Fish Daulphin, the heir of France Disease, sickness Decease, to die
Dolor, grief, sorrow Dollar, a Dutch Coin Differ, to disagree Defer, to delay
E
East, a quarter of heaven Yeast, to make bread with Esther, a proper name
Easter, the Festival Enter, to go in Interr, to bury Entire, whole, perfect
Elder, older, Eldern, tree Earn, to labor for Yearn, woollen thread Yarn, to
pity Eyes, of the body Ice, water frozen Eminent, famous, noted Imminent,
hanging over Emroids, disease, the piles Emraulds, precious stones Exercise,
labor, employment Exorcise, to conjure Ear, of the head Year, twelve months
Err, to mistake Ere, while, in time past Early, betimes Yearly, year after year
Earth, the ground Hearth, Chimney hearth
F
Flower, of the field Flour, of meal Floor, of a Room Fowl, great birds Foul,
filthy, dirty, Fair, beautiful Fare, victuals Fear, horror, trouble Foal, a
Colt Fool, a vain fellow Fourth, day of March Forth, without Freiz, cloth so
called Freez, congealed Fir, trees Fur, on a Gown Fly, like a bird Fly, a
small insect Form, of word Fourm, to sit on Find, to find any thing Fiend, a
Spirit, a Devil Fined, for Alderman Flea, a vermin, or to pull the skin Flee,
to escape
G
Gentiles, heathens Gentle, meek, mild-patient Gesture, carriage of the body
Jester, a foolish fellow Guilt, guiltiness Gilt, with Gold Guess, to imagine,
think Guest, a friend Groan, for grief Grown, bigger, or higher Garden, for
herbs or flowers Guardian, an Overseer Galleys, Ships with Oars Gallows, to
hang malefactors Groat, four pence Grot, a cave Greyhound so called Gray, a
color Grass, in the fields Grace, virtue in the soul
H
Hare, in the woods Hair, of the head Heir, to an estate Air, the Sky Hear,
with the ear Here, present at this place Hire, wages Her, spoken of the female
Are, in health, or in prison Higher, above Heart, of the body Heart, a Deer Art,
skill Heel, of the foot Heal, to cure a wound Hell, a place of torment Hall, in
a house Hale, to pluck or pull Hail, from the sky Ail, to be ill Herd, a drove
of Cattle Heard, he heard Hard, as a stone Haven, for ships Heaven, a place of
glory Hole, bored through Whole, the Total Hallow, to make holy Hollow, empty,
void Halloe, to cry aloud Holy, devout Holly, a tree so called Hoar, a hoar
frost Whore, a Town Miss Hour, quantity of time Hore-hound a plant Head, of the
body Heed, take heed Horse, a beast Hoarse, with a cold Hoop, for a Vessel
Whoop, to hollow or cry out
I
Isle, an Island Oil, Sallet Oil I Will, a place to walk in Idle, Slothful Idol, a
false God Incite, to stir up or provoke Insight, knowledge, or skill Ingenious,
witty Ingenuous, good natured Imply, to signify Employ, to set on work Inn, for
Travelers In, or within a House Itch, a distemper Hitch, or catch hold
K
Kennel, for dogs hannel, the middle of the street Kill, to murder, to destroy
Kiln, to burn bricks Kin, or Kindred Ken, to be within view Keen, sharp Knave,
dishonest man Nave, of a Cart wheel Knight, a Title of Honor Night, succeeds
the day
L
Latin, a Language Laten, Tin Loud, to speak aloud Lowed, like an Ox Lowr, or
frown Lower, or below Lour, the French Kings Palace Lease, of a House or Lands
Leash, of Hounds Less, Smaller Lest, a note of forbidding Lead, to lead along
Lead, a Mineral Lesson, to learn a Lesson Lessen, to make less Listen, to
hearken Lamb, a young sheep Lame, to go lame Liturgy, Common Prayer Lethargy, a
sleepy disease Line, to draw a line Loyn, of veal, or mutton Leopard, a spotted
beast Leper, that has the Leprosy Leaper, one that leapeth Loath, to abhor, or
disdain Loath, unwilling Lice, vermin Lies, untruths Loose, to unty Lose, to
lose any thing Louse, vermin League, of peace and amity Leg, of the body
Lattice, bars of a window Lettice, a woman's name Lettuce, an herb so called
M
Male, the he or masculine Mail, a coat of mail Maul, to break or strike
Manure, to Till the ground Manor, Manor House Manner, after this manner
Medes, a Nation so called Meads, or meadows Meat, to eat Mete, to measure corn
Meet, or fit to be done Might, strength or power Mite, an insect in Cheese, or
small money Mind, the understanding Mine, to dig gold out of Moat, round a House
Mote, in the eye Mantle, a garment Mantil-tree, of a house M^llion, a great
number Mebon, or Muskmellon Maim, a wound Mane, of a Horse Main, the Ocean
Moan, to lament Mown, grass mown Mourning, Lamentation Morning, succeeds the
night Muzzle, to stop the mouth Muscle, a small shelfish Mole, a vermin Mold,
to cast any thing in
N
Neigh, like a horse Nay, a note of denial Nigh, nearer Nigh, a man's name
Niece, brother and sisters daughter Nice, delicate, curious Naught, bad,
worthless Naught, nothing Noise, tumult, clamor Nose' on the face Noah's, Ark
O
Ore, gold ore Oar, of a boat Our, as our Father Hour, of time Over, or over
Oath, to swear an oath Ought, to do any thing Oat, or oats, grain Out, without
Own, to acknowledge One, the first number Order, rule, decency, command Ordure,
filthiness, dung
P
Pear, a fruit Pare, to cut off the skin Pair, a couple Peer, a Lord Pier, a
haven Pail, for water Pale, a fence, or ill colored Pallet, bed Palate, of the
mouth Palliate, to cover or cloak crimes Play, a comedy, or game Plea, a
defense Prize, a reward Price, the value of a thing Parasite, a flatterer
Parricide, that murders his father Principal, of high degree Principle, rules
to walk by Place, as this place Plaise, a fish Potion, a quantity of Physic
Portion, a dowry President, example President, foregoing Pore, with the eyes
Poor, necessitous Power, mighty Pour, out any thing Pence, as two pence Pens,
to write with Partition, a dividing Petition, an humble request
Q
Queen, the Kings wife Queen, a harlot or strumpet Quarry, of stones Quary, of
glass Query a question Quench, to put out fire Quince, a fruit
R
Rays, of the sun Raise, to lift up Race, to run a race Raze, to blot out or
demolish Rear, to raise up Rare, choice, excellent Rere, behind in the rereward
Reins, of the back Reign, to rule as King Rain, from the sky Reed, grows in
water Read, to read books Red, a color Rock, to torment Wrack, of a ship Rake,
to scrape together Retch, to stretch Reach, to fetch a thing Wretch, a
miserable man Rich, wealthy Rise, to arise Rice, a grain Rite, or Ceremony
Right, just, equal Right, hand Write, with a pen Wright, as wheelwright Rome,
to wander, or a City Room, a chamber, space Roof, of the house Rough, course,
rugged Row, of trees, or in a boat Roe, a Deer
S
Savior, that saves Savor, taste, smelling Sun, in the firmament Son, of the
Father Soon, quickly Swound, to faint away Sound, noise Sown, as wheat Sour,
sharp Sore, tender, painful Soar, to fly aloft Sower, of seed Ship, that goes
to sea Sheep, cattle Stares, birds so called Stairs, of a house Scent, a smell
Sent, to any place Shut, the door Shoot, in a bow Shout, to make noise Statue,
an Image Statute, a Law Stature, bigness, proportion Sum, of money Some people
or men Succor, help or relieve Sucker, a young sprig Soul, in the body Soal,
of a foot Soale, a fish Sphere, in the heavens Spear, a weapon of war Spare, to
save Suit, of clothes, or law Sewet, of beef or mutton Shave, as Barbers
Sheave, of corn Slow, dull, heavy Sloe, a plum, or serpent Slough, a miry place
T
Tale, an idle story Tall, high of stature Tail, of any beast Teal, a fowl
Tiles, of houses Toyls, to catch wild beasts Time, of the day Thyme, an herb
Tears, that we weep Tores, in the corn Tongs, to make fires Tongues, that we
speak with Tossed, on the sea Toast, in Ale Throw, to throw or cast Through, to
pierce through Through your means Teem, with child Team of horses Tittle, a
speck or point Title of honor Turn, to turn round Torn, off Thorn, of a Hedge
U
Vacation, Leisure Vocation, Calling Vane, of a steeple Vain, idle, foolish
Vein, of the arm or leg Vial, a glass Viol, a musical instrument Value, to
prize a thing Valley, between hills Volley, of shot Vmbles, of a Deer Humble,
lowly minded Voice, of a man Vice, wickedness Vale, a Valley Vail, a Covering
W
Walls, of a City Walls, a Country Wail, to Lament Weal, public good Wheel, of
a Cart Wheal, a pimple Weights, to weigh with Waits, the City Music White,
contrary to black Wild, untamed Weild, a Sword Weald, of Kent and Sussex Ware,
or goods Wear, as clothes Were, as you were
Proper Names of Men and Women with their Interpretation.
A
Aaron, a Teacher Abel, Just Adam, man earthly Alexander, helper of man
Ambrose, divine, immortal Ananias, the grace of the Lord Andrew, manly, or
manful Anthony, flourishing Arthur, a Bear Augustine, Majestical Abigail, the
fathers Agnes, chaste Alice, noble Amy, beloved conqueror
B
Baldwin, speedy Bartholomew, son of him that makes the waters to mount, God
Barnabas, son of Comfort Benedict, blessed Benjamin, son of the right hand
Bernard, Lord of many Children Buttolph, Help ship Brian, shrill voice
Balthazar, Searcher of Treasure Barbara, strange Beatrice, blessed Blanch,
white or fair Bona, good
C
Caleb, Hearty Charles, strong, stout, courageous Christopher, Christ-carrier
Constantine, fast and firm Cornelius of Cornu, a horn Cassandra, inflaming men
with love Catherine, pure, chaste Clara, bright Cicely, gray-eyed
D
Daniel, Judgment of God David, beloved Denis, divine mind Dru, subtle Dunstan,
most high Diana, Gods daughter Dido, a man-like woman Dorythy, the gift of God
Dorcas, a Roebuck Dousabel, sweet and fair
E
Edgar, blessed power Edmund, blessed peace Edwin, Victor Edward, happy keeper
Egbert, always bright Elias, Lord God Emmanuel, God with us Erasmus, amiable
Esaias, reward of the Lord Eleazer, help of God Eusebius, religious man Everard,
well reported Ezechias, strength of the Lord Ezekiel, seeking the Lord Enoch,
taught or dedicate Ezra, a helper Eleanor, pitiful Elizabeth, peace of the
Lord Emme, a good nurse Eve, giving life
F
Foelix, happy Florence, Flourishing Francis, free Frederick, peaceable reign
Fulk, noble and gallant Ferdinando, pure peace
G
Gabriel, a man of God Gamaliel, Gods reward Gerrard, well reported George,
Husband man Gedeon, a destroyer German, true not counterfeit Gervas, all sure
or firm Geffrey, joyful peace Gilbert, bright pledge Godfery, Gods peace Godard,
strength of God Godwin, victorious in God Gregory, watching Gryffith strong
faith Guy, a guide or Leader Gertrude, all true, amiable
H
Hadrian, wealthy Hannibal, gracious Lord Hector, defender Henry, Rich Lord
Herbert, famous Lord Hercules, glory Hierom, holy name Howel, Sun bright Hugh,
comfort Hubert, fair hope Horatio, good eyesight Habakkuk, a wrastler Hilkiah,
the Lords gentleness Helena, pitiful
I
Jacob, a Supplanter James, a maintainer Joachim, preparation of the Lord
Jeremy, high of the Lord Joab, father-hood John, gracious Joh, sighing and
sorrowing Jordan, the river of judgment Joshua, a Savior Joseph, increase of
the Lord Josias, fire of the Lord Isaac, laughter Israel, seeing the Lord
Julian, soft hair'd Jonathan, Gods gift Jean Jone, the same with John Judith,
praising, confessing Jehosaphat, the Lord is Judge Jesus, a Savior Jedidah,
beloved
K
Renelm, defense of his kindred
L
Lambert, fair Lamb Laurence, flourishing Lazarus, Lords help Leonard,
Lyon-like disposition Lewis, Refuge of the people Lionel, little Lion Leopold,
defender of the people Luke, rising, or lifting up Ludovic, famous warrior
Levi, joined Lot, wrapped, joined Lettice, joyfulness, mirth Lucia, lightsome,
bright
M
Malicias, my messenger Manasses, not forgotten Marmaduc, more mighty Mark,
high Matthew, Gods gift Michael, who is like God Moses, drawn up Morgan, Seaman
Morice, Moor Melchizedek, king of Righteousness Mehetabel, how good is God
Mabel, my fair maid Magdalen, Majestical Margaret, Pearl or precious Mary,
exalted Maud, honorable Lady Melicent, honey sweet Muriel, sweet perfume
N
Nathaniel, the gift of God Neal, blackish or swart Nicholas, Conqueror of the
people Nehemiah, Comfort of the Lord Noah, a ceasing or rest Nicia, victorious
O
Oliver, the peace-bringing Olive Owen, noble or well born Original, born in
good time Osborn, house child Olympius, Heavenly Oralilis, easily entreated.
P
Paschal, the Passover Patrick, a Peer, or State Paul, little or humble Peter,
a stone or rock Peregrine, strange or outlandish Philebert, very bright
Philip, a lover of horses Posthumus, born after his fathers death Peniel,
seeing God Phebe, clear, or bright Phineas, a bold Countenance Pernel, pretty
Stone Priscilla or Prisca, ancient Prudence, or Sophia, wisdom Philadelphia, a
lover of sisters or brethren Phillis, Lovely Polixena, an entertainer of
Strangers
R
Ralph, or Rodulph, Help Raymund, quiet, peace Randal, fair help Reynold,
sincere or pure love Richard, Rich Lord Robert, famous in Counsel Roger, strong
Counsel Roman, strong Reuben, the son of visions Reinfred, pure peace Rachel,
a sheep Rebecca, Fat and full Rosamund, Rose of the world, or Rose of Peace
S
Solomon, Peaceable Sampson, There the second time Samuel, placed of God Saul,
lent of the Lord, or as some will, the Fox Sebastian Honorable, Majestical
Sigismund, Victorious peace Sylvester, a Woodman Simon, obedient, listening
Stephen, a Crown Swithin, very high Sabbath, Rest Shem, Renowned Sarah, Lady or
Dame Sanchia, holy Susan, Lilly or Rose Sophronia, Modest temperate Sibyll,
Gods Counsel Sophia, Wisdom
T
Theobald, Gods power Theodore, Gods gift Theodosius, the fame Theodoric, Rich
in people Theophilus, a Lover of God Thomas, bottomless, deep, or Twin Timothy,
Honoring God Tristram, Sorrowful Trustan, true and trusty Tabitha, Roebuck
Theodosia, Gods gift Titus, honorable Thomasin, or Thomas Valence, or
Valentine, Puissant Vincent, Victorious Vital, Lively Vrbanus, Courteous, civil
Venus, coming to all, or mad folly Vrsula, a little Bear Vzriel, the strength
of God
W
Walter, a Pilgrim or General of an Army Walvin, a Conqueror Warren, all
Victorious William, defense to many Wolston, Comely, descent Walburg, Gracious
Winnifred, win or get peace
Y
Ybel, a Counselor
Z
Zachary, the memory of the Lord Zabdiel, the dowry of God Zephaniah, the
hiding of the Lord
Some Copies Alphabetical for Youth to write out.
ANger destroys the Fool, and he that has
A wrathful heart is slain with his own wrath.
Best are the goods, mixed with contented rest,
Not that which most do covet is the best.
Count what is more sweet and fair than a flower,
And yet it blooms and fades within an hour.
Delight and pleasure's but a golden dream,
Which waking, makes our wants the more extreme.
Each man his Plot, each one his course does bend,
Each has his project, and each one his end.
Fond man, first seek to purchase that Divine
Prize, Wisdom, and then all the world is thine.
Gasp not for honor, wish no blazing glory,
For these will perish in an ages story.
How poor a thing is man, how vain, how brittle,
How seeming great is he, how truly little!
In loving God, if I neglect my neighbor,
My Zeal has lost its proof, and I my labor.
Knowledge, when wisdom is too weak to guide her,
Is like a headstrong Horse that throws his Rider.
Lord give me Wisdom to direct my ways,
I beg not Riches, nor yet length of days.
My life's a Flower, the time it has to last,
Is mixed with Frost, and shook with every blast.
Nor House, nor Land, nor measured heaps of Wealth
Can render to a dying man his health.
Our life on Earth is like a thread of Flax,
That all may touch, and being touched, it cracks.
Pleasure is fleeting still, and makes no stay,
It lends a smile or twain, and steals away.
Quench soon the flames of Lust, and have a care
Of wanton Women, they will prove a snare.
Reprove not in their wrath incensed men,
Good Counsel comes quite out of season then.
Spare not, nor spend too much, be this thy care,
Spare but to spend, and only spend to spare.
To tell thy miseries, will no comfort breed,
Men help thee most that think thou have no need.
Use not to swear, an Oath's a dangerous dart,
Which shot, rebounds to strike the shooters heart.
Whoever makes his Fathers heart to bleed,
Shall have a Child that will revenge the deed.
Xerxes did vainly lash the Seas, but they
His foolish threatenings scorned to obey.
Youth think old men are Fools, but Old men know
By dear experience, that Youth are so.
Zeal is a fire, and useful in its kind,
But nothing is more dangerous, if blind.
Of Great Letters.
GReat Letters, or Capitals, are of use, either to begin Sentences or proper
Names, or else of some things that are remarkable. And sometimes some very
remarkable sentences are written all in Capitals, as in Zachary, HOLINESS TO
THE LORD. In Jeremiah, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. In Revelations, KING OF
KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS; and so in several other places: They do also serve to
begin Titles of Books, as THE HOLY BIBLE, or THE NEW TESTAMENT; or to Divine
Books, as THE SECOND BOOK OF KINGS.

Capital Letters begin Sentences; as, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. and,
I believe in God the Father, etc.

As also proper names of Men, as Adam, Moses, David, Jesus, Peter, Paul, John,
Matthew, Luke, Charles, James, Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Bacchus, etc.

Great Letters are also used in noting the proper names of Countries, Cities,
Towns, Arts, Sciences, Dignities, Offices, Days, Months, Winds, Places, Rivers,
as for example, Asia, Africa, Europe, America, England, Scotland, Ireland,
France, Spain, Holland, Germany, Paris, Vienna, Madrid, Amsterdam,
Constantinopole, Rome, Windsor, Dunkirk, Calis, Printer, Weaver, Astronomy,
Grammar, Music, Rhetoric, Logic, Arithmetic, King, Queen, Prince,
Parliament, Pope, Cardinal, Duke, Earl, Lord, Knight, Esquire, Bishop, Dean,
Prebend, Doctor, Parson, Vicar, Ambassador, Treasurer, Agent, General, Colonel,
Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, Monday, Tuesday, January, February, Christmas,
Easter, Whitsuntide, Lent, North, South, East, West, White Hall, Hampton,
Greenwich, Thames, Severn, Tyber, Po.

And every Book, Chapter, Section, and Paragraph, must begin with a great
Letter, as also after every period or full stop.

Also when the words of another are quoted, they ought to begin with a great
Letter, as Genesis 42.32. And the man, the Lord of the Country said unto us,
Hereby shall I know that you are true men, etc.

Also in Poetry every line is usually begun with a great Letter, though the
former line ended in the middle of a sentence, as, Fly Idleness, which yet thou
can not fly
By Dressing, Mistressing and Complement;
If those take up thy day, the Sun will cry
Against thee; for his light was only lent.
God gave the Soul brave wings, put not those feathers
Into a Bed, to sleep out all ill weathers


The Figures and Letters whereby Numbers are expressed, are these;
1 one I. 2 two II. 3 three III. 4 four IIII or IV. 5 five V. 6 six VI. 7 seven
VII. 8 eight VIII. 9 nine IX. 10 ten X. 11 eleven XI. 12 twelve XII. 13
thirteen XIII. 14 fourteen XIV. 15 fifteen XV. 16 sixteen XVI. 17 seventeen
XVII. 18 eighteen XVIII. 19 nineteen XIX 20 twenty XX 30 thirty XXX 40 forty XL
50 fifty L 60 sixty LX 70 seventy LXX 80 eighty LXXX 90 ninety XC 100 hundred C
200 two hundred CC 500 five hundred D. or D 1000 thousand M. or M 5000 five
thousand 10000 ten thousand 50000 fifty thousand 50000 100000 an hundred
thousand 100000 500000 five hundred thousand 500000 1000000 then hundred
thousand or a Million 1000000 1677 one thousand six hundred seventy seven
MDCLXXVII.
Note that the lesser number set before, takes away so much as it self is, from
the greater, but being set after, adds so much to it, as IV makes four, but VI
six; IX nine, but XI eleven.

If you would express one and a half, or two and a half, it must be thus: 1 2
Two and three qearters thus: 2

Having learned to know the figures and marks whereby numbers are expressed, the
next thing that is necessary is, how to make use of them in the way of Trade,
or business, to which end we must know all numbers are expressed by these
Characters, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0. Which last Cipher signifies nothing
of it self but serves to fill up the number of places: and therefore every
Figure has a double value, one single and certain, and the other uncertain
according as it is placed.

Now because it is not intended to give you a body of Arithmetic, I shall only
show how to cast up a small sum, as suppose you have received l s d Of one man
0 1 6 Of another 0 2 3 Of another 1 3 2 Of another 0 9 8 Of another 3 7 11 Of
another 2 4 2 If you would know what all these Sums amount to, you must do
thus: go to the outmost row of figures on the right hand, and say,

2 and 11 is 13, then make a point against 11, and carry one to the next, and
say, 1 I carried, and 8 is 9, and 2 is 11, and 3 is 14; then make another point
at 3, and carry 2, and say, 2 and 6 is 8, which 8 set down at the bottom under
the said figures, and say, 2 I carry from the pence, and 4 is 6, and 7 is 13,
and 9 is 22, put a point at 9, and carry 2, and say, 2 and 3 is 5, and 2 is 7,
and 1 is 8, which 8 put under this row; then go to the next row, and say, 1
pound I carry and 2 is 3, and 3 is 6, and 1 is 7: which put underneath, and
then the Sum appears thus: l s d 0 1 6 0 2 3 1 3 2 0 9 8 3 7 11 2 4 2 7 8 8

And so it is in laying out of Money, of which there needs no more Examples.
But I shall only give an account of English Money, Weights and Measures, in
some plain and easy Tables; and Money being a principal thing, first of that.

1 Farthing make 1 Farthing 2 Farthings make 1 Halfpenny 4 Farthings make 1
Penny 4 Pence make 1 Groat 12 Pence make 1 Shilling 2 Shillings six pence make
1 Half Crown 5 Shillings make 1 Crown 6 Shillings 8 pence make 1 Noble 3 Nobles
make 1 Twenty Shillings 13 Shillings 4 pence make 1 Mark 20 Shillings make 1
Pound


Troy Weight.
The least weight used in England is a grain of wheat gathered out of the
middle of the ear, and well dried.

24 grains make1 Penny weight 20 Penny weight make 1 Ounce 12 Ounces make 1
Pound Troy weight.


With these weights are weighed Bread, Gold, Silver, and Electuaries.

Aver-du-pois Weights.
4 Quarters of a dram make 1 Dram 16 Drams make 1 Ounce 16 Ounces make 1 Pound
28 Pounds make 1 Quarter of a 100 4 Quarters make 1 Hundred weight or 112 Pound
20 Hundred make 1 Tun


By this weight is weighed all Grocery wares, Butter, Cheese, Flesh, Wax, Lead,
Pitch, Rosin, Tallow, Hemp, Iron, Copper, Tin, and other such things.

Apothecaries Weights.
The weights, used by Apothecaries are, Grains, Scruples, Drams and ounces, of
which 20 grains make make 1 Scruple Thus marked 3 Scruples make 1 Dram Thus
marked 8 Drams make 1 Ounce Thus marked 12 Ounces make 1 Pound Thus marked lb


Of Measures
And first of Liquid Measures by which is sold Beer, Ale, and other Liquors,
whereof the least common Measure is a Pint, which is a pound Troy weight.

2 Pints make 1 Quart 2 Quarts make 1 Pottle 2 Pottles make 1 Gallon 8 Gallons
make 1 Firkin of ale, soap, or, herrings 9 Gallons make 1 Firkin of Beer 10
Gallons and an half make 1 Firkin of Salmon or Eels 2 Firkins make 1 Kilderkin
2 Kilderkins make 1 Barrel 42 Gallons make 1 Tierce of Wine 63 Gallons make 1
Hogshead 2 Hogsheads make 1 Pipe or But 2 Pipes or Buts make 1 Tun of Wine


Of Dry Measure.
Wheat, Barley, Oats, Salt, Coals, Sand and other dry goods are measured by dry
measures, of which a Pint is usually the least.

2 Pints make 1 Quatt 2 Quarts make 1 Pottle 2 Potles make 1 Gallon 2 Gallons
make 1 peck 4 Pecks make 1 Bushel Land-measure 5 Pecks make 1 Bush.
water-measure 8 Bushels make 1 Quarter 4 Quarters make 1 Chaldron 5 Quarters
make 1 Wey


Of Long Measures.
Cloth, Tapestry, Board, Glass, Pavement, Land, etc. are Measured by long
measure, of which a Barley corn is the least.

3 Barley Corns make 1 Inch 12 Inches make 1 Foot 3 Foot make 1 Yard 3 Foot 9
Inches make 1 Ell 6 Foot make 1 Fathom 5 Yards and an half, or 16 make 1
Furlong or Acre in foot and an half make 1 Pole or Perch length 40 Poles or
Perches make 1 English mile 8 Furlongs make 1 Rod or a quarter of 40 Square
poles or perches make an Acre 4 Roods make 1 Acre


Of Time.
Time consists of Years, Months, Weeks, Days, Hours, and Minutes, which last is
the least part of Time, and therefore, 60 Minutes make 1 Hour 24 Hours make 1
Day natural 7 Days make 1 Week 4 Weeks make 1 Month of 28 days 13 Months 1 day
and 6 hours make 1 Year


The year is commonly divided into 12 unequal Calender months, whose names and
the number of days they contain follow.

January 31 days February 28 days March 31 days April 30 days May 31 days June
30 days July 31 days August 31 days September 30 days October 31 days November
30 days December 31 days


Which are briefly summed up in these four Verses.

Thirty days has September,
April, June and November,
February has Twenty eight alone,
All the rest have Thirty one.
So that the year contains 365 days, and six hours, but the six hours are not
reckoned, but only every fourth year, and then a day is added to February,
which then contains 29 days, and that year is called Leap-year, and contains
366 days.

The Four Quarter days in the year are March 25. called Lady Day, June 24.
called Midsummer-day, September 29. called Michaelmas-day, December 25. called
Christmas.

The Countrymen do also sometimes divide the year into four other Quarters,
that is Feb. 2. called Candlemas-day, May 1. called May Day, August 1. called
Lammas, Nov. 1. called All-Saints-day.

Apothecaries use Marks or Figures to express words, weight, or measure, as
thus, [Recipe] or take, ana, or a like quantity; p [ a pugil, or] half a
handful; m. [manipulus] a handful; gr. a grain, a scruple, a dram, an ounce, b
[semissis] half a pound, lb [libra] a pound, q. s. [quantum satis] a sufficient
quantity, q. l. [quantum libet] as much as you please.

Astronomers and Astrologers express the seven Planets and Signs by these Marks
or Characters. The Planets are these, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus,
Mercurius, Luna. The 12 Signs are these, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces: The Sextil,
Quadral Trine, Opposition, Conjunction.

Musicians distinguish their Notes by these Marks, * Semibref * Minim. *
Crotchet.

In our English Writing there are also many abbreviations that we make use of,
which we borrow from the Latin, as e. g. (exempli gratia) for example; and over
our Accounts we commonly write l. s. d. q.

2. 4. 6. 2.

Which is as much as (libri, solidi, denarii, quadrantes) pounds, shillings,
pence, farthings; so that the sum is two pounds, four shillings, six pence, two
farthings, or halfpenny; so also we write viz. (videlicet) to wit, or that is
to say, p. (pagina) a page,. (sectio) section; v. (vide) see; i. e. (id est)
that is, sc. (scilicet) that is to say, M. S. Manuscript, or a Written Book or
Copy; R. S. S. (Regis Societatis Socius) Fellow of the Royal Society; N. B.
(nota been) note well, or mark well; M. A. (Magister Artium) Master of Arts; B.
D. (Baccalaurius Divinitatis) Bachelor of Divinity; L. D. (Legis Doctor)
Doctor of the Civil Law; D. D. or SS. Th. D. (Sacrosanctae Theologiae Doctor)
Doctor of Divinity; Qu. (Question) Question; Ob. (Objectio) Objection; Sol.
(Solutio) Solution or Answer.

There are also other Contractions of English words which we often meet with,
as Admrs Administrators, Agt against, Bp. Bishop, Comrs Commissioners, Dr
Doctor, Esquire; Esquire, Hbl Honorable, Hd Honored, Ld Lord, Lps Lordships, Lr
Letter, Md Memorandum, Mr Master, Mrs Mistress, Mtie Majesty, bd obedient, pd
paid, qr quarter, Sr Sir, St Saint, in then, yt that, ye the, wn when, wp
worship, wll worshipful, yr your, 7ber September, 8ber October, 9ber November,
10ber December. Jan. January, Feb. February, Ap. April, Aug. August. Q.
Question, A. Answer, R. Reason, U. Use, Dct. Doctrine, Xpian Christian, and and,
etc. and so forth, Coll. Colonel, Capt. Captain, Lieut. Lieutenant: we also
oftentimes contract two words into one, as I Will for I will, I Am for I am,
the other the other, let us for let us, and many other.

We also contract the names of places, as Cant. Canterbury, Oxon Oxford, Exon
Exeter, Bucks Buckinghamshire, Salop Shropshire, C. C. C. Corpus Christi
College, Q. C. Queens College, D. C. Dean of Christ-Church: As also in the
names of Books, as Mat. Matthew, Cor. Corinthians, Col. Colossians, Romans
Romans, Rev. Revelations, Genesis Genesis, Chro. Chronicles, Eccles. Ecclesiastes,
Ecclus Ecclesiasticus.

The names of Men and Women, C. R. Charles Rex, I. D. James Duke of York, K.
Katharina Regina: As we do also contract into one or two Syllables at the most,
very many of our common Christian names, as Alexander, Sany Abraham, Abram
Anthony, Tony Augustine, Austin Ann, Nan or Nancy Bartholemew, Bat Benjamin, Ben
Clement, Clem Christopher, Kit Catherine, Kate Daniel, Dan Dorothy* Doll
Deborah, Deb Elenor, Nell Edward, Ned Elizabeth, Betty Edmund, Mun Francis,
Frank Gregory, Greg Henry, Harry, Hal Humphry, Numph Joseph, Jo Joshua, Jos
Jane, Jinny James, Jemmy Joan, Jug Leonard, Len Martha Patt Matthew Matt Mary,
Moll Margaret, Peg Margery, Madg Nicholas, Nick Nathaniel, Not Oliver, Nol
Priscilla, Pris Philip, Phil Robert, Robin Richard, Dick Rebeccah, Beck Roger,
Hodge Samuel, Sam Simon, Sym Sasanna, Sue Solomon, Sol Thomas, Tom Theophilus,
The Timothy, Tim Valentine, Val William, Will Walter, Wat


Forms of Bills of Exchange, Receipts, etc.
The first Bill Outland
Cadiz the 25th of July 1679.
200 l. Sterling.

AT three months after date of this my first Bill of Exchange, my second or
third not being paid, pray pay unto Mr. Thomas Woodward, or order the sum of
two Hundred pounds Sterling Value received of Mr. Edward Symmons at four
Shillings three pence per piece of eight, at time pray make good payment,
allowing it to the Account of (as per advice)

Your Loving Friend, Edward Long.
200 l. Sterling to Mr. Samuel Stephens Merchant.




Cadiz the 25th. of July, 1679.
200 l. Sterling.

AT three months after date of this my second Bill of Exchange my first or
third not being paid, pray pay unto Mr. Thomas Woodward, or Order the sum of
Two hundred Pounds Sterling value received of Mr. Edward Simons at four
shillings three pence per piece of eight: at time pray make good payment,
allowing it to the Account of (as per advice)

Your loving Friend, EDWARD LONG.
205 l. Sterling to Mr. Samuel Stephens Merchant in London.




Cadiz the 25th of July, 1679.
200 l. Sterling.

AT three months after date of this my third Bill of Exchange, my first and
second not being paid, pray pay unto Mr. Thomas Woodward, or order the Sum of
Two hundred pounds Sterling value Received of Mr. Edward Symons at four
shillings three pence per piece of Eight, at time pray make good payment,
allowing it to the Account of (as per advice)

Your loving Friend, EDWARD LONG.
200 l. Sterling to Mr. Samuel Stephens Merchant in London.




A Receipt for Rent.
REceived Aug. 3. 1679. of Richard Tomkins the Sum of Seven pounds ten
Shillings in full for a Quarters Rent for his House, due at Midsummer last
past, I say received 7 l.

per me Thomas Willing.

A Receipt in full.
REceived Aug. 4. 1679. of Mr. John Swift six pounds four shillings in Money
and goods, which is in full of all Acts whatsoever from the said John Swift to
this day, I say, received in full,

per me George Thorp.

Some brief Common Sentences in Latin and English for the use of young Scholars.
1
SI Christum been scis, satis est si caetera nescis;
Si Christum nescis, nihil est si caetera discis.
If you know Christ, you need know little more;
If not, all is lost that you have learnt before.
2.
Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen:
Tuta frequensque licet sit, via crimen habet.
A safe and common way it is by friendship to deceive:
As safe and common as it is, it is knavery by your leave.
3
Dum fueris foelix, multos numerabis amicos;
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.
When thou art rich, thou many friends shall find,
If riches fail, friends soon will prove unkind.
4
Spes bona dat vires, animum quoque spes bona servat:
Vivere spe vidi, qui moriturus erat.
Hope gives strength. Hope does the Soul revive:
I Have seen it make a dying man alive.
5
Scilicet uxorem cum dote, fidemque and amicos,
Et genus and formam Regina Pecunia donat.
This Mighty Monarch Money, to us sends,
Fair Wives, Great Portions, Reputation, Friends,
This makes us Noble, though our birth be base,
And gives our Persons comeliness and grace.
6
Rebus in angustis facile est contemnere Vitam.
Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
In great distress it is easy life to scorn:
He Is Valiant that dares live, although forlorn.
7
Miramur periisse homines, monumenta fatiscunt;
Mors etiam saxis nominibusque venit.
It is no wonder that men turn to Clay,
When Rocks, and Stones, and Monuments decay.
The Scholars Prayer for Morning.
MOst holy and eternal Lord, I thy most poor and unworthy Creature, do give
thee most humble and hearty thanks, that it has pleased thy great goodness to
preserve me this Night past, as well from all my enemies, as from all other
casualties and dangers that poor mortal creatures are subject to, and that thou
have given me sweet and pleasant sleep, that I find my body refreshed and
comforted for performing the duties of this day. It is thou that have said, if
any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God that gives to all men liberally,
and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given unto him. I beseech thee, breath
into my soul the spirit of understanding, that in my Childhood I may learn,
and as I grow further in years, I may practice the study of those things only
that are agreeable to thy Laws: grant that I may always carefully seek for the
Pearls of true knowledge; pour into me thy holy Spirit, that all my travel and
pains being blessed in study by thee, I may be thankful to thee. O loving Father,
be thou my Schoolmaster to instruct me, and when I have attained to some
measure of gifts, let me not be proud in mine own conceit, but carry my self
humbly, knowing I have nothing but what I have received. Bless my dear Parents,
my Kindred and Friends, and grant that I may live so in this world to thy
honor, that I may be a comfort to them, and may at last inherit the Kingdom
prepared for all those that love thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
GRacious Lord God, and heavenly Father, I cannot cease, but I must cry unto
thee for mercy, because my sins cry out against me for Justice: how shall I
address my self to thee, but with the Publican I must stand and admire thy
goodness toward me, in that thou have kept me this day past from being
consumed, or brought to naught: for Lord, what is man, or the Son of man thou
regardest him! for the more days pass over my head, the more sins and
iniquities I heap up against thee. O blessed Father, let thy Sons Blood wash me
and cleanse me from all my impurities, and from all the stains of sin that are
upon me, own me as thy Child, and shadow me with thy wings, that I may safely
take my rest in thy protection this night, that I may behold the next day with
comfort, and may serve in it, and endeavor to grow up more and more in
learning and true knowledge. Bless my Parents, Kindred, Friends and Relations;
and grant that when they and I have past our Pilgrimage here, we may all attain
to thy heavenly Kingdom: and all I beg in the name of Jesus Christ, in whose
most holy words I further pray, Our Father, etc.

Short Graces, or Thanksgiving to be used before and after Meat by Children or
Others.
Before meat.
SAnctify O Lord unto us the use of these thy creatures of which by our sins we
have made our selves unworthy, and grant that the end of our eating and
drinking may be to be better enabled to serve thee in our several places,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, Amen.

After Meat.
MOst gracious God, as thou have now filled our bodies wit^ thy good creatures,
so be pleased, we pray thee, to feed our Souls, and to endue us with all
Spiritual Blessing in Heavenly Things, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Saviou^ Amen.

Before Meat.
O Lord we beseech thee lift up our hearts to look unto the^ for a Blessing
upon our meats, that we may comfortably use thy creatures as pledges of thy
favor, and may serve thee in thy enjoyment of all thy mercies, through Jesus
Christ, Amen.

After Meat.
ALmighty Lord God, blessed be thy holy name, that thou have so liberally fed
us at this time with thy good creatures, we beseech thee to direct us
henceforth with thy grace, that after this life we may be partakers of thy
heavenly Table through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Save thy, etc.

Gloria in coelis altissimis Deo, and in terra pax, in homines benevolentia
FINIS.

