THE Odious, Despicable, and Dreadful condition of a Drunkard; drawn to the
Life: to deter others, and cause them to decline the ways of Death. OR A
hopeful way to cure Drunkenness, (the root of all evil, and rot of all good)
in such as are not (by long custom) past cure. Composed, and Published for
their good; who (not for want of Ignorance) pride themselves in drunken
good-fellowship. Which probably may open their eyes, as the tasting of Honey did
Jonathans; and cause them to say as the Governor to the Bridegroom, John
2.10. The good wine was kept back until now. By Junius Florilegus.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, and are to be sold by Nicholas Bourne at the
South entrance of the Royal Exchange, 1649.

What some Reverend Divines deem of the DRUNKARDS CHARACTER, out of which
Quiver this Arrow is drawn.
HAving advisedly read over and perused a Treatise, bearing the name of R.
Junius, which for some considerations came formerly abroad, veiled under the
Title of The Drunkards Character, and Complete Armor against evil society; we
find it to be for generality of discourse; as a large Map of most men's
thoughts, words, and actions. For, besides that foul sin of Drunkenness, and
many other vices, which commonly accompany the same, very pithily, orderly, and
elegantly, with much both sinew ous strength of Argument and variety of
graceful and delightful illustrations therein discovered, and dealt with; we
have further observed in it, such other subject matter, concerning the
knowledge, belief, and life, of common Protestants, what too frequently it is,
and what in truth it ought to be, (that it may answer to their profession, and
the Title that they bear) wherein also all manner of Christian Graces are
illustrate, and set out by the foulness, and deformity of their opposite
vices; that for the variety of useful matter therein handled, together with
the perspicuous, pleasant, and yet powerful manner of expression; we conceive
that it may very much conduce, both as a Glass for persons generally, to see
the face of their own heart in; and as a Trumpet alowd sounding, to summon
sinners to repentance: besides that unto young Scholars also it may be not
unusefull, as an help to furnish them with matter concerning those common heads
of Virtue and Vice, and most of the usual Subjects as well of Divinity as
Morality: But likewise touching the manifold sleights and advantages of Satan
and wicked men, in tempting to sin, and drawing to perdition. In regard
whereof we deem it very worthy the reprinting with a fuller and further
promising Title.

Thomas Gataker. John Downame. George Walker. Charles Offspring. Samuel Bolton.
Richard Vines. James Cranford. John Crodacott.


To the Reader.
EXperience teaches that no one thing (be it the Violet) will please every one.
That nothing is more easy, then to find a color of exceptions. That men's
censures are as various as their palats; that some are as deeply in love with
vice, as others are with virtue. That crossed wickedness proves desperate; and
in stead of yielding, seeks for revenge of its own sins, upon others
uprightness.

The Prophet also tells me my wages before hand, Come let us smite him with the
Tongue, Jer. 18.18. And Solomon more expressly, He that reproves a scorner,
purchases to himself shame, and he that rebukes the wicked, gets
himself a blot, Prove. 9.7. Shall I then make my self the subject of every
opinion wise and weak? Yes, I had rather hazard the censure of some, then
hinder the good of others. Yea admit, in stead of their tongues, they should
use their swords, (the case of John Baptist for reproving of Herod) Gods glory
we are bound to redeem, with our own lives.

Again, if I do ill, no plea can warrant me; if well, I cannot be discouraged
with any censures. Nevertheless, that I may satisfy all honest minds, (lest
they also should wrest my words beyond the level of my thoughts) that I may
free my Reader and my self from mistaking, and being mistaken, (because it is
not enough to find our own hearts clear, except also we clear our names, and
the consciences of others) I will remove some rubs, level the ground, and pave
a way to our ensuing matter.

What will be alleged against this discourse, my self (though I am no
Antevorta) foresees; yea I could raise to their hand, all their objections, and
as easily answer them. But two only deserve answering, the rest are not worth
the repeating.

First, some will ask why in this Treatise of all the rest, my expressions are
so light, and my comparisons so homely? And to these my answer is; that I may
kill Goliath with his own Sword; dispute with Drunkards in their own Dialect:
For either they understand no other language; or if so, they find no more
relish or sweetness in solid Divinity, then in the white of an Egg: because
their palats are brought out of taste by the world, and lusts of the flesh.

Besides, this subject is less serious then any of the rest; And it is not
possible with grave and modest words, to express, and paint out their light,
vain, and lascivious language and behavior.

Secondly, if any that are addicted to this vice, (for whose gain I am content
to lose) shall ask why I am so bitter? I would desire them (though in Christ,
yea in common equity I might enjoine them) to consider these six ensuing
circumstances; and then they will pardon my just vehemence, and only blame the
foulness of this sin.

First, that the medicine is but fitted to the disease, the wedge but
proportioned to the timber, which could not be avoided; for the harder, and
more knotty our hearts are, the harder and stronger must be the blows and
wedges that must rive them. And nothing but a Diamond will cut a Diamond.

Secondly, without a discovery of our disease, there can be no recovery of our
health. The sight of our filthiness, is the first step toward cleanness. And
how many may bless the time, that ever they were plainly dealt withal?
witness Antiochus, and Antoninus the Emperor, S. Paul Acts 9.3, to 8. and
those murderers of the Lord of life, Acts 2.36, to 42.

Thirdly, they should consider, that I fight not against themselves, but
against their sins; not with them, but against their enemies for them;
knowing that unless those dye, they cannot live.

Fourthly, it would also be considered, that the Physician is not to be blamed
for the pain of his Patient; but the disease: not the Surgeon, but the
wound: which he endeavors by all means to cure. And wounds more dangerous,
require more dolorous plasters: Yea if Physic be not strong enough to purge
out the disease, it increases it. Which makes a good Physician give sharp
medicines and bitter potions, that he may make short diseases, and procure
sound health. And for the most part, those things that are least pleasing, are
most wholesome.

Fifthly, let them consider, that all is done in love, and for their good. And
even those pills which are most bitter, will down, when, they are wrapped up in
love, and for our healths. Yea we will suffer incisions, even the opening of
our veins, and the letting out of our blood, when we know it is done in love,
and to save our lives.

Yea, neither the Physician nor Surgeon heales us without pain; and yet we
both reward and thank them. Which is our very case; for even those invectives
that are most keen, and sharp, do but resemble Jonathans Arrows, which were
not shot to hurt David, but to give him warning, and to occasion his escape
from Saul's fury. Whereas their scoffs and slanders against us, that will not
run with them to the same excess of riot; may fitly be compared to Sanls
spear, which was darted on purpose not to hurt only, but to murder and to
destroy.

Yea let them be read without prejudice, and (by Gods blessing) they shall be
unto them, as David's harp was to Saul, which frighted away the evil spirit
from him, 1 Samuel 16.23. Or as the Cocks crowing to Peter, which occasioned his
repentance, Mat. 26.74, 75. Or as those Messengers to Lot, that came to fetch
him out of Sodom, that he might not feel the fire and brimstone which
followed. Genesis 19. Yea as the Angel was 10 Peter, that opened the Iron gates,
loosed his bands, brought him out of prison, and delivered him from the
thraldom of his enemies. Acts 12. These things have I said, that they may be
saved.

Sixthly, let them consider, that if these judgments be so dreadful to hear:
how terrible will they be to feel? The Law ( Waspe-like) stings shrewdly, but
Satan that Hornet will sting worse a great deal: but if men will be warned by
the former, (as who would not rather be converted then confounded? or who had
not rather a Book or Sermon should awaken him, then fire and brimstone?) they
may prevent the latter.

These things premised, (though there needs neither reasons to be given, nor
excuse, or apology to be made, where the Word is our warrant, and the glory of
God our aim,) most humbly beseeching God, who only has the key of the heart,
and can open the eyes of these poor souls, to see the miserable slavery and
danger they are in: to bless this weak means prescribed for their recovery,
and others warning. I leave its success to Him, its use to the world; and
refer my self to the honest and intelligent Readers judgment: as for
others, let them smite me being absent I care not; for their dispraise is a
man's honor, their praise his dishonor.

I. F.

The Odious, Despicable, and Dreadful Condition of a Drunkard, drawn to the
LIFE: to deter others, and cause them to decline the ways of DEATH.
1.

A Drunkard (and I take him for such, that drinks more for lust, or pride, or
covetousness, or fear, or good fellowship, or to drive away time, or to still
conscience, then for thirst;) being one of those Creatures, which God never
made in the Creation: (like that spoken of Genesis 36.24.) is half a Man, half a
Beast; or one that was borne a Man, lives a Beast; or one that has a Bestiall
heart in a Case of humane flesh. For through custom of sin, and a just
judgment of God upon it, he has his heart changed from man's nature, and a
beasts heart given him in the stead; as it fared with Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.16.

Whereas other sins deprive a man of Gods Image, this deprives him of man's;
and for the present, robs him of himself; leaving him neither the use of
reason, nor speech, without which he is no better then a Beast. Nor does he so
much surpass a Beast in his shape, as he out-strips a Beast in beastliness,
as Hermes well observes. Yea reckon up all the brutish conditions, observeable
in other Beasts; and you shall find every of them to meet in a Drunkard, as
Rivers in the Sea. As produce the very worst qualities, in the very worst o^
Beasts, and this Beast will match them all, without being matched by any; as for
instance.

In one beastly quality, he is like the Jerffe, a Beast in the North parts of
Swetia, whose property (as Gesner out of Olaus Magnus relates) is, when he has
killed his prey, or found some carcass, to fall a devouring the same, and
never leave feeding, until his belly be puffed up, and strouteth like a
Bag-pipe, and then not being able to hold any more, he goes between two
narrow Trees, and straineth out backward what he has eaten; and so being made
empty, returns again to the Carcass and fills himself as before, and
then straineth it out the second time; and so continues filling and emptying
himself, until he has devoured all; which being consumed he hunteth after
more; and this is the course of his whole life. In another particular, he is
like the Asses of Thuscia: who when they have fed upon Hemlocks, sleep so
soundly, that they seem to be dead, in so much that the Country men many
times, more then flea off half their skins, before they will awake. And so of
the rest, which I can but name; for in heart he is a Swine; in head a Cephalus;
in tongue an Aspe; in belly a Lump; in appetite a Leech; in sloth an Ignavus;
a Goat for lust; a Siren for flattery; a Hiena for subtilty; a Panther for
cruelty; in envying a Basiliske; in antipathy to all good, a Lexus; in
hindering others from good, a Remora; in life a Salamander; in conscience an
Ostrich, etc.

And what says Chrysostom to such an one? shall I think thee a Man, when thou
have all the qualities of a Beast? swillest like a Swine? kickest like an Ass?
neighest after women like a Horse? ragest in lust like a Bull? ravenest like a
Bear? stingest like a Scorpion? rakest like a Wolf? art as fierce as a Tiger?
as subtle as a Fox? as impudent, and shameless as a Dog? no, I see nothing of
Man in thee, save thy shape: and that affrights me the more, when I see a Beast
in the likeness of a Man.

2. And yet poor souls, they like their condition so well, that they would
not change upon any terms; for as those Beasts spoken of by Plutarch,
renounced the benefit of Circes grant, and desired Ulysses that he would not
press them with the reaccepting of reason; so call Drunkards from their
brutish sensuality, they will reject the offer: what, make them men? no, they
thank you as much as if you did, they had rather be beasts still. As the have
no reason, so they will hear none. Yea, they are more brutish then those
beasts: for whereas Christ by us would reconcile them to God; as Joab did
Absalom to David, by the woman of Tekoah: they cry we come to torment them.
Their case being like his in the Gospel, that called himself Legion: who
having been possessed with Devils a long time, was at length very loath to part
with his guests. Yea he thought himself tormented, when Christ came to cast
out them, and save him. Mark 1.24. Luke 8.28. And the reason is, Drunkenness
bestiates the heart, and spoils the brain, overthrowes the faculties and
organs of repentance, and resolution; turns reason into exile, and poisoneth
the very soul of a man: As how does it damme up the head and spirits with mud?
how does it infatuate the understanding? blind the judgment, pervert the
will, and corrupt all the affections? how does it surprise the thoughts, entrap
the desires, and bring all the powers and faculties of the soul out of order?
as experience proves and the Word also; which informs us, that the excess of
wine takes away the heart; makes men mad, feelish, and out^agious; makes them
forget God and his Laws. Prove. 20.1. and 31.3, 4, 5. Yea that it makes men
utterly to fall away from God, until they are incapable of returning, Prove.
23.35. Esaias 5.11, 12. and 56.12. For by this sin the heart is hardened, the
spirit quenched, and the body of sin with all its lusts so strengthened, that
it keeps them in final impenitency, Esaias 22.12, 13, 14. and 28.7, 8. Romans
13.13, 14. Gal. 5.21. 1 Cor. 6.10. Ephesians. 5.18. 1 Pet. 2.11. Yea the soul by it,
is made like a City broken down, and without walls, Prove. 25.28. By all which
it appears, that these unclean beasts which wallow in the mire of sensuality;
these brutish Drunkards; which transform themselves through excess; are even
those swing whom the Legion carries headlong to the Sea, or pit of Perdition,
Mat. 8.32. for otherwise the worst of Beasts will be found in a far better
condition.

3. And indeed to give beasts their due, it is a wrong to Beasts to call
drunkenness their sin; for generally they are sober, keep within the bounds
of moderation, and know when they have drunk enough. Beasts also keep the
prerogative of their Creation, whereas Drunkards lose (yea shame) theirs. Nor
do Beasts like Drunkards, prove cruel to themselves etc. so that in many
particulars a beast is a man, to such men. But see this proved also.

Such is the power of sin, that it made God become Man, Angels become D^vils,
and Men become Beasts. But this sin, this vile, and odious sin of
drunkenness, has a more superlative power; for wine bereaves the Drunkard,
not only of reason and speech, (which two things distinguish Beast and Man;)
but likewise of sense and motion, wherein beasts excel stocks and stones. For
it so blockifies them for the present, that they may fitly be compared to the
Idols of the Heathen; which have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, tongues
and speak not, noses and smell not, (no not their own vomit) hands and
handle not, feet and walk not, being as dead men that can neither sit, stand,
nor go.

4. Or if they will (notwithstanding all this) be taken for men; yea admit as
men, they have some advantage above beasts, or stocks: it is a miserable
advantage, that only makes them apt to evil, yea the worst of evils; and
capable of an Hell: which is all the advantage they have; for to what men may
they be likened? they are but like that lunaticke man mentioned Mat. 17.15, 16.
who being sore vexed with an evil spirit, fell oft-times into the fire, and
oft-times into the water: whom all the Disciples could nor cure, until the
Master himself came. Or like that man spoken of Mark 5.2, to 6. who being
possessed with the Devil, lived amongst the graves, and cut himself with stones:
and whom no man could tame. For they love none but base company, base places,
and base courses. And what does their frequent and horrible oaths but cut them
deeper, then those stones did him? Nor is Moses or Aaron, Caesar or Paul,
Minister of the Word, or Minister of the Sword, able to restrain or tame them.

You may think it an hard saying, as the Disciples did that of our Savior
John 6.53, to 61. But let me tell you from Gods Word, that the ^^^porall
possession of evil spirits, is not so rare; as the spiritual is rife. For no
natural man is free: as for instance, one has the spirit of error, 1 Timothy
4.1. another the spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1.7. another the spirit of
fornication, Hos. 4.12. another the spirit of falsehood, Mat. 24.11. another the
spirit of blasphemy, Rev. 2.9. and 13.1, 5, 6. another the spirit of slumber,
Romans 11.8. another the spirit of giddiness, Esaias 29.9, to 15. another the
spirit of pride; all have the spirit of the world, 1 Cor. 2.12. But Drunkards
for the most part are possessed with more evil spirits, or Devils, then Mary
Magdalen was, for every reigning sin (whereof each Drunkard has more then a
good many) is a Devil; as Augustine, Basil, and Gregory, affirm.

Besides, other Scriptures make plain that they are as truly, though
spiritually, carried by evil spirits into the deeps of their known
wickedness; and consequently are posting Hel-wards; as ever the Gadarean Hogs
were carried by them down the precipice into the Sea. For they are the Devils
captives, at his command, and ready to do his will, as is evident by 2 Timothy
2.26. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Cor. 4.4. Yea he is their Father, Genesis 3.15. John 8.44.
Their King, John 12.31. and 14.30. And their God, 2 Cor. 4.4. Even ruling over,
and working in them his pleasure, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. 2 Timothy 2.26. For he enters into
them, and puts it into their hearts what he will have them to do; as he did
formerly into Judas, John 13.2. Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5.3. and David, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Yea he opens their mouths and speaks in, and by them as he did by
the Serpent, Genesis 3.1, to 6. Ahabs 400 Prophets, 1 Kings 22.22. and Peter, Mat.
16.22, 23. stretches forth their hands, and acts by them, as he did by Herod,
Acts. 12.1, 2, etc. and still does by Magistrates, when they cast the servants
of God into prison, Revel. 2.10. So that as Paul, being guided by the good
spirit of God, could say, I live not, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. So may
Drunkards say, we live not, but the Devil lives in us, 2 Cor. 4.4. John 14.30.
Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26.

Not that the mind of man is capable of a violation, either from Satan, or any
else: nor can the wickedst man tax any for his yielding but himself. Only this
is the difference; Drunkards are driven as free Horses; that need only the
shaking of the hand to the Tavern, to the Siues, to this or that evil
company, or wicked action. Yea, they are so at the Devils beck, that he needs
no more but hold up his finger, (suggest the thought, or say the word) and it is
done: As if he appoint them to lie, they will lie: if he command them to
deceive, they will deceive: if he bid them slander, they will slander, and that
as falsely as he: if he persuade them to revenge, to persecute, etc. they will do
it as spitefully and fully as he could do them himself. And so of every other
sin. If he but say to them, let there be an oath, a quarrel, or the like;
instantly they obey him. Yea, they are so greedy of sin, that were there no
Devil to do his office, they would beget destruction on themselves. If Satan
should not feed them with temptations, they would tempt him for them, and
snatch their own bane.

5. It Is true, the Drunkard may seem to be in a better condition: as first he
may have a name to live, but indeed he is dead, as S. John speaks. Secondly,
he may have the appearance of a man, but indeed he is a beast, as Jeremiah
speaks. Thirdly, he may be thought a sound man; but indeed he is demonaicall;
obsessed, or rather possessed with a Devil, (yea many Devils) and more
miserable then such an one, because it is a Devil of his own choosing, as
Basil speaks. Yea they may most fitly be compared to the Devil himself;
whom they most of all resemble,

1 In Surpassing others in sin, 2 In Tempting others to sin, 3 In Drawing
others to perdition.
So that it were well for them, if their condition were not worse then the
Beasts that perish; for their misery is determined with their lives. Or those
dead images, for they can do neither good nor ill; but Drunkards are dead to
all goodness whatsoever; but alive, yea, very active to all wickedness. Or
such as are really, and corporeally possessed: for Satan carries not such but
against their wills: as he did that man in the Gospel into the fire and water,
so using violence to their bodies; which makes them Satan's own sins, and not
theirs: whereas these are carried willingly, and so become Agents in what they
do; and as guilty of the sins they commit, as the Tempter himself, when he
makes them abuse their eyes to wantonness, their mouths to filthiness, and
makes their feet swift to shed blood. So that though their bodies are usually
free from that possessive power, yet Satan has a far greater power in the
voluntary motions of their bodies and souls. So that a Drunkard is the the
most despicable piece of all humanity; and not worthy to be reckoned amongst
either men, or beasts, or any other terrestrial creatures. Indeed in their
want of reason, they are but transformed into beasts; and in their want of
sense, and motion, but into stocks: but in their abuse of reason, in the
delight they take in sin, and in their mischievous tempting others to sin,
and drawing others to perdition, they are transformed into Devils. As will
appear when I have cut up and anatomized this Chimera, (for hitherto I have
only presented him whole and entire) wherein that I may be brief, let a few
of his ill qualities in stead of many, serve to be rehearsed, or spoken of; and
that sparingly: and by them you may guess at the residue; for as huge as the
Sea is, we may taste the saltness thereof in a drop. Only that you may find
it a short cut, a sure and easy way to make you loath drunkenness and love
sobriety: seriously consider as you go along, what a woeful slavery it is, to
be possessed with a drunken Devil.

6. One base quality denoting the Drunkards slavish condition, and which first
offers it self, is this; Every hour seems a day, and every day a month to
him, which is not spent in a Tap-house; and therefore where ever his house is,
his dwelling is at the Alehouse, except all his money be spent or he in bed.
Yea they seem to have nailed their ears to a Tavern, or Alehouse, Esaias 5.11.
and to have agreed with Satan, Master it is good being here, let us build, etc.
For as they rise up early to follow Drunkenness, Esaias 5.11. so their first
flight is from their beds to the Tap-house, or Tavern: those common quagmires
of all filthiness, where too many drawing their Patrimonies through their
throats, exhaust and lavish out their substance; and lay plots and devises how
to get more. For hence they fall either to open courses of violence, or secret
mischief; till at last the Jaile prepares them for the Jibbet; for lightly
they sing through a red Lettis, before they cry through a Grate.

But this is the work of many months; do but follow them step by step, and you
shall observe, that so soon as they are upon the Ale-bench, up comes every
man's pot uncalled for, upon pain of losing their custom for a month after:
which being doft are filled again; for it is the waiters office to see that
the pots be either always full or empty.

7. Now if you will know the reason, why every morning their first sacrifice is
offered to Bacchus; it is this; First, they are sick in the morning, until
they have qualified the old heat with a new; and so they cure sin with sin;
which yet is no other, then to heal an Ulcer by deading the flesh: which
indeed does not make a man whole, but insensible of pain.

Secondly, by a long and desperate custom, they have turned delight, and
infirmity, into necessity; so that without wine they cannot live: as having by
a kind of frequency, made other men's physic their natural food; whereby they
bring upon themselves such an unsatiable thirst; that they will as willingly
leave to live, as leave their excessive drinking. For let them be convinced by
their Physician, that it will even kill them if they continue it, their answer
shall be, as good be buried, as so much debarred of their appetites. Neither is
it possible, the appetites of these Leeches should ever be satisfied.

Or in case thirst does not provoke them, they will drink before they a^e dry,
drink until they become dry, so that thirst overtakes drunkenness, as fools
run into the River to avoid a shower of rain. Yea while they are in the
drinking School, they are bound by their saw of good fellowship, (and would be
so, were there no such law) to be pouring in at their mouths, or whiffing out
at their noses; one serving as a shooing-horne to the other: for Tobacco being
hot and dry, must have a qualifier of cold and moist from the pot; and that
again being cold and moist, must have a qualifier of hot and dry, from the
pipe: which makes them like Rats baned Rats, drink and vent, vent and drink;
Sellingers round and the same again. Besides they drink one liquor to draw on
another; not to quench, but to increase thirst; not to qualify, but to
inkindle heat. In which their swinish swilling, they resemble so many frogs in
a puddle, or water snakes in a pond: for their whole exercise, yea religion, is
to drink; they even drown themselves on the dry land. As O the deluges of
wine, and strong drink, that one true Drunkard devoures, and causes to be
devoured! who never drinks but double, for he must be pledged. Yea, if there
be ten in company, every one must drink as much as he; and he will drink
until his eyes stare like two blazing Stars, so that they drink more spirits
in a night, then their flesh and brains be worth.

But in the mean time; how many thousands which are hard driven with poverty,
or the exigents of war, might be relieved, with that which these men spend
like beasts? while that is thrown out of one Swines nose, and mouth, and guts,
which would refresh a whole family? And does not the very echo of this sin,
this excessive devouring the good creatures of God, together with the tears of
the poor; daily cry in his ears for vengeance on all that use it? if not for
a famine upon the whole land for their sakes, (who turn the Sanctuary of life,
into the shambles of death,) and because they are suffered? Yes undoubtedly.
Yea O Lord, it is thy unspeakable mercy, that our Land (which has been so
long sick of this drunken disease, and so long surfetted of this sin) does
not spue us all out, which are the inhabitants.

8. Now by that these gut mongers have doubled their mornings draught, or
gulped down so many quarts, as they can well overcome, (for I will tie my
self, to the Drunkards method) their hearts come up as easily as some of their
drink. For wine, says Plato, is the daughter of verity; the glass of the
mind, says Euripides: Yea let him get but a cup or two more in his pate, his
limitlesse tongue shall clatter like a window loose in the wind; and you may
as soon persuade a stone to speak, as him to be silent. For then it fares with
his clapper, as with a sick man's pulse; which always beats, but ever out of
order. Yea one Drunkard has tongue enough for twenty men: it being like that
clapper at Roane, which is so big, that it is said to weigh without the Bell,
more then six hundred pounds. And what is their discourse?

First, they discover all secrets; for like as when the wine purges, says
Plutarch, that which is in the bottom comes up to the brim, and swimmeth
aloft; or else it breaks the vessel, and runs all abroad: Even so
drunkenness discovers the secrets of the heart. And indeed, if discretion, and
moderation be as hoopes to a vessel; how should these hogsheads keep their
liquor, if ye take away those hoopes? It is the property of a drunkard to
disgorge his bosom with his stomach, to empty his mind with his maw: he can
ill rule his hands, but worse his tongue; fat cups oil that so, that it cannot
stick, and makes it so laskative, that it cannot hold. And whatsoever is in
the heart of a sober man, is found in the tongue of a Drunkard. Drink
disapparels the soul, and is the betrayer of the mind: it turns the key of
the tongue, and makes it unlock that counsel, which before wisdom had in
keeping. And experience shows, that when a man is drunk, you may thrust your
hand into him like an Eele skin, and strip his inside outward.

Or suppose you urge him not, the wine having set his tongue at liberty, it
shall resemble Bacchus his Liber pater, and go like the sail of a Windmill:
for as a great gale of wind whirleth the sails about; so abundance of wine
whirleth his tongue about, and keeps it in perpetual motion. For now he
rayles, now he scoffs, now he lies, now he slanders, now he seduces, talks
bawdy, swears, bannes, foames; and cannot be quiet until his tongue be
wormed. Nor is he more lewd then loud; for commonly a lewd tongue is a loud
one; and a loud tongue a lewd one. Impudent speakers are like gaping oysters;
which being opened either stink, or there is nothing in them.

9. But to keep close to Drunkards, this Cacodemons discourse is all
quarrelling, scoffing, or scurrilous: for as he has a spightfull tongue in his
anger, so he has a beastly tongue in his mirth; as these two inseparably
attend each other.

First, a spightfull tongue in his anger; for if you mark him then, as having
more rage then reason; he enterlaceth all his discourse, either with reviling
the present, or backbiting the absent. Now all his prayers are curses, and all
his relations lies: as talkative, and lying, are two birds which always fly
out of one nest. To be short, hear him when he is in this vein, and but
seriously consider his condition, you would think, that by a just judgment of
God he were metamorphosed, like Hecuba the wife of Priamus, into a dog; for
without question their wits are shorter, and their tongues longer then to
demonstrate them rational creatures.

Secondly, the Drunkards communication is ever filthy, and beastly, full of all
ribaldry, and baudinesse: no filthy talk, or rotten speech whatsoever, comes
amiss to a Drunkard. Yea no word savours well with them, that is not
unsavory: their only music (and so it fares with all the rude rabble) is
ribaldry; modesty, and sober merriment with them is dullness. So that from the
beginning to the end, he belcheth forth nothing, but what is as far from
truth, piety, reason, modesty; as that the moon came down from Heaven, to
visit Mahomet.

O the beastliness which burns in their unchaste, and impure minds! that
smoakes out of their polluted mouths! a man would think that even the Devil
himself should blush, to hear his child so talk; as how does his mouth run
over with falsehoods, against both Christians, and Preachers? what speaks he
less then Whoredoms, Adulteries, incests at every word? Yea, hear two or
three of them talk, you will change the Lycaomans language, and say, Devils
are come up in the likeness of men.

And because it is a small matter with them, to meddle with their equals, or
to sit upon their parish Priest, (as those Hogsheads term him) in such
meetings they will visit a whole Drocesse, and Province; nay, the sagest Judge
and gravest Counselor, and greatest Peer in the land; must do service to
their Court, and be summoned before the Alebench: according to that in the
Psalms, They set their mouths against Heaven, and their tongues walk through
the earth, Psalm. 73.9. And having huft their smoke into the face of these,
they will have a health to King Charles; and what not, for the honor of
England.

10. Thirdly, from wicked talking, he proceeds to cursed, and impious
swearing, blaspheming, etc. as you shall rarely see a Drunkard, but he is a
great swearer: and not of petty oaths, but those proditious, and fearful
ones, of wounds and blood; the damned language of Ruffins, and Monsters of the
earth: together with God danne me, which words many of them use superficially,
if they repent not. Yea they swear and curse, as if Heaven were deaf to their
noise. O the numberless number of oaths and blasphemies, that one
blacke-mouthed Drunkard spits out in defiance as it were of God, and all
prohibitions to the contrary! I dare affirm it, had some one of them three
thousand pounds per annum, his means would scarce hold out, to pay those small
twelve penny mulcts, which our Stat^te Law imposes upon swearers, were it duly
executed; and if so, to what number will the oaths and curses amount, which are
sworn, and uttered through the whole Land? Yea in some one Alehouse, or
Tavern; where they fit all day in Troops, doing that in earnest, which we
have seen boys do in sport; stand on their heads and shake their heels
against Heaven. Where even to hear, how the name of the Lord Jesus is pierced,
and Gods name blasphemed, would make a dumb man speak, a dead man almost to
quake: in which they resemble a mad dog that flies in his Masters face that
keeps him. But how they swear away their salvation, curse away their
blessing: I have shown at large, in another Tract.

11. Now after the pots for a while have stopped all their mouths, (though every
man had his share before) and they forgot what was formerly spoken; You shall
have one for very pure love, and want of other expression, weep in his
fellows bosom: another sit kissing of his companion, not without some short
sentence, nothing to the purpose. A third setting his mouth on the rack with
laughter, (wise were the man that could tell at what.) A fourth swaggering, and
swearing, because the wine was brought him no sooner. A fifth (for I pass him
that sits there in a corner nodding, and slavouring) falls down upon his
marrow bones, in devotion to Bacchus, and up with the pot hand-smooth. After
which every one that is awake sings his song, seasoning the same with many a
goodly belch: their one in stead of a Harp, takes a knife and a quart pot;
with which he will make fine music. Another in his song commends his
mistress; another the goodness of the wine; another being better skilled in
prose then meeter, relates all the passages between him and his wife at home.
Where to hear how they all lay their heads together; plot and consult how to
charm and tame their poor wives: would make a discreet Maid resolve never to
marry so long as she is able to work with a knitting needle. Another tells how
many quarts, he and so many more drank at such a meeting; another begins to
argue of Religion, and matters of State; another (for wine descending, causes
words still to ascend) bragges of his lying with such a woman, into whose
company he could never yet be admitted; another again boasts how he jeered such
a Roundhead or Puritan: (for so are all abstemious men, in the Epicures words,
or a beasts language) and the drink having bitten him, he runs up and down
like a mad dog, snapping at every body; and many a good man may say with David,
I became a song of the drunkards. Another quarrels with his friend, that after
the third health refuses to drink any more: and being at length delivered of
their company, they dispute the case about his departure; and are so vexed, that
they gnaw their own tongues for spite; and call him the basest names their
block-heads can think of; every one stoutly affirming, that he can be no
honest man who refuses to pledge them. For as the utmost of a Drunkards
honesty is good fellowship, so it is an unpardonable crime, not to drink
equal with the rest, or to depart while they are able to speak sense. Whence
many have lost their lives, because they would not drink. Another sals a
rhyming all in Satyr against the rest that are absent; and perhaps steepes his
jest in his own laughter; which being liked, and laughed at, they all fall a
rhyming; then every one in his order must play the Poet out of the inspiration
of Bacchus only; for Sibylla like, they never yield any Oracle, except they are
first possessed with a fury: and the Muses may go hang for any room they have
here.

Their Library is a large room, ranked full of Pots, Cannes, Glasses, Tobacco
pipes, rashers on the coals, red herrings, a gammon of Bacon, Caveare,
Anchovis, or such like shooing-hornes to whet on their appetites, (I mean to
more drink; for that they are no Trencher men, is all their boast, and all
they have to be proud of,) together with a Jordane for their urine on the one
side, and a boule for their vomit on the other. For they will vomit, as if they
were so many live Whales spuing up the Ocean: which done, they can drink
again afresh.

12. Now although the wisest of them cannot make two true verses in his mother
tongue, in three hours: yea although they be the veriest lacklatins, and the
most unalphabetical raggabasha's that ever lived: yet notwithstanding (for
stand well they cannot) they will one with a coal, another with a candle, fill
all the walls and seelings with Epithalamiums, Elegies, and Epitaphs; which done
are expounded to the rest of the company, if any be awake to hear them. Your
ears would blister to read them; though it would do a deaf man's heart good to
hear them, or a blind man's to see them.

And yet poor souls they think themselves wiser then Solomon; for being
bribed with self conceit, what cannot they do, what do they not know, what
will they not say? Whence it is their speech is much though little to the
purpose: and what ever the question be, the truth is on their side: all is
spoken in print that is spoken by them, though their phrase (the apparel of
their speech) has a rash outside, and fustian linings. Yea all the Drunkards
Geese are Swans; and all their virtues ten foot long. As for faults they have
none; for poor souls they see neither their slips, nor wants. In a word, they
hold all the world Dunces, besides themselves and will swear they are but
shallow fellows, that do not drink sack.

Alas, if they can but break a jest (as many of them are like Sarmantius a
gentleman of Rome; who was famous only for his scoffing;) then they conceit of
themselves as Menecrates did, who (although not worthy to be Aesculapius his
Apothecaries boy) would needs be Jupiter; and to speak rightly, the bean of
all their honor, lies in scoffs, and jeeres; for take from these Aspes but
their poison and sting, you utterly undo them; they have nothing left of any
use. All their worth lies in wit-crackers, as some in the Netherlands have
their wealth in squibs, and fire-workes, though it were happy for them, if they
wanted this wit too; and Satan should do them a greater pleasure, if he did not
so prompt them in scoffs: for like Absaloms hair, it proves but an ornament
to hang themselves with all; and the best office their wit does them, is either
to spit out friends with their tongues, or laugh them into enemies.

13. But are they so wise, because they think themselves so? No, no more then
Simon Magus was great, because he called himself a great man. For what ever
they think, by the rule of scripture every Drunkard is a fool, Prove. 9.6. And
experience shows, that the greatest bowzars are the greatest buzzards in the
world: that they have most leaden conceits, dull understandings, drossy wits,
gross and muddy affections. A fools voice (says Solomon) is known by a
multitude of words, Ecclesiastes 10.14. and babbling drunkards can better afford
you a Sea of words, then a drop of wit. As mark whether their discourse be not
more sound then substance; wind then matter; as ever where is least brain,
there is most tongue, and lowdest, says Socrates: even as a Bruers Cart upon
the stones, makes most noise, when his vessels are emptiest; the full vessel
gives you a soft answer, but sound liquor: so a knowing, and solid man will
either be silent, or his words shall be better then silence; whereas they that
speak much, seldom speak well. I might proceed to his knowledge in the best
things; and show you that whereas some are like the Moon at full, have all
their light toward Earth, none toward Heaven: others like the Moon at wane,
or change; have all their light to Heaven wards, none to the Earth: Drunkards
are like the Moon in Eclipse, as having no light in it self; neither toward
Earth, nor toward Heaven. Though they are apt to think themselves Giants for
wit, and E^gles for light and judgment even in divinity also: which makes them
so put themselves forward: as how often have I seen a Case of Leather stuffed with
wind, (as he in Marcellus Donatus thought himself) A very beef brained
fellow, that has had only impudence enough to show himself a fool; thrust
into discourses of Religion, thinking to get esteem; when all that he has
purchased thereby, has been only the hiss of the wise, and a just derision
from the abler judgments. Not unlike that German Clown, who undertook to be
very ready in the Ten Commandments; but being asked by the Minister which was
the first? he answered, Thou shall not eat. If you doubt of it, do but ask the
Drunkard a reason of his faith; and you shall see that he can no more tell
you, then the Wind can tell which last blowed off my Hat.

Yea the Drunkard is such a fool, that he would be begged for a fool: I would
feign know whether is wisest, the prodigal waster, or the covetous griper? he
that with a wanton eye, a licorish tongue, and a gamesome hand, indiscreetly
ravels out his Ancestors fair possessions, it may be an hundredth pounds per
annum in three years: and then leads the rest of his days in prison, there to
repent at leisure; having for his attendants sorrow, grief, derision, beggary,
contempt, etc. Or he that to get an hundred pounds per annum, and only
possess, not use the same after he has got it, perhaps three years: is
content to be weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth in the prison of hell
for evermore? without question these two are both fools alike. But that
Drunkards are none of the wisest, I shall show in the effects of drunkenness:
In the mean time I Will acquaint you with the causes, And

14. First, one maine cause why their heaven is the Tavern, whence they never
depart until they have cast up the reckoning: why like horses they are only
guided by the mouth, is this; the pot is no sooner from their lips, but they
are melancholy; and their hearts as heavy, as if a millstone lay upon it;
resembling the fly Pyrausta, which dies if out of the fire. I call it
melancholy, because they call it so; but the truth is, they are vexed like Saul
with an evil spirit; which nothing will drive away but drink, and tobacco;
which is to them, as David's Harp was to him, 1 Samuel 16.23.

They so wound their consciences with oaths, intentionall murders, rapes, and
other the like actual uncleanness; and so exceedingly provoke God; that they
are even in this life rewarded with the strapadoes of an humane soul; wrackt in
conscience, and tortured with the very flashes of hell fire: which makes them
many times to lay violent hands upon themselves; being never well, nor in their
own place till they be in hell, Acts 1.25.

When the horror of their oaths, blasphemies, thesis, whoredoms, and other
prodigious uncleanness has caused a dejection of spirit, and the worm of
conscience to sting them; (as it fared with Cain, when he had murdered his
brother Abel) how should they remedy it? but (as if Satan alone could expel
Satan) straight to the Tavern, and drink sorrow, and care away. Or perhaps
there is a factor for hell present, that cheares him up as Jezebel did Ahab;
when he was sick for want of Naboths vineyard, 1 Kings 21.7. crying, Come, you
are melancholy; let us both to the Tavern, and Brothel-house; and so cures all
his sadness for that time with a charm: wherein nevertheless the principal
ingredient is drink; the common refuge of melancholy sinners, their constant
and never failing friend; to which also they are as constant: for when did the
Sun ever see some of them sober; and how are our Cities, and Towns pestered,
and our streets strewed with these filths? And this is the maine ground of all;
for as they that have cursed and shrewish wives at home, love to stray abroad:
so these men being molested with a scolding conscience, are feign continually
to drink, play, riot, go to bed with their heads full of wine, and no sooner
awake but to it again. So that their consciences must knock at the door a
thousand times, and they are never at home, or at leisure to be spoke withal.
Indeed at last they must be met, and found by this enemy, even as Ahab was by
Eliah; stay they never so long, and stray they never so far, they must home at
last, sickness will waken them, conscience must speak with them as a Master
with his Trewant Scholar, after a long absence; and then there are no men under
Heaven, who more need that prayer Lord have mercy upon them. For a wicked man's
peace will not always last; at the end his guilt will gnaw him, with so much a
sharper tooth. Neither are they more jocund in prosperity, then in dysasters
they are amazed.

Whereas they should eat, and drink, and do all things to the glory of God;
they drink to this end only, that they may the easier forget God; forget him
in his threats, which stick in their souls after some Sermon: forget him in
his judgments, which have taken hold of some of their companions; they drink
to the end they may drown conscience, and put off all thoughts of death and
Hell; and to hearten and harden themselves against all the messages of God, and
threats of thr Law. Whereas if they had wit, and were not past grace; they
would both invite, and welcome this Angel or Messenger of the Lord, so soon
as the waters be troubled. But many a time is poor Christ (offering to be newborn in thee) thrust into the stable, while lewd companions, by their
drinking, music, and jests take up all the best rooms in the Inn of thine
heart; which yet are but miserable comforters, Physicians of no value: Yea let
ten consorts of music be added, all shall not drown the clamorous cries of
conscience: nor can the whole world afford an expurgation of this melancholy.
Yea I Will appeal from your selves in drink, to your selves in your sober fits;
whether it fares not with you, as it did with Menippus; who went down into
Hell to seek content; for what is this other in mitigating the pangs of
conscience, then as a saddle of gold to a gauled horse? or a draught of poison
to quench a man's thirst?

Alas, they which strive to cure their present misery (in this case) with
present mirth; have not their misery so much taken away, as changed; and of
temporal made eternal. Thou have taken thy pleasure (says Abraham to that
belly-god frying in Hell flames) therefore art thou now tormented, Luke 16.25.
Little do drunkards consider, that the Devil is a fisher, sin his hook,
pleasure his bait, fools his fish; or the danger they are in, even making a
recreation of misery, sporting themselves in their sins, round about the pits
brinke without fear: when as they are every hour ready to tople into hell, that
bottomless gulf of easeless, and everlasting flames. They spend their days in
mirth, says Job, and suddenly they go down into hell, Job 21.13.

Indeed, your charms may with their pleasantness, bring conscience into some
short slumbers: but it waketh eftsoons, and in spite of all your spells rages
as before. Yea, if but sickness come, these carnal delights will run from
you afrighted, like Rats from an house on fire. Pleasure like Orpah, kisses,
but parts: only grief like Ruth, weeps and tarryes with you. No joy will
down, till there be hope of a pardon, as it fares with condemned persons.

So that no hand can heal you, but the very same which wounded you; the wounds
of the mind can only be cured by the word of God: which teaches what is to
be said, what to be known, what to be believed, what to be avoided, and what
not.

Thus in stead of repenting, and laboring in a lawful calling: which (says
Fulgentius) is the only cure of melancholy, and destruction of all vices: they
add sin to sin, leaving Gods remedies, to seek remedy of the Devil;
whose office is not to quench fire, but to kindle it; even the fire of lust,
with the fire of drunkenness here; and with those two, the fire of hell
hereafter. But

15. Secondly, to this may be added the Drunkards idleness as another cause;
yea, idleness is the cause both of drunkenness, melancholy, and all the residue
of evils which accompany the same. For as idleness is the Devils only
opportunity: so it is the most corrupting fly that can blow in any humane
mind: we learn to do ill, by doing what is next it, nothing: an idle person is
good for nothing, but to propagate sin; as ground unoccupied produces nothing
but noisome, and unprofitable things. The soul is like a River, that is
always in progression: the heart like a Wherry, either goes forward or
backward. If the mind be not busied with good thoughts, it will fill with
evil cogitations: the death of the one, is but the birth of the other.

Now drunkards generally, either do nothing, or that which is worse then
nothing; all the drunkards labor, is to satisfy his lusts, and all his life
naught else but a vicissitude of devouring, and venting: as how many of them
make it their whole trade and employment to keep company, to go from their beds
to the Taphouse, (for the drunkard thinks no wine good, that is brought over
two thresholds) from the Tap-house to the Playhouse, where they make a match
for the Brothel-house, and from thence back to the Tavern, and so to bed
again. Or else they spend the whole day, yea, every day in howsing, and
bowling, and taking Tobacco: for they only sit to eat, and drink, lie down
to sleep, and rise up to play: this is all their exercise, herein lies all
their worth; and no marvel, for if the world be a man's God, pleasure must
needs be his Religion. The company-keeper is the barrenest piece of earth in
all the Orb: the Commonwealth has no more use of him, then Jerchoam had of
his withered hand. He is like the dumb Jacke in a Virginal; for he has not
so much as a voice in the commonwealth.

What is recorded of Margites, namely that he never plowed nor dug, nor did
any thing all his life long, that might tend to any good: is truly verified in
him, he is not more nimble tongued, then lasie handed, as Julian confessed of
himself. Drunkards are like so many Gnats, for as Gnats do nothing but play up
and down in the warm Sun and sing; and when they have done sit down and
sting the next hand or face they can seize upon: so drunkards miserably spend
their good hours in wicked, or unprofitable pastime; sit down and backbite
their neighbors. And so much of the second cause.

16. Thirdly, sottish fear, and base cowardlinesse is another maine cause; men
dare not forsooth, refuse to go to the Tavern, when the motion is made, (and
they seldom meet one another, but they make the motion) nor refuse when they
come there, to do as the rest; that is, to drink drunk, be it to the wounding
of conscience, hazard of health, life, soul, etc. for fear of seeming
singular. Yea he shall be scofft at, and called Roundhead, or Puritan, if he
will not revell it with them in a shoarlesse excess, and the coward had rather
go to hell, then be so reputed; so that not God, not their consciences come
into any regard with them; but they shall be mocked, the case of Zedekiah,
Ier. 38.19. of Saul, who stood more upon the praise of men, then the favor of
God, 1 Samuel 15.30. and of Herod, when he cut off John Baptists head; for he did
it full sore against his will, and only to answer the expectation of the
standers by, Mat. 14.8, 9. Whence we may gather, that too much modesty, and
want of courage to deny the requests of a seeming friend, has lost millions of
souls; that this is one notable means to fill hell, loathness to displease.
And certainly there is something in it, that the fearful are placed by the
holy Ghost, in the forefront of that damned crew; who shall have their part in
the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. they are ashamed of
Christ, and of holiness before men on earth; therefore Christ will be ashamed
of them, and not own them before his Father, and his holy Angels in heaven.
And indeed it is a damnable plausibility, so to regard the vain approbation,
or censure of the beholders: as in the mean time to neglect the allowance or
judgment of God. A good heart will rather fall out with all the world, then
with his maker, then with his conscience. Nor is he more wicked then foolish,
that will gain the worlds favor, and lose Gods; escape derision, to meet with
confusion.

17. Again, other reasons and causes there be of it (though indeed there is
no reason in it) which I must be forced to pass over with only naming them,
as first, pride, or reputation of good fellowship is one special cause;
covetousness another; evil company a third, etc. for they will by no means
grant, that they drink for the love of drink. No, will these swilbowles say,
yea swear that is the basest thing in the world, they are Epicures indeed that
will do so; though they love it (as they should do God) above all, above
health, wealth, credit, child, wife, life, heaven, salvation, all: calling for
it, as the Pope once for his dish; even in despite of heaven. For is not their
gullet, their God? do they not sacrifice more to their God Belly, then those
Babylonians did to their God Bell? Alas, they no more care for wine, then Esau
did for his pottage, for which he sold his birthright: then Lysimachus did, who
made away a whole Kingdom for drink: then Philoxenus, and Melanthius did,
who, that the drink might yield them the more pleasure in going down to their
stomachs, wished the one a Swans throat, the other a Cranes neck. For let them
say or swear what they will, i will believe the Prophet Esaias, who makes us privy
to their heart and thoughts, Esaias 56.12. where they confess as much; and that
other scripture 1 Samuel 1.16. and 2.12. where Drunkards are called the sons of
Beliall, that is, all belly, and for the belly.

Yea let some good fellow or other tell me, whether it would not make his teeth
water, and his guts grumble; yea whether in envy he would not feed upon his
own heart to see his companions drink their healths round, while he sat by
only to see and hear them? And if so, confess that you drink not to please
others, but your selves; (as Canus played upon his harp) not for your friends
sake, but for the drinks sake; that you drink not out of need, but lust; not
for health, but for delight.

18. But to go on, (for I may seem to have left them) what has been spoken
proves them much worse then beasts: but this is a small evil with them; this
is but to work out their own damnations: their chief care, industry, and
delight is to infect others: the serpents special venom, wherewith these his
elves be intoxicated, is, to make others more beasts then themselves. Yea
Drunkards being the Devils deputies, to turn others into beasts, will make
themselves Devils. Wherein they have a notable dexteri^y, making the Al^house,
or Tavern, their study; their circle the Pot, themselves the conjurers, men's
souls the hire, reputation of good fellowship the charm, the characters
healths, the Goblin raised, is the spirit of the buttery; and to drink God out
of their bearts, health out of their bodies, wit out of their heads, strength
out of their joints, all the money out of their purses, all the drink out of
the Brewers barrels, wife and children out of doors, the land out of quiet,
plenty out of the Kingdom, is all their business.

These Agents for the Devil, Drunkards, practice nothing but the art of d^
bauching men; for they will take no pains, unless the Devil sets them on
work: but being set like beasts to draw in the Devils Teeme; they will l^ad
captive unstable souls to sin, with cords of vanity, as it were with a Cart
rep^, Esaias 5.18. For to sin, these pernicious seducers, Devils in the shape
of men, are no niggards of their pains. As o how much is hell beholding to
them (...) for as the Pharisees would take great pains, compass Sea and Land,
to make one the child of Hell, like themselves: so what will not some
Drunkards do, or spend; to make a sober man a Drunkard, or to drink another
drunkard under the table?

19. Now for the effecting of this, what comparable to drinking of Lealths?
which Antisthenes calls the only occasion, and means of surfeiting, and
disorder. Another very fitly, the palley or shooing-horne to all drunkenness
and excess. For their drinking and beginning of healths is purposely, and
serves to no other end, but to draw men on to drink more liberally, then else
they would or should do.

As le^ a sober, and religious man fall into their company; as a purse of money
may fall into a stinking privy: O how they will conspire to provoke his
unwilling appetite, with drunken healths! and if they can (like the Baby^^^ish
harlot) make him taste poison in a golden cup: O then they will sing, and
rejoice as in the division of a spoil! and brag that they have drenched
sobriety, and blinded the light, and ever after be a snussing of this Taper,
Psalm. 13.4. and the like to every one they light upon, which is a most woeful
glory: yea, how will they wind men in, by drinking first a health to such a
man, then to such a woman my mistress, then to every ones mistress, then to such
a great person; naming some Lord or Lady, or near friend; their Magistrates,
their Captains, Commanders, Parents, Kindreds, or Companions health; and that
not seldom upon their knees: so making Gods of others, Beasts of themselves.
Or rather doing homage to Satan, for health-drinking upon their knees was first
invented, and used as the Devils drinke-offering; or as a part of that honor,
and adoration which the Pagan Idolaters, sorcerers, and witches, consecrated,
and gave to Beelzeb^b the Prince of Devils, and those other Devill-gods which
they used to worship: as Basil and Augustine affirm: so that it is most rank,
and devilish Idolatry.

And last of all, they will drink the Kings or the Queens health: as taking
it for granted, that none dare refuse to pledge their healths, be they willing
or unwilling, able or ^mable; and by this means they will wind men in to
drink, even till their brains, their wits, their tongues, their eyes, their
feet, their senses, and all their members fail them. For commonly when these
friends fall a drinking of healths; it is as enemies fall to fighting with
weapons, to show their valor, and to get the mastery; for he is of most
reputation with them, that is able to drink most; and he gets the greatest
honor, that can drink the rest off their legs. Yea, if they but meet with a
man that can gulpe down wine through the channel of his throat without
interspiration between gulpes, (as the Crocodile cats, without moving of her
nether jaw) they think he deserves some great preferment. As Tiberius the
Emperor preferred many to honors in his time, because they were famous
whoremasters, and sturdy drinkers. Yea if they might have their wills, none
should refuse to be drunk unpunished; or be drunk un^^warded at the common
charge. Yea, they not only think excessive drinking worthy all honor during
life; but they look their associates should not cease to honor them being
dead; by mentioning their rare exploits herein.

20. But O you sottish sensualists! how has the Devil bewitched you, to
magnify, honor, and applaud all that are enthralled to this worse then
swinish swilling? and on the otherside, to vilisie, rep^oach and undervalue,
all that hate and loath it in their judgments; or else renownce it in their
practice? Is it possible that the reasonable soul of man (not professedly
barbarous) should be capable of such a monster? certainly if I had not known
the truth and probate of it by ocular and experimental demonstration from day
to day; I could hardly bring my understanding to believe, that men, that
Christians should be of such a reprobate judgment, as to affect, admire, adore
etc. so foul, so base, so beastly, so unamiable, so unfruitful, unprofi^able,
unpleasant, unnatural a vice as this is in most men's judgments, and
experience. Nay I cannot believe what I have both seen, and lieard in this
case (...) for it is not possible for the most corrupted heart, to think that
any should be honored for villainy, and for honesty to be contemned. But rather
that every drunkard in his more serious cogitations, thinks of his fellow
dying in this sin without repentance, a fit Saint to be canonized for the
Devil. For not seldom are wicked men's judgments forced to yield unto that
truth, against which their affections maintain a rebellion.

But it is admirable to think, and incredible to believe, how the Devil
blindes them in this particular; which makes them that they care not what they
spend, nor how much they drink for popular applause, and to have others
commend them for joviall; to be reputed generous, and brave blades. For opinion
is all they stand upon, and that from men more gallant then wise, that have
more heart then brain; yea more lust, pride, and ignorance then either. The
same and reputation of good fellowship with them; is more sweet then life, then
salvation; for they had rather go to hell, then be counted Puritanes for
shaking hands with their drunken associates. So p^oud are they of baseness,
yea of shame; for let one commend the drunkard for a notable good fellow;
another more wise, will reply, the better the worse.

And no less sottish is their opinion of victory: when even in conquering they
are most overcome; for whilst they triumph in a drunken victory, or conquest
over their friends; Satan gets the victory over them. In excessive drinking
they have overcome all their companions: this they see and boast of; but they
see not how they are overcome, shamefully foiled, and utterly overthrown by
the Devil their chief enemy; under whose lash they are like to be
everlastingly.

Besides, what office so base? the hangmans is bad enough; but to be a Tempter,
todestroy souls, to wear the livery of Satan, to be a pensioner of ^el, at the
command of that malignant and degenerous spirit, this is the most ignominious,
and dishonorable name and shame, that can be. To be the ^angmans servant is an
honor to it: for to seduce, and draw others to destruction, is the only
proper part of a Fiend or Devil.

21. I grant the Devil so blindes, and bewitches them, that they think the
reputation of good fellowship the only name, and fame, and themselves the
only men alive; brave, generous, free, and bountiful blades: and all others
but base, and covetous hoggrubbers. But all that are wise, or sober winded,
account them the very scum of the nation; and good for naught but to stand in
the midst of a breach, when the Ordinance play, and bullets fly thick about
their cares. And certainly there is nothing in the world more ^pitifull; an
Ape carrier is honorable compared with a Drunkard: and hear but their wives
speak, you will grant that his of the two is far more happy in her choice.

Yea, Drunkards are so unworthy the meanest repute, that by the law, they ought
to be stoued to death, Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. and by the Gospel, to be spurned or
spued out of other men's company; I mean separated from all Christian society,
and like dirt thrown out of the Church into the street, by excommunication, as
is commanded, 1 Cor. 5.11. And until that rule be observed, we shall have but
a sorry reformation. For are they not as excrements and had humors in man's
body; which is never at ease till it be thereof disburdened? as Augustine
speaks do they not infect all that converse with them? Is not the Gospel and
the name of God blasphemed among the Gentiles? and an evil scandal raised
upon the whole Church through their superlative wickedness? Romans 2.24. does
not their unchristian-like behavior cause the very Turks even to detest the
true religion, and protest against their own conversion? thinking it
impossible that he should be a good God, who has such evil sons.

And sure I am, that in the Primitive times, the Church would have de^^ied her
blessing to such sons of Belial as these are, who make a trade of sin; as
though there were no God to judge, nor hell to punish, nor heaven to reward;
and live as if they had no souls to save. Such as have shaken out of their
hearts the fear of Ged, the shame of the world, the love of heaven, and the
dread of ^el; not caring what is thought, or spoken of them here; or what
becomes of them hereafter. Yea such amonstrous menstruous brood, that (like a
certain mountain in Ar^bia) breed, and bring forth nothing but monsters;
whose deeds are too foul for my words to express; being such as ought not to
be once named amongst Christians, Ephesians 5.3, 4.

Now the good husbandman weeds his field of burtfull plants; that they may not
spoil the good corn; and when fire has taken a house, we use to pull it
down, lest it should fire also the neighbors houses: Yea the good Surgeon
cuts off a rotten member betimes, that the sound may not be ^^dangered.

22. And thus I have made it good, that Drunkards drink not for strength, but
lust, and pride; to show how full of Satan they be, and how near to Swine. And
that their chief delight, is to make men drink these healths till they vomit
up their shame again li^^e a filthy dog, or lie wallowing in their beastliness
like a brutish swine, and make it their only glory; which is the most sad, and
woeful spectacle to a rectified understanding, that can be. Yea they will brag
of the conquest, when with the weapons of full charged cups, they have overcome
the rest: which is the basest office, and lamentablest overthrow to themselves
that can possibly be imagined. For what a barbarous, graceless, and
unchristian-like practice is this? to take pleasure in making others drunk, as
if it were their glory and pastime to see God dishonored, his spirit grieved,
his name blasphemed, his creatures abused, themselves and their friends souls
damned. But surely to glory in giving weak brains a drench, to see them
wallow in their filthiness, i^ but to brag how far they are become the Devils
children. Yea, such men clime the highest step of the ladder of wickedness;
thinking their own fin^ will not press them deep enough into hell, except they
also load themselves with other men's; for this is no other then the setting a
man's own house (...) fire, it burns many of his neighbors, and he shall
answer for all the ruins.

23. But see their cunning, and industry in tempting to sin, and drawing to
perdition. A drunkard (as if his brains were fired with all the plots,
projects, and cunning stratagems that hell can yield) is as rarely gifted in
drawing to sin, as the Devil himself; and is become the child of hell by as
proper a right: so that if Satan would change his office, or were to surrender
his place to any man alive, it should be to some good fellow or other; who has
learned to handle a man so sweetly, that one would think it a pleasure to be
seduced. For to take away all suspicion, they will so mollify the stifness of
a man's prejudice, so temper and fit him to their own mould; that once to
doith^ the^ would require the spirit of discerning. As how many are there that
hate their other enemies, yea and their friends too; and yet embrace this
enemy, because he kisseth when he betrayeth? As what fence for the Pist^^ that
is charged with the Bulle^ of friendship? Hilary compares it to a Razo^ in the
hand of a counterfeit Barber. And indeed he so confirms the profession of his
love, with vows, protestations, and promises, (as a large complement for the
most part ushers in a close craft) that you would think Jonathans love to
David, was nothing in comparison (as no faces look lovelier then the painred)
but accept of gain from him, and you are lost for ever. For with Sisera, you
can no sooner taste of this Jaels milk, but you shall feel a nail in your
Temples. So that the very wickedness of one which fears God, is better then
the good entreaty of a Drunkard. His proffers are like the Fowlers shrape, when
he casts meat to Birds: which is not out of charity to relieve, but out of
treachery to ensnare them.

Or like Traps we set for vermin; which seem charitable when they intend to
kill. They lay wait, says Jeremy, as he that sets snares; and make a pit to
catch men, Ier. 5.26. and thou may answer these cursed tempters which
delight in the murder of souls, as the woman of Endor did Saul, wherefore
seek thou to take me ^in a snare, to cause me to dye? 1 Samuel 28.9. Or as a
Godly woman (spoken of by Ambrose) did one that solicited her to incontinency,
professing how infinitely he loved her: who answered him, If you love me so
well as you profess, or seem to do, hold your finger in this flame until the
flesh be burnt off; and when he answered that was no part of love in her to
require it: she replied yes, if yours be love to cause both my body and soul
to burn in hell fire for ever; which by consequence will follow if I yield to
your request, and follow your counsel. And to speak rightly, this is the depth
of a Drunkards love; and yet never such abject, and servile prostitutions of
presentations: as life, soul, devotion, adoration, servant, stave etc. as
there is among. Drunkards. Oh will one drunkard say, (yea swear) to another, I
love thee as well as my self, and therein speak truth: for what said Augustine
to such an one? Thou love thy self so, as thou will destroy thy self; and
thou will destroy him, whom thou love as thy self. To sum up all, in brief,
A drunkard for kindness is another Julian, who was often times b^ untifull, but
how? he never did a man a good turn, but it was to dainne his soul. He is
another Absalom, who made a feast for Amnen, whom he meant to kill.

24. Which is the sole cause, that drunkards swarm so in every corner of the
Land; as where shall a man come, and not find one of these seducers? Yea whole
herds of them? as were I injoined to take up a ragged Regiment, I should think
it no hard task, to muster up a thousand men, (admit but drunkards to be men)
out of the very Suburbs, that in sheere drink, spend all they can get, borrow,
or imbezill. Indeed heretofore they were as ^are as Wolves, but now they are as
common as Hogs. Heretofore it was the sin of Tinkers, Hostlers, Beggars, etc.
now of Farmers, Citizens, Esquires, Knights, etc. Heretofore wine was sold
only in Apothecaries shops, and drunk rather in time of sickness, then in
health: now it is vented in Tavernes, as if it grew in the Thames. There was a
street in Rome called Vicus ^obrius, Sober street; because there was never a
drinking house in it. Find ^uch a street in any City, or populous Town in
England, and some good man or other, will put it in the Chronicle. Yea woe is
me! how is the world turned Beast? what bowsing, and quaffing, and whiffing,
and healthing, is there on every bench? and what reeling, and staggering in our
streets? what drinking by the yard, the dye, the dozen? what forcing of
pledges? what quarrels for measure and form? how is that become an excuse of
villainy, which any villainy might rather excuse I was drunk? how has this
torrent, yea this deluge of excess in drink, drowned the face of the earth,
and risen many cubits above the highest Mountains of Religion and good Laws?
Yea would to God I might not say (that which I fear, and shame, and grieve to
say) that even some of them which square the Arc for others, inwardly drown
themselves, and discover their nakedness hereby. That other inundation scowred
the world, this impures it: and what but a deluge of fire and brimstone, can
wash it from so abominable filthiness?

O the drunkenness that is in one day in this Land! yea in this City! yea at
some fair or market to be seen! for go but to the Towns end where a Fair is
kept; and there they lie as if some field had been fought; here lies one man,
there another; yea alas for woe, a womannay aswine with a woman's face. Or go
into the back lanes, and there you shall have them among Frogs and Toads, their
fit matches. To be short, it is a disease whereof this Nation and Generation is
sick at the very heart; and which is worse, in all prebability this infectious
vice of drunken good-fellowship is like to stick by this Nation: for so long as
the mulutude of offenders, benums the sense of offending; a common blor is held
no stain.

25. Increase it may, as how can it other? when each Drunkard is like the
bramble, Judge. 9.15. which first set it self on fire, and then fired all the
wood. Or like one sick of the Plague, who (as they say) is carried with an
itching desire to infect others that are clear. Or like an house on fire in
the midst of a City; which (if the wind blows vehemently) stays not in the
burning of an house or two, but sets on fire all adjoining: neither does it
cease there, but every one which it has set on fire kindles as many more, and
so one another til it may be half, or all the whole City be consumed. For this
is the Drunkards case directly, who is the bane of many poor souls besides his
own. It is Basils observation, that one whore makes many fornicators: but
experience shows, that one drunkard makes ten times as many drunkards.

As what a multitude of drunkards, will one true drunkard make; especially if
he be well accomplished with ingenuity, and gifts of nature? As when
Achitophels head stands upon Simon Magus his shoulders, there is a world of
mischief toward. A will ^ent to do harm, and a wit able to prosecute it, like
Cannon shot, makes a lane where it goes.

All which considered, vi^. the number of seducers, together with their skill,
will, and industry in sea^^^ng: we may with reverence, and love, wonder at the
mercy of God in our delivery. For as our Savior says, Blessed is the man that
is not offended at their scoffs, Mat. 11.6. so blessed is the man, that is not
taken with their wills. For herein alone consists the difference; He whom the
Lord loves, shall be delivered from their meretricious allurements, Eccles.
2.26. and he whom the Lord abhors, shall fall into their snares, Prove. 22.14.
And so much of the Drunkards subtilty in seducing.

26. Now if they cannot allure and persuade men to pledge them in their wicked
customs; and so work their wills by subtilty and fair means; they will seek
to compel and enforce them to do as they do: that so they may have their
company here in sin, and hereafter in torment. At least that they may
discourage us in the way to heaven; floute us out of our faith; and draw us
back to the world: when they can no longer seduce us, they will envy, bate,
censure, scoff at, revile, rail on, nickname, slander falsely, accuse, curse,
threaten, undermine, and combine together against us: Yea did not the Law
manacle their hands, they would even strike, hurt, and slay us; in case we
would not yet yield to associate them in their evil doings, nor conform to
their lewd and wicked customs; If we would not for company grievously sin
against God, wrong our own bodies, destroy our souls, and wilfully leap into
Hell fire with them. They would make us either bow, or break; they would kill
our bodies, if they could not corrupt our souls. If we would not part with our
innocence, we should part with our lives: as it fared with those numberless
Martyrs, whose souls 8. John saw under the Altar, Rev. 6. who were killed
because they would not do and say at the rest; yea even for the word of God,
and for the testimony which they maintained, ver. 9. And why fares it not so
with us? why do not the same drunkards, vicious livers, and other enemies of
holiness, which now envy, hate, censure, scoff at, nickname, rail on, and
slander us; even strike, maime, and kill us? but because their hands are tied
by the Law. Why are not our Sanctuaries turned into shambles, and our beds made
to swim with our bloods, in London (as it fares with them in Ireland, and in
many parts of this kingdom) long before this? but that the God of Israel has
crossed the confederacy of Balak. It is no thanks to wicked men, that their
wickedness does not prosper: they have laid a world of plots, ever since there
was a purpose of Reformation, to cut all the Roundheads throats, had not
justice and an overruling providence prevented them. The world would soon be
over-runne with evils, if men might be so devilish as they would. Alas if it
were not for the Parliament and Army, (for all they are so hated, scorned, and
contemned,) it would be otherwise then it is with the People of God; as the
Word of God, and both former and late experience do witness. But of this, see
more in the Drunkards Character: for I must be brief. I pass therefore from
the drunkards qualities, carriage, and behavior, with the method he uses in
drinking, to the fruits and effects of their drunkenness, which are many. I Will
mention some only. And

27. First, I will say open the Drunkards outward bodily deformities; which are
sundry, and those odious: for commonly he has ( Vertumnus-like) a Brasill
nose, a swollen and inflamed face; beset with goodly chowles and rubies, as if
it were both roste and sodde; swimming, running, glaring, gogle eyes, bleered,
rolling, and red; a mouth nasty, with offensive fumes, always foaming or
drivelling; a feverish body, a sick and giddy brain, a mind dispersed, a
boiling stomach, rotten teeth, a stinking breath, a drumming ear, a palsied
hand, gowty, staggering legs, that feign would go, but cannot: a drawling,
stammering; temulentive tongue, clam'd to the roof and gums: In fine (not to
speak of his odious gestures, loathsome nastinesse, or beastly behavior; his
belching, hiccocks, vomitings; his ridiculous pestures, and how easily he is
knocked down, whose hamstrings Bacchus has already cut in two: nor of the
unmeasurable grosseness of such, whose only Element is Ale; especially your
Alewives, who like the Germane Froes are all cheeks to the belly, and all
belly to the knees; whose dugs and chinnes meet without any forcing of either:
because you may daily see such fustilugs walking in the streets, like so many
Tons, each moving upon two pottle pots) His essential parts are so obscured;
his sense so dulled, his eyes so dazelled, his face so distorted, his
countenance so deformed, his joints so infeebled, and his whole body and mind
so transformed; that he is become the child of folly, the derision of the
world, a laughing stock to fools, a laothing stock to the godly, ridiculous to
all. Yea questionless, had they a glass presented them, they could hardly be
brought again to love their own faces. Much more should they read a true
Character of their odious conditions; would they run besides their wits, if
they had any to lose; or go and dispatch themselves as Bepalus did upon view
of Hipponax his letter. For ( Thersites-like) many are their bodily
deformities; but far more, and worse are those of their souls.

28. Neither are his diseases and infirmities fewer then his deformities: for
excessive and intemperate drinking, has brought upon him a world of diseases
and infirmities which shorten his life; as who can recount, or recite the
crudities, rheumes, gowtes, dropsies, aches, imposthumes, apoplexies,
inflammations, plurisies, consumptions, (for though he devoures much, yet he is
the leaner every way) with the falling sickness, and innumerable other
distempers hence ensuing; which drunkards better know by experience, then I how
to reckon up?

To whom are pearled faces, palsies, headaches, but to Drunkards? what so much
as swilling, blows up the cheeks with wind; fills the nose and eyes with fire;
loads the hands and legs with water; and in short plagues the whole man with
the diseases of an Horse, the belly of a Cow, the head of an Ass, etc. almost
turning him into a very walking dunghill? Believe a man in his own art, the
distempered body, the more it is filled, the more it is spilled, says
Hippocrates; and to it the Prophet sets his seal, Hosea 7.5. so that the
Drunkard draws death out of that which preserves other men's lives; and the
reason is, the natural, and vital heat of men is hereby drowned, and
extinguished before it be near spent; like a candle cast into the water,
before it be half burnt. Yea wine, and strong drink has drowned more men
then the Sea has devoured; and more dye of surfets then by the sword. Yea as
drunkenness has drowned more souls then all the sins of Sodomes so it has
drowned more bodies, then were drowned in the general deluge of Noabs flood:
But you have not heard all; for,

29. Thirdly, as if the drunkard scorned to go to his grave in peace, he
strives to do execution upon himself: either by drinking until his skin and
guts crack again: As how many have drank themselves dead? how many have even
burst themselves with drinking, and so dyed? being taken away in Gods just
wrath, etc. Or secondly, by a frequent exposing himself in the dark, to
diverse fearful and lamentable accidents: whereby he often breaks his limbs, or
neck; drownes or burns himself. Yea how often have snakes been known to
creep down their throats into their bellies, as they lay asleep in the
fields? And how should it be otherwise? for when he is drunk, he is like a
running Coach without a Coachman to guide it, as Pittacus makes the comparison.
Or thirdly, by running into quarress when he is drunk; whereby he either
murders others, or is stabbed, and murdered by others. For while the wine
works, they resemble those fishes which love to be in violent streams, and
flood gates; but do dye in still waters. As who will sooner kill and slay then
Cowards, when once they are pot valiant? I deny not, but such a ones discourse
may sometimes sound big, and yet mean nothing: Cowards being most forward both
in giving charge with the tongue, and recoyling back with the foot. Yea you
shall see a drunkard look like the four winds in painting; as if he would blow
away the enemy; and yet at the very first onset, suffer fear, and trembling to
d^ess themselves in his face apparently. And commonly where is least heart,
there is most tongue: swelling words being like the report of great Ordnance;
which does only blaze, and crack, and smoke, and stink, and vanish.

But this holds not always, for sure I am, many do that in a Tavern, which
they repent at Tiburne; and nothing more common then for drunkards to kiss
when they meet, and kill when they part. For when they have lost the stern of
reason, it shall go hard, but they will either give offense, or take it. A
drunken man you know, will make a fray with his own shadow; or suppose he but
nods his head against some Post or Table, (for they will even fall asleep as
they sit) he is so stupefied, that in revenge he will strike his opposite for
the wrong, and then call for drink to make himself friends again: which
friendly cup, gives occasion of a second quarrel; for whether he laughes or
chafes, he is alike apt to quarrel. Or let but a friend admonish him, he were
as good take a Bear by the tooth.

This sin scorns reproof, admonition to it were like goads to them that are
mad already: or like pouring oil down the chimney, which may set the house on
fire, but never abate the heat; it may move them to choler, never to amendment.
I am loath to trouble you with the multitude of examples which are recorded of
those, that having made up the measure of their wickenesse; have Amnon-like
dyed, and been slain in Drink, as it were with the weapon in their belly,
being taken away in Gods just wrath: it faring with them as it did with that
Pope, whom the Devil is said to have slain in the very instant of his
adultery, and carry him quick to hell. And what can be more fearful, then
when their heads are merry, and their wits drowned with wine, to be suddenly
stricken with death: as if the exccution were no less intended to the scule,
then to the body? or what can be more just, then that they which in many years
impunity, will find no leisure of repentance, should at last receive a
punishment, without possibility of repentance? But

30. Fourthly, as drunkenness is the cause of murder, so it is no less the
cause of Adultery: You shall rarely (says Augustine) see a man continent that
is not abstinent. Yea (says Ambrose) the first evil of drunkenness, is
danger of chastity; for Bacchus is but a pandar to Venus; as one Devil is
ready to help another in mischief. He that tarrieth long at the wine, says
Solomon, his eyes shall look upon strange women, and his heart shall speak
lewd things. Prove. 23.33. And Saint Paul witnesses that the fruits of gluttony
and drunkenness, is chambering and wantonness, Romans 13.13. And the example of
Lot, more then proves it, who being sober, abhorred all filthiness; but being
drunk he was easily drawn to commit incest with his own daughters; not once
perceiving when he lay down, or when he rose up. Genesis 19.32. to 36. Which
being rightly considered, methinkes a man had need to be drunk before hand,
that shall admit of more wine then enough; that shall for one hours mad mirth,
hazard a whole age of grief and shame; together with his displeasure, that is
able to destroy both body and soul in hell.

You know when Iron is hot, the Smith can fashion it to his pleasure; and wine
tempers the heart like wax for the Devils impression. When a man is drunk,
Satan may stamp in his heart the foulest sin; but lust will admit no denial.
That heat which is taken at the Tavern must be allayed at the Brothel house.
And the blood which is fired with Bacchus, must be cooled with Venus. Yea the
Devil should forget both his office, and malice, if he did not play the Pandar
to concupiscence this way: for idleness makes way for loose compa^^ loose
company makes way for wine, wine makes way for lust, and lust (...) work for
the Devil: Venus comes out of the froth of this Sea. Nor d^chastity ever sleep
in a Drunkards bed.

The Drunkard is like a Salamander stone, which fires at the sight of every
flame. Yea if he but see a whore, and she him; like the Weesle, and the
Basiliske, they poison each other with their sight, Prev. 7.

Wine and high diet, is adulteries nurse: They rose up in the morning like fed
^orses (says the Prophet) and what follows? Every man neighed after his
neighbors wise; Ier. 5.8. which is more then true with our Drunkards; who like
the Horse and Mule, that have no understanding, no shame, no conscience, etc.
especially your brazen brained, and flinty foreheaded clownes; can no sooner
spy a woman or maid even in the open streets, but they will fall to embracing
and tempting her with ribauldry, scurrility, and turning every word she
speaks, to some lascivious and obscene sense; whereof they are not a little
proud; though it would make a wise and modest man even spue to hear them.

Now what has been said of Murder and Adultery, may also be averred of every
other sin that can be named: for what sin was there ever committed, which
wine has not proved the occasion of? as our reverend Judges, in their several
circuits, find by continued experience? but I must pass over many things

31. Fifthly, as the drunkard deformes his body, impaires his health, shortens
his life, etc. by his excessive drinking: so he consumes his estate, and brings
himself to poverty, and want, as Solomon shows, Prove. 23.21. And I could
largely demonstrate how they consume their wealth at the wine, even until they
have swallowed down their whole estates: and then rather then not satisfy
their guts, that they will spend in sheere drink, all the clothes on their
beds and backs. Yea they will drink the very blood of their wives and
children; who are not only impoverished, but even parched with famine, and
burnt up with thirst, to satisfy his throat; in which he is worse then an
Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. But I will pass this, as of least consequence. Only
observe how he is paid in his own coin. The Drunkard having spent all in
superfluities, in the end he wants necessaries; and because in his youth he
will drink nothing but wine, in his old age he is constrained to drink water.
Yea how often are Vermin seen to suck his blood, as fast as he does that of the
grape and mauli? And lastly, how he throws his house so long out at windows,
that at last his house throws him out at doors: and when all is gone, glad
would he be to be a Swine-herd like the prodigal son: but knowing himself
unworthy of any man's entertainment, he grows weary of his life, and is ready
to make himself away; like Peter the Cardinal, base son to Sixtus the fourth,
that monstrous Epicure, the shame of the later times; or like Apicius, the
shame of the ancient age wherein he lived. Neither stays he here, for the
tiplers progress is commonly from luxury to beggary; from beggary to theevery;
from the Tavern to Tiburne; from the Alehouse to the Gallows.

32. Again, sixthly, another effect of drunkenness is, it not only caufeth a
world of vain babbling, scurilous jesting, wicked talking, impious swearing,
etc. as I have already shown; but over and above, it mightily decays the
brain; for if it finds them not fools, it makes them fools that follow it.
Indeed for the most part it finds men fools; for excess is a true argument of
folly; as who more foolish then those profane Esaus, that will sell their
birthright, reason, and the blessing of grace here, and glory hereafter, for a
mess of pottage; a little sensual delight: and with Adam part with their
salvations for an Apple? What greater folly, and madness, says Gregory, then
for a little tickling of the palate, a kind of running banquet: to lose an
eternal Kingdom, and expose ones self to a devouring fire, an everlasting
burning? Esaias 33.14. Surely in this case, if a man were not either foolish, or
drunk before hand, he could never yield to be made drunk. But secondly, if
they have wit, and other good natural parts before, yet this vice makes them
become fools. Yea, it is the funeral of all a man's good parts. For
drunkenness banisheth wit; reason is so clowded with those fogs, and mists,
which ascend up out of the kitchen of the stomach to the brain, that their
wits run a wool-gathering, as the Proverb is.

A full belly makes an empty brain, when a mass of moisture (like the first
Chaos) is in the stomach; all the faculties of the soul are void, and without
form; and darkness is upon the face of it; until there be another Fiat even a
voice from heaven commanding a new light.

Yea drunkenness besots the strongest brain, and bestiates even the bravest
spirits: when the Grecians that sage Nation, fell to this vice, they mightily
decayed in brain. And take this for a rule, while Bacchus is a man's chief
God, Apollo will never keep him company. I name not these counterfeit deities
to grace, but rather to disgrace them.

Neither are men robbed by it of their natural parts only, but drunkenness
darkens the light both of nature, and grace; and so yields men over unto Satan,
to be led by him, as it were blindfold into all manner of sin, and
wickedness. And which is most remarkable, this may seem to be the drunkards
aim: for being at it, he will never give over drinking, till he has laid
Reason his keeper to sleep, and blown out that little light which is left in
him, and desperately drowned the voice, and cry of Conscience.

33. And the like touching Memory; for the abundance of wine has drowned and
mudded that noble Recorder. The drunkard first speaks he knows not what; nor
after can he remember what that was he spoke. A Drunkards mind, and stomach
are alike: neither can retain what they receive; deep drinkers have shallow me
mories. Yea drunkenness takes from men wit, memory, and all other their good
parts: as how many of these quagmirists, have lost their souls sight by
overmuch drinking; as Dionysius did his bodily? How many through a long custom
in this vice, are grown sottish, and stupid, as if their brains were buried
in tar? I speak not of the present time only, when they are in drink; for
then I should tell you of one drunkard, that sought all the Innes in the Town
for his horse, when indeed he came thither on foot: of another that having laid
his brecches under his bed, for the more safety of his purse; challenged the
Chamberlain that he had stolen them away: of a third, that stuffed his pillow (a
brass pot) with straw to make it soft: of a fourth, that fell to cussing of a
post, for not giving him the wall; and being told that it was a post, made
reply, he might have blown his horn then. I might also tell you, how a
Tavern was by the fancy and imagination of a drunken crew, turned into a
Galley: who having a tempest in their heads, caused by a Sea of drink within;
verily thought this Taphouse on land, a Pinnace at Sea; and the present storm
so vehement, that they unloaded the Ship, throwing the goods out at window,
instead of overboard; calling the Constable Neptune, and the Officers Tritons:
Whereupon some got under the Table, as if they lay under Hatches, another
holding a great pot for the Mast; all crying out that so many brave gentlemen
should be cast away, as Atheneus relates; with abundance of the like, did they
not tend rather to laughter, then godly edifying: but I speak of habituated
drunkards, when they are at the best.

I confess, it is the better for them that they are fools, the case being
rightly considered; for what Owen speaks in the Epigram, may be applied to
sundry Drunkards;

Good wine they say makes vinegar most tart:
Thou the more witty, the more wicked art.
Yea had they been borne mere naturals, they had either been in no fault, or
in a great deal less fault then they are. And so you see that drunkards are
strangely stupendous, and forgetful; that drunkenness deprives men both of
wit and memory: and yet they madly pursue this vice, as the kindler of them.
But no wonder, when the forbidden Tree, which promised our first Parents
knowledge, took their knowledge from them; the same Devil having a hand in
both.

34. Thus having got through the principal stages of the drunkards progress;
before we go any further, let us look back upon what we have past. As how
they imitate their Father the Devil, in tempting, and in forcing to sin, and
in drawing to perdition: after a review taken, let any stander by say, whether
Satan be so much beholding to any men alive, as to them; whether he has any
servants, that do him such faithful service; any Factors that make him a
better return of souls; any Generals, that subdue so many soldiers to him;
any advocates, that plead so hard for him, as the true drunkard. I presume you
cannot nominate one: I confess a beautiful whorish woman, (another of the
Devils lime-twigs) who has a flattering tongue, Prove. 6.24. smooth and
enticing words, Prove. 7.5. lips which drop like an honey comb; and a mouth more
soft then oil, Prove. 5.3. does the Devil singular service in the business of
tempting, for infinite are the souls which these artificial Paradises have
beguiled; for as through an Hell upon Earth, God brings many to Heaven; so
through an Heaven upon Earth many bring themselves to Hell. And she has a
privilege above other tempters; for Cockatrice-like, she kills with her very
sight: yea she is able to take a man with her very eyelids, Prove. 6.25. which
makes the Wise man say, that many have perished by the beauty of women, Eccles.
9.8. Yet nevertheless, let her bid welcome to all comers; so that any base
fellow may ride her post to the Devil, with a golden bit: thee shall never be
able to fill hell, (her body will not hold out) nor help to people that
infernal Kingdom, as some Drunkards do, that are gifted thereafter.

The which considered, together with his other sins of idleness, epicurisme,
adul^^r^, murder, his vain babbling, scurrilous jesting, wicked talking,
impious swearing, atheism, and the like: (for he has treble heads to
Ce^berus, that ugly porter o^ Hell) proves him the King or chiese of sinners;
as the Basilisk is called the King of Serpents. And not only shows them to be
children of the Devil, as all unregenerate men are; but to be really
metamorphosed into Devils: as Lots wife was really metamorphosed into a Pillar
of Salt, and Ulysses companions into hogs and dogs; and Cadmus with his wife
into Serpents, as Poets feign. Yea certainly, if the Devil would change his
properties, he would put himself into the person, and appropriate to himself
the very qualities of some drunken good fellow: as what think you? Is not
drunkenness the root of all evil, and the rot of all good? yea is not this a
sin, which turns a man wholly into sin? and as Ahab sold himself to work
wickedness, so does not the drunkard wholly dedicate, resign, surrender, and
give himself up to serve sin, and Satan? his whole employment is only to
drink, drab, quarrel, swear, scoff, slander, and seduce, as if to sin
were his trade, and he could do nothing else. Like the Devil who was a sinner
from the beginning, a sinner to the end. Yea he is sin in the abstract, as
Augustine speaks. Neither is that man of sin (2 Thessalonians 2.3.) fuller of sin
then such an one; for if these be their words and actions, what think you are
the secrets of their hearts? certainly if all their thoughts did but break
forth into action, they would not come far short of the Devils themselves. Yea
if half so much were known to man, as God knows of them: how would all
drunkards hang down their heads with shame? as what strange monsters would
appear? what ugly, odious, hideous fiends would represent themselves? O what
swarms, what litters, what legions of noisome lusts are couched in the
stinking sty of a drunkards heart! which God only has reserved as a
prerogative royal to him self, exactly to search to the bottom, Jer. 17.9,
10.

You may marvel at this which has been discovered, but you would marvel
much more if all should be told. As I could carry you a great way farther, and
yet leave more of him before then behind. For he is like some putrid Grave,
the deeper you dig, the fuller you shall find him both of stench and horror.
But I am injoined to contract him in a sheet or two of paper, lest it should
cause many to make an end before they begin; as not seldom does a little more
writ, cause a great deal less to be read. Besides, he who has a long journey
to go, and but a little time allowed him, must make but short baits by the
way, and cannot stand to take every acquaintance he meets by the hand. And they
that are to paint or print a pitched field, within the compass of a small table;
can make but few soldiers whole, and complete; but are feign to set down for
the most, their heads only, or their helmets.

35. Wherefore, as drunkards have seen their sin laid open; so let them now
hearken to their punishment: for both by Gods, and man's Law; next after
indictment and conviction, follows sentence; and after sentence is past comes
execution; if a reprieve or pardon be not sued out in the interim.

If there be any of these Antipodes to God and his kingdom, who like Trees
have rooted both head and heart into the earth, and set heaven at their heels:
That have in this Treatise as in a picture taken a full view of his own horrid
and detestable condition; and with Bupalus the Painter read the lively
character of his odious, and deformed demeanor; and after he has seen as in
a clear Glass, the ugly face of his foul heart, with those spots and
wrincles, which otherwise he could not have espied, or confessed in himself: and
further seen, how miserably Satan has deluded him, and shall notwithstanding
persever in this his brutish sensuality; and resolve against yielding; and
prefer the humouring of his soul, before the saving of it; and shall think it
a disparagement to repent him of his errors: and would rather obstinately
continue in them, then disclaim them; so shutting his eyes that he may not
see, and stopping his ears that ^e may not hear, and hardening his heart that
he may not consider; presumptuously as Pharaoh did, maliciously as Cain did,
desperately as Ahab did, and blasphemously as Julian did, Iet him know that he
shall surely perish. The reason of it is taken out of the Proverbs; an Arrow
drawn out of Solomon's sententious Quiver. Read the words and tremble; A man
that hardens his neck when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy, Prove. 29.1. Yea the Lord himself says, Prove. 1.24, 25,
26, etc. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out mine hand,
and ye would not regard, but despised all my counsel: I will also laugh at
your destruction, and mock when your fear comes.

And of this we have sundry instances; The sons of Ely would not hearken
unto, nor obey the voice of their Father, why? because (says the Text) the
Lord was determined to destroy them, 1 Samuel 2.25. Their hearts must be
hardened, that they may be destroyed; I know (says the Prophet to Amaziah)
that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou host done this, and host
not obeyed my counsel, 2 Chronicles. 25.16, 20.

O remember, I beseech you! that there is a day of account, a day of death, a
day of judgment coming; wherein the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angels in slaming fire, to render vengeance unto them
which obey not his Gospel, and to punish them with everlasting perdition from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9.
Jude 15. at which time thou shall hear him pronounce this fearful doom,
Depart from me ye cursed, Mat. 25.41. which is an everlasting departure; not
for a day, nor for years of days, nor for millions of years; but for
eternity; and that from Christ, into those scorching flames of fire and
brimstone, which are prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

More particularly, consider how many woes the word of God pronounces against
drunkards. As woe to Drunkards (says Esaias) that are mighty to drink wine; and
unto them that are strong to pour in strong drink; that continue drinking
until the wine does inflame them. Woe, says Habakkuk, unto him that gives
his neighbor drink till he be drunken. Woe, says Solomon, to them that tarry
long at the wine, to them that go and seek mixed wine: Woe to his body, which
is a temporal woe; woe to his soul, which is a spiritual woe; we to both
body and soul, which is an eternal woe. Howl ye drunkards, says Joe^; weep
ye, says S. James. Esaias 5.22. Habakkuk 2.15. Joel 1.5. James 5.1, 5. Yea,
which of Gods servants has not a woe in his mouth, to throw at this sin? and
every title of this word shall be accomplished: God will one day hold the cup
of vengeance to their lips, and bid them drink their fills. Yea as drunkards are
Satan's Eldest sons; so they shall have a double portion of vengeance. Whereas
riot in the forenoone has been merry, in the afternoon drunk, at night gone
to bed stark mad; in the morning of their resurrection, it shall rise sober
into everlasting sorrow: they find not the beginning and progress so sweet, as
the farewell of it shall be bitter. For as sure as God is in heaven, if they
forsake not their swilling (which they are no more able to do, then they are
able to eat a Rock, the Devil has so besotted them) they shall once pay dear
for it, even in a bed of unquenchable flames.

I speak not of the many temporal judgments which God brings upon them in
this life; though to mention them alone were omni-sufficient, if they thirsted
not after their own ruin. As I could tell them from Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28.
that all curses threatened, all temporal plagues and judgments which befall men
in this life, are inflicted upon them for sin, and disobedience. But I speak
of those torments which are both intolerable, and interminable; which can
neither be endured, nor avoided when once entered into.

If I say you persevere in this your brutish sensuality, and will needs
Dives-like, drink here without thirst; you shall thirst hereafter without
drink. Yea though that fire be hot; the thirst great, and a drop of water be
but a little; yet in this hot fire, and great thirst, that little drop shall be
denied you, Luke 16. For know this, that without repentance Paul will be found
a true Prophet; who says that No drunkard shall ever inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And Esaias no less, who says that Hell enlarges it self
for drunkards, and opens her mouth without measure; that all those may
descend into it, who follow drunkenness, and prefer the pleasing of their
palats; before the saving of their souls, Esaias 5.11, 14. As they make their
belly their God, and their shame their glory; so damnation shall be their end.
Phil. 3.19. Yea their end is a damnation without end; wickedness has but a
time, but the punishment of it is beyond all time.

Neither is the extremity of the pain, inferior to the perpetuity of it; for
the pains and suffering of the damned are ten thousand times more then can be
imagined by any heart as deep as the Sea; and can rather be endured then
expressed. It is a death never to be painted to the life; no pen nor pensil,
nor art, nor heart can comprehend it. Yea if all the Land were Paper, and all
the water Ink; every Plant a Pen, and every other Creature a ready writer; yet
they could not set down the least piece of the pains of Hell fire: for should
we first burn off one hand, then another, after that each arm, and so all the
parts of the body, it were intolerable; yet it is nothing to the burning of
body and soul in Hell: should we endure ten thousand years torments in hell,
it were much; but nothing to eternity: should we suffer one pain, it were
enough, but if we come there, our pains for number and kinds, shall be
infinitely various, as our pleasures have been here. Every sense, and member,
every power and faculty, both of soul and body, shall have their several
objects of wretchedness; and that without intermission, or end, or ease, or
patience to endure it.

O that I could give you but a glimps of it! that you did but see it, to the
end you might never feel it; that so you might be won, if not out of faith, yet
out of fear: for certainly this were the hopefullest means of prevention; for
though diverse Thieves have robbed Passengers within sight of the Gallows: yet
if a sinner could see but one glimps of Hell, or be suffered to look one
moment into that fiery lake, he would rather choose to dye ten thousand deaths,
then commit one sin. And indeed therefore are we dissolute, because we do not
think what a judgment there is after our dissolution, because we make it the
least, and last thing we think on. Something you have heard of it, but alas I
may as well with a Coal paint out the Sun in his splendour; as with my pen,
or tongue express the joys of Heaven (which they willingly part withal) or
those torments of Hell (which they strive to purchase:) for as one said, that
nothing but the eloquence of Tully, could sufficiently set forth Tullies
eloquence: so none can express those everlasting torments, but he that is from
everlasting to everlasting. And should either man or Angel go about the
work, when (with that Philosopher) he had taken a sevennights time to consider
of it; he might ask a fortnight more, and at the fortnights end, a month more;
and be at his wits end at the worlds end, before he could make a satisfying
answer, other then his was, that the longer he thought of it, the more
difficult he found it. Alas the pain of the body, is but the body of pain;
the anguish of the soul, is the soul of anguish.

But to be everlastingly in hell, to lie for ever in a bed of quenchless flames,
is not all: for as thy sins have exceeded, so shall thy sufferings exceed. As
thou have had a double portion of sin, to other men here, so thou shall have
a double portion of torment to them hereafter. The number and measure of
Torments, shall be according to the multitude and magnitude of offenses: mighty
sinners shall be mightily punished. For God will reward every man according to
his works, Rev. 20.12, 13. and 22.12. As our works are better or worse; so
shall our joys in heaven, our pains in hell be more or less. As every one
has been more wicked, so he shall be more wretched. Capernaum exceeding
Sodom and Gomorrah in sin, shall feel also an excess of punishment. And the
wilful servant shall receive more stripes then the ignorant, Luke 12.47, 48.
Matthew. 10 15. Which being so, viz. that every man shall be punished according
to merit; what will become of thee? surely thy sins are so prodigious, that
they scorn any proportion, under a whole volume of plagues. If thou will see
the particular circumstances, which greaten, aggravate, and add weight to thy
sins, and make them above measure sinful; turn to page 465. in the
Drunkards Character, and read to the 142 Section. Or in case thou objectest,
that God is merciful, and that the Thief was heard by our Savior at the last
hour; read the answer to that Plea, from page 542. to the 154. Section, for I
cannot stand upon them here.

Neither let drunkards ever hope to escape this punishment, except in due time
they forsake this sin; for if every transgression without repentance,
deserves the wages of death eternal, as a just recompense of reward, Heb. 2.2.
Romans 6.23. how much more this accursed, and damnable sin of drunkenness?
which both causes, and is attended upon, by almost all other sins, ashath
been proved.

36. And yet if thou can after all this, but truly repent, and lay hold upon
Christ by a lively faith; which ever manifests it self by the fruits of a
godly life and conversation: know withal that though thy sins have been
never so many for multitude, never so great for magnitude; God is very ready to
forgive them; and this I can assure thee of; yea I can show thee thy pardon
from the great King of Heaven for all that is past: the Tenure whereof is, Let
the wick^d forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginati^us, and
turn to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7. And that we should not doubt of this, he
redoubles the promise, Ezekiel. 18. and confirms the same with an oath, chap.
33.11. Yea sins upon repentance, are so remitted, as if they had never been
^ommitted; I have put away thy transgression as a cloud, and thy sins as a
mist. Esaias 44.22. and what by corruption has been done, by repentance is
undone, as abundance of examples witness. He pardoned David's adultery,
Solomon's Idolatry, Peter's Apostasy; Paul did not only deny Christ, but
persecuted him in his members as thou do; yet he obtained mercy upon his
repentance. Yea amongst the worst of Gods enemies, some are singled out for
mercy; witness Manasses, Mary Magdalen, the Thief, etc. many of the Jews did
not only deny Christ, the holy one and the just, but crucified him: yet were
they pricked in heart at Peter's Sermon, gladly received the word, and were
baptized, Acts 2.41.

Yea I can show thee this very case in a president, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. where ^^e
read of certain Corinthians, that had been given to this sin of drunkenness: ^ho
upon their repentance, were both washed, sanctified, and justified. And S.
Ambrose tells of one, that being a spectacle of drunkenness; proved after his
conversion, a pattern of sobriety. Yea know this, that Gods mercy is greater
then thy sin, what ever it be: thou can not be so infinite in sinning, as
he is infinite in pardoning if thou repent. Let us change our sins, and God
will change his sentence. The seed of the Woman, is able to bruise this
Serpents head. Wherefore if you prefer not hell to heaven; abandon this vice.

But withal know, that if it shall come to pass, that the drunkard (when he
hears the words of this curse, namely these threatenings before rehearsed)
shall Pharaoh-like harden his heart, and bless himself in his wickedness,
saying, I shall have peace, although I walk according to the stubbornness of
mine own ^eart; so adding drunkenness to thirst: the Lord will not be
merciful to that man, ^ut then his wrath and jealousy shall smoke against
him; and every curse that is ^ritten in his law shall light upon him; and the
Lord shall put out his name from under heaven; as himself speaks Deuteronomy. 29.19,
20. which chapter, together with the former, I wish thee to read, if thou will
know thy self, and foreknow thy judgment.

37. But will some Titormus say, being it may be stronger to drink, and aller
to tiple, then Milo himself was to eat; who devoured a whole Ox at a meal,
as Poets pretend) I was never so gone yet, but I knew the way home, I could
tell what I did, what I said, etc. Yea no man ever sa^ me so much as wheel in
the streets; I am therefore no drunkard, neither d^ these threats appertain to
me.

To whom I answer; Perhaps thou art no drunkard in thine own, or the worlds
account; but in Gods account, (whose Law extends even to the hea^^ and
affections, Mat. 5.28.) he is one that is mighty to drink wine, and of strengt^
to pour down strong drink. Esaias 5.22. He that goes often to the drink, or tha^
tarriteth too long as it; Prove. 23.30. He that will be drawn to the Tavern^ or
Alehouse by every idle solicitor, and there be detained whole hours i^
drinking against his stomach and constitution of body, against his judgment,
the checkes of his own conscience, the motions of Gods spirit, the ea^nes^
dehortation of his godly friends, and many woes to the contrary: to the
spending of his money, wasting of his precious time, neglect of his calling,
abusing (...) the creatures, (which thousands better then he want) wounding of
his go^^ name, impairing of his health, prejudice of his peace, discredit of
the Gospel, an^ professors ther^of; the stumbling of weak ones, the
encouraging of indifferent and unresolved ones; the fore-staling, and hardening
of his associates, and all other enemies who know, or hear of it. Briefly, he
that drinks more for lust, or pride, or covetousness, or fear, or good
fellowship, or to drive awa^ time, or to still conscience, then for thirst, is
a drunkard in Solomon's dialect^ he is the party to whom those many Woes before
rehearsed do belong. For drink is not only abused, when it turns up a man's
heels, and makes the house turn round: but when it steals away the
affections so far, tha^ a man can neither buy, nor sell, nor meet any friend,
or customer, bu^ straight to the Tavern, or Alehouse. Perhaps six times in a
day, as is the common but base custom of most Tradesmen. And what ever they
think (...) if I have any skill in scripture, they are to be ranked with
drunkards. A^ for those that truly fear God, though they may use their
Christian liberty, and sometimes drink a little for delight; yet ordinarily
they drink a^ other creatures drink, only to satisfy and quench their
thirst. Nor can those formal and titular Christians deny, but in cases of this
nature, things are rather measured by the intention, and affection of the doer,
then by the issue and event. And why should not a man be deemed a drunkard for
his immoderate, and inordinate affection to drink or drunken Company; as well
as an adulterer for the like affection to his neighbors wife, Mat. 5.28? And
so much of the reward and punishment of this sin.

38. I should now proceed to the remedies, at least if there were hope of
reclaiming them; but to speak ingenuously, I never intended it for their
sakes; as considering that habituated drunkards, will be sure to turn their
backs upon this bright shining truth, Jer. 38.15 Sore eyes cannot abide the
light of the Sun; nor Bankrupts, of their Counting books; nor deformed
faces, of the Looking-glass, as our Savior shows, John 3.19, 20, 21.

Neither had Satan any brains, if he s^ou^d suffer them. A Faulkner, you know,
will carry diverse Hawks hooded quietly; which he could not do if they had the
use of their sight; or admit they should read it, I have not the least hope of
their yielding: for these lines to them, would be but as so many characters
written in the water, which leave no impression behind them, James 1.23, 24. 2
Kings 8.12, to 16. Prove. 23.35. Nor will all the water in the Sea, make one of
these Black moors white. The drunkard has been too long sick of this
disease to be recovered. Besides, it is a sin that increases with age; a
Gamester will hold out so long as his purse lasts; an Adulterer so long as his
loins last; but a Drunkard so long as his lungs and life lasts. It is like a
desperate Plague that knows no cure. It may be called the Kings Evil of the
soul, that none except God himself can heal: whence Augustine compares it to
the pit of Hell, out of which there is no hope of redemption. I speak of
drunkards, not of one drunken; (such who rarely and casually have Noah-like
been surprised, and overtaken at unawares) but once a custom, and ever a
necessity. As for instance, let them be told by any minister the hainousness of
this sin, and what a fearful reckoning of vengeance will come in the end; it
is to no more purpose, then if he should speak to lifeless stones, or
senseless plants, or witless beasts. For they will never fear any thing, till
they be in Hell fire. They have no faith in the Scriptures, they will not
believe what is written, therefore they shall feel what is written.

Or secondly, let God send never so heavy judgments upon the land; as Plague,
Famine, War, or the like; these warped, wicked, wretched men, neither fear,
nor cease to rore, drink, drab, swear, etc. so little are they moved with
Gods displeasure, and those grievous judgments. Yea when the fire of Gods
wrath is kindled amongst us for their sakes; they do but warm themselves at the
flame, even sinning so much the more freely, and merrily: even living as if
they were neither beholding to God, nor afraid of him; both out of his debt and
danger. Yea as if the judgment were not only welcome unto them, but they
would fall to courting of their own destruction: as if with Calanus, they
hated to dye a natural death.

Yea thirdly, suppose the Drunkard has every day purposes to forsake his sin;
suppose he strives against it; yea detests and bewailes it in himself, and
others; and thereupon indents with himself and his friends for the
relinquishing of it: yet let him but meet with a companion that holds but up
his finger; he follows him as a fool to the stocks, and as a Ox to the
slaughterhouse: having no power to withstand the temptation; but in he goes
with him to the tippling house, and there he continues as one bewitched, or
conjured with a Spell; out of which he returns not, till he has emptied his
purse of money, his head of ^eason, and his heart of all his former seeming
grace. O this is a difficult Devil to be cast out! and I wish men would beware
of it in time; for when a man is once possessed with this evil spirit, a drunken
Devil; it is a miracle if ever he become his own man after. And indeed it is
much to be feared, that the Lord has done by them, as by Jeremiah; he
threatens the Babylonians, even given them over to a perpetual drunkenness,
Jer. 51.39. And is it not just with God that he who will put out his natural
light, should have his spiritual extinguished? he that will deprive himself
of reason, should lose also the guide, and pilot of reason Gods spirit, and
grace? he that will wittingly and willingly make himself an habitation of
unclean spirits, should not disposesse them at his pleasure?

Alas the flesh, unto them that shall perish, will be stronger then all my
reasons. The sound of the pot with them, will drown all reprehension, all
admonition. They will rather be confounded then reformed; and nothing will
confute them, but fire and brimstone.

All those beasts which went into the Arc unclean, came likewise out
unclean: and a brute Beast is as capable of good counsel, as a drunkard once
become a scorner: yea as Basil speaks, we were as good round a dead man in the
ear, as admonish a drunkard. And indeed he is dead in sin, (only his sin
is alive;) and not only dead as Jairus daughter was, Mat. 9.25. nor only
dead, laid out, and coffined, as the Widows sone of Naum was, Luke 7.14. but
even dead, coffined, and buried, with a Stone upon the Graves mouth to keep him
in, by reason of long custom, as Lazarus was, John 11.39. even till he stinkes
in the nostrils of God, and all good men. And what rubbing can fetch heat in
such a dead body? as appears by the exemples of Pharaod, Exodus 7. chap. to 14.
The Sodomites, Genesis 19. Hazael, 2 Kings 8.12, to 16. Ahab, 1 Kings 22.16, to
53. Balaam, Number. 22.30. etc. The Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 27.51, etc. Prove.
27.22, etc. Yea to expect that this unmasking their faces, should humble and
reclaim them; were to imitate the Fool, that carried his saddle to shame his
horse; or to tell them what is denounced in the Word against this sin, were
almost as ridiculous, as that Ceremony which the Mahometans use, of flinging
stones to stone the Devil with. Wherefore I have no other message to deliver
unto such an one, then that which the vigilant Captain delivered, together
with a deaths wound to his sleeping Watchman, Dead I found thee, and dead I
leave thee.

Only thou O Father, (to whom nothing is hard) if it be thy good pleasure, (as
why not? seeing it will make much for the glory of thy great name, to save such
a mighty sinner; who Manasses-like, has multiplied offenses above the number
of the sand of the Sea; and is bound down with many iron bands) say unto his
soul, Live: It is true, thy angry threatening toward sinners is importable; but
thy merciful promise, is unmeasurable, and unsearchable: Thou therefore that
art able to quicken the dead, and make even of Stones, children to Abraham,
mollify these stony and dead hearts with the blood of the Lamb; and make of
these children of the Devil, members of thy son Jesus Christ.

39. But here some hastily, (peradventure over hastily) will say; this is a
strange course, to discourse against drunkenness; when you have no expectation
that drunkards should give it the hearing. For, as Christ said, They that are
whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick.

To which I answer; what though these deaf Adders will not be charmed? (as
that music loses both its sound and grace, which is bestowed upon the
deaf.) What though none of this herd of habituated drunkards will be cured?
yet some young ones may be deterred, some Novices reclaimed, some Parents,
Masters, and Magistrates awakened, to prevent and suppress the spreading of
this Gangren: and we are no less commanded to used the means. I have done it
also for their sakes, who are not yet infected with this drunken good
fellowship, to increase their detestation of evil company, and that the others
purpose may be infatuated. For vices true picture makes us vice detest. And
what though every plant that is watered, proves not fruitful? yet if God (who
it may be has bidden me speak) but accompany his Word to the hearts of some;
if but a few, if but one be persuaded, in stead of loving this vice, to hate
it; the labor is not in vain, the gain of one soul, is greater then the
Indies.

Now Physicians say, if the Disease be once known, the Cure is half done.
Here you have drunkenness disapparelled of her robes, and her face so unvailed,
that possibly the sight of it may cause such a loathing, and that loathing,
such a forsaking; that hundreds of others may both know, abhor, and beware
their allurements; strive against the sin, shun all occasions of it, bewail
their cases that are led captive to it; neglect their censures, labor their
recovery, and pray for their salvation.

40. Now if any of them shall ask, how they may use and apply this remedy for
their best advantage? I answer, upon every occasion let them examine what the
drunkard (herein set forth) does; an^ do the contrary: for he is the most sober
and honest man, that resembles this drunkard least. Do but con this lesson,
it is enough. Nevertheless, lest I should imitate those, who kindle a fire under
green wood, and leave it so soon as it begins to flame; read also Complete
Armor against evil Society: for as in this Treatise, I have showed what
drunkards do, so in that I have showed them, and others what they should do.

Only I will add a word of advice; If any would escape this snare of the
Devil, and Drunkards: let them have a special care, to refrain the company
of this drunken rout, Prove. 23.20. who not only make a sport of drunkenness,
but delight also to make others drunk.

There are some Vices of that nature, that they cannot be vanquished, but by
avoiding, 1 Cor. 6.18. such is this: bid a man consort a while with Drunkards,
and depart from them innocent; you may as well put a match to dry powder, and
forbid it to take fire. It is not sat to commit a little Wherry to the Seas
violence. A stick that has once been in the fire, will soon take fire again;
and corruption, like a candle new put out, is soon ^ighted again: if Satan
but blow upon it, the own heat is enough to inflame it. It is not safe
venturing into evil company, in confidence of our own strength; no more then
it is to consort with Cheaters in hope that they will not consen us. They were
emingled among the Heathen (says the Psalmist,) and what follows? they
learned their works, Psalm. 106.35. Yea how soon was Peter himself changed,
with but coming into the Highpriests Hall? Nor had he ever denied, and
forsworn his Master, if he had not been in company with Christ's enemies. Nor
had David ever so dissembled, if he had not been among the Philistims. Which
made him say, so soon as he had considered it, Depart from me all ye workers
of iniquity, for I will keep the commandments of my God, Psalm. 119.115. As
knowing that the one could not be without the other. And indeed it is rare, if
with Peter w^ deny not Christ in Caiaphas his house: with Solomon we shall
find it hard having the Egyptian without her Idols. Yea how many thousand of
these drunkards have confessed at the Gallows: I had never come to this, but for
evil company which drew me to these courses? And indeed, why do we pray not
to be led into temptation; if we lead our selves into temptation? if we will
not keep our selves from the occasion, God will not keep us from the sin: and
if God do not keep us, we cannot be kept; we cannot, we will not choose but
fall. Wherefore as Joseph no sooner heard his Mistress say, come let us lie
together, but he left her and fled away; so if you but hear good fellows say,
come let us drink together, be sure to leave them, though without taking your
leave of them. Satan and his instruments like a flattering Host, may promise
good cheer, but the reckoning pays for all; and he that compares the welcome
with the farewell, shall find he had better have fasted; for if we swallow the
bait, the hook will choke us. Wherefore be as wary, and as wife as a Serpent,
to keep out, or at least to get out of their company; but as innocent as a Dove
if it be possible, while thou art in i^ and can not choose. Remembering
always, that they are but the Devils deputies; yea hum^ne Devils, as once our
Savior called Peter (being isntrumental to Satan) Satan himself, Mat. 16.23.
Change no words with them, for there is no disputing with Satan or his Agents;
as you may see by his success in Paradise; when he so easily persuaded Eve by
himself, and Adam by her; to believe what he spoke, though they had heard God
himself say the contrary immediately before. When Castles once come to a parley,
there is great fear they will yield, and Gates that are always open, will
sometimes admit an enemy.

Neither will the complaint of our first parents be taken for a good answer, or
plea another day, it will be fruitless to say such and such a friend deceived
me: Eve was persuaded by the Serpent to eat the forbidden fruit, and Adam by
Eve; yet each had a several curse; both tempters, and tempted.

41. Now by observing, or not observing this rule; it will appear whether
there be any hope of thy holding out, for all depends upon this; yea could the
most infatuated, habituated, incorrigible, cauterised drunkard, that is even
dead in this sin; but forsake his ill company, I should not once doubt of his
recovery; for do but drive away these unclean birds from the Carcass, a
million to amity, the Lord may be pleased to breath into his nostrils again,
the breath of life, and he become a living soul. O that all drunkards were
driven to the Barbados, there to drink water and work, until some divine
Ulysses could procure them their reason, and persuade them once again to
become men, sober men, yea sound Christians: so should our Nation flourish
again, and be better provided with honest men ^or places of trust, both in
Church and State, then now it is, where so few have public spirits, and prove
faithful. And what justerpunishment can there ^e devised, then that they shall
be debarred both of the blood of the Grape, and the spirit of Barley; for
consuming the Countries fat? Were not ^leare Rocke-water good enough for such
Gormondizers? Or if authority ^hinkes not this fit; I could wish there were
Pesthouses provided for them ^n all places, as there are for infected persons.
Or that they were put by themselves in some City, (if any were big enough to
receive them all) as Philip King of Macedon, built a City of purpose; and
peopled it with the most wicked, graceless, and irregular persons of all his
subjects; and ha^ing so done, called it Poneropolis, that is, the City of
wicked persons.

And certainly if it were well considered, how many of these Brokers of
cillany, which live only upon the spoils of young hopes, every populous ^lace
affords: and what evil they do by their seducing some, and giving ill ^xamples
to others, by devouring the good Creatures of God which they never sweat for,
by disturbing the peace of Church and Commonwealth, by ^ulling down heavy
judgments upon the Land, and considering the little good they do (being as so
many loose Teeth in the mandable of the Commonwealth, which were better out
then in) and what small hope there is ^f their amendment, if any at all: the
like means of prevention would ^e thought profitable for our times. I do not
wish them stoned to death, as God commanded such rioters, and drunkards to be,
under the Law, Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. Nor bamshed the Land, as the Romans did all
vicious, and vo^uptuous persons, that the rest might not be endangered. And
Lycurgus all ^nventers of new fashions, lest these things should effeminate all
their young men: for then I fear the land would be much unpeopled. And so much
for ^he avoiding of drunken company.

42. Secondly, be careful to abstain from drinking places, which are even the
nurseries of all riot, excess, and idleness; making our land another Sodom,
and furnishing yearly our Jails, and Gallowses. Far be it from me to ^lame a
good calling, to accuse the innocent in that calling; I know the Lord ^ath many
in the world in these houses; but sure I am, too many of them ^re even the
dens, and shops, yea the thrones of Satan; very sinkes of sin, which like so
many common-shoares, or receptacles, refuse not to welcome, and encourage any
in the most loathsome pollutions they are able to invent, and put in practice.

Who if there were any hope of prevailing, would be minded of their wic^edness,
in entertaining into their houses, encouraging, and complying with ^hese
Traitors against God; and of their danger in suffering so much im^iety, to rest
within their Gates. For if one sin of Theft, or of perjury is enough to rot
the Rafters, to grind the stones, to level the walls, and roof of any house,
with the ground, as is laid down Zach. 5.4. what are the oaths, the lies, the
thefts, the whoredoms, the murders, the numberless, and nameless
abominations, that are committed there? But should I speak to these, I should
but speed as Paul at Ephesus; I should be cried down with Great is Diana,
after some one Demetrius had told the rest of this occupation, Sirs, ye know
that by this craft we have our wealth. Surely if fear of having their Signs
pulled down, their licenses called in, etc. cannot prevail, it little boots
me to speak.

43. Only to you Churchwardens, Constables, and other Officers, that love the
Lord, the Church, the State, your selves, and people; Help the Lord, the King
and his Laws, against this mighty sin; present it, indict it, smite it,
every one shoot at it as a common enemy, do what you can to suppress and
prevent it.

Tell me not he is a friend, a gentleman, such an ones kinsman that offends,
for he is better, and greater, and nearer to you, that is offended. Learn to
fear, to love, and obey your Maker, and Savior, your Sovereign and
Protector. Yea learn this Norman distinction; when William the first, censured
one that was both Bishop of Bajeux, and Earl of Kent; his Apology to the
plaintiff popeling was, that he meddled not with the Bishop, but the Earl do
you the like, let the gentleman escape, but stock the drunkard; meddle not with
your friend, and kinsman, but for all that pay the drunkard, and make his Host
pay that suffers him to be drunk. O^ if you do not to your power, you shall
have Ahabs wages, his faults shall be beaten upon your backs. 1 King. 20.42.

44. But most of all are they to be desired, who are within the commission of
Peace in Gods name, whose servants they profess themselves to be, to remember
him, themselves, their country, their oaths, and to bend their strength and
power against this many-headed Monster; that they will purge their Country,
much more their own houses, of this pernicious and viperous brood. Yea if
there be any love of God, any hatred of sin, any zeal, any courage, any
conscience of an oath: away with drunkenness out of your Houses, Towns,
Liberties; balk none, bear with none that offend: say they be poor in whose
houses the sin is practiced; it is better one or two should lose their gain,
then Towns of men should lose their wits, their wealths, their souls. O
beloved, did you hear, and see, and smell, and know, what is done in some one
Tavern, or Alehouse (hell-house I might call it) in this land; you would
wonder that the earth could bear the house, or the Sun endure to look upon
it. But alas how many of these Houses be there in some one Town? how many of
these Towns in some one Shire, and so upward?

You often complain of Bastardies, Sheep stealers, robbers, quarrellers, and
the like, will you be eased of these diseases? believe it, these gather into
the Alehouse, as the humors do into the stomach against an Ague fit; take them
there, drive them thence, with some strong physic; and you heal our land at
once of infinite distempers.

Here I might also mind you, of most prisons: Just Lot was vexed with the
uncleanly conversation of his wicked neighbors; Sodom was worse then a Jaile,
to his righteous soul; and report lies, if our Jailes be not much like to
Sodom; the very dens of mischief, the schools of wickedness; a malefactor,
or broken Shopkeeper, learnes more villainy there, then ever he knew before.
Drunkenness, and blasphemy, usurp the places of Mortification and Humility,
though most unfit it should be so.

Such as would know more of this, and other subjects more serious; let them
read Sin Stigmatized, from which I have plucked this, as a Bunch of Grapes
from a large Vine.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Spartans and Lacedaemonians, used to show their Slaves in their drunkenness
unto their children, thinking that their ugly deformity both in body and mind,
would be an effectual argument to make them loath this vice, which even at the
first view seemed so horrid. The Persians and Parthians also, to the same end
kept always in their houses the like ugly, and deformed descriptions lively
painted out; and found it by experience, the most operative and effectual
course to keep theirs from excess. And nothing, as Anacharsis holds, will
sooner reclaim a man from Drunkenness, then the seeing and remembering of a
drunkards odious condition, and beastly behavior.

Would we then that are Christians have our children and servants decline this
bewitching, besotting, infectious, and incurable sin; this wastefull,
insatiable, unreasonable, unnatural sin; this base, brutish, atheistical,
execrable, prodigious, and infernal sin; this transcendent sin, which is the
cause of all other sins; yea a confluence or collection of every sin; even
turning a man wholly into sin: this sin that is the Funeral of all a man's
good parts, and indisposeth him to all grace and godliness; yea to all the
means thereof? (...) use we them, and that often, to read over in our families,
this description of a drunkard: and for ought we know, ours and after
generations, may by Gods blessing, be less inamored with this loathsome, and
worse then beastly abomination.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

John Downam.


