A DECLARATION And full Narrative of the proceedings of Admiral Vantrump With
the Dutch Fleet at Sea; his entering of Cales Bay: And the manner of the taking
of ninety sail of the Hollanders ships by the English: with the proceedings of
the French Fleet thereupon.

Also a Message to the English Consul at the city of Venice, and Vantrumps
Letter to the Princes of Italy.

Likewise, the Jesuits proceedings of the City of GENOA and a Sermon preached,
touching the Heriticks of ENGLAND, as they are pleased to call us. With other
particulars of great concernment, in relation thereunto.

LONDON, Printed for I. Clowes Anno Dom. 1651.

Strange Nevvs from Genoa 27 October 1651.
WE have little news, save that the Hollanders who will with their Admiral
Trump be 45. sail of men of War, suddenly will randezvouz in Cales Bay, for
what design this winter we know not well: He has writ several Letters to the
Princes of Italy, declaring that the quarrel is not against any of them, but
the French for their pyrating; Now the French will at most be but ten men of
War abroad this winter, whereof as yet are but three, whereby the fleet cannot
be immediately for them. Some Letters from London of this last week speak of
the Dutch Agents or residcnts sudden retirement from London without taking
leave, also that the English have seized on near 90. sail of their ships,
whereby its thought a War (for those and other respects) may happen between the
two states.(...)

Captain Pen we understand is gone for the Straights mouth with his squdron
to catch the Newfound Land: Baccaleau french men that furnish Marsellis and
many other places of France with their Winter and Lent provision; its thought
the taking of them may make a mutiny in France against those that of their
Nation first set out shipping against the English, we shall hear the effect.

To this Town came lately a Jesuit extraordinary from his Hollinei (for sooth)
with special order to pardon the sins of those upon confession, though they
have been 20. years 25. years without confessing, so full of clemency and
grace is the Pope, this man preaches hear 2 or 3 times a day, and makes people
run mad after him, admiring his sanctity and zeal: The Pulpits here usually
are long, so that two or three persons may be in one of them at one and the
same time, and because this man would show his learning, and how sound their
Religion i^, he has a fellow that now and then comes up into the Pulpit to him
during the preachment, and at his Q. falls to disputing with him concerning
some of their tenants as seeming to oppose them, but at length being silenced
and consuted by the Jesuit, their composed argument cease, 'and down goes my
fellow again; so that they that have been there to hear them, tell us of great
sport and recreation they afford to the people.

His chief drift is at two things. 1. To convert the Heretics as he calls us,
next to stir up the people to part with their monyes in exchange of Prayers and
Masses for their Grandfathers and friends departed, and this he does by
special authority from the Pope, the collection of monyes so gathred being for
the Church. And (says he) believe not these rank and stinking Heretics that
say, there is no Purgatory (spisting at them as he is speaking) for Christ
says, there is 2 purgatory, the primitive Church also confirms it, as the
Popes, Cardinals, and Counsels likewise do, but Calvin forsooth, he like an
impudent fellow tells you it is all lies, all forgeries, all stories we tell
you. He, (says he) is one of the three Pillars of their Church: Luther and
Queen Elizabeth being the others. This Town I look upon (says he) as a great
place for Heresy, Oh that I could but have one os them to dispute with me here
before you all, that I might shamefully lay him on his back. We see (says he)
what their sweet Religion has brought them to in England: I have been told but
very lately by some English Gentlemen come from thence, that they have one Sect
called the Adamites still amongst them, and declared their nakedness, and
manners, rendering that Religion most hidious to this people, who think we are
all of one mind. Taking occasion to speak of Mary Magdalens Conversion, he
said she was not so highly guilty of incontinency as the world talks of, for
she never had to do with a man but 3 or 4 times, the manner thus. She being a
great Queen says be, young and handsome, she fell in love with her Secretary
(alas youth is apt that way you know) and so ly that means he lay with her 3
times Now this Secretary not being able to contain so great a happiness,
tells an intimate friend of his how that he was made for e ver by his
Mistresses (the Queens) affection: and what had passed Ay says the other, you
must procure me the like favor of the Queen, or else I am resolved to divulge
thi^. I hope not so says the Secretary: Its neither more nor less than I tell
you of says the other.

Hereupon the Secretary goes to the Queen a most sad man, declares to her how
that the felicity of her love was so insupportabl that he had revealed it to a
confident friend of his, but that he had deceived him, for he declared to
reveal the business unless she admit him to the like happiness. The Queen
here upon knew not what to say, poor woman, being put to such a plunge, but at
length to save her honor chose to lay with him; and this is all that people
make such a stir for sooth quoth he, concerning this Queen, Mary Magdalen.

This wretch was so blasphemously impudent as to assert in his Sermons, that a
Priest was in some respects more then God himself, for that God could not make
a man without a man's help, for its man and God that makes a man,) but says he
a priest speaks but a few words and he makes a God Ipso facto. Urging people to
meritorious works by way of contribution of monyes to get their deceased
friends out of Purgatory, which he vehemently insisted on (as indeed it brings
them most moneys in) he related a story of a certain Godly prince, that had so
much pity on the poor souls in purgatory that he allowed 30. Masses a day to
be said for them a while after, something like a Spirit came in the night into
his Chamber, and frighted him grievously, hereupon he calls for help to his
several Servants, Anthony, Richard, William, Ralph, come all of you hither
presently, they awakned at his loud cry presently came into his Chamber, the
Prince bad them light a Candle and seek diligently for a Spirit that walked too
and again, they after long search about all the house could see nothing,
whereupon they were bid to go to 'bed again.

The next night 'twas wors then before, for the Spirit (says he) heaved up the
bed from under him, that the Prince was again put to it to call out for his
servants to drive this troublesome spirit out of doors, but all in vain, for
they could not find him.

The third night (good lack) was not tolerable, the spirit so r^unted it in
the said Chamber, that Gregory and Cudbert, and all must rise once more to
unkennell the spright, but still none could be found.

The Prince says he, thus outrageous perplexed, and encompassed with grief and
melancholy, musing (the next day) what might be the cause that he must be a
mere game for Goblins more then another man, especially since he had
commiserated the poor mortals in Purgatory, and was full of other good works:
At last striking his naked fist upon the table by which he sat, after he had
recollected his thoughts call me hither (says he) my Steward forthwith: the
Steward appearing, and the Prince looking wishly upon him, says he have thou
paid for the 30 Masses a day as I bad thee, which I fear me is the cause I am
thus haunted a nights, the Steward being struck as it were dumb of astonishment
and shame, intending to pocket up the money himself, immediately confessed the
guilt, Oh thou rascal thou Hedge-hogg that thou art quoth the Prince, go, the
first thing thou do and pay for 100. Masses a day that I be no more thus
plagued with Devils when I should sleep a nights. These his commands being
accordingly performed, the Prince never heard of any more Goblins after, but
(says he) slept as well as any one of us.

Thus far; for matter of their preaching I shall now conclude with a story
latety acted in this place.

Their courteousnesse being taken notice of both by their friends as well as
well as their foes, occationed this following stratagem; Half a dozen
scholars falling in company with one of the Jesuits Pupils in their discourse
upbraided their Fathers with uncharitableness to the Poor: saying saying that
if a poor neighbor lying sick should send for them at any convenient of night
for their assistane and comfort they would s^arse stir from their chambers
whereas, let them have the least invitation from a rich body and they are ready
at all times of the night the pupils took their Masters part saying it was
otherwise with them.

Hereupon the scholars resolving to try ^onclutions see some instruments at
work to go to the College prsently after 9. a clock one night who knocking at
door acquainted the porter they were sent from such a poor man 'dwelling not
far of, who being as it was thought deadly sick, did much desire the presence
of such and such Fathers to comfort him and pray with him

This being carried up to them, they sent to them answer that it was not a
fitting time of night to require that at their hands, and that besides some of
them were preparing to preach next day.

Some few nights after, they sent again very late being after midnight, and
knocked up a Porter, acquainting him that such a rich Merchant by name, dwelling
at a great distance from that College: being very dangerously sick had sent to
them, desiring earnestly that they would come away as well to confess him, as
also to help him to order his last will Testament, and that 'twas conceived he
had not many hours to live: The porter bad the messengers tarry, and that he
would go call them up: who accordingly half ready came down to them on, saying
they were sorry to hear of the sad condition of that worthy pious Gentleman,
whom they had so lately seen at Church; and that they would soon be ready to
give him their best assistance. Whereupon one of the Messengers desired to run
home before, pretending to acquaint the sick party of their intended coming,
and left the other to serve them as a guide. He that was gone before gave
notice to his comrades who were ready in ambuscado, waiting the coming of our
holy Fathers, And taking their opportunity, they very handsomely set on them
with good Cudgels, belabouring them to some tune and so left them sprauling on
the pavement for helfe dead: none of the Inhabitants daring to appear for
their assistance, it beieg very dangerous in most Cities of Italy to open door^
after midnight, by reason of many insolences The next day complaints were made
to the Magistrate of such high indignities acted on these eminent Religious
persons desiring that inqussition might be made to find out the authors
thereof. Now at the same time there were libells stuck up in many chief
public places of the City, declaring the whole ground work and carriage of the
business; which being produced and read before as well of the Magistrate as
the Jesuits, they were feign to retire with their blows on their backs, to the
perpetual shame of them and their society. Thus with my most affectionate
Respects to all our friends, I k^sse your hands and remain

Your obliged friend and servant R. Y.
Pray excuse my have and brevity at this time your last Letter was four days
older than the others, but was never the simpler for that you will say.
FINIS,

