EIGHT REASONS Categorical: Wherein is Examined and Proved, That it is probable,
THE LAW-COMMON Will Stand.

And continue at LONDON and WEST MINSTER: Humbly tendered to the consideration
of all ingenuous Men; And for The Encouragement of Students.

By Albertus Warren Gent.

June. 30. LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for John Place at Furnivals Inne-Gate
in Holborn, 1653.

Eight Reasons Categoricall, etc.
TO mention the Antiquity of our Common Law, is not herein material, neither
the unequalled wisdom of it (comparing it to the Laws of neighboring
Nations); It is sufficient to prove its excellency: If (I say) the Law never
had an Enemy who understood it -- But whether the Body or Essence of our
Fundationall, Common, or Municipall Law, is like (rebus sic stantibus) to
receive any considerable change, or no, is the Quaerie in the first place.
Secondly, whether our Judicial Courts of the Common Pleas, and of the Upper
Bench (the former whereof handles properly Disputes at the Common Law; the
latter, frequently, though sometimes improperly, the like also;) be like to
continue where they are, or not; with some inconveniences hinted, if they be
removed elsewhere.

etc. For which last, many pregnant remedies are allowed, if the party injured
can prove, or will swear before a Justice in the Country. Now, the end of
Actions so allowed, is, to curb men's hearts, and passions; who would otherwise
quarrel every hour, and shed blood. Clear enough it is, that, as to the matter
of Title, what famous Littleton said long ago, is so Aphoristicall, and
indeed, to the Intelligent, perspicuous, that very rarely (as the Learned
observe) any of his Positive Judicials admit of Dispute. And if we well
consider who they are who most Carp at the Law; they are either, Turbulent
spirits, pleased with no Government; or else, Vulgar heads, perhaps, men on
both sides, of small estates, and illiterate. The common Law disturbeth few of
quiet spirits, or of low estates; the Vulgar has not wherewith to work its own
ruin by Law: only there is that unsatisfied first Generation, whose aim is to
make out their own malice, by Law vexatious; a fault in themselves, not in the
Law I am so far from admiring, there are so many Enemies to the Law, that I
wonder, there are no more, since every man desires his Cause shall pass for
him: As if the Law ought not to speak to all alike.

Quondam Body Politic of this Nation: The Law is their defense, and safety;
every discerning man has heard, there was a legal vestment of the Forfeited
Estates of Delinquents, first, in the Trustees for the State, and from them
derived to the Purchasers; and that way, the present Indefeasible Estates of
the Soldiery are vested in them: They have reason to maintain that Law. So
indulgently loving and profitable, so strong a ligament of their ffortunes.

It is evident,

Energie. Some necessities there are sometimes in states, absolute, present,
and necessary, and these, men say, may dispense with the very Laws of Nature,
much more with any positive humane Law, for the safety of the People. The
question never was, whether we or any other people ought to be governed by an
Arbytrary power (for there must be an Arbitrary power some where, else where
will Salus populi be, at a pinch) But in whose hands it ought to be. What
extraordinary and illegal Acts the King committed, were so illegal; because
he must have convented that triplicity of power to make them legal: here lay
the first rise of our politic quarrels; and therefore Kings must be, and were
always, at variance with the Common Law: But now the present Governors (in
esse and posse) are and must be in a legal capacity (and that immortally
during every intervall) to act for imposing of Taxes, raising the Militia, etc.
if you granted the King the Militia (as inherent ratione Politicae, or
naturalis capacitutis) yet had he little money. The Law was not for him; it did
hinder him, in the execution. But our present Governors, I say, without more
ado, do not offend the letter of the Law in rationally providing for the
people: because they are above the Law of men and (taken collectively) to those
ends aforesaid; else we should be in an hostile condition, as Mr. Hobbs well
observes. The Army is as it were necessitated to maintain the Law.

difference (as to the sacredness of some protests of maintaining the Laws of
this Nation, for distributive Justice) between those obligations some men had
put unwarily upon us for preserving the regal interest, contrary to the
freedom of natures Law, (which shows, that al^egeance and protection are
correlate; and contrary to the national engagement, which tyeth me to a
government then established, in effect to obey my superiors; so the sound word
of God had said before, it was but a commemoration of the Apostles Precept,)
and between their own protests that they would maintain the fundamental laws,
and therefore, although the King might be within some stipulations, yet might
he recede from their reciprocallity, exactible on his part (and so was he
charged) by some acts disreciprocall, and those Acts gave men, in power, over
him, liberty to cancel any supposals of his restitution: But for the Armies
promise, for maintenance of the Law which (though a wise thing) could not be
mutually stipulatory (being as dead matter taken abstractedly) it is the same,
Laws cannot commit any crime. The Army will maintain, and love the Law, for
its constant, and unshaken, prudent constitution, for our people under the
present government.

case is now altered, and God has mightyly appeared in owning the proceedings
of the Councels, now on foot, and men's spirits are more still Parcite paucorum
crimen diffundere in omnes.

Law Judicial; and in nothing, I know of, disagreable to Gods word, or any
Christian Philosophy.

Mars, or there interest in all imaginable respects, in reason; as to the
honor of the Nation abroad, (whereof the Army seems very tender) to the
keeping of busy heads within the large sphere, and latitude of legal
studies, while things purely National are transacted by our Superiors: As to
the presenting of their own issue (when Peace shall triumph in the three
Nations joined happily in one Republic) into places of trust and judicature.
But especially, as before hinted, for fixing and establishing their own
possessions (accrewed unto them by the merit of their Arms and Valor) jointly
with other men Titles. And that this is the design of all wise Politians, he
that runs may read: we shall be degrees come to know, that the Gentry (where
well fixed) are very significant in England with them, when the Soldiery well
agrees, Floriceat Respublica, the Law, and marriages, in time, will wipe all
pristine indispositions away betwixt them.

England, what an irreparable decay, and impoverishing to two parts of the
Nation at least, the removal of the Judicatory Courts from London, into the
Country would be. London is the chief Mart, and Empory of the three Nations;
The place where all trading, upon the matter, concenters; hence Money presently
for payment of an Army, Soldiers, Land and Maritine may, be raised; Arms, at
2. hours time, to be had, against any Foreign invasion (which God forbid) yet
our sins cry loud to heaven. This is a City situate upon our Queen of Rivers,
opposing by the convenience of shipping; from hence, France our ancient Enemy:
The very glory indeed London is, of the English Nation; for its admirable
civil Sanctions, and way of Government; what if I say, without its help, things
could not possibly have been, as now they are, shall we dismember our Trade,
and weaken it into Nookes? Will our Superiors, think you, ruin myriads of
Families? Will they suffer those gallant fringes of London, the majestic
Suburbs of this thrice noble City to be depopulated? All these must and a
thousand other mischiefs follow, should the Law be Courts removed. But whether
would some rash heads have the Carried? Into the Country, we are so troubled
already with Country Jurors, that, for the most part, one cunning knave
carries all the rest (right or wrong) which way he pleases. And some of late
have got a trick to carry Sugar Plumes, or Raysons of the Sun in their Pockets,
they will starve the rest, but the cause shall go after their wishes.

I have but this to say (though these are but hasty draughts together) where
the Law is defective, or redundant, where the practice of it, is either prolix,
chargeable, or uneven, where apparent disfavours are cast upon Defendant. In a
word, where the same principles upon equal and adequate reason (the matter
whereunto they are tied being identicall) are not suffered or do not, but
accidently, produce the same effects in Law Theorick and Pracktick where
corruption is crept in, or men's cunning have started subter suges, let all such
excrescencies be pared off, and with great care, lest in one hour, more hurt
come to the liberty of the subject, then can be repayed in an age, Nihil simul
Natum et perfectum est.

FINIS.

