A Hopeful way to Cure, that horrid Sin of SWEARING.
Or an help to save Swearers, if willing to be saved: being an Offer or
Message from HIM, whom they so Daringly, and Audatiously provoke.
Before you lay it by, at lest read the Postcript at the End.

Messenger, SIr, methinkes you swear and curse as if he that made the ear
could not hear, Or as if he were neither to be feared nor cared for, who for
sin cast the Angels out of heaven, Adam out of Paradise, drowned the old
world, rained down fire and brimstone upon Sodom, commanded the earth to open
her mouth and swallow down quick Corah and his company, he who smote Egypt
with so many plagues, overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea; destroyed
great and mighty Kings, giving their land for an inheritance to his people, And
can as easily with a word of his mouth strike you dead while you are
blaspheming him, and cast you body and soul into hell for your odious
unthankefullnesse; Yea it is a mercy beyond expression that he has spared you
so long.

What, because you are displeased with others, will you fly in your makers
face? and tare your Saviors name in pieces? This is worse then frenzy, this is
to send challenges into heaven, and make love to destruction; consider of it
least you swear away your part in that blood which must save you, if ever you
be saved; yea, take heed least you be plagued with a witness, and that both here
and here after, for God (who cannot lie) has threatened that his curse shall
never depart from the house of the swearer, as it is Zach. 5.1. to 5. And I
doubt not but you are already cursed, though you know it not; That either he
has cursed you in your body by sending some foul disease, or in your estate
by suddenly consuming it, or in your name by blemishing and blasting it, or in
your seed by not prospering it, or in your mind by darkning it, or in your
heart by hardening it, or in your conscience by terrifying it, or will in your
soul by everlastingly damning it, if you repent not. Wherefore take heed what
you do before it prove too late.

Or if you regard not your self, or your own souls good, yet for the
Kingdoms good leave your swaring, for the Lord (as now we find to our smart)
has a great controversy with the inhabitants of the land because of swaring,
Hosea 4.1.2. Yea because of oaths the whole land (even the 3. Kingdoms) now
mourns, or rather lies a bleeding, and that to death, as you may see, Ier.
23.10. Neither object that ye are so accusto^ed to swaring that you cannnot
leave it, for this defense is worse then the offense, as take an instance.
Shall a Thief or Murderer at the bar aleadge for his defense, that it has
been his use and custom of a long time to rob and kill; or if he do, will
not the Judge so much the rather send him to the Gallows.

Besides, the objection is false and frivilus, for wear you forced to pay 12.
pence for every oath you swear, (as the law injoynes) or if you were sure to
have your tongue cut out (which is too light a punishment for this sin,
damnation being the due penalty thereof, as the Apostle sets it down, James
5.12. You both could and would leave it: Wherefore I beseech you by the mercies
of God, (who has removed so many evils and conferred so many good things upon
you, that they are beyond thought or imagination) to leave it, especially after
this warning, which in case you do not will be a sore witness, and rise up in
judgment against you another day.


Swarer. Did I swear or curse?


Messenger. Very often, as all here present can witness, and Satan also, who
stands by to take notice: reckon up and set on your score every oath you utter,
keeping them upon record against the great day of asize, at which time every
oath will prove as a daggars point stabbing your soul to the heart, or as so
many waights pressing you down to hell; Revelat. 12.10. As also the searcher
of hearts, who himself will one day be a swift witness against swarers; Mal.
3.5. For of all other sinners the Lord will not hold him guiltless that
takes his name in vain; as the third commandment tells you, Exodus 20.7.

But woe is me, it fares with common swarers as with persons desperately
deseased, whose excrements and filth comes from them at unawars; for as by much
labor the hand is so hardened that it has no sense of labor, so there much
swaring causes such abrawny skin of sencelessenesse to overspread the heart,
memory and conscienee, that the swarer swareth unwittingly; and having sworn
has no remembrance of his oath, much less repentance for his sin.


Swarer. Alas though I did swear yet I thought no harm?


Messenger. O fool, what Prince hearing himself abused to his face, by the
reproachful words of his base and impotent Subject, would admit of such an
excuse, that whatsoever he spoke with his mouth, yet he thought no ill in his
heart? And shall God take this for a good answer, having told us beforehand
Deuteronomy. 28.58.59. that if we do not fear and dread his glorious and fearful
name, the Lord our God he will make our plagues wonderful, and of long
continuance, and the plagues of our posterity? Besides, how frequently do
thou polute and prophaine Gods name, and thy Saviors? The Jews greviously
finned in crusifying the Lord of life but once, and that of ignorance, but the
times are innumerable that thou do it, every day in the year, every hour
in the day, although thy conscience, and the holy spirit of grace has checked
thee for it a thousand and a thousand times.

Do thou expect to have Christ thy Redeemer and Advocate, when thy
conscience tells thee that thou have seldom remembered him but to blaspheme
him, and more often named him in thy oaths and curses then in thy prayers.


Swarer. Surely if I did swear, it was but faith and troth, by our lady, the
mass, the roode, the light, this bread, by the cross of the silver, or the
like, which is no great matter, I hope, so long as I swear not by God nor by
my Savior.


Messenger. That's your gross ignorance of the Scriptures, for God expressly
forbids it, and that upon pain of damnation. James the 5.12. First our Savior
Christ in his own person forbids it. Mat. 5.34, 35, 36.37. I say unto you
swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne, nor by earth, for
it is his footstool, nor by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King;
neither shall thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black; but let your communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay, for
whatsoever is more then these comes of evil: and then by his Apostle; Above
all things my breathren, swear not, neither by heaven; nor by earth, ^or by any
other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, least you fall into
condemnation. James 5.12. Where mark the Emphasis, in the first words; Above
all things swear not; and the great danger of it, in the last word condemnation.

If the matter be light and vain, we must not swear at all, if so weighty,
that we may lawfully swear as before a Magistrate being called to it; then we
must only use the glorious name of our God in a holy and religious manor, as
you may see. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Isa. 45.23. and 65.16. Josh. 23.7. Ier. 5.7. Exodus
23.13. And the reasons of it are weighty, if we look into them: for in swaring
by any creature whatsoever, we do invocate that creature, and ascibe to it
divine worship: a lawful oath being a kind of invocation, and a part of Gods
worship, Yea, whatsoever we swear by, that we invocate, both as our witness,
surety, and judge, Heb. 6.16. and by consequence deifie it, by ascribing, and
communicating unto it, Gods incommunicable atributes: as his omnipresents, and
omnisiencie of being every where present, and knowing the secret thoughts and
intentions of the heart, and likewise an omnipotency, as being almighty in
patronising, protecting, defending and rewarding us for speaking the truth, or
punishing us if we speak falsely: All which are so peculiar to God, as that
they can no way be communicated or ascribed to another. So that in swaring by
any of those things, thou committest an heigh degree of gross Idollatry, thou
spoylest and robbest God of his glory (the most impious kind of theft) and in a
manner dethronest him and placest an Idol in his room. And as to swear by
the creature makes the sin far more heinous, so the more mean and vile the
thing is which you swear by (be it by my fey, by cock and pie, hares foot,
by this cheese and such like childish oaths which are so much in use with the
ignorant and superstitious swarm) the greater is your sin in swearing such
an oath, because you ascribe that unto these basest of creatures, which is only
proper to God; namely to know your heart, and to be a deseruer of secret
things; why else should you call that creature as a witness unto your
conscience, that you speak the truth and lie not, which only belongs to God?
And therefore the Lord calls it a forsaking of him: as mark well what he says
Jer 5.7. How shall I spare thee for this? thy children have forsaken me and
sworn by them that are no Gods. Exodus 23.13. And do you make it a small
matter to forsake God, and make a God of the creature? Will you believe the
Prophet Amos. If you will, he says (speaking of them that swore by the sin of
Samaria) that they shall fall and never rise again. Amos 8.14. a terrible
place to vain swarers.

Neither are we to join any other with God in our oaths; for in so doing we
make base Idols and filthy creatures corrivalls in honor, and competitors in
the throne of justice with the Lord who is creator of heaven and earth, and the
supreme judge and sole Monnarke of all the world.

Or in case we do, our doom shall be remediless, for the Lord threatens by
the Prophet Zephany, that he will cut off them that swear by the Lord, and by
Maulcham: which Maulcham was there King, or as some think their Idol, Zeph.
1.4.5.

But admit the sin were small, as you would have it to be, yet the
circomstances make it most heinous; for even the least sin in its own nature
is not only mortal, but unpardonable, so long as it is willingly committed and
excused or defended.


Swarer. But all do swear except some few singular ones, and they also will
lie, which is as bad.


Messenger. You must not measure all others by your own Bushel, for although
ill dispositions cause ill suspicions, even as the eye that is bloodshot sees
all things red, or as they that have the Jaunders see all things yellow; yet
know that there be thousands who can say truly, through Gods mercy, that they
had rather choose to have their souls pass from their bodies, then a wilful
premeditated lie, or a wicked oath from their mouths; wherefore when you want
experience, think the best, as charity bids you, and leave what you know not
to the searcher of hearts.

As for the number of swearers, it cannot be denied, but the sin is almost
universal, and this is it which has insensed Gods wrath, and almost brought
an universal destruction upon our whole Nation: But is not this excuse, that
others do so; a most reasonlesse plea, and only becoming a fool? when our
Savior Christ has plainly told us, that the greatest number go the broad
way to destruction, and but a few the narrow way which leads unto life: Mat.
7.13.14. and St. John that the whole world lies in wickedness. 1 John 5.19.
And that the number of those whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand of the
Sea. Revelat. 20.8. and 13.16. Isay 10.22. Romans 9.27. And tell me, were it a
good plea to commit a felony, and say that others do so? Or will thou leap
into hell and cast away thy soul, because others do so? A sorry comfort it
will be to have a numerous multitude accoompany us into that lake of fire, that
nver shall be quenched.

Besides, it is Gods express charge Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil; and St. Paul's everlasting rule. Romans 12.2. Fashion not
your selves like unto this world.


Swarer. But I may lawfully swear, so I affirm nothing but the truth.


Messenger, If you be lawfully called to it as before a Magistrate, or when
some urgent matter constrains for the confirming of a necessary truth, (which
can by no other lawful means be cleared) and for the ending of al contentions
and controversies, and clearing our own or our neighbors good name, person or
estate, and to put an end unto all strife, aiming at Gods glory, and our own
or our neighbors good, which is the only use and end of an oath; in which case
a man is rather a patient then a voluntary agent, You may swear, otherwise not.

Neither must we swear at all in our ordinary communication, if we will obey
Gods word, as you may see Mat. 5.34.35, 36, 37. James 5.12.


Swarer. Except I swear men will not believe me.


Messenger. Thou had as good say, I have so often made shipwreck of my credit
by accustomary lying, that I can gain no belief unto my words without an
oath; for it argues a guilty conscience of the want of credit, and that our
word alone is worth no respect, when it will not be taken without a paune or
surety. Neither will any but bas^ banquerouts pawn so precious a jewel as
their faith for every small trifle. Besides, he that often swears not seldom
forsweareth. And so I have informed you from Gods word what the danger is of
vain and wicked swearing.

Now if you either believe the scriptures, or desire to escape that dyerful
sentence; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25.41. No longer excuse nor defend it, but repent of
it and forsake it; And so much the rather for that of all other sins this
sin of swearing is the most in excusable. First, Because it is a sin from
which of all other sins we have most power of abstinance, as I showed you
before; and the easiar the thing commanded is, the greater guilt in the breach
of it; and the lighter the injunction, the heavier the transgression; as St.
Austine speaks, and Adam his eating the forbidden fruit sufficiently proves.

Secondly; because it is a sin, to which of all other sins we have the
fewest temptations; for all thou can expect by it is the suspicion of a
common liar, by being a common swearer; Or that thou shall vex others and they
shall hate thee, for it brings not so much as any apearance of good unto us
to induce us: for whereas other sins have their several bayts to alure us:
some the bayte of profit, some of honor, some of pleasure, this sin is
destitute of them all, and only brings much loss here, namely of credit and
a good conscience, and the loss of Gods faviour, and the Kingdom of heaven
hereafter: which is of more vallew then ten thousand worlds: which shows that
thou love this sin only because it is a sin, and swearest out of mere
malice, and contempt of God; which is most fearful: and (as a man would
think) should make it unpardonable. I am sure the Psalmist has a terrible
word for all such, if they would take notice of it; Let them be confounded that
transgress without a cause, Psalm. 25.3.


Swearer, O but God is merciful, and Christ came into the world to save
sinners; witness the Thief upon the cross, who was heard by him at the last
hour


Messenger. I grant the Lord is exceeding merciful and gracious, slow to
anger, and abundant in goodness and truth keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving ^^iquity, transgression and sin, for he proclaims himself so.
Exodus 34.6, 7. But he will by no means clear the ungodly,

(...) And no marvel, that this fearful imprecation should fall from the
Prophets mouth; for that man is bottomlesly ill, who loves vice merely because
it is a vice, and because God most strictly forbids it He is a desperate,
prodigeous, damnable wretch, who (rather then not dye) will anger God on set
purpose.

But as if swearing alone would not press thee deep enough into hell, thou
addest Cursing to it, a sin of an higher nature: which none use frequently,
but such as are desperately wicked: it being their peculier brand in Scripture;
as how does the Holy Ghost stigmatize such an one? His mouth is full of
cursing, Psalm. 10.7. and Romans 3.14. or He loves cursing, Psalm. 109.17. and
indeed, whom can you observe to love this sin? or to have their mouths full
of cursing; but ruff^ines, and sons of Beliall; such as have shaken out of
their hearts the fear of God, the shame of men, the love of heaven, the dread
of hell, not once caring what is thought or spoken of them here, or what
becomes of them hereafter; yea observe them well and you will find, that they
are mockers of all, that march not under the pay of the Devil.

And whence do these monsters of the Earth? these hellish miscreants, these
bodily and visble devils, learn this their damnable cursing and swearing; are
not there tongues fired and edged from hell, as Saint James has it, Iam. 36.
yea it is the very language of ^he damned, as you may see Revel. 16.11.21. Only
they learn it hear, before they come thither: and are such proficients
therein, that the devil counts them his best scholars, and setts them in his
highest form. Psalm. 1.1. well they deserve it, with whom the language of hell
is so familiar, that blasphemy is become their mother tongue Besides it is the
very depth of sin, roaring and drinking is the horse way to hell whoring and
cheating, the foot way; but swearing and cursing follows Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram. And certainly if the infernal Tophet be not for these men, it can
challenge no guests. But see how witless, graceless, and shameless, even the
best are that use to curse; (for I pass over such as call for a curse on
themselves saying, God damn me, confound me, the devil take me, and the
like; which would make a rational man tremble to name; because I were as good
knock at a dead man's grave, as speak to them.

Thou art crossed by some one, perhaps thy wife, child, or servant; or else thy
horse, the weather, the dice, bowls, or some other of the creatures displease
thee; and thou fallest a cursing, and blaspheming them, wishing the plague of
God; or Gods vengeance to light on them, or some such hellish speech falls
from thy foul mouth. And so upon every foolish trifle, or every time thou art
angry, God must be at thy beck, and come down from heaven in all have, and
become thine officer to revenge thy quarrel, and serve thy malicious humor.
(O monstrous impiety! O shameless impudency! to be obhorred of all that hear
it.) not once taking notice what he commands in his word; As bless them that
persecute you, bless I say and curse not, Romans 12.14. and again, Bless them
that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke 6.28. which is the
practice of all true christians, 1 Cor. 4.12.

But this is not one half of thine offense, for whom do thou curse? alas
the creatures that displease thee are but instruments, thy sin is the cause,
and God is the Author, 2 Samuel 16 11. Psalm. 39.9, 10. Genesis 458. Ioh 1.21. from
whom thou have deserved it, and ten thousand times a greater cross. But in
stead of looking up from the stone, to the hand which threw it; or from the
effect, to the cause; as Gods people do; thou like a mastiffe dog set
upon the stone or weapon that hurts thee. But in this case who are you angry
withal? Does your Horse, the dice, the rain, or any other creature displease
you? alas they are but servants, and if their master bids smite, they must
not forbear; they may say truly, what Rabsheke usurped, Jsa. 36.10. Are we
come without the Lord, and all that hear thee may say as the Prophet did to
Senacharib. 2 King. 19.22. Whom have thou blas^themed? and against whom have
thou axalted thy self? even against the holy one of Jsrael.

And what will be the issue? the causeless curse shall not come where the
curser meant it. Prove. 26.2. yea though thou cursest, yet God will bless Psalm.
109.28. but thy curses shall be sure to rebound back into thine own breast.
Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. Prove. 14.30. Cursing mouths are like ill made pieces,
which while men discharge at others, recoile in splinters on their own faces.
Their words and wishes be but whirle winds, which being breathen forth, return
again to the same place. As hear how the Holy Ghost delivers it. Psalm. 109.
As he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him, and as he loved not blessing,
so shall it be far from him. As he clothed himself with cursing like a
garment, so shall it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his
bones; let it be unto him as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle wherewith
he shall always be girded. ver. 17, 18, 19. Here this all ye, whose tongues
tun so fast one the devils arrand, you loved cursing, you shall have it,
both upon you, about you, and in you, and that everlastingly if you persereve
and go on; for Christ himself at the last day, even he which came to save the
world, shall say unto all such, depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25.41. Where they shall do
nothing but curse for evermore; for they no farther apprehending the goodness,
mercy, and bounty of God, then by the sense of their own torments, the effects
of his justice shall hate him, and hating him they shall curse him Revel.
16.11.21. They suffer, and they blaspheme, there is in them a furious malice
against him, being cursed of him they recurse him; they curse him* for making
them, curse him for condemning them, curse him because being ajudged to death,
they can never find death; they curse his punishments because they are so
unsufferable, curse his mercies, because they may never taste them; curse the
blood of Christ shed on the Cross, becuse it has satisfied for milions, and
done their unbeleeving souls no good; curse the Angels and Saints in heaven,
because they see them in joy and themselves in torment; Cursings shall be their
sins, and their chief ease; Blasphemies their Prayers; Lacrimae their notes;
Lamentation all their harmony: these shall be their evening songs, their
morning songs, their mourning songs for ever and ever. And indeed who shall go
to hell, if cursers should be left out. Wherefore let all those learn to
bless, that look to be heirers of the blessing.


Swearer. O But God is merciful, and Christ came into the world to save
sinners; witness the Thief upon the Cross, who was heard by him at the last
hour.


Messenger. I grant the Lord is exceeding merciful and gracious, flow to
anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, for he proclaims himself so.
Exodus 34.6, 7. But he will by no means clear the ungodly, but visit the
iniquity of their fathers upon their children, and upon their childrens
children, unto the third and fourth generation, as it follows in the very same
verse. Yea, he will reward the wicked according to their works Revel.
20.12.13. and 22.12.

Indeed a world of men believe with Orrigen, that God is so merciful that all
shall be saved; they presume that God must needs save them, because he made
them, without any other ground, though in another fit they are as apt to
despair, and to say with the same Origin, should all other sinners obtain
mercy yet not I. Wicked men are altogether in extremes, at first they make
question whether this or that be a sin, at last, they apprehend it such a
sin, that they make question whether it can be forgiven. Either God is so
merciful that they may live how they list; or so just, that he will not pardon
them upon their repentance. No mean with them, between the rock of
presumption, and the gulf of dispayer.

But the tenure of the word of God runs thus. Let the wicked forsake his ways,
and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive. As
Esaias has it, Chap. 55 7. And that we should not doubt of this, the Lord
redoubles his promise, Ezekiel. 18. And confirms the same with an oath Chap.
33.11. Yea, he is more ready to show mercy upon our repentance, then we are to
beg it, as appears in the example of the Prodigal Son. Luke 15.20, Do but
repent and God will pardon you; be your sins never so many and innumerable
for multitude, never so heinous for quality and magnitude: for repentance is
always blessed with forgiveness. Yea, sins upon repentance are so remitted,
as if they had never been committed. I have put away thy transgressions as a
cloud, and thy sins as a mist. Esaias 44.22. And what by corruption has been
done, by repentance is undone; as a bundance of examples witness He pardoned
David's Murder and Adultery, Solomon's Idolatry, Peter's Apostasy, Paul did not
only deny Christ, but persecuted him, yet he obtained mercy upon his
repentance: yea amongst the worst of Gods enemies some are singled out for
mercy, witness Manasses, Mary Magdalen, the Thief, etc. Many of the Jews did
not only deny Christ the holy one and the just, but crucified him, yet were
they pricked in there hearts at Peter's Sermon, gladly received the word, and
were baptized. Act. 2.41. But on the other side, unless we repent and amend
our lives, we shall all perish, as Christ himself affirms. Luke 13.3.5. For
though mercy rejoices against justice, Iam 2.13. yet it destroys not God
justice: he is just as well as merciful; his mercy is a just mercy, and his
justice is not an unmercifull justice, he is infinite in both, and therefore in
his word he has equally promised, all blessings (spiritual, temporal, and
eternal) unto those that keep his commandments, and threatened all manor of
judgments to those that break them, with their several extremes, according
to the measure and degree of every sin. Deuteronomy. 28. which chapter, together with
the former, I wish thee to read, if thou will know thy self, and foreknow thy
judgment. Neither is salvation more promised to the godly, then eternal death
and destruction is threatened to the wicked, both in the old and new Testament.
And as Christ is a Savior, so Moses is an accuser. John 5.45. Alas though to
all repentant sinners, he is amost merciful God, yet to wilful and
inpenitente sinners, he is a consuming fire. Heb. 12.29. Deuteronomy. 4.24. Does not
the Apostle say that neither fornecators nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
buggerers, nor thieves, nor coveteous, nor drunkards, nor raylers, nor
extortioners, to which number Saint John Revel. 21.8. adds the fearful, and
unbeleeving, and murderers, and sorserers, and all liars shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, but shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire
and brimstone which is the second death. 1. Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.21. And does
he not likewise affirm? that all they shall be damned which believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 2 These 2.12. does not the Lord say
Ier. 16.13. that he will have no mercy for such as are deseparately wicked, and
again Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. That if any man bless himself in his heart saying, I
shall have peace although I walk according to the stubbornenesse of mine own
heart: so adding drunkenesse to thirst the Lord will not be merciful unto him,
but the wrath of the Lord and his jelousie shall smoke against that man, and
every curse that is written in his book shall light upon him; and the Lord
shall put out his name from under Heaven, etc. Does not our Savor himself
say? that the gate of heaven is so straight that few find it Mat. 7.13.14. and
will he not at his coming to judgment, as well say to the disobedient? depart
from me ye cursed, as to the obedient come ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom, etc. yes they are his own words. Mat. 25 34.41. In fine, he that
believes in the son has everlasting life, but he that obeys not the sun
shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him. John 3.36.

And in all reason, if he punished David's Adultery and Murder so sharply, (a
man after his own heart, yea and that after his sin was remitted) what will
he do to his enemies, but send them to that devowring fire, that everlasting
burning. Isay 33.14. If Gods own children (who are as near and dear to him
as the aple of his eye, or the signet on his right hand. Zach. 2.8. Duet.
32.10. Suffer so many and greivious afflictions here? what shall his
adversaries suffer in hell. If Sampson be thus punished, shall the Philistems
escape? Yea, if judgment begin at the house God, what shall their end be that
obeay not the Gospel. 1 Pet. 4.17. If many shall seek to enter in at the
straight gate and shall not be able, how shall they be able who seek not at
all. Luke 13.24. If the righteous shall scarcely be saved, when shall the
ungodly and sinner appea^e? as the Scripture speaks. 1 Pet. 4.18. So that
mercy i^ for vessels of mercy. Mat. 5. and not for vessels of wrath.

And what though Christ in the Gospel, has made many large and precious
promises? ther^ are none so general, which are not limited with the condition
of faith, and the fruit thereof unfeigned repentance. And each of them are so
tied and entailed, that none can lay claim to them but true believers: who
repent and turn from all their sins, to serve him in holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord Heb. 12.14. Isay 59 20. So that he must forsake
hi^ sins that will have God to forgive them. 1 Samuel 2.30. Mark 16.16. Heb.
5.9.

Neither was it ever heard, that any one ascended into heaven without going up
the stairs o^ obedience and good works: that any have attained unto
everlasting life, without faith, repentance, and sanctification; for even the
theife upon the cross, (which you ignorantly aleadge) believed in Christ, and
showed the fruits of his faith, in acknowledging his own sin, reproving his
fellow, in confessing our Savior Christ even then when his Apostles denied,
an^ forsook him; in calling upon his name, desiring and confidently trusting
by his means and merrits, to have everlasting life. Neither does his example
make any whit for the comfort o^ procrastinators, for he is a fool that makes
an ordinary rule of an extraordinary example: and such is this of the theifes
convertion, for it was a miracle. Not unlike the Suns standing still in Ioshuas
time, or its going back in the days of Hezekiah. Or rather those other
miracle^ of the graves opening, the dead arising, the veil of the temple
renting, the light of the Sun failing, etc. which Christ wrought at the same
time; with the glory whereof, our Savior would honor the ignominy of his
Cross. Besides, he was then to take his leave of the world, and to enter into
his glory, and we know it is usual with Princes to save some heinous
malefactors at their coronation, when they enter upon their Kingdoms in
triumph, which they are never known to do afterward Besides, the Scripture
speaks of another, even his fellow; in that very place, and at that very
instant, which was damned. There was one says St. Austine converted at the
last hour, that none might despair; there was bu^ one that none should
presume. Yet every drunken beast, and swearing Athiest, can wrest this
scripture to their own destruction, and decoct the mercy of God in pardoning
him, into ranck^ poison, taking the same for an encouragement, and thinkeing it
a sufficient warrant for them to continue in their evil and vicious courses.

Not once taking notice of other Scriptures, which show that millions who had
less iniquity, have found less mercy. And that whosoever Christ saves with
his blood, he sanctifies with his spirit, and in whom his death taken takes
away the guilt and punishment of sin, it is also effectual for the
mortifying of sin, as is plain by Romans 6.5, 6. Titus 2.14. Ephesians. 1.4. and
many the like, Yea, the Lord binds it with an oath, that whomsoever he
redeemeth out of the hands of their spiritual enemies; they shall worship him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. Luke 1.70. to 76.
Other Scriptures to this purpose are many, see only, Titus 2.12. 1 Pet. 2 24.

But to make it yet more clear, what else did thy vow in baptism (which is a
seal of the Covenant) importe? but that there are Articles and conditions,
viz. Certain duties on thy part to be performed, as well as promises on Gods
part to be fullfiled. A Sacrament is a sealing of a league with Covenants,
between party and party says Parreus Now as God has covenanted, and bound
himself by his word and seal to remit thee thy sins, adopt and regenerate
thee his child, give thee the Kingdom of heaven, and everlasting life, by and
for his sons sake: so thou did for thy part, bind thy self by Covenant,
promise and vow: that thou would forsake the Devil and all his works,
constantly believe Gods holy word, and obediently keep his commandments, the
better thereby to express thy thankfulness toward him, for so great a
benefit. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 116.12, 13.14. And we know that in-Covenants
and Indentures, if the conditions be not kept, the Obligation is not in force.
Whereby many (even Magus like) after the water of Baptism, go to the fire of
hell. Yea, except we repent and believe the Gospel, we are perjured; and that
holy Sacrament, together with the offer of grace, and in stead of sealing to us
our salvation, will be an obligation under our hand and seal against us, and
so prove a seal of our greater condemnation.

Alas ignorant Worldlings (who will believe nothing which comes not within
the compass of their five senses) think that because God strikes not he
minds not. Psalm. 50.21. Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men, is fully set in
them to do evil, as Solomon speaks. Eccles. 8.11. Because God does not
forthwith strike one dead with a Thunder Bolte, and rain down fire and
brimestone upon another, and cause the earth to swallow down a third quick;
while they are blaspheming him: though I might give you many examples of Gods
vengance upon swearers even here: men harden themselves in their sins, and
think that God allows of their doings. But O fools, though he comes softly
to judgment, yet he will come surely, and in the end what he wanted in
swiftness, shall be supplied in severenesst Yea, such men's very deliverance
from judgment, is a worse judgment then the judgment from which they are
delivered, for it argues, either Gds utter forsaking them as disperate patients
are given over by the Physician as in Isay 1.5. or else it argues a reservation
of them for some more fearful plagues, as it is Levit. 26.18. to 40 and Esaias
6.10.11. and the examples of Cham, Lots wife, Absalom and Pharaoh sufficiently
prove. As what did it avail Pharaoh, that himself was not smitten with many
of those judgments, wherein others perished, it was far from being a mercy,
yea it was a reservation to the greatest temporal judgment of all here, and
to that eternal judgment also in the burning lake, from which there is no
redemption. God owes that man a greivious payment, whom he suffers to run on so
long unquestioned, and his punishment shall be the greater, when he comes to
reckon with him for all his faults together. When God will give over men to his
judgments, he first gives them over to the judgment of an hard and impenitent
heart. Thou have smitten them says the Prophet, but they have not sorrowed.
Thou have consumed them but they have refused to receive correction, they have
made their faces harder then a stone, and have refused to return. Ier. 5 3.

Which is now Englands case, for though its back be all blew and sore with
stripes, yet still it persists and presumes, no repentance, no reformation,
(understand it of the generality) nor will we be warned without our full
vengance, As filching leaves not the pil^^erer with raw sides, but brings him
to a broaken neck. They will not believe that are ordained to perish. As tell
me, of so many millions of notorious sinners as were in this land: how many, or
where are any; who from the beginning of these bloody and unnatural wars,
these sad and calamitus distemp^^s, have left off their drinking, swearing,
whoreing, profaning of the Lords day, cheating and the like; can you name
tenn, yea or two of a thousand which you partly knew, no certainly; for he that
was a drunkard before, is a drunkard still, he that was a swearer before, is a
swearer still, he that was filthy before, is filthy still, etc. Though such a
judgment in a different age, (wherein religion it self and the power of
godliness was not countemptible as now it is) would have caused an universal
repentance and reformation, as the like (only threatened, not executed) did in
the Nine vites. Jona. 3

But what do I speak of their repentance and reformation, or of their being
the better, when they are much the worse for this greivious judgment* When the
greatest number swear and curse even in a presumptious bravery, as neither
regarding Gods wrath nor waying his heavy displeasure. Being like so many mad
dogs, that fly in their masters face who keeps them. Yea, when they will
scoff at, jeere and persecute any, that shall refuse to run with them unto the
same excess of riot. 1 Pet. 4.4. even living as if they were neither beholding
to God, nor afraid of him, both out of his debt and danger.

Oh the small hopes that we have of Gods sheathing his sword, and the many and
woeful, symetomes of an universal destruction of our whole Nation, (whom God
has more honored with the means of grace then any nation under heaven) for
this we may build upon; that God will never leave smiting, till we smite that
which smites at his honor. Was it the Lords complant against Jerusalem, when
he threatened her destruction by Nebuchadnezar? I called to weeping and
mourning, and to baldness and girding with sackcloth; but behold joy and
gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinkeing wine.
Isay 22.12.13 For which he was so highly offended, that he tells them this
their iniquity should not be purged till death verse 14?

what then may we justly look for, when we drink, and swear, and cheat and
whore, as if there were no God to judge, nor hell to punish, nor heaven to
reward? which sins at any time were abominable, but now (and that upon days
of humiliation) they are most execrable. Yea, what other is this, then to
imitate the Thra^ians, who when it lightens and thunders, shoot arrows against
heaven; thinking by that means to daw God to some reason.

And yet these men profess and call themselves Christians, and look that
others should esteem them so: yea, they dare call God father, and expect that
he should give them the Kingdom of heaven: and not only show their faces in
the Temple; but with their mouths receive (as they think) the sacred body and
blood of the Lord of life. But will God own such wicked and profane wretches
for his children? no such matter. He will one day (if they repent not) turn
them over to the god of this world. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2 26 John 12.31. and 14*
30. And say to them as once Christ to the Jews. John 8.44. Ye are of your
father the Devil. Neither can he be a good God, who has such evil sons: As
the Indians told the Spaniards when they first came amongst them, after they
had observed their conditions.

But I need say no more, you have heard what God himself has both said and
sworn in his word. And in case you believe not Moses and the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles, you would never be persuaded, although one should be sent
unto you from the dead, to testify what a place of torment you are (without
repentance) going unto. Luke 16.31. Wherefore do you believe there is a God?
and that he speaks as he means in his word? are you a Christian? if you be
there is an hell in your creed, If there be an hell, how dare you tare heaven
with your blasphemies? and bandy the dreadful name of God in your impure and
miry mouth by your bloody oaths and execrations. Do not stifle your
conscience, nor stop your ears against the mennases, and threats of God in his
word. Flatter not your heart with an opinion that he is all mercy: but believe
peremptorily and fully what the word speaks: as well the commands and threats,
as the promises: And not what Satan and his adherents (the world and the flesh)
suggests of meeting with heaven at the last hour, when all your life long you
have gallowped in the beaten road toward hell. Or to use our Saviors own
words, Do not stop your ears, and wink with your eyes; least you should see
with your eyes, and hear with your ears, and understand with your heart, and
so should be converted. Mat. 13.15. Acts 28.27. Yea, if you bear any good will
to your own soul, break off your sins by repentance, give no longer credit
to the flesh or the Devil which prophecy prosperity to sin; (as once the
Pope to the powder traitors) but believe God and the Scripture; which
manifestly proves, that every man shall be judged according to his works.
Revel. 20.13. and 22.12. Make not Christ a bolster for sin, nor Gods mercy a
warrant for your continuing in an evil course. Be not therefore evil because
he is good, least like the foolish builder, Luke 14. you come short of your
reckoning.

Oh what a blasphemous imagination is this against Jesus Christ! to think that
he came into the world to be a patron of sin, or a Bolster whereupon we may
more securely sleep in sensuality; and not to destroy the works of the Devil
as it is, 1 John 3.3.8.9.10. O that Christians should so live, as if the
practice of the Gospel were quite contrary to the rule of the law! But such
men show what they are, for none but base minds, and perverse dispositions
says St. Barnard, will therefore be evil because God is good. And those that
belong to Gods election, and for whom Christ died, will never make that liberty
which he has purchased for them with his precious blood, a warrant or cloak to
sin, but rather a spur to insite them to godliness. As nothing so soon leads
an ingenious mind to repentance, as when he considers Gods bountifullnesse,
and long suffering toward him, Romans 2.4. What says holy David, There is mercy
with thee that thou may be feared. Psalm. 130.4. Not that thou might be
despised, blasphemed, etc. Yea, know this, and wright it in the table book of
thy memory and on the table of thine heart; that if Gods bountifulness and
long suffering toward thee, do not lead thee to repentance, it will double
thy doom, and increase the pile of thy torments; for every day which does not
abate of thy reckoning will increase it; and thou by thine hardness and
impenetencie, shall but treasure up unto thy self wroth against the day of
wroth, and the declaration of the just judgment of God. Romans 2.4, 5.


Swearer. This is but one doctors opinion, another (who knows as much as you)
will judge you but a legal preacher, and call it ridgid devinity which
breathes out nothing but damnation: as being a means to make men dispayer,
rather then win them to Christ. Are all damned except a few presizians.


Messenger, I know it is the divinity of diverse, Let men live how they list, in
ignorance and all abominable filthynesse; so they call at last, and but say
Lord have mercy upon me, we must infalably conclude their estate as good as the
best, as if the Lord had not said you shall cry and not be heard. Pro. 1.24. to
32.

I know also, that the Church has never in any age, or place of the world,
been without many false prophets: who are very ready to withstand, and
contrary whatsoever doctrine the true prophets are commanded by God to deliver,
and you may also see it 1 Kings 22. 6.23.24. Ier. 5.12.13.31. and 6.14, 15. and
8.11. and 14.13. to 19. and 26.8.9. Acts 13, 7. to 12. and 17.18. to 21. and
20.29.30. Ezekiel. 22.25, 26.28. Deuteronomy. 13.3. Mar. 7.15. and 24.5.11.24. 2 Timothy
3.8. 2 Cor. 11.13. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. Phil. 3.18. And these do all that
possibly they can, (by wresting and misaplying the Scripture) to discourage the
godly, and encourage the wicked. And therefore in stead of discovering of, and
rebuking for sin, Lam. 2.14. (which is the first step tending to edification
and conversion) they flatter the people in their sins, as those confederates
of Korah did Israel; The Congregation is holy enough. Numb^^^ 6.3. O^ preach
p^ace un^o them, as the Serpent to Eve^ ye shall not dye at all Genesis 3.4, 5.
Or promis^ them good success in an evil way; as those 400 false prophets to
Aha^, G^e up and prosper^ for the Lo^^ shall deliver it into thine hand; 2 Chronicles. 18.11. Which the h^ly ^h^st calls daubing with untempered m^rter, Ezekiel.
13 14.15 and 22.28. Saying, more^ver that from these Prophets, prophanes goes
forth into all the land Ier. 23.15. Whereas if they dis^harged their ^^ty, and
deal^ pl^inly with (...) people; they should turn them from their ^ill way,
and from (...) evil of the (...) ^^rse 21, 22. N^r can there be a better
p^oofe of a false teacher then soothing (...) ^s a M^un^e^^nke trick; to heal
an ulcer and leave in the cor^. Yea, wh^^ good Phys^i^ian, either for soul o^
body does not first tell us the state of the diseal^, with us symtomes, and
then pres^ribe; and in prescribing, first pull down the body, and then rais^
it wi^h cordia^ls* and ^^^se patient would (...), that sh^rpe medicens, and
bitter potions, make short diseases, and pro^ure sound hea^t^ Bu^ touching
Ministers that edify to damnation, I refer you to a small book called, An
Abs^^^^ of some late Characters: where they are painted out to the life
Secondly, How much better it is to strike the conscience, then stroke the
ear; I shall show you hereafter upon another occasi^n Thirdly touching what I
have said, as it is for the discharge of my duty, and according to Gods
express command. Levit. 19.17. Heb 2.13. So search the Scriptures, and try
whether my doctrine and allegations be of God or no, as those noble B^reans did
when Paul preached. Acts 17 11. And then if they agree not with the pensill of
the Holy ghost reject them, but if they do, e^teraine it, as if it were an
epistle sent from God himself, to invi^e and call you (...) repentance. And so
doing it shall (with Gods blessing upon it) be unto you, as Ionathans three
Arrows were to David, which occasioned his escape from Saules fury. O^ as
David's harp was to Saul, which frighted away the evil spirit from him. 1 Samuel
16.23, Yea as the Angel was to Peter, Acts 12.7. to 12 that opened the Iron
gates, loosed his bands, brought him out of the P^ison, and delivered him from
the thraldom of his enemies. Which is my prayer and hope, and should be my joy
to see it. These things have I said, that ye might be sav^d, 1 Cor. 10 33.

wherefore consider seriously what I have said and do not, Oh do not mock at
Gods word, nor sport away your soul^ into those pains which are easelesse,
endless and remediless. Shall we give an account at the day of judgment for
every idle word we speak, Mat. 12.36. and never give a r^ckoning for our
wicked swearing and cursing? we shall be judged by our words. verse 37.

Are you willing to be saved? if you are, Break of your sins by repentance.
Dan. 4.24. Cease to do evil, lea^ne to do well. Isay 1.16.17. Seriously
greive and bewail, for the millions of ^^mes that you have blasphemed God and
peirsed your savior, and never more commit the l^ke impiety. Y^a do not only
leave your swearing, but fear an oath and make conscience of it, resolve not
to take the glorious name of God in vain, nor place any other creature in his
room: though the Devil should say unto you, as once he did to Christ all this
will I give thee.

For it is not enough that we abstain from evil, unless we hate it also, and
do the contrary good Sanctify the Lord God in your heart, 1 Pet. 3.15. Make a
Covenant with your m^uth, as Ioh did with his eyes, and set a watch before the
door of your lips, that you thus offend not with your tongue Psalm. 141.3.

Which if you do rightly, the like care to avoyde all other sins will
necessarily follow: because he that fears to commit one sin out of conscience,
and because God forbids it, will upon the sam^ ground, fear all that his law
forbids, and as heartily, and unfainedly desire that he may never commit it, as
that God should never impuce it 2 Timothy 2.19. Neither can a reg^nerate m^nd
consist with a determination to continue in any one sin; as when Christ cast
out one Devil, we read that he cast out all, even the whole Legion, Mark 5,
2, And he that makes not some conscience of all sin, makes no true conscience
of any sin,

And the same is to be understood also of duties commanded, for the same law
which injoynes us to hate and forsake all sin, commands us also to strive
after universal obedience to every precept. And it is a true rule, he that
has not in him all christian graces in their measure has none, and he that
has any one truly has all. He that is not sanctified in every part, is truly
sanctified in no part. 1 Pet. 1.15. 2 Pet. 3.11. Mat. 5 48. 2 Timothy 3.17. 2 Cor.
7.1. And the least sin allowed of, be it but a vain thought, or one duty
omitted: is enough to cast thee into hell; for the wages of sin (any sin be
it never so little) is death. Romans 6 23. James 1.15. Yea, admit thou had
never acted any the least evil in all thy life, it were not enough to save
thee from hell, much less to bring thee to heaven, for we need no more to
condemn us, then what we brought into the world with us. Genesis 2.17. Psalm.
51.5. Romans 5.12. Whence the newborn child in the law was commanded to offer a
sin offering. Levit 12.6.

Which grace if you would obtain; First, lay to heart the things formerly
delivered. Believe thine estate dangerous, and that there is but one way to
help thee, viz. to repent what thou have done, and never more to do wilfully or
premedetately what thou have repented* not fostering one known sin in thy
soul. For the only way to become good, is first to believe that thou art evil;
and by accusing our selves we prevent satan, by judging our selves we prevent
God.

Scondly, If thou be convinced, and resolvest upon a new course, let thy
resolution be p^remtory and constant: and take heed thou hearden not again as
Pharaoh, the Philistems, the Young man in the Gospel, Pilate and Judas did.
Resemble not the Iron which is no longer ^oft then it is in the fire, be not
like those which are sea sick, who are much troubled while they are on
shipbord but presently well again when they come to shore; for that good says
St. Gregory will do us no good, which is not made good by perseverance. If
with these premonitions, the spirit shall vouchsafe to stir up in thy heart any
good motions, and holy purposes to obey God, in letting thy sins go; quench
not, grieve not the spirit. 1 These. 5.19. return not with the dog to thy
vomit, least thy latter end prove seven fold worse then thy beginning: Mat.
12.43.45. As it fared with Julian the Apostate, and Judas the Traitor: Oh it is
a fearful thing to receive the grace of God in vain, and a desperate thing
being warned of a rock, will fully to cast our selves upon it.

Thirdly, Let not Satan persuade you to defer your repentance: no not an hour,
least your resolution proves as a false conception that never comes to bearing,
for as ill debtors put off their creaditors, first one week and then another,
tell at last they are able to pay nothing. So deal delayers with God. Besides,
Death may be sudden, even the least of a thousand things can kill thee and
give thee no leisure to be sick.

2. Or if death be not sudden, repentance is no such easy work, as to be put
off to sickness: And though true repentance be never too late, yet late
repentance is seldom true. And indeed there is small hope of repentance at the
hour of death, where there was no regard of honesty in the time of life, and
millions are now in hell, who thought they would repent hereafter: not being
wise enough to consider, that it is with sin in the heart, as with a tree
planted in the ground, which the longer it grows, the harder it is to be
plucked up; or a nail in a post, which is made faster by every stroke of the
hammer. Can the Blackamore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may
ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil says the Lord, Ier. 13.23.

3. Or suppose after many years spent in the service of sin and Satan: thou
art willing to relinquish thy lusts, and offer to God thy service, and best
devotions at the last gasp: Will he accept of them? No, he has expressly told
us the contrary Pro. 1.24. to 32. Yea is (...) likely that God will accept of
thy dry bones, when Satan has su^kt out all the marrow: that he will give his
heavenly and spirtuall graces at the hour of deah, to those who have c^nt^mned
them all their life. Yea, is it not most just and equal ^f God will not be
found of those that were content to loosse him: If he shut his ear against
their prayers, calling to him for pardon: that stopped their ears against his
voice, calling upon them for repentance? The Lord has made a promise to late
repentance, not of late repentance. If thou convertest to morrow, thou art sure
of grace, but thou art not sure of to morrowes conversion. If in any reasonable
time we pray he will hear us, if we repent he will pardon us, if we am^nd our
lives he will save us; but for want of this consideration, Dives prayed but was
not heard. Esau wept but was not pitied, the foolish Virgins knocked but were
denied. And so thousands have cried unto God at the hour of death and found no
acceptance: but they died as they lived, and went from ^ispayer unto
destruction.

Wherefore as you tender the good of your own soul, set upon the work
presently, provide with Joseph for the Dearth to come: With Noah in the days
of thine he^lth, build the arc of a good conscience aganst the floods of
sickness. Imitate the Ant, who provides her meat in summer for the winter
following. Yea, do it whilst the yearning bowels; the bleeding wounds, and
compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lie open to receive you. Whiles you have
health, and life and means, and time to repent, and make your peace with God
in Christ: as you tender I say the everlasting happiness and well-farre of your
almost lost and drowned soul, as you expect or hope for grace or mercy, for
joy and comfort, for heaven and salvation, for endless bliss and glory at the
last. As you would escape the dyerfull wroth of God, the bitter sentence and
doom of Christ, the neverdying sting, and worm of conscience, the tormenting
and soul scorching flames of hell, and everlasting separation from Gods blisful
presents, abjure and utterly renounce all wilful and affected evil; and in
the first place this abominable sin of swearing and cursing.

Fourthly, If thou would hold out in thy good purposes, and bring thy
thoughts to the birth, fly evil company for fear of infection; because it is
exceeding hard and difficult, not to fall into those sins unto which the eyes
and the ears are inured. It is rare if with Peter we deny not Chrst, in
Caiphas his house; With Soloman we shall find that it is hard having the
Egyptian without her Idols. Yea, be as careful to avoid all the occsions of
sin as sin it self, and not now and then, but continually.

Fifthly, Be dilligent to hear Gods word (powrfully preached) which is the
sword of the spirit that kills our corruptions, and that unresistable cannon
shot which beats and batteeth down the strong houlds of sin and Satan.

Sixthly, Ponder and meditate seriously on Gods inestemable love toward us, who
has not spared to give his only beloved son, out of his bosom to dye for us
and to purchase thereby every good thing we do enjoy either for soul or body,
even to the least bit of bread we eat, and this will make thee, (if thou have
any ingenuiety) to direct all thy thoughts, speeches, and actious to his glory,
as he has directed thy eternal salvation thereunto: and often force thee to
break out into this or the like expression; What shall I render un^to thee O
Lord for all thy benefits, but love thee my Creator, and become a new creature.

Seventhly, Consider that the Lord beholds thee in all places, and in every
thing thou do; even as the eyes of a well drawn picture are fastened on thee
which way so ever thou turnest. Yea, consider him as a just judge, who will not
let this cursed sin go unpunished: and this will make thee keep a narrower
watch over thy thoughts, then any other can do over thy actions.

Eighthly and lastly, But chiesly and principally, Omit not to pray for the
asistance of Gods spirit, otherwise thy strength is small; yea, except God give
thee repentance, and removes all impediments that may hinder, thou can no
more turn thy self, then thou could at first make thy self. We are not
sufficient of our selves to think, much less to speak, least of all to do
ought that is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. John 15.4, 5. We are swift to all evil, but to
any good immovable. Wherefore beg of God that he will give you a new heart, and
when the heart is changed, all the members will follow after it, as the rest of
the creatures after the sun when it arises. Importune him for grace, that thou
may firmly resolve, speedily begin, and continually persevere in doing and
suffering his holy will. Desire him to inform and reform thee so, that thou
may neither misbeleeve, nor mislive. To regenerate thy heart, change and
purify thy nature, subdue thy reason, rectify thy judgment, reform and
strengthen thy will, renew thy affections, and beat down in thee whatsoever
stands in opposition to the septer of Jesus Christ. In a word to give and
increase in thee all christian graces: that thou may know, and believe, and
repent, and amend, and persevere in well doing; not forgetting that prayer is
the key of heaven.

Do this, use the means, and look up for assistance, Imitate the Matriner,
who in sailing sets his hand^^o the stern, his eye to the star. and my soul
for thine, thou art in the direct way to ar^^ at the port of eternal glory.

Only this let ^e add. Be sure you wholly and only rest on your Savior Jesus
Christ for salvation, abhorring to attribute or ascribe ought to doing: for our
very righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Esaias. 64.5. And the sole prefection
of a christian, is the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and the not
imputation of his own unrighteousness, a rule which we are very apt to swarve
from, either on the right or left hand wherefore if you would not err, observe
this goulden mean, endeavor to live as if there were no Gospel, and to die as
if there were no law. And now for conclusion, If thou receivest any power
against this greatevill, forget not to be thankful, and when God has the
fruit of his mercys, he will not spare to sow much where he reapes much. Many
may show you the way better, but none canshew you a better way, and so having
set before you life and death, I leave you to choose, which of them you like
best


Swearer, I see you are a Puritan?


Messenger, And why not Roundhead? (the name last coined in the Devils mint) I
confess, formerly the word was Puritan, because it was a capital crime to be
religious, but now it is Roundhead (a term of a larger extent) that men may
not only be ashamed to serve God and be saved, but even fear to be so much as
civil: here you over shot your self; But since the religious only are thorns
in your eyes, give me your reason, Are all Puritains that love not swearing if
so I am one indeed; if not, define what you mean by the name.


Swearer, Tell not me of diffinitions, for I am no scholar, but I hate a
Puritaine.


Messenger, It appears indeed you were never a puple of Christ teaching though
you call your self after his name: Or if so, you have forgot your first
lesson, for he tells you in his word, that the fear of God (which I am sure
you want) is the very beginning of wisdom, Pro, 1.7.


Swearer, How know you that I have not the fear of God? I bless his name I
fear him as well as you, and have as good an heart as the best, theugh I make
not such a show as many do, but all Puritains are thus sencorious, whereas the
Scripture says; Judge not that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye
judge ye shall be judged Mat. 7.1, 2.


Messenger, Our Savior in that place condemns judging of our brotherfor motes
or some sudden eruptions, or appearances only, or determining of his final
estate, which makes nothing for habitruated swearers until they repent,
neither do I determine of yourfuture estate; I know God can with a word of his
mouth create in you a new heart, and that it is as easy with him to make a man
religious as to bid him be such; But touching the present, I may more then
guess that you are not. For does not our Savior tell us also, That out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speak eth? Mat. 12.34. and that we shall know
men by their fruits; That every good tree brings forth good fruit, and a
corrupt tree evil fruit? Mat. 7.16.17.20. and 12.33. Does not St. James say,
If any man among you seems to be religious, and brideleth not his tongue,
that man deceives himself, and his religion is vain: James 1.16. You may
flatter your self, but evil speaking discovers an evil heart; A corrupt
stream is an ill sign of a pure fountain; neither shall you persuade me,
that good wine is in the vessel, when only vinigar comes forth, if the words
be hellish and profane, we may flatly conclude that the heart also is wicked;
If you blessed God with your soul, you would not blaspheme him with your
tongue. Yea, could you rappe out oaths in such a manner as you do, if your
conscience were not, seared and your heart hardened, and you past felling, and
destitute of all grace? No, its impossible; for the least spark of the true
fear of God in your heart would be as a bridle to curb in this unruly evil
of the tongue, that it should not run so at randum, nor burst out either into
wicked or vain swearing; If ye love me, says our Savior, keep my
commandments. John 14.15. Now what sin will a man leave for Christ's sake, if
he will not leave this which is every way unprofitable, and many ways
hurtful? And what though the natural man (who wants both the eye of faith and
the light of Gods word and spirit) can perceive nothing amiss in his own
heart; yet one that is spiritual may: 1 Cor. 2.14.15. The disease appears not
many times to the Patient himself, yet when he talks idly, the Phisutian
knows he is even sick to death.

But what needs all this? when you fret and spurn against the good word of
God, and swell against your reprehender; when with Balam and Herod you grudge
to be stayed in the way to death, and fly'upon those who oppose your perdition?
which is an infallible argument that you are utterly destitute of the fear of
God. Yea, he that will not hear of his faults, is not capable of amendment.

Yea, to be exasperated with good counsel, and in stead of penetency to break
into choler; when fury sparkles in those eyes which should gush out with
water; it is an evident sign of one that shall perish; Pro. 29 1 Read the
words and tremble, a man that heardneth his neck being of ten reproved shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy: see more Pro. 1.24.25.26. to
33. Whence it is the Prophet tells Amazia; I know that God has determined to
destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not obeyed my council; 2
Chro. 25.16.20. and that the Holy ghost speaking of Elyes sons, says that
they would not hearken unto, uor obey the voice of their father, because the
Lord was determined to destroy them; 1 Samuel 2.25. That sin is past al cure.
which strives against the cure Herbs, that are worse for warering Trees that
are less fruitful for dunging and pruning are to be rooted out, or hewn
down. Even salvation it self will not save those that spill the potion, and
fling away the plaster. When God would have cured Babylon, and she would not be
cured, then she is given up to destruction without further warning. Wherefore,
boast what you will of a good heart; yea, swear also that you fear God, I
know and am assured that you have not the fear of God before your eyes: as the
Apostle speaking of unbeleevers phraseth it, Romans 3.18 For as St, John says,
If any man love the world the love of God is not in him, 1 John 2 15 so if any
man love swearing or cursing the fear of God is not in him, for it cannot be
that the true fear of God and ordinary swearing and cursing should dwell
together in one man. Yea, dead are they while they live that live in this sin,
Ephesians. 1, 2, 3 Col. 2.13. Math. 8.22. James 2.17. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.2 These 2 9.10.
Nor ought believers (by the rule of Gods word) to eat or keep company with
such, 2 Thesalo. 3.6.14. Ephesians 5.5.7 1 Cor. 5.11. 1 Timothy 1.10. But of this
sin see more.

In Mr. Downames Treatise of swearing. Mr. Dod upon the third commandment. A
late treatise called Sin Stigmatized.


Out of which three books I have improved my own tallent for the honor of
the giver, and profit of the hearers. And as touching Puritanisme, have but
patience, and your self shall confess, that those are not puritanes who are
generally so reputed: but their accusers; (viz. Papists, Prophaine, Ignorant
and mere civil men, prelaticall; Arminian, Scandalous and Malignant
Ministers) who are pleased, (either out of Ignorance or malice) to term and
repute them so. Yea, I will make it so plain by Gods assistance that every one
present shall acknowledge the religious to be innocent and there accusers to be
guilty of the same things which you and the world blinded in judgment, judge
of them, and most unjustly lay to their charge; whether you mean by a puritan.

One Who is pure in his own eyes. Or who says, and does not, seems and is
not. Or who under a show of religion cosens the world. Or who stumbles at
strawes, and leapes over blocks. Or who is over ridged and sensorious. Or who
is singular in his judgemment and practice. Or who is unquiet and contentious
amongst his neighbors.


For this is the case, the men of the world think all that are scrupelous, and
conscionable to be puritanes: but they know (upon good ground from Gods word)
all, who bark out this odious name to be indeed rank Puritanes and gross
Hypocrites, and that they are in the condition of blind persons, who rushing
one upon another in the way: either complains of the others blindness, but
neither of his own: for (for the most part) he alone that is guilty will be
casting these stones, and complain of another unsavory breath, when his lungs
only are corrupt

Thus the Author goes one in the conference tell he has completed his
promise, and answered all the usual questions in controversy betweeen the Word
and the World; as every one shall find that reads the cure of Misprision.


Postscript.
YOu that fear God, or have any bowels of compassion toward the precious
souls of those poor ignorant men, women and children, whom you hear to
swear and curse as dogs bark, (that is not more of curstnes then out of
custom) wish them to read these few pages, at least the first 5. or 6. which I
thought fit to print even as I found it in the beginning of a Manuscript. And
in case you perceive good come of it, give of them to your friends and
neighbors At James Crumps a Booke-binder, in Little Bartholmewes Well yard,
you may have as many Gratis, as you shall be pleased to distribute.

Finis.
Imprimatur.

J. Downam.

Errata.
Page I under the title, for postcript read postscript. Page 1. l. 1. and 22,
and 23. and 25. for swaring r. swearing. Page 1. l. 28. for kill read kill, and
therefore he must continue it. page 3 l. 30. for unpardonable, r. rests
unpardonable. Page 4. leave. out the 5. last lines. p. 4. l. 21 for there
faith, 1. their faith, or ofter better security. p. 5.1.19. for well they
deserve it, r. and well they deserve it, page 6. l. 26. for heirers, r. heirs.


