A hopeful way to Cure that horrid sin of SWEARING: or an help to save
Swearers, if willing to be saved: Being an Offer or Message from HIM whom they
so daringly and audaciously provoke.
Also a Curb against CVRSING.
Before you lay it by, at lest read the Postscript at the end.

Messenger, SIr, me thinks you Swear and Curse as if he that made the ear
could not hear, Or as if he were neither to be feared nor cared for, who for
sin cast the Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradis^ drowned the old world,
rained down fire and brimstone upon Sodom, commanded the earth to op^ her
mouth, and swallow down quick Korah and his company, he who smote Egypt with so
man plagues, overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea, destroyed great and
mighty Kings, giving the land for an inheritance to his people, and can as
easily with a word of his mouth strike you dead wh^ you are blaspheming him,
and cast you body and soul into hell for your odious unthankfulness; Yea i^ a
mercy beyond expression that he has spared you so long.

What, because you are displeased with others, will you fly in your Makers
face? and tear your Savio^ Name in pieces? This is worse then frenzy, this is
to send challenges into Heaven, and make love to ^struction; consider of it,
lest you swear away your part in that Blood which must save you, if ever you
(...) saved; yea, take heed lest you be plagued with a witness, and that both
here and hereafter, for God (w^ cannot lie) has threatened that his curse shall
never depart from the house of the swearer, as it is Za^ 5.1. to 5. And I doubt
not but you are already cursed, though you know it not; That either he has
c^sed you in your body by sending some foul disease, or in your estate by
suddenly consuming it, in your name by blemishing or blasting it, or in your
seed by not prospering it, or in your mind (...) darkning it, or in your heart
by hardening it, or in your conscience by terrifying it, or will in your soul
(...) everlastingly damning it, if you repent not. Wherefore take heed what you
do before it prove too late.

Or if you regard not your self, or your own souls good, yet for the Kingdoms
good leave your swearing for the Lord (as now we find to our smart) has a
great controversy with the inhabitants of the l^ because of swearing, Hos.
4.1, 2. Yea because of oaths the whole land (even the three Kingdoms) no^
mourns, or rather lies a bleeding, and that to death, as you may see, Jer.
23.10. Neither object that (...) are so accustomed to swearing that you cannot
leave it, for this defense is worse then the offense, as ta^ an instance; Shall
a Thief or Murderer at the baralleage for his defense, that it has been his
use a^ custom of a long time to rob and kill, and therefore he must continue
it: or if he do, will not the Jud^ so much the rather send him to the Gallows.

Besides, the objection is false and frivolous, for were you forced to pay
twelve pence for every Oath you swear (as the Law enjoynes) or if you were sure
to have your tongue cut out, which is too light punishment for this sin,
damnation being the due penalty thereof, as the Apostle sets it down, Jam.
5.1 you both could and would leave it. Wherefore I beseech you by the mercies
of God (who has rem^ved so many evils, and conferred so many good things upon
you, that they are beyond thought or imagination) to leave it, especially after
this warning, which in case you do not, will be a sore witness, and ri^ up in
judgment against you another day.


Swearer. Did I swear or curse?


Messenger. Very often, as all here present can witness, and Satan also, who
stands by to take notic^ reckon up, and set on your score every Oath you utter,
keeping them upon record against the great day ^asize, at which time every Oath
will prove as a daggers point stabing your soul to the heart, or as so man
weights pressing you down to hell, Revel. 12.10. As also the searcher of
hearts, who himself will one da^ be a swift witness against swearers, Mal.
3.5. For of all other sinners the Lord will not hold him guiltle that takes
his Name in vain, as the third Commandment tells you, Exodus 20.7.

But woe is me, it fares with common swearers as with persons desperately
diseased, whose excremen^ and filth comes from them at unawares; for as by much
labor the hand is so hardened that it has no sen^ of labor, so their much
swearing causes such a brawnie skin of sencelesnesse to overspread the hea^
memory, and conscience, that the swearer swears unwittingly, and having
sworn, has no remembranc^ of his Oath, much less repentance for his sin.


Swearer. A less though I did swear, yet I thought no harm.


Messenger. O fool! What Prince, hearing himself abused to his face, by the
reproachful words (...) his base and impotent Subject, would admit of such an
excuse, that whatsoever he spoke with his mouth yet he thought no ill in his
heart? And shall God take this for a good answer, having told us before hand
Deuteronomy 28.58, 59. that if we do not fear and dread his glorious and fearful
Name, the Lord our God, he wi^ make our plagues wonderful, and of long
continuance, and the plagues of our posterity. Besides, how frequently do
thou polute and profane Gods Name, and thy Saviors. The Jews grievously
sinned in crucifying the Lord of life but once, and that of ignorance, but the
times are innumerable that thou do it ^ery day in the year, every hour in
the day, although thy Conscience and the ^oly Spirit of gra^^ checked thee for
it a thousand and a thousand times.

Do thou expect to have Christ thy Redeemer and Advocate; when thy
Conscience tell; thee that a have seldom remembered Him but to blaspheme Him,
and more often named Him in thy oaths and ^ses then in thy prayers.


Swearer. Surely if I did swear, it was but faith and troth, by our lady, the
mass, the rood, the light, this bread, by ^crosse of the silver, or the like,
which is no great matter, I hope, so long as I swore not by God, nor by my
Savior.


Messenger. That's your gross ignorance of the Scriptures, for God expressly
forbids it, and that upon ^ne of damnation, Jam. 5.12. First, our Savior
Christ in his own person forbids it, Matthew. 5. 34, 35, 37. I say unto you,
Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is Gods throne; nor by Earth, for
it is his foot^e; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King;
neither shall thou swear by thine head, because tho^ ^t not make one hair
white or black; but let your communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay, for
whatsoever is more ^n these comes of evil. And then by his Apostle, Above
all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by Hea^ nor by Earth, nor by any
other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, lest you fall into
condemnation (...) 5.12. where mark the Emphasis, in the first words, Above
all things swear not; and the great danger (...) it, in the last word,
condemnation.

If the matter be light and vain, we must nor swear at all; if so weighty,
that we may lawfully swear^ before a Magistrate, being called to it, then we
must only use the glorious Name of our God in a holy ^d religious manner, as
you may see, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Isa. 45.23. and 65.16. Josh. 23.7. Jer. 5.7. Exodus
23.13 ^d the reasons of it are weighty, if we look into them: for in swearing
by any creature whatsoever, we ^e invocate that creature, and ascribe to it
divine worship; a lawful oath being a kind of invocation, (...) a part of
Gods worship: Yea, whatsoever we swear by, that we invocate, both as our
witness, sure^ and judge, Heb. 6.16. and by consequence deifie it, by
ascribing and communicating unto it Gods in^mmunicable attributes, as his
Omnipresence, and Omniciencie of being every where present, and know^g the
secret thoughts and intentions of the heart, and likewise an omnipotency, as
being Almighty i^ ^ronising, protecting, defending, and rewarding us for
speaking the truth, or punishing us if we speak ^ly: All which are so peculiar
to God, as that they can no way be communicated or ascribed to another (...)
that in swearing by any of those things, thou committest an high degree of
gross Idolatry, thou spoile^ ^d robest God of his glory (the most impious
kind of theft) and in a manner dethronest him and place^ (...) Idol in his
room.

And as to swear by the creature makes the sin far more heinous, so the more
mean and vile the ^ng is which you swear by (be it by my fey, by cock and
pie, hares foot, by this cheese, and such like ^ildish oaths, which are so much
in use with the ignorant and superstitions swarm) the greater is your ^ne in
swearing such an oath, because you ascribe that unto these basest of creatures,
which is only pr^^r to God, namely to know your heart, and to be a discerner of
secret things; why else should you call that ^eature as a witness unto your
conscience, that you speak the truth and lie not, which only belongs (...)
God? And therefore the Lord calls it a forsaking of him; as mark well what he
says, Jer. 5.7. How ^ll I spare thee for this? thy children have forsaken me
and sworn by them that are no gods, Exodus 23.13. And ^e you make it a small
matter to forsake God, and make a God of the creature? Will you believe the
^ophet Amos, if you will, he says (speaking of them that swore by the sin of
Samaria) that they sha^ ^ll and never rise again, Amos 8.14. a terrible place
to vain swearers.

Neither are we to join any other with God in our oaths, for in so doing we
make base Idols and filth^ ^eatures corrivals in honor, and competitors in the
throne of justice with the Lord, who is Creator of ^eaven and Earth, and the
supreme Judge and sole Monarch of all the world.

Or in case we do, our doom shall be remediless, for the Lord threatens by
the Prophet Zephan at he will cut off them that swear by the Lord, and by
Maulcham: which Maulcham was their King or as some ^ink, their Idol, Zeph.
1.4, 5.

But admit the sin were small, as you would have it to be, yet the
circumstances make it most heinous; (...) even the least sin in its own
nature is not only mortal, but rests unpardonable, so long as it is
wil^gly-committed, and excused or defended.


Swearer. But all do swear, except some few singular ones, and they also will
lie, which is as bad.


Messenger. You must not measure all others by your own bushel, for although
ill dispositions cause i^ ^spitions, even as the eye that is bloodshed sees all
things red, or as they that have the Jaundees see a^ ^ings yellow; yet know
that there be thousands who can say truly, through Gods mercy, that they ha^
^ther choose to have their souls pass from their bodies, then a wilful
premeditated lie, or a wicked oath ^om their mouths; wherefore when you want
experience, think the best, as charity bids you, and leave that you know not
to the searcher of hearts.

As for the number of swearers, it cannot be denied, but the sin is almost
universal, and this is (...) which has incensed Gods wrath, and almost
brought an universal destruction upon our whole Na^on: But is not this excuse,
That others do so? a most reasonlesse plea, and only becoming a fool then
our Savior Christ has plainly told us, that the greatest number go the broad
way to destruction, and bi^ a few (...) wickedness, 1 John 5.19. And that the
number of those whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand of the sea, Revel.
20.8. and 13.16. Isay 10.22. Romans 9.27. And tell me, were it a good plea to
commit a felony, and say that others do so? Or will thou leap into hell and
cast away thy soul, because others do so? A sorry comfort it will be to have
a numerous multitude accompany us into that lake of fire that never shall be
quenched.

Besides, it is Gods express charge, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil; and St. Paul's everlasting rule, Romans 12.2. Fashion not
your selves like unto this world.


Swearer. But I may lawfully swear, so I affirm nothing but the truth.


Messenger. If you be lawfully called to it as before a Magistrate, or when
some urgent matter constrains for the confirming of a necessary truth (which
can by no other lawful means be cleared) and for the ending of all
contentions and controversies, and clearing our own or our neighbors good
name, person, or estate, and to put an end unto all strife, aiming at Gods
glory, and our own or our neighbors good, which is the only use and end of an
oath; in which case a man is rather a patient then a voluntary agent, You may
swear, otherwise not.

Neither must we swear at all in our ordinary communication, if we will obey
Gods Word, as you may see Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. James 5.12.


Swearer. Except I swear, men will not believe me.


Messenger. Thou had as good say, I have so often made shipwreck of my credit
by accustomary ly^ng, that I can gain no belief unto my word, without an
oath; for it argues a guilty conscience of the want of credit, and that our
word alone is worth no respect, when it will not be taken without a pawn or
surety. Neither will any but base banquerours pawn so precious a jewel as
their faith, or offer better security for every small trifle. Besides, he that
often swears, not seldom forsweareth. And so I have informed you from Gods
Word what the danger is of vain and wicked swearing.

Now if you either believe the Scriptures, or desire to escape that direful
sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his angels, Matthew. 25.41. No longer excuse nor defend it, but repent
of it and forsake it; and so much the rather for that of all other sins this
sin of swearing is the most inexcusable. First, because it is a sin from
which of all other sins we have most power of abstinence, as I showed you
before; and the easier the thing commanded is, the greater guilt in the breach
of it; and the lighter the injunction, the heavier the transgression; as St.
Austin speaks, and Adam his eating the forbidden fruit sufficiently proves.
Secondly, because it is a sin, to which of all other sins we have the fewest
temptations; for all thou can expect by it is the suspicion of a common liar
by being a common swearer; Or that thou shall vex others, and they shall hate
thee; for it brings not so much as any appearance of good unto us to induce
us: for whereas other sins have their several baits to allure us, some the
bait of profit, some of honor, some of pleasure, this sin is destitute of them
all, and only brings much loss here, namely of credit and a good
conscience; and the loss of Gods favor, and the Kingdom of Heaven hereafrer,
which is of more value then ten thousand worlds; which shows that thou love
this sin only because it is a sin, and swearest out of mere malice and
contempt of God, which is most fearful; and (as a man would think) should
make it unpardonable. I am sure the Psalmist has a tertible word for all such,
if they would take notice of it, Let them be confounded that transgress
without a cause, Psalm. 25.3.

And no marvel, that this fearful imprecation should fall from the Prophets
mouth, for that man is bottomlesly ill who loves vice merely because it is a
vice, and because God most strictly forbids it. He is a desperate, prodigious,
damnable wretch, who (rather then not die) will anger God on set purpose.

But as if swearing alone would not press thee deep enough into hell, thou
addest Cursing to it, a sin of a^ higher nature; which none use frequently, but
such as are desperately wicked: it being their peculia^ brand in Scripture, as
how does the Holy Ghost stigmatize such an one? His mouth is full of cursing,
Psalm 10. and Romans 3.14. ot, He loves cursing, Psalm. 109.17. and indeed, whom
can you observe to love this sin, or to have their mouths full of cursing? but
ruffaines, and sons of Belial, such as have shaken out of their heart the fear
of God, the shame of men, the love of Heaven, the dread of Hell, not once
caring what is though of spoken of them here or what becomes of them hereafter;
yea, observe them well, and you will find that they are mockers of all that
march not under the pay of the Devil.

And whence do these monsters of the earth, these hellish miscreants, these
bodily and visible devi^ learn this their damnable cursing and swearing? are
not their tongues fired and edged from hell, as Saint James has it, Jam. 3.6.
yea, it is the very language of the damned, as you may see Revel. 16.11, 21.
On^ they learn it here before they come thither; and are such proficients
therein, that the Devil counts the^ his best scholars, and sets them in his
highest form, Psalm. 1.1. and well they deserve it, with whum the language of
hell is so familiar, that blasphemy is become their mother tongue. Besides, it
is the very dep^ of sin, roaring and drinking is the horse way to hell;
whooring and cheating the foot way; but swearing and cursing follows Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram. And certainly, if the infernal Tophet be not for these me
it can challenge no guests. But see how witless, graceless, and shameless,
even the best are that use t^ curse (...) saying, God damn me, confound me,
the devil take me, and the like; which would make a rational man tremble to
name; because I were as good knock at a dead man's grave, as speak to them.

Thou art crossed by some one, perhaps thy wise, child, or servant; or else
thy horse, the weather, the ^ce, bow^es, or some other of the creatures
displease thee; and thou fallest a cursing, and blaspheming them, wishing the
plague of God, or Gods vengeance to light on them, or some such hellish speech
falls from thy foul mouth. And so upon every foolish trifl^e, or every time
thou art angry, God must be at thy beck, and come down from Heaven in a I
haste, and become thine officer to revenge thy quarrel, and serve thy
malicious humor. (O monstrous impiety! O shameless impudency! to be abhorred
of all that hear ^t) not once taking notice what he commands in his Word, as,
Bless them that persecute you, bless, I say, and curse not, Romans 12 14. And
again, Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke
6.28. which is the practice of all true Christians, 1 Cor. 4.12.

But this is not one half of thine offense, for whom do thou curse? Alas
the creatures that displease thee are but instruments, thy sin is the cause,
and God is the Author, 2 Samuel 16.11. Psalm. 39.9, 10. Genesis 45.8. Job 1.21. from
whom thou have deserved it, and ten thousand times a greater cross. But in
stead of look^ing up from the stone, to the hand which threw it; or from the
effect, to the cause; as Gods people do: thou like a mastiffe dog set upon
the stone or weapon that hurts thee. But in this case who are you angry
withal? Does your Horse, the Dice, the Rain, or any other creature displease
you? alas, they are out servants, and if their master bid Smite, they must not
forbear; they may say truly what Rabshakeh usurped, Jsa. 36 10. Are we come
without the Lord, and all that hear thee may say, as the Prophet did to
Sena^ha^b, 2 King. 19 22. Whom have thou blasphemed? and against whom have thou
exalted thy self? even against ^he holy One of Israel.

And what will be the issue? the causeless curse shall not come where the
curser meant it, Prove. 26.2. ^ea though thou cursest, yet God will bless,
Psalm. 109.28. but thy curses shall be sure to rebound back into thine own
breast, Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. Prove. 14.30. Cursing mouths are like ill made
Pieces, which while men discharge at others, recoile in splinters on their own
faces. Their words and wishes be but whirlwinds, which being breathen forth,
return again to the same place. As hear how the Holy Ghost delivers it,
Psalm. 109. As he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him; and as he loved not
blessing, so shall it be far ^om him. As he clothed himself with cursing like
a garment, so shall it come into his bowels like water, and like ^e into his
bones; let it be unto him as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle wherewith
he shall always be ^rded, ver. 17, 18, 19. Hear this all ye, whose tongue run
so fast on the Devils errand, you loved curing, you shall have it, both upon
you, about you, and in you, and that everlastingly, if you persevere and ^e on;
for Christ himself at the last day, even he which came to save the world,
shall say unto all such, epart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his angels, Mat. 25.41. Where they ^all do nothing
but curse for evermore; for they no farther apprehending the goodness, mercy,
and ^ounty of God, then by the sense of their own torments, the effects of his
justice shall hate him, and ^ing him they shall curse him, Revel. 16.11, 21.
They suffer, and they blaspheme, there is in them a ^rious malice against him,
being cursed of him they recurse him; they curse him for making them, curse ^m
for condemning them, curse him because being adjudged to death, they can never
find death; they ^se his punishments, because they are so unsufferable; curse
his mercies, because they may never taste ^em; curse the Blood of Christ shed
on the Cross, because it has satisfied for millions, and done their believing
souls no good; curse the Angels and Saints in Heaven, because they see them in
joy and ^emselves in torment; Cursing; shall be their sins, and their chief
ease; Blasphemies their Prayers, La^mae their notes; Lamentation all their
harmony; these shall be their evening songs, their morning ^gs, their mourning
song; for ever and ever. And indeed, who shall go to Hell, if cursers should
be ^t out. Wherefore let all those learn to bless, that look to be heirs of
the blessing.

Other objections follow in this conference, and are accordingly answered (with
the means of cure ^scribed, etc.) in the ten ensuing pages, which are also
printed for such as think these four over short. ^t being loath either to
surfeit or cloy the swearer, who is communly short breathed in well doing, and
least ^ing more should hinder him from reading this (for Satan and her corrupt
heart will not condescend shall hold cut to hear his beloved sin so spoken
against) it brakes off thus abruptly.


Postscript.
YOu that fear God, or have any bowels of compassion toward the precious
souls of those poor ignorant men, women, and children, whom you hear to
swear and curse as dogs bark; (that is not more ^urstnes then out of custom;)
wish them to read these four pages, which I thought fit to print, even as,
^und it in the beginning of a Manuscript. And in case you perceive good come of
it, give of them to ^ur friends and neighbors. At James Crumps, a Bookbinder
in little Bartholomewes Well-yard, you may ^e as many gratis, as you shall be
pleased to destribute. If you would paste it on a wall, or Table, take (...) of
each lea^e, placing the pages thus 1. 2. 3. 4. paring away the margents.

Imprimatur

John Downam


