The MESSIAH found: Being A brief and plain DECLARATION Where he is to be
found, To whom The gatherings of the people shall be, And of whom Moses in the
Law and Prophets did write.

Also; A WARNING To fly from The IDOL-SHEPHERDS.

Written for the use of all that love the appearance of our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
BY R. W.

Isa. 11. 12. And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble
the outcast of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the
four corners of the earth. LONDON, Printed by J. C. for Giles Calvert, at the
Black-spread Eagle at the West End of Paul's. 1656.

The Banner of God's Love displayed, and the Mystery of Christ unvailed,
acording as it is noted in the Scriptures of Truth.
THat there is a God, and that he is good, may be known to all: that Christ is
come in the Flesh, and crucified sixteen hundred years since at Jerusalem, is
believed by some of all: but that Christ was and is in the World, is believed
but by a few of all; even the Remnant of Jacob, who are in the midst of many
people, as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon grass, Mic. 5. 7, 8. And
these are the Church of the living God, which is in God, the pillar and ground
of truth, 1 These. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 15. That I may be useful in the hand of the
Lord, to those that may read my lines, I shall, as I have laid down, proceed:
And that there is a God, the visible things make it appear, to wit, the
Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the things that are therein; as it is
written, Psalm. 19 The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handiwork. So that the eternal power and Godhead, which is
invisible, may be cleery seen, being understood by the things that are made,
Romans 1. 20. Now where these things are made, there must be a Maker, or else the
things made, makes it self: now if any thing could make it self, man might; he
having all things put into his hand: for every kind of Beasts, and of Birds,
and of Serpents, and things in the Sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of
Mankind, Jam. 3. 7. Yet man is so unable to make himself, that he cannot add a
cubit to his stature: So that I conclude, as it is written, He that made all
things, is God, Genesis 1. 1. Heb. 3. 4. And that the God that made all things, is
good, will appear, in that he does good, by sending Rain and fruitful Seasons,
filling our hearts with food and gladness: for, the Lord is good to all, and
his tender mercy is over all his works, Psalm 145. 9. Now the Lord's goodness
and tender mercies is the ground of all men's happiness, as will appear if we
consider the time of his love: secondly, if we consider the gift of his love,
which was his Son: as for the time, it was when Adam had destroyed himself, and
we in him; for in Adam all died, 1 Cor. 15. 22. and so all men and women
considered in that nature, are children of wrath, whether Jew or Gentiles, Ephesians.
2. 3. and are under the power of the Prince of darkness which rules in the
children of disobedience: for through the subtilty of the Serpent, which is
Satan, man was and is deceived: not that he compels them, for that he cannot
do; but he presenting objects, enticing and persuading by his lying, we
consenting, come to sinning, Genesis 3. 5. and the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.
23. and the devil had power over death, Heb. 2. 14. and in these ways, and by
these means, man comes to be in the hands of Satan, a captive, and alienated
from God, and without Christ in the world; and the whole world lies in
wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. and are enemies to God and to their own souls,
wallowing in their own blood, Ezekiel. 16. 6. and the Lord beholding of it in that
state, pitied it in his love, not as men do use to pity, in words without
deeds; but does devise means, without respect of persons, to bring back his
banished, 2 Samuel 14. 14. to wit, to give his Son, his only Son, the Son of his
bosom, in whom his Soul delights, for the world, because he loved it as his
work; his tender mercy being overall his works, and therefore sent his Son into
the world, not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved, Joh. 3. 17. and that they might, he lights every one that comes into
the world; for in him was life, and the life was the light of men, Joh. 1. 4.
and he was in the world, and the world knew him not, though all things was made
by him; for the Father by the Son made the worlds, Heb. 1. 2. and this is he
that was promised to Adam that partook of the feed of the woman, which came in
the fullness of time; forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and
blood, he himself partook of the same, Heb. 2. 14. and was put to death in the
flesh but quickened by the Spirit, which was the substance of all the types,
shadows, and figures; and so was the end of the Law, that being the shadows of
good things to come: but the body is of Christ, Col. 2. 17. as it is written, a
body have thou prepared me, Heb. 10. 5. and this body was the sacrifice that
was offered up through the eternal Spirit, once for all, to put away sin, he
being made sin for us, which knew no sin, bore our sins in his own body on the
Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and so put an end to sin, he being put to death in the
flesh for us, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the devil; and deliver them, who through fear of death were all
their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 15. for though he were crucified
through weakness, yet he lives by the power of God, 2 Cor. 13. 4. who quickened
him by his Spirit, and raised his Body, which is ascended; and whom the heavens
must receive until the restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21. and has all
power given him: for to the Son is all power given, Mat. 28. 18. and he is the
light of the world, and lights every one that comes into the world. Now that
which is lighted in man, is the spirit of man; for that is the candle of the
Lord, and he lights it, and searches the deep things of his belly, Prove. 20.
27. and makes manifest the hidden things of dishonesty unto man, that so a man
may see his fallen state by nature, and so come to the light, to be judged by
the light, that so the body of death, which is sin, might be destroyed in us,
by him; for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy
the works of the devil, 1 John 3. 8. and so redeem his people from their sins:
which cannot be, except we believe in the light, which light is in us
everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. and all that by him do believe, are
justified from all things, which they could not be by the law of Moses, Act.
13. 39. now how can we believe by him, if he be not first in us? who shall
fetch him down for us? but what says the Scriptures? The word is nigh unto
thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart: and this is the word of says we
preach, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. Romans 10. 8. which has been hid from ages and
generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints, Col 1. 26. And this I
witness, who have my self run from mountain to hill, seeking rest for my poor
soul, from one form to another, but found no rest in those observations; for
the kingdom of God was within me, Luke 17. 21. and I knew not, although it did
manifest sin to me, which was the trouble of my soul. And as Adam was afraid,
having sinned, so was I: and as they sowed leaves together to hide their
nakedness, so would I with a leaflike profession, hide my nakedness: and as
they, when they heard the voice of the Lord God, hid themselves amongst the
trees; so I separated my self from the world and their worship, to hide my self
amongst the trees in a gathered way; but had no rest for the feet of my soul,
but was like the Dove which was out of the Ark, whilst the waters was upon the
earth, Genesis 8. 9. until I returned to the light in me, which did judge me;
which I would have fled from, I being ignorant of the way of God in his
judgments, by which he betroths his to himself, as it is written, I will
betroth thee unto me in righteousness and in judgment, Hos. 2. 19. under which
judgment, I received a sentence of death upon the body of sin, which was in
me; that I might not trust in my self, but in the living God which raises the
dead, 2 Cor 1. 9. thus being put to death in the flesh, was quickened by the
Spirit, and joined to the Lord the Bridegroom of my soul, which is in me the
hope of glory, for the glory is to be revealed in us, Rom 8. 18. and all that
are partakers of this glory have waited upon the Lord in the way of his
judgments, Isa. 26. 8. and so have witnessed redemption from their sins; for
Sion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness,
Isa. 1. 27. for judgment must begin at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. and for
this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might
be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the
spirit, 1 Pet. 4. 6. and so dwell with everlasting burnings, as it is written,
Isa 33. 14, 15, 16. being purged by the spirit of judgment and the spirit of
burning, Isa. 4. 4. and so are the habitations of God through the Spirit, Ephesians.
2. 22. his habitation being righteousness and judgment, Psalm. 97. 2. And thus
man becomes the temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in
them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people,
Levit. 26. 12. 2 Cor. 6. 16. A chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, that should show forth the praises of him who has
called you out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and in whose
hearts is the Law and Covenant of God, as it is written, Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 10.
16. I will put my law in their hearts, and in their minds will I write them:
not in a book without them, yet not contrary to the Scriptures of Truth; for
they are opened to them, but sealed to all the world, though they may talk of
them, and trade with them amongst the simple ones; by whom the holy City has
been trodden under foot, this forty and two months, Rev. 11. 2. even all the
time of the reign of the man of sin, which is now to be destroyed, the Lord
being raised, Zech. 2. 13. in his witnesses, will reveal the man of sin in man,
the son of perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God, or worshipped; so that he as God, sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. now the temple of God is your
bodies, 1 Cor. 3. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 6. 19. and the man of sin is a mystery of
iniquity in the body, which shall be revealed by the Lord, and consumed with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall be destroyed with the brightness of his
coming, 2 These. 2. 8. For behold, the day comes that shall burn as an oven;
and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble; and the day
that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that is shall leave
them neither root nor branch: but unto you that fear my name, shall the sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. 1, 2. Isa. 40. 5. not
descend first without you; for that will not be till all things be restored,
Act. 3. 21. arise within you, to heal the wounded conscience in you, and to
deliver the poor captivated oppressed spirit in you, which is thy companion and
the wife of thy covenant, Mal. 2. 14. Now thy covenant is the light, as it is
written, I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand,
and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of
the Gentiles, Isa. 42. 6. that thou may be my salvation to the ends of the
ea^^h, Isa. 49. 9. and this is the salvation of God by covenant, which is
^^^^ly given unto men, the light which does manifest sin in man: and this is
the Lord from Heaven, the second man; For, as by the offense of one, judgment
came upon all men to condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the free
gift came upon all men, unto justification of life, Romans 5. 18. and they that
receive him in the love thereof, and obeying him, are justified from all
things; and they that receive him not, their destruction is of themselves. Now
the life of the body is the spirit, Jam. 2. 26. upon which the free gift comes,
and lights it: which gift is the Son of God, given of God to the world, Joh. 3.
16. And he was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew
him not, John 1. 10. Heb. 11. 3. But to as many as received him, to them he
gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name,
John 1. 12. which is light which lights every man that comes into the world,
and is the way to the Father, and no man knows the Father but the Son, and he
to whom he will reveal him; and this Son was revealed in Paul, Gal. 1. 16. and
the Son which was revealed in Paul, he preached in the world, which the world
knew not, but was to them a mystery, until he was revealed in the ministry of
the Gospel, which was Christ in them the hope of glory: whom we preach, warning
every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 27, 28. And thus the holy men of old preached
him to be in their hearts, and in their mouths the word of faith, Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
Romans 10. 8. and all that believed savingly, believed in him in them, by which
they are freed from all things, which they could not be by the Law of Moses,
Act. 13. 39. Isa. 50. 8. And of this am I a witness, in my measure, amongst the
many witnesses, That this Faith purifieth the heart; and justifies the spirit
by which we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, which is in us
the hope of glory: to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

Therefore examine your selves, whether you be in the faith; prove your own
selves: know you not your own selves, how that Christ Jesus is in you, except
you be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5. Now if Christ be in you, the body is dead,
because of sin; but the spirit is alive, because of rithteousness.

A Warning to all People to fly from their Idol-shepherds.
WOE from the Lord to the Idol-shepherds: they are Isa. 56. 11. Jer. 5. 13. Jer.
23. 30. 2 Pet. 2. 3. Ezekiel. 14. 4. 2 These. 3. 6. 2 Cor. 6. 16, and 17. Isa. 40.
11. Eze. 34. 33. Joh. 10. 11. Joh. 1. 4, 9. Luke 17. 21. Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 5.
13. 1 Cor. 12. 7. Heb. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 25. Heb. 3. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 21. Prove: 1.
23. Mat. 28. 18. Joh. 1. 12. Isa. 49. 6. Isa. 40. 11. Joh. 10. 16. Joh. 10. 11.
Rev. 18. 4. Zech. 11. 17.
for their gain, and teach for hire; yet they say, Hear the word of the Lord,
when they had not word from the Lord; but stole it from their neighbors to make
a merchandise thereof: they are Idol-shepherds, and their Idols are in their
hearts: depart from them, and turn to the true Shepherd, the Son of God, which
lights you all; a light which does manifest sin unto you all, and is but one in
all, and all have the manifestation in measure of the same Son by which God
made the worlds: and this is the true Shepherd and Bishop of your souls,
therefore hear his voice, which is a soft moving in you, which reproves you for
sin; therefore believe it and obey it: It Is your Him you are to receive, with
whom is power; and all that receive him, to them he gives power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. The light which will gather
you, you obeying it, into the true sheepfold, which is but one, and to it but
one Shepherd, a good Shepherd, which lain down his life in the flesh for his
sheep: but the hireling flies, and leaves the sheep: therefore fly from the
hireling all of you that love your souls, that you be not partakers with him in
your sins, and so of his plagues; for the sword of the Lord shall be upon his
arm, and upon his right-eye, his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right-eye
shall be uttterly darkened.

Thus have you had Warning by R. W.

FINIS.

