UNBELIEVERS No subjects of JUSTIFICATION, Nor of mystical Union to Christ,
Being the sum of a Sermon preached at New-SARUM, with a Vindication of it from
the objections, and calumniations cast upon it by Mr. William Air, in his
Vindiciae Justificationis.

Together with Animadversions upon the said Book, and a refutation of that
Anti-fidian, and Anti-Evangelical error asserted therein: viz. The
justification of Infidels, or the justification of a sinner before, and without
Faith.

Wherein also the conditional necessity, and instrumentality of Faith unto
justification, together with the consistency of it, with the freeness of Gods
grace, is explained, confirmed, and vindicated from the exceptions of the said
Mr. Air, his arguments answertd, his authorities examined, and brought in
against himself.

By T. WARREN Minister of the Gospel at Houghton in Hampshire.

PROVE. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
even they both are abomination to the Lord. Videmus ut priorem locum teneat Dei
dilectio, tanquam summa causa and origo, and sequatur fides in Christum tanquam
causa secunda, and propria. Calv. I^st. lib. 2. c. 17. n. 2. LONDON, Printed by
E. T. for John Brown at the sign of the Acron in Paul's Churchyard, 1654.

To the Right Worshipful, Mr. Mayor, The Court of Aldermen, and Common
Council of the City of New-sarum, Grace and Peace from JESUS CHRIST.
Right Worshipful,
IT was an excellent speech of Luthers, Ego odi meos libros, et saepe opto eos
interire, quod metuo, ne morentur lectores a lectione ipsius scripturae, quae
sola omnis sapientiae fons est. I hate my own books, and wish them lost which
yet were of excellent use and for which the Church stands much bound unto God
in thankfulness, because I fear the reading of them will hinder the reading of
the scriptures, which indeed is the fountain of all spiritual wisdom. And for
this reason we have cause to wish that many books were burnt, especially such
as tend to corrupt the sense of the scripture; And of all books, such as serve
to cast the reader quite off from the foundation, and to turn them aside to
another Gospel. This caused that holy Apostle to thunder out an anathema
against such: if an Angel from heaven shall preach any other Gospel, let him be
accursed. And the truth is, we can never err more dangerously then in the
doctrine of justification; For which cause he is of small judgment, and less
observation, that sees not how needful it is to have this doctrine kept pure:
And especially with you, where Mr. William Air.
one is risen up amongst your selves, who has sown tares in the Lords field,
whose opinion treads Antipodes to the gospel, which he has published to the
world in his book, which he calls Vindiciae justifications gratuitae, which
(that I may do him right) I judge the strongest shield and buckler, wherewith
this Antinomian cause was ever protected: Yet as in Salem of old, God brake
both sword and shield, so I doubt not but he has done the like now in this
ensuing treatise (though by a weak hand) making a few scripture arguments to
pierce this shield, and to wound the Cause that he maintains, that it lies a
bleeding at the feet of a scripture truth. And for the Author, I wish he had
had more respect to truth, the churches peace, that he had carried meekness
and love to the persons whose judgment he does oppose, fighting with his heart
and pen, against their arguments, not their persons: but the want of this is
obvious to every eye, his opinion is diametrically opposite to the letter of
the Scriptures, to the unanimous Consent of all orthodox antiquity, and the
learned of the present age, to the harmony of the Churches; and yet he boldly
charge us, and all that dissent from him, to be no better then Papists and
Arminians. And I doubt not but all to whom we are known, have done justice
upon this piece of his morality. And for his opinion it self, I question not
but every believer that has embraced the truth as it is in Jesus, (as a
sufficient professor in this controversy) has condemned it for Novelisme,
and a dangerous error, and do judge that Satan's design by him is to draw
others, but you especially (if it be possible) from the simplicity, and
sincerity of the gospel received: but I am persuaded better things of you, and
things that accompany salvation: Yet I think it meet to stir you up to a
diligent examination of the Scriptures, that this Corner stone of justification
in the building of your faith may be laid aright. And whereas Mr. Air has in
the hearing of some of you, condemned a Sermon of mine, preached amongst you,
as Anti-scripturall, and my arguments irrational, and now in his printed book
has de-cryed it as wide from the orthodox faith as well as contrary to his
doctrine, and contradictory to many plain Scripturrs, and dorogatory to the
full atonement which Christ has made by his death, and disconsolatory to the
souls of men, in laying the whole weight of their salvation upon an uncertain
condition of their own performing: Where observe, that Mr. Eyres name was not
mentioned in the preaching of the sermon, though it be in this printed Copy,
and such passages as relate to his book were added since the publishing of his.
I have once again presented this to your eyes, which was delivered to some of
your ears, with some small addition, and as little alterati^n as I could but in
substance the same; and I willingly submit it to your examination by the word,
and to the censure of my brethren, who I know are most able to award an upright
judgment in this case; and I doubt not but I shall have public right done as
your Reverend Pastor, Mr. Conant by name, of precious esteem now with Christ,
did before in your hearing give a public, and seasonable acknowledgment to
the soundness of this Sermon, in the Congregation, at the time of this
Crimination. I have likewise sent forth together with it a Polemicall
discourse, to vindicate this distressed truth, which this Sermon holds forth,
and to break the staff of the oppressor. And as little David, I am come
forth against this enemy to the truth of Christ, with a sling and a few stones,
drawn out of the pure Crystal river of the scriptures, and doubt not, but
God, whose cause I plead, will so far assist me, as that these stones shall
smite and sink into the forehead of this error, that it shall fall Goliah-like
to the earth, and the weak hand that he uses shall only point at the mighty
arm of God, which neither any error, nor they that do defend it, are able to
resist, Hieron.
Novit Veritas paucorum manu, et non de multis militum copiis triumphare. Truth
is great, and will praevaile, though destitute of all weapons, except what is
drawn out of the armory of Scriptures, yea I doubt not, but you your selves
have done execution upon his error. And I was glad (though not so much in my
own behalf, as in respect of you) of that letter, which was signed by some of
you, bearing witness to the truth, and desiring me not to be discouraged for
that uncivil affront, And although Mr. Air blame me for the like practice,
and that of all men I had least reason to be offended with it, because I had
done the same thing in another place, I must tell him, I took that liberty but
once, and that out of constraint; for after I had privately borne witness
against some Antinomian errors vented by one Mr. Symonds at Rumsey, the next
time I heard him, he was advanced higher into familisticall blasphemy,
asserting, A believer was as righteous as Christ, and that being one with him,
according to the prayer of Christ in the 17 Chap. of John's Gospel, Lord make
them one as we are one, and having the righteousness of Christ imputed, which
is the righteousness of God himself, he propounded it to the people to
consider, if a Christian were not a certain divine person as the son of God
is: And to have been silent in this case, had been my sin, especially seeing
the people were led captive by him into his former errors of Antinomianisme,
admirers of his person, and of a ductile spirit: But that I desired the people
not to believe a word which Mr. Symonds taught, has as much truth in it
(though Mr. Air relate it) as that had which was spoken to Christ concerning
the Kingdoms of the world, All this power will I give thee, and the glory of
them, for that is delivered to me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. And he
himself doubted of the truth of it, for he adds, how justly I cannot tell,
yet in his passion to render me odious he relates it, though he be commanded
not to receive an accusation against an Elder, under two or three witnesses.
But to return unto you, 1 Timothy 5.18.
Right worshipful, to whom I have been bold to dedicate this little Tractate,
I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, receive neither it nor me, but so far
forth as it is agreeable to the word of truth, and if God has not given me
darkness for a vision, I apprehend a mavelous beauty in the truth here
offered unto you, nay already embraced by you, which Mr. Air striving tanquam
pro aris et focis, seeks to undermine. I beseech you stand fast in the truth,
and in the love of it. The rain fell as impetuously upon, the floods did swell
with as great rage against, and the winds did storm with as great violence,
the house built upon the rock, as that, which was built upon the sands: And the
truth of Christ that is built upon the scriptures as an immovable rock, is
capable of as much opposition from men, (and especially this of the free
justification of a sinner by faith) as any brainsick opinion of men that lie
in wait to deceive, which has no affinity, nor confederacy with the word of God.
Having therefore such a sure word of prophecy, you shall do well if you take
heed to it, 2 Pet. 2 9.
as to a light that shines in a dark place: Account it your great honor to
honor God, and your honorable profession, by keeping the doctrine received,
and as you have hitherto done, show your selves to be men of understanding, and
not Children, tossed up and down with every wind of doctrine; even so stand
fast immovable in the truth of Christ, And Copy out that grace and faith in
your lives, 3 John. 1^.
which you profess to have, and practice that great commandment of loving one
another as Christ has loved you, hereby shall it be known that ye are his
disciples indeed, though the Antinomians judge it a dark sign that cannot give
a sufficient evidence to the conscience of justification, and herein they
contradict Christ and his Apostle, who said, By this we know that we are
passed from death to life because we love the brethren; 1 John 3.15 Ephesians. 4.3
Romans 16.14
study to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: Beware of dividing
principles, and dividing practices, and mark those among you that cause
divisions and offenses, and avoid them; be thankful unto God for the light of
his gospel that yet shines amongst you; be thankful to the Lord, that
although error walk abroad without a vizard, there is so much liberty to
profess, and defend the truth. Pray to the Lord, which is all you have to do
in things which might be better in the public, and praise God that they are no
worse. Prize the Churches peace next to the peace of a good conscience, and yet
buy not peace with the loss of truth. And as God has magnified his word above
all his name, do you esteem it above your credit. Remember Obed Edom that was
blessed for the arks sake; and though I know and believe some of you do not
count gain to be godliness, yet you shall find godliness to be great gain:
the gospel is not so poor a guest, but it is able to recompense those that
lodge and entertain it. A Guest seldom bestows his bounty but at his
departure, but there is no gain to be expected by this guest at his departure,
but a loss that cannot be recovered. I commend it to your care to preserve the
ark amongst you, fail in this, and the vital spirit of your corporation will
be lost together with it. And I beseech you have not men's persons in
admiration, affect not the word for the persons sake, but the person for the
words sake. Let not knowledge be laid up for discourse, but for practice, not
so much to enrich the head, Luke. 12.14. Math. 23.22.
as to amend the heart. Beware of covetousness, least the cares of the world
choke the good seed of the word. Think not an hour more prrofitably spent in
the Shop then in the church, in enquiring into your debts, then in searching of
your consciences, cast up your accounts often with God, consider what religion
will cost you, make sure your evidences for eternal life, have not a Christ to
seek, when you shall have life to seek: Be sure to do good, or to receive
good wheresoever you go, with whomsoever you deal, let your public trust
make you men of public spirits, suffer nor your Taverns to be full, when your
churches are empty, and whilst you complain of the badnesse of the times: let
them not be the worse for you. what evil you cannot help to redress, bewail,
let your sighs be more for your sins then your crosses, encourage them that
teach the good knowledge of the Lord, and hide not your talents in a napkin,
but trade with them for your Master, that at his coming he may say to you, Well
done, good, and faithful servants, enter into the joy of your Lord. Which that
you may not fail of, nor be led aside with the error of the wicked, and fall
from your own steadfastness, (but may grow in grace and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Christ, who is our hope) shall be the prayer of him, who is

Your remembrancer at the throne of grace, and your soules-servant in the work
of Christ, THOMAS WARREN.

TO THE Christian Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IN this intervall of church discipline, which is no small damage to the
church, and a manifest injury to the Kingly office of Jesus Christ, every bold
adversary to the truth takes liberty to question, and deny the fundamental
articles of religion; and being equally infranchized with the Orthodox in the
liberty of the press, and armed with this advantage, that the nature of man is
more prone to embrace error, then truth, and the Athenian itch having
infecting the minds of most men, that they spend their time in nothing else
but to relate, or hear some new thing, hence the world is at once infected
with dangerous heresies, and men's judgments are leavened with an antipathy
against the known, and received truths of Christ; hinc illae lachrimae. But to
see Mr. Air, and men of some name for learning, walking in the throng of
seducers, and to list themselves among the common adversaries to religion, and
to become Satan's decoyes to ensnare the simple, and lead them from the
simplicity of the gospel, to see such men ascend the chair, and turn
professors, and defenders of error, yea even panders to the flesh, it is time
for the lords servants to stand up as Champions for the truth. But alas that
complaint of Hierome concerning the seducers of his time may well be taken up,
Ardentius ab illis defenditur haeresis, quam a nostris oppugnatur. Heresy is
more zealously defended by them, then opposed by us. I confess I prize the
unity of brethren, and next to the peace of a good conscience the Churches
peace, provided that peace, and truth may live together; but where truth must
be strangled to preserve peace, it is better to ransom the life of truth
though it be with the loss of peace. For which cause I have appeared in this
controversy, (not so much to vindicate my self defamed by Mr. Air as) to
rescue the truth, which he does under the show of defending the freeness of
Gods grace (and therefore the more dangerously) seek to destroy his error,
being of such consequence, that it subverteth (if received) the whole order of
the Gospel, it opposes a maine article of religion, and opens a wide door
to profaneness. And next to this, my respects to some to whom my ministry may
be useful, has drawn me forth to this vindication, to whom I may say as
Augustine, Mihi sufficit conscientia mea, Aug: ad fratres in cremo.
vobis autem necessaria est fama mea. The testimony of my own conscience that
I have not in that Sermon which M. Air does oppose, departed from the truth,
had been sufficient to me, but to them a vindication of my self, and it may be
necessary. What Mr. Eyres intentions were to rend the Churches peace, and to
trouble the world with the untimely birth of this error I cannot tell, sure I
am, that if it were not finis opperantis, yet it is finis operis, the end of the
work, if not of the author to unsettle christians in the doctrine of faith. It
may be, because he reckons himself to be one of the manly sort of Divines he
speaks of, and not being content to lie in obscurity, he is willing to raise
an estate of reputation by letting the world see how able he is to defend an
error. There are many who, as learned Vossius well observes, gloriosum putant
toti antiquitati bellum indicere, nec fl^ccipendunt si haeretici, modo docti
habeantur, think it a glorious thing to oppose all antiquity, nor do they
care to be accounted heretics, so they may have the repute of being learned.
And that his opinion, viz. the Antedency of justification unto faith, is
repugnant to all orthodox antiquity, is above contradiction: Neither is there
any one error against which Scripture light does more rise up in arms then
this, and I appeal to every intelligent reader whether it does not run
contrary to the very vein of the gospel, which teaches justification to be
the effect, not the cause of faith, as he in terminis does assert, p. 78, 79.
that he sees no absurdity to say, that faith is from justification causally,
and justification by faith evidentially. It was the complaint of Aug: in his
time, sub laudibus naturae latent inimici gratiae, but we may invert and alter
the proposition, and say, sub laudibus gratiae latent inimici fidei, enemies to
faith shelter themselves under the praises of Gods free grace. And herein I
wonder much at Mr. Air that he should oppose grace, and faith, when he knows
that the adversaries he opposes, hold not faith a condition of the Covenant,
either in an Arminian, or Popish sense, and that the Scripture says that it
was the purpose of God to justify us by faith, that it might be of grace, Romans
4.16. 2 Ephesians. 8.
as the reader may see (...) in the 4 to the Romans 16 therefore it is of faith
that it might be of grace, and in 2. Ephesians. 8. by grace ye are saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest
any man should boast. I can scarcely have so much faith, and charity to think
that a man can live by faith, that sets himself to destroy that grace of faith
by which we live; however, 1 Ephesians. 18.19.^ 1 Romans 17. 2 H^b. 4. 3 Ephesians. 17.
he is a small friend to this grace, which the Scripture does so highly
commend, as being wrought by the same almighty power that wrought in Christ
when God raised him from the dead, by which the just shall live, and by which
Christ dwells in our hearts, that shall deprive it of the most vital, and
noble act of it, viz. of uniting us to Christ, and intitling us to the
righteousness of Christ unto justification. I plead not for faith so as to set
the crown upon her head which is due to Christ alone, she is content to be
the friend of the bridegroom, neither seeks she to share with Christ in the
honor of Salvation. Faith is content, and all that have it, to wither in their
reputation, it is fit that Christ should increase, and we decrease, we plead
not then to have faith to be a corrivall with Christ, to be a sociall, and
coordinate cause in the justification of a sinner. And yet we cannot but give
it that office which God has assigned to it, to be an isntrumental cause of
justification, wherein it has the praecedency above all other graces, as being
the only instrument ordained of God to receive Christ's righteousness, and so
not only to be a necessary antecedent of salvation as other graces are, which
are necessary necessitate medii, and are causae dispositivae of salvation, but
this is necessary by way of causality for the application of Christ's
righteousness unto justification. And when we say, that we are justified by
faith, we understand it not by faith as a work, or a grace, as an act, or as an
habit, by virtue of any innate worth, excellency, and dignity in faith; we do
not take it sensu proprio, in whole, or in part, as Arminians, Papists, and
Socinians do, in making it the matter of our righteousness, but when that is
spoken of we understand it metonimice, tropically, by relation to its object,
for what man that is not a professed Papist, and enemy to the free grace of God
did ever dream of justification by faith without an object, you may as well
dream of a man without a soul as to be justified without Christ. Yet when we
take faith tropically, for the object of faith, we do not take faith
exclusively, (although we so apprehend it when you speak of the matter of our
righteousness) as if faith had no hand in justification, no not by way of
application of Christ's righteousness, as if by the word faith, were understood
Christ, surely this were not to keep our wits company And if it were the
Apostles meaning to exclude faith from having any hand in justification upon
any terms whatsoever, surely he would not so darkly have expressed himself by
a figurative expression, when he might have done it more clearly by putting in
the name Christ for faith, as Mr. Air would teach us to do. We willingly
grant that Christ is the meritorious cause of justification which he seems to
me to deny, (making justification an Christis not the meretorious cause of any
immanent act in God.
immanent and not a transient act, as we do) we also grant that Christ's
active, and passive obedience is the matter of our righteousness, and the
formal cause of justification is the imputation of this righteousness, without
any works of ours. Yet this no way excludes faith from being an active
instrument to apply this righteousness to us, (faith it is our act, although
it be Gods gift, it is our instrument wrought in us by God for our benefit, to
apply by his ordination the righteousness of Christ unto justification.) For
as the efficient cause excludes not the meritorious, so neither does the
meritorious exclude the isntrumental, which in suo genere, in its kind, is as
necessary as the other; for bonum est ex integris causis: but I shall more
fully open this in stating of the controversy, and will not therefore
anticipate my self any further, but shall refer the reader thither for
further satisfaction, where I intend to handle this controversy more largely,
though I desire the reader to take notice that I shall chieflly meddle with
that in Mr. Eyres his book, which relates to my self, and purely belongs to
this controversy, leaving that which belongs to Mr. Woodbridge, that I may
not falcem in alienam messem immittere, put a sickle into another man's harvest.
And if any man desire further satisfaction why I publicly interpose in this
controversy, seeing Mr. Woodbridge so eminently qualified, has already
undertaken this task, I take that of Hierom, Hierom.
to be a sufficient apology. Nolo quenquam in suspicione haereseos esse
patientem. I would have none to bear the suspicion of heresy: and Mr. Air
has both in the pulpit, and press rendered me to be heterodox in the point of
justification, he has declaimed against my Sermon, as anti-scripturall, my
arguments as irrational, and in his book he says I have delivered what was
wide from the orthodox faith, Mr. Eyres vindic: p. 5,
and contrary to many plain scriptures, derogatory to the full atonement made
by Christ's death, disconsolatory to the souls of men, in laying the whole
weight of their salvation upon an uncertain condition of their own performing:
And should I be silent in such a charge, the world would count me guilty,
therefore to purge my self from these crimes, I have published my sermon, with
a vindication of it, and a short refutation of the said book: and although I
have a little in one place digressed from the controversy, sp^aking more largly
then I needed in the doctrine of Christ's death, and passion, yet it is only to
show that I have delivered, and hold nothing therein contrary to the orthodox
faith, as Mr. Air affirms, which he is more able to say, then prove. And for
as much as he has wronged both me, and the truth, in relating what I said not,
( viz. that I should say that the union between Christ and the Saints was a
personal union, which I called a union of persons, but not a personal union)
and has represented our conference in as unhandsome a dress to render me
contemptible, I am the less troubled (though I rejoice at no man's sin) knowing
that he is a man of hard language, and morose carriage unto many of my
brethren, of far more eminent worth, and esteem in the Church of Christ then
my self. And for that slander, where he says, that I compared him to Judas,
and my self to Christ, I do solemnly beseech him to remember what God has
threatened to him that loves and makes a lie, Rev. 22.15.
and to take heed how he bears false witness against his neighbor, where he
has God, angels, and men, and his own conscience to contradict him, least God
impute that as sin to him, which he fears not to commit, it may be upon this
ground, because he judges it to be antecedently pardoned before it is
committed. My expression for which he blames me was this, I said to him, What?
are you come out against me as against an heretic, before you know whether
that which I hold be a heresy, or that I am obstinate in the defense of it?
moreover, at the request of friends, that heard my Sermon, (with which Mr. Air
has dealt as Pharaoh with the male children of the Israelites) having given
way to the publishing of it (not doubting but when it comes under the censure
of my brethren, but they will do the same office for it that the religious
midwives did for the male children, to save it alive from the hand of the
oppressor) I conceive, I was engaged to some further act toward the ending,
and laying this controversy asleep, especially seeing Mr. Air says, Mr.
Woodbridg did but blow the coals that Mr. Warren had kindled, whereas this
fire was kindled long before by himself, and the pulpit turned by him into a
cockpit, to defend this error. And because some are infected, more are in
danger, the truth is oppressed, the course of the Gospel like to be hindered,
and profaneness, and Antinomianisme go hand in hand, and speak with one
tongue, as Mr. Baxter has well observed, I have put my self upon this task
of confuting his conceit. Besides, his dis-ingenious description of our
conference, by introducing interlocutours, as if I were ad incitas redactus,
and that they did interpose to help me (for it seems to me to be his end in
that relation) has made me willing to wipe off that obloquie by entering the
lists once more with him, whereas the true cause of that interruption was, his
popular appeals, his usual artifice to evade the force of an argument, and to
enthrone himself as victor, in the hearts of the in-judicious multitude. In a
word, the ensuing reasons were no small motive to enforce me to this work, The
bridge of justification by which men must pass over from death to life is very
narrow, and one step awry may be the loss of many precious souls, and all
gospel truth is a precious depositum concredited to us ministers of the gospel,
and is a part of that 2 Timothy 1.14. Jude. 3.
good thing committed to us, and we are commanded earnestly to * contend for
the faith once delivered to the Saints, Aug ad Lauren cap. 64.
and this doctrine of justification is articulus stantis, vel cadentis
Ecclesiae (as Luther says) the Church stands, or falls according as this
truth is believed, or violated, and what Augustine says of remission of sins,
that I may say of faith, by which remission of sins is received, per hanc stat
Ecclesia, quae in terris est, per hanc non perit, quod perierat, et inventum
est. And therefore there is a necessity of keeping this doctrine pure, and
every minister is bound to preserve this truth, and to keep the Philistines from
throwing dirt into this well. And if Shamma be recorded in Sacred writ for
defending a field of lentills, against the Philistines, surely it cannot but be
acceptable to God and man, to defend that doctrine which is the sum of the
gospel, confirmed with the blood of Christ. And if it were Paul's Eulogium to
preach that faith, which he did once destroy, it cannot be Mr. Eyres encomium
to destroy that faith he ought to preach. And seeing God himself takes care of
the very hairs of our head, and numbers them all, we have much more reason to
make a precious esteem of that truth which is worth all our heads, and by
which our very souls must be saved, And no less care ought we to have of the
honor of Christ, and of his mystical body. For who is he that is a living
member of Christ, that is not sensible of the dishonor done to Christ our
head, and what dishonor is done to Christ by this doctrine, by making an
unbeleever a subject of justification, and a member of Christ's body, let him
that is least in the Church judge. The Apostle could not without an absit
think of it that a member of Christ should be joined to a harlot: shall I take
the members of Christ, and make them the member of a harlot? God forbid: and is
it not an anointed truth of the same authority, 1 Cor. 6.15.
that I must not take a harlot (so remaining) and make it the member of Christ?
If Mezentius was condemned for a wicked tyrant, for tying a dead man to a
living person, can he be esteemed a good Christian, and friend to Christ (not
to say a good minister) that shall join an unbeleever dead in sins and
trespasses, as a member unto Christ? the Lord give him the sight of this evil,
and God forbid I should cease to pray for him, and I hereby beg a Collection of
prayers for him from all that know him, for I believe his own principles will
not suffer him to pray for the pardon of sin, which in his opinion is pardoned
long before it is committed. And now that I might not trouble the Reader any
further, I will but mention a passage or two in his Epistle dedicatory, and
another in his book, and I will not hold him from the discourse it self. Mr.
Air has in his second page of that Epistle perfumed his brethren opposite to
his errors, to render them acceptable to the magistrate: It is remarkable
(says he) that they, who ascribed unto magistrates a definitive, and coercive
power in spirituals, have (when magistrates would not serve their turns) denied
the power, which they have in temporals, refusing contrary to the rules of
Christ, to own them, pray for them, or to yield obedience to their lawful
commands, as if none must hold the sword, but such as will use it to fight
their quarrel, and to effect that by force of arms, which they themselves
cannot do by strength of argument. But is this an irrefragable argument to
prove eternal justification? or a lively demonstration of a man parboiled in
his passion? is this the effect of charity? or the foame of a passionate man?
was he sick of a fever? or troubled with the scurvy when this passage fell from
him? I am sure there is neither charity nor verity in it, if it be examined by
the law of God, or the known laws of the land: if he be able, let him produce
any proof of our disobedience to authority, least the world say he has
linguam mentiri doctam. But nothing is more usual then for the nocent to
accuse the innocent, 1 K. 18.17. 4 Ephesians. 3.
Ahab accused Elijah for troubling of Israel, when himself was the person that
troubled Israel. * Athaliah crye's treason, treason, when her self was the
traitor. 2 K. 11.14.
4 Act. 5.
Tertullus accused Paul that he was a pestilent fellow, and a mover of
sedition, when himself was the ringleader of a notorious faction. And were I
minded to recriminate, and did seek rather to d sparage his person, then to
weaken his case, I might more justly retort the charge upon himself, for his
bold attempt in endeavoring to affright the chief magistrate of the city of
N. Sarum from, or for his proclaiming the Lord Protector, fearing it seems,
(that I may use his own words) that he would not serve his turn, and therefore
he would not have him hold the sword, because he would not use it to fight his
quarrel. But in this suggillation of his, to make his brethren odious, and
obnoxious to authority, the reader may observe how closely be follows
Lysanders Counsel, vbi leonina pellis non sufficit, assumenda est vulpina, that
where the lions skin will not serve he will eeke it out with a fox skin, he
would stop our mouths, or pull out our tongues, because he cannot answer our
arguments: as Herod dealt with John Baptist, cutting off his head, because he
would not hold his peace, but reprove him for Herodias; so he would silence us
by power, who he cannot overcome by reason, To whom I will say as Hieron in his
Apol. 3. ad Ruff: talibus institutus es disciplinis, ut cui respondere non
poteris, caput auferas? et linguam, quae tacere non potest secas? In his third
page of the same epistle, he would have the magistrate punish nothing but what
is contrary to the light of nature, and yet over the leaf desires the
parliament to prohibit all names of obloquie under fitting penalties. But I
fear Mr. Ey^e who is so liberal in calling his brethren Arminians, Socrat
hist, lib. 6, 65.
Papists, Socinians, would be the first that would come under the lash of such
a law, if it were made, as Eutropius the Eunuch did of that Edict made by the
Emperor at his request: But let him tell us, is it against the light of nature
to call him an Antinomian who upholds the maine pillar of Antinomianisme, and
lays the foundation stone whereon it is built? is it lawful to be an
Antinomian, and unlawful to call him so that is so? shall a man be covetuous,
and if his neighbor tell him of it, and speak the words of truth, and
soberness in so doing, is this against the light of nature? is it a more
insufferable injury to call Mr Air an Antinomian, then to be so? and is his
credit more ne^essary then Christ's? shall a man call Christ a deceiver, and
vilify the Scriptures, and worship a breaden god, a door, an altar, or a
crucifix, praeferre Mahomet or the Pope before Christ? and must such an evil
go unpunished? and would he have the magistrate bring himself by connivence at
such evils under the guilt of these sins? then would England be a purgatory
for the Orthodox, and a paradise for the heterodox; yet this is that he aims
at* He would have a liberty for men to profess what errors they please, but a
restraint laid upon those that shall endeavor to confute them: and if this
should ever be established, which I hope never will be, I should not stick to
say, O Mariana tempora, hi sunt vltimi sing^ltus moribundae libertatis? Now for
this good service, and telling the Libertines that if they be elected they are
justified already; though they be of a dissolute life, the covenant is
absolute; every one of them with a garland of laurel in his hand, is ready to
salute him: Tu mihi patronus, tu mihi Christus eris. A third passage is his
incivility to Master Good, who because Mr. Air had appealed to the people,
(among many others that discovered their satisfaction for what he had said, and
objected) propounded this question, whether God was well pleased with
unregenerate men? to whom he says (ironically enough) he did not reply as
Bazil did to Demosthenes the clark of the Emperors Kitchen that he should
meddle with his broth, and his sauce, having a little before with petulancy
styled him an Inn Keeper, (though) he be as Demetrius was, a man well reported
of all men, and the truth it self, and of M. Air in time past) for which
favor he is as much beholding to him as Amasa was to Joab when he took him by
the beard, and said, Art thou in h^alth my brother? And for his answer to the
question, that God was well pleased with his elect in Christ whilst they be
unregenerate, though he be not well pleased with their unregeneracy. I may say
had he himself minded the kitchen less and studied the question more, he had
either yielded the cause, or given a more satisfactory answer; for if all the
sins of an unregenerate man be pardoned, what is there for God to be displeased
with? nor will the nature of a holy God allow him to love an unregenerate
person with that love which Divines call the love of complacency, though he may
intend him good with a love of benevolence. And now I shall entreat the
reader, if there be any acrimony, or sharpeness in this epistle to excuse me in
it, having been in a manner forced to it, to heal the exulcerations in Mr.
Air his book, and I shall endeavor in this following discourse (...), laying
aside all animosity. And I willingly profess with Augustine, Non pigebit me
sicubi haesito quaerere, nec pudebit sicubi erro discere, proinde quisquis hoc
letat, vbi pariter certus est, mecum pergat, vbi pariter haesigit quaerat
mecum, vbi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me, vbi meum revocet me, ita
ingrediamur simul veritatis viam tendentes ad eum de quo dictum est, quaeramus
faciem ejus semper. I shall not be unwilling where I doubt to inquire, nor
shall I be ashamed where I err to learn, therefore whosoever read what I have
written, where he is certain, let him go forward with me, where he doubts
with me, let him seek with me, where he sees his error, let him return to
me, where he discerns mine, let him reclaim, and recall me, so let us walk
together in the way of truth, making toward him, of whom it is said, Let us
always seek his face. And I beseech the God of peace to tread down Satan under
Romans 16.2.8
our feet, to heal our divisions, to power out upon all his people the Spirit
of truth, of meekeness, of love, and of a sound mind, and to give us to avoid,
all curious, and needless questions, which neither serve to beget, nor
increase holiness, and to lay aside all contentions, that we may keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, that we may with united strength
oppose the common adversary, 4. Ephesians. 3.
and not sheathe our swords in one another bowels, least by intestine, and
unseasonable differences, we rend the Church of Christ, and be justly blamed
with that of the Poet, Quumque superba foret Babylon spolianda trophaeis,
Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos,


Now the Lord Jesus, the great Apostle, and high priest of our profession, the
great Prophet of his church, double the anointing of his Spirit upon thee, and
lead thee into all truth, settle confirm, and establish thee in the love of
it, and keep thee sound in the faith, and blameless in thy life, until the day
of the Lord Jesus, which is the hearty prayer of

Thy souls friend, and servant in the Gospel of Christ THOMAS WARREN.

REader, by reason of the great distance of the Author from the press many
errata's have escaped, the most material are corrected to thy hand, the rest
thou art entreated to amend as thou art here directed, what ever else thou
find, let thy intelligence cure and thy Charity cover.

p. 8. l. last, for in, r. is. p. 9 l. 18. for our, r. my. item 2^. l. for you.
r. he. p. 10. l. 13. blot out the second, so. p. 13. l. 4. for Consistence, r
Coexsistence, l. 17. for purposes. 1. purposed. p. 19. l. 31 for mna, r man p.
11. l. 18. for have, r. has. p. 22. l. 32 for dies, 1. die. p. 27. l. 2. after
man, add [he] p. 36 l. 12. after were add not. p. 37. l. 5. for has r. have.
l. 21. blot out [so] l. 29. for once. r. one. p. 39. l. 29. for sin, r. sinned.
p. 40. l. last, for Christ's, r. Christ. p. 49. l. 33. after that add (he) p.
67. l 16. blot out for. p. 71. l. 30. after being, blot out (that), p. 74. l.
13. for affirming, r. affirm p. 91. l 1. blot out (but) p. 99. l r. blot out
the first (as) p, 108. l. 14. for malem, r. mallem. p. 134. l. 27. blot out
(for p. 145. l. 25. for there, read theirs p. 146. l 16. for no^, not, p. 150.
l. 26. for the first. is, r. (as) p. 154. l. 11. for my, r. me. p. 158. l. 5.
after unto add were elected. p. 159. l. 33. for these, r. thee. p. 176. l. 26.
after but, add we. p. 180. l. 29. for at, r. as. p. 183. l. 2. after the first
foresight, add (but) and for nor r. not. p. 195. l. 37. blot (and) p. 199. line
34. for soil, r. soul

October 13. 1654.
Imprimatur

EDM. CALAMY.

A Christless-estate A HOPELESSE-ESTATE.
EPHESIANS. 2.12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise,
having no hope, and without God in the world.
THe Scope of the Apostle in this Chapter, is the same with that in the former,
to set the forth freeness of Gods grace in Christ, proving sometimes in
hypothesi, that the converted Ephesians, sometimes in thesi, that all the
faithful are saved by grace. And he uses many Arguments

First, in the state of nature, they were not only defiled with arise from the
grave; and therefore unless the same Almighty power that raised Christ from
the dead, had been exerted to quicken them, they could never have been saved.

verse 2. He tells them that their whole life was a life of sin, though
they were dead to grace, and spiritual life, yet they were alive to sin.





verse he shows that they had their conversation in the lusts of the flesh,
doing what their vain mind did dictate, and their corrupt appetite and sinful
affections did desire

Sixthly, The Apostle amplifies this by comparison, showing

In the fourth verse the Apostle lays down a second Argument

In the fifth verse he shows the order of Gods dispensing grace to us, and
that is by the redemption of Christ, amplified from the time, that while we
were yet dead in sins God quickened us with Christ, and therefore by grace we
are saved, that is, while we were dead in sins and trespasses, a Covenant
passed between God and Christ our Redeemer, and God gave us unto Christ, that
by him we should be redeemed: and when he raised Christ, he gave us a pledge of
our redemption and justification in him.

verse he tells us that we are not only quickened and raised to life,
begotten to a living hope of eternal life, but we were in a manner raised with
him, and ascended with him as in our head, and set down together with him in
heavenly ace, spl that is, in respect of our right purchased, we had it before
faith, but in respect of actual possession and application of these mercies
this is not conferred upon our persons until we do believe.

In the seventh verse the Apostle shows what end God had in all this, that in
the ages to come be might show the exceeding riches of his grace, and kindness
toward us in Jesus Christ.

In the eighth ver. he concludes from his former discourse, that therefore we
are saved by grace; And goes on to prove it by a third Argument taken from the
means whereby this grace is received and applied: we are saved by grace,
because we are saved by faith; where faith is taken metonymically, for Christ
apprehended by faith, yet not excluding faith as a means to apply Christ to
us; and that which is due to Christ, is attributed to faith, because it alone
is the only instrument to apply Christ's righteousness unto justification. Now
the Apostle to prevent a mistake, lest any should think because faith is our
act, that therefore we are saved by something in us; he answers, that though it
be our Act, it is Gods gift, and therefore we cannot challenge any thing in the
work of Salvation, because we are passive in this work; it is a grace wrought
in us by God, to apply Christ to us, and therefore in 9. verse he removes all
works, whether performed by grace, or nature, from being the cause of our
salvation, knowing how deeply this error is rooted in all men by nature, to
seek righteousness in themselves: and he gives a reason why God will not have
salvation by works, because as they cannot stand with grace, as faith may, so
they are enemies to the glory of God, and will lift up the heart of man to
glory in himself; therefore God will have it to be by grace, received by faith,
that no man might boast.

In the tenth verse, the Apostle having showed that our salvation is only of
grace, and the means by which we are made capable of all saving good in Christ
by faith, excluding all causes in man lest he should boast; he lays down a
new reason, why we cannot be saved by works, because in the work of
regeneration we are wholly Gods workmanship in Christ created to good works;
and we are as merely passive in this work, as in the first work of creation;
for as no creature contributed any thing to its own being; and as there was no
disposition in man to make himself a man, so there is naturally no ability in
us to contribute any thing to our new creation; therefore seeing all we have,
and are enabled to do, is by grace, we are not saved by our own works; and to
prevent an Objection concerning works, (for works being excluded from being a
cause of salvatition,) then some might ask, What place have they? and why are
they required? the Apostle answers, they are of necessary use, though not to
purchase salvation, yet they are the way wherein salvation must be had; for God
has ordained before, that we should walk in them.

In the 11th. and 12th. verses, The Apostle that he might the better affect
their hearts with the greatness of Gods mercy, and freeness of his grace to
them; he puts them in mind of their former estate in Gentilisme, as if he
should say, Do but remember what once you were; cast but an eye upon your
former estate, and compare it with your present; and your very change will
evidence this truth, that ye are saved by grace.

Now this wretched and deplorable estate, he sets down in seven things: Two
whereof are set down in the 10th. verse, the rest in the 11th. ver. which I
have chosen for my Text.

1. First, remember that ye were Gentiles in the flesh, living according to the
flesh, so that in that estate they could not please God.

2. They were uncircumcised, that is, they had not the seal of Gods Covenant,
and so were despised by the Jews, who rejoice in that Circumcision which is
made with hands; you not only were uncircumcised in heart, but also you wanted
the outward sign of it in the flesh, which is a seal of Gods Covenant. And in
the Text here are five evils more that he would have them remember:

that time ye were without Christ; that is, as Diodat upon the place observes,
ye had neither union, nor communion with Christ, who is Head of the Church, the
Foundation, and Mediator of the Covenant, and the Spring of all spiritual, and
everlasting blessings.

Israel, and so separate from Christ's body, which is the Church; they had no
communion with the Church.

Thirdly, They were strangers from the Covenants of Promise, Bains observes,
they had no propriety in the Covenant, or promulgation of the Covenant; and as
Diodat upon the place, having no interest nor portion in the goods promised by
the Covenant of Grace, which was made with Abraham; and so often reiterated and
confirmed, or as Dickson upon the place, having no right to application of the
promises, or as Piscator upon the place, Haec promissio foederis gratiae qua
Deus promittebat remissionem peccatorum propter meritum Christi, and
renovationem cordium per efficactam Christi, nihil ad eos pertinebat.

Fourthly, They were without hope in that estate, in a hopeless

Fifthly, they were without God, that is, without the knowledge, What a chaffy,
crude, jejune, and ridiculous gloss, then is that of our new Rabbi, Mr. Air
Vindic. just. gratui^ p. 73.
Mr. Air, in his Vindiciae justificationis gratuitae, who makes the sense and
meaning of these words to be thus: The Elect before faith have no knowledge or
comfort of Gods gracious volitions toward them, or of Christ's undertakings,
and purchases in their behalf, in which respect they are said to be without
Christ, and without God in the world; As if they were not so really, but to
their apprehensions; they did apprehend themselves to be without Christ, and
without God, and without hope in the world, but were not; as if he should say,
They were mistaken, their estate was good enough, but they wanted faith to give
them the knowledge, and comfort of it; which is to contradict the scope and end
of this place, which is to show what a change God had wrought by place, as the
next words declare.

I wonder with what fate he can thus grossly corrupt the sense of the Holy
Ghost, when as the plain scope, and meaning of the words, is to mind them of
their former misery, before conversion, or actual faith; they were a
Christlesse-people, without all actual communion with Christ, the Spirit of
Christ had not yet drawn them to Christ, nor united them to him, nor did he yet
dwell in their hearts by faith; but in respect of any real, actual communion
with Christ in respect of Justification, or Sanctification; they were as if
there were no Christ, and they were without communion with the Church, without
the means of grace and salvation, in a very sad, hopelesse-estate, without any
interest in God, or any true saving knowledge of him.

My purpose is not to speak to all of these, but only to the first of them,
which I shall take as it is in conjunction with that other expression in the
Text, that they were without hope.

Observe.
The Observation then I shall insist upon is this, That a Christlesse-estate, is
a Hopelesse-estate: And where there is no union to Christ, that soul is without
hope; this is the head of all spiritual misery to be without Christ, this
makes a soul to be without God, and without hope in the world; Romans 8.32.
let a man have Christ, and he shall with Christ have all things; but let him
be without Christ, and then he has nothing, he is under wrath, poor, wretched,
miserable, blind and naked. In the opening of this Point, I will oserve this
method.

1. I will inquire what it is to be without Christ.

2. I will confirm it by Scripture and Reason, that a Christless-estate is a
Hopelesse-estate.

3. I will show you, that before actual faith, even the Elect of God are in a
Christlesse-estate, in this hopelesse-condition; and then will apply it.

First, What is it to be without Christ, and how could the Ephesians be said to
be without Christ, when they were Elect persons, and redeemed by Christ? The
Apostle speaks not here of Gods counsel, and purpose, for so he intended to
give Christ to them, and them to Christ; yet for all that they were without
Christ, for this is terminus diminuens, and did not put them into a state of
actual union to Christ, nor does he look upon the price of redemption paid for
them; for they were notwithstanding this without Christ: but he speaks in
regard of actual application, So Baines upon the place.
and thus they were without Christ; they were (...), absque Christo, seorsum a
Christo. Now this may be understood in two respects:

Christ made to them in the Gospel, while they were Ethnicks and strangers to
the Commonwealth of Israel; thus they were without Christ, because without the
saving knowledge of Christ; and so were in a hopelesse-estate, till God did
reveal Christ to them; and thus as Paul tells the Corinthians, If the Gospel
be hid, it is hid from them that are lost, they are a lost people to whom the
Gospel is hid. Now it is hid two ways:

1. When it is not revealed, and thus where no vision Prove. 2918.
is, the people perish; And they that sit in Isa. 9.2. Matthew. 4.16.
darkness, sit in the region and the shadow of death.

2. When it is 2 Cor. 4.4.
hid from a people in regard of the saving light, and efficacy of it; and in
both these senses the Gospel was hid from them; for they had not Christ the
Col. 1.27.
hope of glory preached to them, the Ephesians. 3.8.
unsearchable riches of Christ was not yet revealed to them, much less was
Christ revealed Gal 1.16.
in them by the powerful illumination and effectual operation of the Spirit of
Christ.

Secondly, A man is said to be without Christ, when he was Ephesians. 3 17.
dwell in his heart by faith, and he was never united to Christ by his Spirit,
when they were never implanted into Christ by faith: Thus the Ephesians were
without Christ, they were not so much as in him by external profession, much
less by mystical implantation; there was never any mutual act between Christ
and them, Christ exhibiting himself to them, and they adhering, and dwelling in
Christ by faith; they had not the Spirit of Christ working an unity of wills, a
confederacy of affections, a participation of natures, a concurrence to the
making up the same body; and this is here principally intended.

And thus the greatest number of men and women that live under the sound of the
Gospel are without Christ, and were never in him to this day.

Now all that are thus in a Christlesse-estate, are in a hopelesse-estate; let
no man flatter himself, and think that because Christ the Son of God died for
sinners, they shall be saved by giving a general assent to this truth: I tell
you, Christ himself shall not save you, unless you be united to him by faith;
We preach, says the Apostle, Christ in you, the hope of glory Col. 1.27.
not Christ among you, as some As Mr. Air Epist. Flock. p. 2.
interpret it, but in you. Christus per fidem receptus and habitans in vobis
Dickson in locum. Christus per fidem receptus and habiants in vo^is.
Explicat quid revelavit in genere, vocat divitias, summam scilicet Evangelii.
Deinde explicat clarius quae sint illae divitiae, Christus non simpliciter, and
extra nos, sed in nobis inhabitans per fidem. Ergo dum Christus est extra nos,
divitiarum coelestium non possumus esse participes. Z nch in loc.
In vobis, quia nunc Christum possident, a quo nuper erant tam alieni. Calv.
apud Marlo. And Diodat, In you, namely of which mystery Christ who is preached
among you, is the whole subject; or inhabiting, reigning, operating in you by
his Spirit, which in you is a certain pledge of glory.

And seeing the word (...) in the proper signification of it, signifies in;
and it is a truth agreeable to the scripture, that Christ dwells in us; and
Christ so dwelling, is the hope of glory: It is a senseless cavil of Mr. Air
in his Epistle to his People in his Vindiciae Justificationis, To call this
Interpretation a delusion; that we call works, or inherent holiness by the
Name of Christ, the success of this bait, says he, we have seen of late in
too many, who have dallied so long with the notion of a Christ within them,
that they have quite forgotten; nay, some have utterly denied the Christ
without them; that God-man, who is the only propitiation for our sins; Col.
1.27.
which mistake, (he says,) is grounded upon Col. 1.27. Christ in you, the hope
of glory; whereas Christ in you, is no more then Christ preached among you;
(...) is rendered among in the same ver. If this be granted, that hinders not,
but the word in the next acception of it, should be taken in its proper genuine
signification, though in the first place there is necessity so to interpret it.
And as for that dream of calling inherent works by the Name of Christ, if any
so do, we abhor it with him; yet ought we not, because some abuse the
Scripture, therefor to lose the benefit of any saving truth; and seeing Christ
does really dwell in us by faith, we fear not to assert this without the
suspicion Familisme. Mistake me not, I do not say that Christ dwells in
Believers by any personal inhabitation, so as to make an hypostalical union;
but by the graces and operation of his Spirit; and unless he thus dwell in thy
soul, and be united to thee, thou can not be saved. As the manslayer could
not be safe, if the avenger of blood found him out of the City of refuge; And
as Lot was not safe till he was in Zoar: So Christ in our City of refuge, he is
our Zoar, we must fly to for safety; and God has promised only strong Heb.
6.18.
consolation to such as fly for refuge to this hope set before them in Christ.
And as none were saved that did hang about the Ark when the flood came, but
they that were got into the Arc, and shut up in it; so none that do hang upon
Christ only by external profession, shall be saved, but such as get into Christ
by mystical implantation. And hence in Scripture we read of a mutual indwelling
of Christ in us, and we in Christ, to which the comfort of salvation is
ascribed thus in Romans 8.1. Romans 8.1. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith, prove your selves. Know ye not
your own selves that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? 2 Cor.
13.5. that is, seeing you question my Ministry, and seek a proof of Christ
speaking in me; I pray, says he, reflect upon your selves, if you have any
faith, and Christ dwelling in you by faith; and unless ye will judge your
selves to be reprobates, rejected and disallowed of God, for such as are not in
Christ, and so none of his members, you must acknowledge our Ministry by whom
ye were begotten to the faith. Now I put it to your selves, you know it to be a
plain truth that Christ is in you by faith; and if he be not, you can judge at
present your selves to be no better then reprobates: Now unless you
acknowledge our Ministry, you must condemn your selves; where you see that
such as have not Christ dwelling in them, they are in the judgment of Paul,
disallowed and rejected of God; and though he call them not reprobates, as
opposed to the Elect; because as (...), rejectanci; sic eos vocat Apostolus hoc
loco, non qui sunt divinitus ad vitam aeternam electis oppositi, nec enim
censendi sunt statim irae vasa, quicunque vel in suis peccatis adhuc manent
nondum efficaciter vocati. Bez. in locum.
Beza observes, they are not presently to be judged vessels of wrath that yet
abide in their sins; yet as to their present estate, they are such as God
approves not of, nor are they in a capacity of salvation, Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ: Now in Scripture-sense it is all one
to be in Christ, or Christ to be in us, and there is nothing but condemnation
to them that are out of Christ; So the John 15.5.
15th. of John, If any man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and
withers; that is, if any man be in Christ only by external profession, and
outward Baptism, and is not truly united to him, and abide in him by faith, so
as to partake of spiritual life from Christ, As the living branch lives in the
Vine, you shall be cut off as a dead branch, and cast into the fire: So in Joh.
6.56, 57.
John 6.56, 57. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me,
and I in him. As the living Father has sent me, I live by the Father; So he
that eats me, shall live by me; that is, as the body is preserved by meat and
drink, and our meat and drink turn into the substance of the body, and become
one with it: So he that spiritually feeds upon my flesh and blood, upon my
death and suffering by faith, he shall be inseparably united to me, and I will
become one with him. And by this he shall live; as I who am Mediator, am sent
by the Father to this end, to bring men to life; so that I might be able to
give life, I have received life from the Father, and live by his Spirit
communicated to me; And so, as sure as God lives, and as I live by influence of
the life, and Spirit of God; so he that eats me, and so becomes one with me
by faith, as the meat with the body, he shall live by me.

Ver. 53.
And in Ver. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you; that is, unless you become one with Christ by faith,
you have no life in you. So the 1 John 3.24. Romans 8.9.
1 John 3.24. and compared with Romans 8.9. Hereby we know that he abides in us,
because of his Spirit which he has given us.

Where observe, 1. That Christ dwells in his people: Hereby we know that he
abides in us. This is not a fancy, or a conjecturall ungrounded hope, but it
is an infallible truth of eternal verity; Hereby we know he abides in us.

2. Observe, the means by which he dwells in us, and how this may be known;
It is by his Spirit: and this is a sure evidence of Christ dwelling in us,
because he has given us his Spirit: Now compare this with Romans 8 ^. If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he it none of Christ's; He that has not the
Spirit of Christ dwelling in him, he has no Christ dwelling in him, and so is
none of Christ's, none of his members, and so can never be saved so long as he
lives without Christ; so that you see the truth cleared, That to be without
Christ, is to be without Hope.

Now, the reasons why a Christlesse estate is a Hopeless estate: are,

Reason. 1. Because there is no Act. 4.12.
name given under heaven whereby we may be saved; God has taken up an
immutable purpose never to be reconciled unto man, but in and through Christ;
so that there is not the least sounding of the bowels of God toward a sinner,
but in Christ; Hence Christ is called our 1 Timothy 1.1.
Hope, that is, he is the object of our Hope, in whom alone we are begotten
unto a lively hope of eternal life. Such is the distance and difference between
God and the souls of men, that none is found worthy, or able in heaven or earth
to umpire this difference, but Christ; and were he not a person of infinite
worth, he could never make any satisfaction, nor work a reconciliation; We are
dead in sins and trespasses, and none but Christ that is the Lord of Life can
quicken us; we are spiritually blind, and were not Christ God, he could not
cure our blindness; for it was never John 9.32.
known from the beginning of the world, that any but God could open the eyes of
the blind. None but Christ who is the Heb. 1.3.
brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Character of his Image, is
able to restore Gods Image in us; without which, we shall never see the face of
God, nor can God take us for his children, nor delight in us, unless this were
restored; such is the opposition made against our salvation by Satan, and all
the powers of darkness, that none but Christ is able to deliver us from this
strong man. So great is the mystery of godliness, that none but Christ who
has lien in the bosom of the Father, and knows all things, could reveal the
Father to us, whom to John 1. 18. John 17.3.
know in Christ is eternal life; nor could he give us the Spirit Ephesians. 1.17.
of wisdom and revelation, to know God and the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints, nor translate us out of darkness into mavelous
light: Such is that perfect righteousness God requires to cloth us, that we
may be presented without Ephesians. 5.26.
spot or wrinkle in Gods sight, that none but God in our nature is able to
furnish us with such a righteousness.

Reason. 2. As none but Christ can save, so none but such as the graft and the
stock; dissolve the union, and the communion is destroyed. In the Politic
communion between a people, unless united under one government. So in all
others, and why not in the mystical union between Christ and us? Hence says
Paul, 2 Cor. 6.15.
What concord has Christ with Belial? Thus in the Ephesians. 1.3.
Ephesians 1.3. God is said to have blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places; but how? in Christ; thus the believing R^manes were first Romans
11.24.
cut off from their old stock, the wild Olive they grew upon, and were graffed
into the new Olive Tree before they could be partakers of the root and fatness
of the Ol^ve-tree, and their being graffed in did precede their being partakers
of the root, and fatness of the Olive Tree. And he that has but the
first fruits of reason must acknowledge this; and take one place for all, to
show that all the benefits that come by Christ, follow upon our union to
Christ. In the 1 Cor. 1.30.
1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. So that first we
are in him before he is made of God unto us, wisdom, righteousness, etc.

Now I come to the third particular, and that is to show you that before actual
faith there is no actual union to Christ, and so no spiritual communion with
him in his death, not actual hope of eternal life.

Now for the fuller vindicating of this Proposition, and what I have hereafter
laid down in the defense of it against Mr. Eyre's Exceptions or Cavils, rather
I refer the Reader to the following discourse, where I will purposely
undertake this task; because I intend here only to give the world a sight of
that naked truth, as it was delivered without any variation from it, that the
world may see what reason Mr. Air had to condemn it as Heterodox. To return
then to the Proposition delivered, That before actual faith there can be no
actual union with Christ. That which some imagine of an union with Christ from
eternity, and an union with Christ upon the Cross when he stood as a common
person; if they understand it of an actual union and implantation into Christ,
and not of a relative respect and virtual union, which yet is an union
improperly so called; that which they affirm is very irrational: for that
union which is the mystical union between Christ and a Believer, by which we
have spiritual communion with Christ in his death, is the formal effect of
faith; by means of which Christ and we are made one Ephesians. 5.23. 1 Cor. ^0.7.
body, and this union necessarily requires the consistence of the persons
united; for that union whereby Christ and we are united, is such an union,
whereby the person of a Believer is united to the person of Christ, (I called
it not a personal union, though it be an union of persons; and although I
explained my self so, in my conference with him after the Sermon; yet he is not
ashamed to tell the world, I hold our union with Christ to be a personal
union: but of this hereafter.)

Now this actual union whereby the person of a Believer is united to the person
of Christ, necessarily requires the pre-existence of his person, and the
antecedency of his faith. And therefore when it is said that God Ephesians. 1.4.
chose us in Christ, that is not to be understood as if we were then existentes
in Christo, or actually united; but it shows us Gods order how he purposes to
bring us unto holiness, that is, through Christ, or for Christ's sake; this
being an immanent and eternal action, it could not leave any present effect
upon us, who had no actual, but a mental existence only in Gods mind, and
therefore we could not be actually united: for neither Christ as yet had
assumed our nature into the unity of his Person, which was to lay the
foundation of the union of our persons unto Christ; although I deny not but the
Patriarchs before Christ, were really united by faith, before the assumption of
the humane nature.

Besides, union to Christ is a thing accidental as to the nature of man; now an
accident is not, nor cannot be without its subject, (where let the Reader
observe the forgery of Mr. Air; that which I spoke of union with Christ, he
applies to imputation of righteousness): For Where I take inesse or esse in
alio quatenus opponitur substantiae quae per se subsistit late, non stricte,
sed pro omni accidentali informatione in ordine al substantiam, sive sit per
modum inh^rentiae, adjacentiae, sive essendi, etc.
Accidentis esse, est inesse; now the Believer being the person united, and so
a subject of this union, how can union which is an accident subsist, without
man that is the subject exist? And besides, it is a known rule: Non entis nulla
sunt accidentia, nullae sunt affectiones; how can any thing be truly predicated
of that which is not? Besides, it is against another Principle in reason; (and
unless we will betray our reason to become beasts, we cannot submit to this
new Creed;) Omnis actio fit per contactum: All action is by some contact; which
holds good in this supernatural action; for by faith we touch Christ, not by
any local contiguity, but by a spiritual contact and apprehension, whereby
Christ is said to dwell in our hearts.

Now having proved a priori, that the Elect before faith are not united to
Christ, let us a posteriori see if the same truth will not be concluded from
the proper effect of union with Christ, which is communion with him in his
death unto justification, that the Elect are not united before faith.

Such then as are actually united to Christ, are actually justified: But a man
is not justified actually before faith: Therefore neither united to Christ. As
for Infants, their case is of a peculiar consideration, God by his Spirit
supplying what is wanting through the imbecility of their age; and hence the
Spirit working semen fidei, and apprehending them, though they cannot apprehend
Christ, I question not their union to Christ, and the imputation of his
righteousness to their justification; but we speak now de adultis, that none
that are of years sufficient, are justified without actual faith. Now that we
are not justified by an immanent act of God from eternity, nor immediately from
the time of Christ's death, without some act of ours intervening for the
application of Christ's righteousness to justification; will appear,

1. From such Scriptures which require an act of faith to go before our
justification, and the remission of sins, Acts 16.31. Acts 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved; the Jaylors question was
not, What shall I do to be quieted in conscience, and assured that I am
justified, and in a state of salvation? but, What shall I do to be saved? I
see my lost damnable estate, how shall I do to be saved? With the heart Romans
10.10.
man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to
salvation; where you see righteousness is obtained by faith, and made the end
1 Pet 1.9.
of believing, as the Apostle expressly elsewhere calls salvation the end of
our faith, for faith is the means to that end; for having said, that he that
confesseh with his mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in his heart that
God raised him from the dead, shall be saved; He subjoynes this as a reason;
for with the heart, man believes unto righteousness, that is, he obtaines by
faith such a righteousness by which he shall be saved. John 20.31. These
things are written that ye might believe, and that believing ye might have John
20.31.
life through his Name, where life is made an effect of believing, Gal. 2.16.
Gal. 2.16. We have believed, that we might be justified; where justification
is made the final cause of believing; and so, Romans 3.25.
Romans 3.25 Whom God has set forth as a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins; where setting
down all the causes of justification, he does not exclude faith: for,
Subordinata inter se non pugnant.

(1.) God is the efficient, whom he has set forth as a propitiation.

(2.) Christ's death is made the meritorious cause, in his blood; and faith, the
instrumental. Now as the efficient excludes not the meritorious, no more must
the meritorious exclude the efficient; for, Bonum est ex integris causis. The
like may be proved from those places, which affirm that a man is in the state
of damnation, till he do believe. The 16th. of Mark, He that Ma^k 16.
believes, shall be saved: he that believes not, shall be damned, Joh. 3.18. He
that believes not, is condemned already; and ver. 36. He that believes not,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. And as the Scripture
ownes it for an anointed truth, so reason confirms it with a high hand, which
I prove thus:

1. As by the first Adam no man is guilty of eternal death, but he that is a
member of him by natural generation; so Christ frees no man from condemnation,
justifies and reconcileth no man, till be a member of him by supernatural
regeneration; but this is not before faith, John 1.12. To as many as John 1.12.
received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to as many
as believed on his Name; Which were borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, but of God.

2. If a man be justified from the time of Christ's death antecedently, not only
to a man's faith, but to a man's birth, then a justified person is not borne a
child of wrath, which contradicts that of the Apostle, where he says of
himself and the converted Ephesians; Than they were by Ephesians. 2.3.
nature the children of wrath as well as others.

3. A sin is not remitted before it is committed; But if we be justified from
the time of Christ's death, sin is remitted, before it is committed. The Major
is evident, because it is not a sin before committed; and therefore seeing it
is but potentially a sin, and not formally it cannot be actually and formally
remitted; nor is it of any great moment, that our sins were imputed to Christ,
before they were committed by us. For,

1. It will not easily be granted that our sins were imputed to Christ, but
only the punishment due to sin was said upon Christ; but if it be granted, the
reason is not alike: for Christ to whom our sin in the guilt of it was imputed,
was a person existing.

And, 2. Sin imputed to Christ, was not as the Doct^r C^isp. Ser. p. 108, 109.
Antinomians judge so transferred upon Christ as to constitute him guilty by an
inherent guilt, to whom sin, and the guilt of sin are all one; so that in their
esteem Christ was the sinner, as really as he that did commit it; for this is
impossible; for, Idem numero accidens non potest migrare a subjecto in
subjectum; and therefore this imputation was an extrinsecal denomination, and
Christ subjected himself to it without sin, which he could not have done if sin
and the guilt of it be inseparable; and the same thing therefore it was only an
external imputation of the guilt of it, which rendered him obnoxious unto
punishment, and there was a necessity for this imputation, for otherwise he
could not have suffered as a surety; but now we cannot be conceived sinners
before we commit sin, because sin in us is an inherent blot; whereby we having
broken the Law, deserved punishment for our offense against God, and this
formally constitutes us sinners; and that guilt or obligation to punishment
that arises from it, is a Reatus est duplex, culpae and poenae, sive
reatusredundans in personam. The first is inseparable, the second separable
from sin; this was imputed to Christ, not the first.
separable effect; nor can we thus be counted sinners by God in justice, till
we be so actually by inherent guilt; therefore as a medicine that has a
sufficient virtue to cure all leprosies, yet it does not cure till a man be
actually leprous; so the blood of Christ that has a healing virtue, does not
purge a man till he be defiled with sin.

4. The whole efficacy of the merit of Christ's death, in respect of the
imputation and application of it, depends upon the will of God ordaining it,
and accepting of it; for who dares take or apply the merit of Christ any other
way, or upon any other condition then he has ordained to communicate it, and
to be accepted for men? And Christ as Mediator was the servant of God,
submitting his will to Gods will in it; and Christ was constituted as a Head
and Mediator out of mere grace, and favor, and his will was to be in every
respect conformable to the will of God.

Now then seeing it was not intended by God, nor accepted of God to procure
immediate reconciliation, and remission of sins for any before repentance,
and implantation into Christ by faith; so neither was it the intendment of
Christ, and so no wrong is done to Christ, though the benefit of his death be
suspended until actual faith; especially considering, that for Christ's sake
grace shall be given effectually to draw them to faith for whom Christ died,
therefore none are justified actually till faith.

I might here add, that the Law being relaxed, to put in the name of a surety,
whose payment was refusable; hereupon the solution being not in this respect
the same in obligation, (for dum alius solvit, aliud solvitur) and so being not
solutio ejusdem, but tantidem, the discharge does not immediately follow;
especially seeing it was neither the will of God, nor of Christ, that an
immediate discharge should be given, which appears by Scripture strongly by a
negative argument thus, There is no Scripture can be produced from whence,
without manifest injury to the Holy Ghost, this can be drawn by any tolerable
consequence, that by virtue of Christ's death all the Elect are ipso facto
invested with Christ's righteousness, and are actually justified without the
intervention of faith; nay, the Scriptures expressly threatening unbelievers
with damnation, and limiting salvation to Believers, do evidently declare the
contrary. Neither let any reject this argument drawn from the Scripture
negatively; for although this argument be infirm in matters of less
consequence, yet in fundamentals it is of great force; such as this is, by what
means this righteousness of Christ shall be applied to justification;
therefore in such truths as concern our salvation, this is of maine
importance, it is not written, therefore it is not to be believed. Indeed if
Christ had merited this absolutely, that we should be justified whether we
believe, or not believe, the matter had been otherwise.

And when we make faith the condition necessary to justification, we do not
with Arminians make it a potestative uncertain condition, depending upon the
liberty of man's free will; but though it be contingent in respect of us, yet it
comes to pass necessarily in respect of God, who has ordained unto faith such
as he has chosen in Christ unto salvation. And it is an effect of the death of
Christ, which shall be given in Gods appointed time to such for whom Christ
died. Nor do we make faith a condition of Christ's acquiring pardon, nor an
instrument to make his merits satisfactory, nor an organical instrument of Gods
acception of it; Christ's merits have their worth, whether we believe or not;
and Gods will cannot be moved by any external cause; but it is a prerequisite
condition by Gods appointment, which is to be fulfilled by us through his grace
working it, whereby Christ's righteousness shall be applied to us for
justification. And as for those Scriptures that speak of Gods being reconciled
by the death of Christ, they are to be restrained to actual Believers, to whom
Paul wrote his Epistles; or if they be indefinitely understood of all the
Elect, they hold forrh no more then that Christ has by a sufficient price paid
removed the cause of enmity meritoriously, but not by any formal application of
it unto any until faith. And whereas they speak of Gods reconciling us, while
enemies, (from whence our Adversaries infer, that we are reconciled while
enemies, antecedently to faith) this only shows what we were when Christ died
for us, enemies to God as well as others; but that we are (while we remain so)
reconciled, is atheologon, and not worthy of him that savours of the Spirit of
grace; nor can any sober man that keeps his wits company, imagine any such
thing in God, who is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity.

5. Besides, in the fifth place, it is considerable among what sort of causes
the death of Christ is to be ranked; it is a meritorious cause, which is to be
numbered amongst moral causes. Christ in his death is not to be looked upon as a
natural agent, that the effect of his sufferings should work immediately, but
as a voluntary agent; and hence the effect does not necessarily follow, but at
the will of the agent moved thereby; yea, the effect of a moral cause, or
voluntary agent, may sometimes precede the cause, as in this of the death of
Christ, by which all that believed in Christ to come, were justified as well as
we, though Christ had not as yet made an actual satisfaction by his death; for
in this case the effect is wholly at the will of the Agent moved thereby, who
together with Christ has suspended the effect until faith.

I add in the 6th. place, Bonum est ex integris causis, and therefore where
many causes concur to the producing of one effect, the effect is not
accomplished till every cause has contributed his proper influence.

Now there are three causes of man's justification, which may therefore be
called sociall causes, but not coordinate; but the two last subordinate to the
first.

The first is the efficient cause, that is God of his free mercy.

The second is the meritorious cause, the death and obedience of Christ.

The third is the instumentall cause, and that is says. Now as the efficient
justifies not without the meritorious, so neither does the meritorious without
the instrumental, and much less the instrumental without the other; but all
three conjoined, constitute a person actually justified in the sight of God.
And whereas they argue, that those Scriptures that speak of justification by
faith, are to be understood in foro conscientiae, that they do but justify us
declaratively, and serve to evidence justification, but not to confer
justification upon us, neither are we justified by faith (say they) in the
sight of God: I will therefore propound three arguments against this which is a
chief cornerstone in the Antinomians building.

1. That that does change and alter the state of a sinner, and put him into a
new condition in refrence to God, that does more then evidentially justify:
But faith does thus alter the state of a sinner; and the Major is above
contradiction: the Minor is no less true, which I prove thus, If before faith
a mna is in the state of damnation, and upon believing he be put into a state
of salvation, and that before God, then faith does really alter and change a
man's estate before God: But before faith a man is under condemnation, and upon
faith delivered from it: Ergo. Mr. Air his answer to this was, that the Law
did condemn him, but God d^d not; To which I replied, If the Law be the Law of
God, and receive all its power and authority from God, then when the Law
condemns, then God condemns; But the Law is the Law of God, and has all
its force and efficacy from the will of God. (Now look what answer he has
given to Mr. Woodbridge, which you may see, Mr. Air, p. 112. Number 6.
Vindiciae Justifica. p. 112. Sect. 6. the same he gave to me, which I shall
answer in its proper place.)

2. What the Aposle denies to Works, he attributes to faith; therefore faith
has an influence into justification, which works have not. From whence I argue,

If faith do only declaratively justify the sinner, then faith does no more
toward the justification of a sinner then works, because works may evidence my
justification, as well as faith; but according to the Apostle, faith
contributes more to justification then works: Ergo. The proof of the
consequence, that works may evidence justification, will appear from Romans 8.1.
Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: By this we 1 John 3.14.
know that we are passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren.

3. Besides, the controversy between the Apostle and the Justiciaries of his
time, was not, whether faith or works do evidence our justication; but by what
we are justified in the sight of God.

From whence I argue, That that makes the Apostle to assert an untruth, that
interpretation cannot be true: But if the meaning of the Apostle had been, We
are justified by faith, that is, faith does evidence our justification, and
works do not evidence it, this makes the Apostles words to be untrue, and he
should uphold a needless strife, and they should be in the truth, and he in an
error. But we shall rather suspect this gloss, then so far question the
credit of St. Paul, who was Amanuensis Spiritus Sancti, the Penman of the Holy
Ghost.

because without the means by which God offers and exhibites Christ, though
their condition be very sad; but even of those to whom Christ is preached, and
salvation by Christ offered; but yet (alas!) they are as great strangers to
Christ as if they had never heard of him, they know not what union and
communion with Christ means, they never were cut off from their old stock; but
are members of the first Adam, who are yet in their sins, ready to perish
everlastingly for want of union with Christ, to give them a right unto his
righteousness; if God stop but their breath, which he can as easily do as a
man would crush a moth, they are everlastingly undone; and we may say of them
as Christ of Judas, It had been good for them they had never been borne, Let
such persons as these are know, that have lived under excellent means, and yet
are not drawn to faith, It shall be more tolerable in the day of judgment for
the Heathen that never heard of Christ, then for them; if they die in this
estate, they shall not be damned for not believing in Christ, for Christ was
never revealed unto them; but Christ have been revealed unto you, the
unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ has been laid open before your eyes; God
has made many sweet offers of Christ and all his benefits unto your souls,
when God has denied to Dives a drop of water to cool his tongue; the windows
of heaven have been opened to you, and the fountains of the great deep of the
bottomless mercy of God have been broken up, and the Seas and depths of Gods
mercies in Christ have been opened to you. One would think the most
iron-hearted sinner would be allured with such bowels of mercy as have wept
over you, and yet you have received all the grace of God in vain, you have not
been brought over unto Christ by faith; how will this provoke the Lord to the
sorest vengeance, that the hand of a jealous God can inflict? If the word
spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and obedience received a
just recompense of reward; how shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? This will be condemnation with a witness, That light is come into
the world, and men love darkness rather then light. Thou that art not united
to Christ, thou have as yet no part nor portion in Christ, thou art yet in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.

Indeed there is righteousness enough in Christ to justify thee; if all the
sins of all the men in the world did lie upon thee, yet if thou be a member
of Christ, none of all these should condemn thee; yea, with reverence be it
spoken, God can no more condemn thee then he can condemn his Son that died
for thee; thou art as safe from condemnation, as Christ; but thou that art yet
out of Christ by unbelief, let me tell thee, the very blood of Christ cannot
save thee in this estate; God must make a new Gospel, and deny himself, or else
thou can not come to heaven.

What claim can thou lay to Christ's righteousness, that have no interest in
Christ himself? will he give his blood to thee, that never gave himself to
thee? Thou that art a Christlesse person, thou art a graceless person; for if
God have not made Christ righteousness to thee, to justify thee, he is not
made sanctification to thee, thou art a godless, a hopeless man in this
estate. As it was said of Coniah, so may I say of thee, Ob earth, earth, earth,
write this man childlesse, a man that shall not prosper all his days! he was a
broken vessel in whom the Lord had no pleasure; so thou art a broken vessel in
whom the Lord has no pleasure. Oh earth, earth, earth, write this man
graceless, hopeless, heavenlesse, a man that shall not prosper all his days!
Oh, what a dreadful thing must death needs be to thee when thou die, that
have no Christ to intercede for thee, nor righteousness to appear in! If all
the hairs upon thy head were so many vipers in thy bosom, they will not sting
thy body more deadly, then sin will sting thy soul unto death eternal. Know
therefore that without union with Christ, it would be well with thee if thou
could change conditions with the meanest beast, or creature God has given
to serve thee; yea, take the Sodomites that now suffer the vengeance of eternal
fire, they shall have a Summers parlour in hell over that soul that has had
such offers of Christ as you have had, and yet dies in a Christlesse estate,
without union with him. I beseech you, lay it strongly to heart, before the
wrath of the Lord break forth like fire against you, and burn down to the
lowest hell, and there be none to quench it.

the old stock, and to implant us into Christ; for God to give us his Gospel,
and that his Spirit should attend upon the Word preached; without which the
Word preached would be as useless as the Gardners kniffe, which cannot cut off
a branch, nor be helpful to the implantation of it, without the hand of the
Gardner to act and improve it; and so the Word without the Spirit would implant
none. Oh r^st! it is the Spirit in the Word that works faith, and so draws and
unites the soul to Christ.

Now that God should give a people his Word, and his Spirit to apply Christ to
them, and them to Christ, that there may be a mutual application of them, as
there is of the stock to the graft, and the graft to the stock; that the
Believer may apprehend Christ, and be apprehended by him, and so grow up into
union and blessed fellowship and communion with Christ in his death and
resurrection* Oh what a blessed unspeakable mercy is this! without which Christ
himself would not save us; and therefore though the world slight the Word
preached, yet if we did rightly consider it as a means of union to Christ, we
should think it a greater blessing then to be made heirs of the world; and
should God take it away from a people, it would be a greater loss then the Sun
out of the Firmament. But if it be such a blessing to have the Word preached,
which is the means to beget faith, whereby this union is made; what a mercy is
it to that soul to whom the Lord has blessed it as a means of his insition
into Christ, that the preaching of the law has been in the hand of God, as the
Gardners knife by which he has cut thee off from the old stock^ the stock of
nature; and that the preaching of the Gospel has been the means to implant
thee into Christ as into a new stock, by whom thou that were dead in sins and
trespasses, art now spiritually alive unto God in Christ; and thou that were a
child of wrath, a firebrand of hell, art now made a child of God, an heir of
eternal life! If to be without Christ, be the fountain of all misery, then to
be one with Christ is the spring, and fountain of all blessedness. If all the
generations shall call the mother of Christ blessed, because she bare Christ in
her womb; all the Angels of heaven shall call thee blessed, that have Christ
dwelling in thy heart by faith. Oh what a comfort was it to Noah when he was in
the Arc, when he saw so many thousands sinking and drowning in the waters
without any hope of escaping! and yet he sat secure in his Arc without any
fear; and as the waters did arise, so his Arc did arise: So, what a comfort
will it be to a soul in Christ, when he shall see so many roaring and damning,
going to hell without mercy, and he himself that was united to Christ saved! Oh
what a comfort was it to Lot when all Sodom was of a light fire, burning and
flaming about the ears of the Inhabitants, and they crying out for anguish and
extremity of pain; that he who was an Inhabitant in that place, and had no
mind to go out, was by the hand of God mercifully snatched out of those flames,
and had a Zoar to fly unto, where he might be safe from those burnings! So,
when the world shall at the great day be of a light fire about men's ears, and
all the wicked that are without Christ in the world, shall be condemned to hell
to dwell with devouring fire, and everlasting burnnings; that then thy self who
were a child of wrath by nature as well as others, and as unwilling to go out
of thy self unto Christ for life, as ever Lot was to go out of Sodom; and yet
by the merciful hand of God, he did pluck thee as a brand out of the fire, and
by his Spirit did draw thee unto faith in Christ, that in him thy soul might
find everlasting rest, and safety in Christ; Oh, what cause have thou to be
everlastingly thankful unto the Lord for this mercy!

The 3d. Use shall be to put you upon the trial, whether or no you be united
unto Christ; for otherwise, whosoever thou art, thy estate is wretched, thou
art a hopeless man, without God, and without any well grounded hope in the
world. Now this may be known by several signs.

John 15.5. Every branch that abides in me, the same brings forth much
fruit. Where observe, that Christ is compared to a Vine, and his Members that
are really united, not by profession only, are compared to Branches that abide
in the Vine; for a dead branch is cut off, and cast into the fire; and an
abiding branch brings forth much fruit. And as a branch of a Vine, is worth
nothing unless it be for fruit, a man cannot make a pin to fasten in a wall of
the branch of a Vine; so that an unfruitful Christian is the most unprofitable
person in the world, and there is nothing can be pleaded to keep a dead branch
of a Vine from the fire, it is good for no other use; if it bring not forth
fruit, it must serve for fuel: So then, all such as are in Christ, must be
fruitful; it is the end why a Christian is ingraffed into Christ, to make him
fruitful; wherefore does a man put a graft into another stock, but for
fructification? this is Gods end in uniting a soul to Christ.

God looks for much fruit, and better fruit, as a man would never be at pains
to ingraft a cion, unless he did expect better fruit, and more fruit then he
had before. Ephesians. 2.10.
Hence we are said to be Gods workmanship in Christ, created unto good works;
the Lord of the Vineyard sent his servant to demand some fruit; Mark 12.2.
and Christ is a very fruitful stock, there is much sap and fatness in this
spiritual root; and it is a dishonor to Christ, the stock into which a
Christian is planted, if he bring not forth fruit; but what is this fruit? why,
Matthew. 3 8.
it is such as John the Baptist called for, fruits meet for repentance, such as
may evidence and testify the truth of repentance, and its fruit unto
holiness, as Paul tells the Romans; That being made free from sin, Romans 6.22.
and become servants of God, they had their fruit unto holiness. And in
another place, this is called fruits of righteousness; Phi. 1.11.
when a Christian is filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are to the
praise and glory of God; when a man is fruitful in every good work, both in
works of piety toward God, and charity toward men; when there is not only
leaves of external profession, Col. 1.10.
but real fruits of holiness, and sanctification; and observe it, it is
fruitfulness in every good work; so that our fruit must be good for the
quality, much for the quantity. Art thou such a fruitful Christian? do thou
bring forth fruits meet for repentance? may the change of thy heart be read in
the change of thy life? is it such fruit as may evidence the truth and power of
grace? art thou no longer a servant to sin, but a servant of righteousness? is
thy affection to sin mortified? They that are Christ's, Gal. 5.24.
have crucified the flesh with the affections, and the lusts thereof. Art thou
like a tree planted by the rivers of water, bringing forth fruit in its season?
do thou bring forth fruit when God expects it? do thou bring forth fruit
not to thy self, but unto God? as a tree brings forth fruit for the Master, so
do thou live to God? not only caring for thy credit, that thy life be
unblameable, but that God may be honored? do thou abound in the fruits of
righteousness? art thou full of love, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, meekness, faith, humility, patience, temperance? He that is not
thus fruitful, is not ingraffed into Christ; if thy faith be a dead faith, that
does not manifest it self by good works; if thou be barren, and unfruitful
in the knowledge of Christ, and have nothing but the outward leaves of
profession, thou were never truly ingraffed into Christ.

A 2d. note is this, he that is united to Christ, lives the life of Christ; for
it is not he, but Christ that lives in him; nevertheless says Paul, I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me. As a branch in the tree, if it be a living
branch, partakes of the same life; it does not only cleave by adherence, and
continuation to the body of the tree, but it is in the tree by a real
participation of life, partaking of the sap and influences of the root; thus it
is between Christ and a Christian, united to him by a true faith, Acts 3.15.
he partakes of spiritual life from Christ; hence Christ is called the Prince
of Life, 1 Cor. 15.45.
and a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. Now Christ is the Root, Author, and
fruition of all spiritual life in us; and thus he lives in us by his Spirit,
which is called the Spirit of life which is in Christ, and by this he freeth us
from the law of sin and death; Romans 8.2.
The same Spirit that dwells in Christ, dwells in a Believer, and quickens him;
as it raised Christ from the dead, so it does raise up us to newness of life,
and so to live a life in conformity to the life of Christ; which appears in two
things, because it makes a Christian live by the same rule, and to the same end.

1. By the same rule, Christ as Mediator lived according to the written Word
of God, P^al. 40.8.
The Law of God was written in his heart; look what the Law did require, there
was a disposition in his heart suitable to that Law; and hence Christ
professed, He came not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him;
It was his meat and drink to do the will of his Father: John 4.34.
And in the most difficult case, wherein he could be tried, though nature
started and stood amazed at the greatness of the sufferings, and therefore as
man could not but fear the wrath of God; and in this sense he feared, and
declined the bitterness of the cup, and desired it might pass away; and
unless he had put off the nature and affections of man, he could do no
otherwise; yet knowing that immutable purpose of God, and for that end he came
to this home, in that sense he voluntarily submitted; and so though here were a
diversity of wills, yet not a contrariety of wills in Christ, and truly his
will was wholly agreeable to the will of God; so in such as Christ lives by his
Spirit, he makes them so live, as to make the will of God the rule of their
life, and to this end he writes the Law in their heart, that they may both
know, and have an inward suitableness of Spirit to yield obedience to the will
of God: And hence he that has had communion with Christ in his death, is said
to cease to sin, for this end that he should no longer live to the lusts of
men, but to the will of God.

2. Christ made the honor of God his end; thus Christ says, He did honor the
Father, and sought not his own glory; John 8.49, 50.
Thus also a Christian that is united to Christ, seeks that glory of God, and
makes that his last end, as Paul injoynes, Whatsoever ye do, 1 Cor. 10.31.
do all to the glory of God. Now if thou art one that do make the will of
God the rule of thy life, and obey it from thy heart, making God thy last end
in all thou do; surely this is an infallible sign of a man in Christ,

3. That man that is united to Christ, cannot live to sin any longer; as a
graft cut off the old stock, lives not in the stock any longer, but wholly
lives in another; so that man that is united to Christ, being cut off from the
old stock, lives not to corrupt nature any longer; Nay, there is nothing now so
contrary to the life of a Christian as sin, nothing so hateful; nothing was
more hateful to Christ; he came into the world to destroy the works of the
devil, to destroy sin; 1 John 3.8. Romans 6.6. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
and they that are in Christ, their old man was crucified with him; and thus,
he that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin, i. e. he that has
been crucified with Christ, sin reigns no more in his heart; so then they that
are Christ's have crucified the flesh, Gal. 5.24.
with the affections and lusts thereof; they cannot cleave in their affections
unto sin, nay, they cannot but hate it, as being that that drew tears and blood
from Christ's heart, who is now dearer to them then their own lives. Therefore
such as can give up themselves to the love of any one sin, and suffer their
affection to be ensnared with the love of it, were never united truly to
Christ; for separation from sin, and union to Christ, are inseparable
companions. Thus you see how we may know our union to Christ.

The last Use shall be to persuade every man to labor after this union, seeing
life and death stands in it. Christ himself will profit us nothing without this
union. Wealth in the Mine does not enrich any man till it be severed from its
dross, and appropriated to a particular use; water in the Fountain profits not
a man, till it be conveyed by some pipe into his cisterne; light in the Sun
does me no good, unless I have an eye to behold it; Christ is a rich Mine, in
which are hid unsearchable treasures, but what am I the better if he be not
mine? Toll meum and toll Deum, says Luther; Take away my propriety in
Christ, and the knowledge of a Christ will torment, and not comfort my heart.
He is a Fountain of living water, but unless faith be the conduit-pipe, and
cock to conveigh this water, I may perish for all that; he is a Sun of
righteousness, yet if he do not enlighten me, I may be cast into utter
darkness; therefore till Christ by some bond or union become mine and I his, I
may be as miserable as if this Mine had not been discovered, as if this
Fountain had not been opened, as if this Sun had never risen. Now this union
and communion with Christ on our part is by faith; Oh let us labor for faith.

Consider how freely God has given Christ for us, and how willing God is to
give Christ to us; consider how lovingly Christ invites us to come, and how
willingly he will embrace every soul that comes; John 6.38.
For this is the will of the Father, that whosoever come, he should in no wise
cast out, The Spirit says, come, Rev. 22.17.
and the Bride says, come; Whosoever will let him come, and drink of the
water of life freely. And to that end that faith may be wrought, attend upon
the Word of God, for faith comes by hearing, it is the power of God to
salvation; and desire the Lord to draw thee unto Christ, tell him thou art
undone without Christ, and there is nothing that thy heart is more set upon
then Christ; and if he will give thee Christ, thou will be conntented whatever
he do with thee; and when the Lord sees thee hunger and thirst after Christ
and his righteousness, and that nothing but a Christ will content thee; he
will say, Be it unto thee according to thy desire; if nothing but a Christ will
satisfy thee, why, take Christ, and let him everlastingly become thine, and
with his Christ he will give his Spirit, if thou ask it, to seal up this gift
to thy heart to thy everlasting comfort.

Thus then being come to the end of this Sermon, as it was delivered, with as
little variation as I could, I shall prosecute this argument no further; and if
friends and enemies would have been so satisfied, I had not troubled the Press
with this Sermon, but I and it had been yet buried in silence; but since it is
the will of God, I here submit it to the judgment of my Brethren; and I doubt
not but I shall receive from them a quietus est, to discharge me from Mr Eyre's
Arrest, who has in the Pulpit and Press condemned this Sermon, as wide from
the Orthodox Faith; which if he will undertake to show, and convince me
wherein, I promise him through the grace of Christ to be a thankful Proselyte.

Now the God of peace tread down Satan under your feet, rebuke that spirit of
Error and division that is among you, settle and confirm you in the truth as
it is in Jesus, to whose grace I commend you, and rest in hope of your
establishment.

JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH, OR UNBELIEVERS, NO SUBJECTS OF Justification.
CHAP. I. Being a Vindication of my Sermon preached at N. Sarum, showing that
Union to Christ, and Justification by Christ is not Antecedent to Faith.
ABout April (which was Anno 1652.) according to my course in the Lecture at
New Sarum, I preached the foregoing Sermon, grounded upon the second to the
Ephesians the 12. verse. That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens
from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise,
having no hope, and without God in the world.

From which words the Point observed was this, That a Christlesse estate is a
Hopeless estate; for the explication and proof of the Point, I refer the
Reader to the Sermon it self.

That which I chiefly aimed at was to show, that the very Elect are said to be
without Christ, or in a Christless estate until actual faith; because without
union to Christ, there is no communion with him, but this union is the formal
effect of faith, or is made by believing. After the Sermon, Mr. Air took
liberty to remonstrate, and since in his Vindiciae Justify, he has declared
to the world, that I said, That the Elect themselves, (to whom Christ was
peculiarly given by the Father before the foundations of the world, for whom
Christ gave himself a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, whose sins he bare
on his body on the tree, even to a full propitiation,) had no right or interest
in Christ; nor any more benefit by his death then reprobates, till they did
believe, and that they are but dreamers who conceit the contrary.

To which I answer, that as he has a faculty to speak of others what they
never said, so he can hear what they never spoke; he has innovated my terms,
of which as in our conference, (so in his Printed relation, where he is no
less peccant,) he was always wittingly, (as I conceive) guilty, which because
I minded him of before the people; he styles in his Book a provocation of
language which I gave him.

But to the matter, because I intend not a strife of words, I shall first
readily grant him, that the Elect were given to Christ by the Father before the
foundations of the world, and Christ to them; if he understand it only of an
immanent act terminated in God himself, and understand by it no more then an
eternal purpose in God, to give Christ in the fullness of time to die for
those whom in his eternal counsel he had foreordained to eternal life, and to
give them faith whereby they may become his members; but if he judge this to be
actually done, and that Christ and all the Elect were one mystical body, and so
justified from eternity, I wholly dissent from him; Predestination is only a
love of purpose and intention, not of execution; it being an immanent act,
leaves no positive real effect upon the person predestined. Hence when God
is said to give Christ to the Elect from eternity, it signifies only the will
and purpose of God, constituting and appointing Christ to die for the Elect,
(but he was not actually given till in the fullness of time he sent him into
the world; and although in his death he gave him to die for them, yet was he
not actually given to them, that they should possess the benefits of his death
until actual faith; and I shall further manifest this, when I shall prove that
an immanent act of God purposing to justify us, is not our formal
justification.

Secondly, Whereas he says, that Christ gave himself a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor, and bare our sins in his body on the tree, even to a full
propitiation: This I willingly acknowledge, and bless the Lord for; if he
understand it only of the fullness of satisfaction, and not of an immediate
discharge of the sinner for whom he died; Christ did not satisfy the justice
of God by divine acceptance, but he satisfied the justice of God fully; the
dignity and excellency of his person did no way dispense with any degree of the
extremity of the punishment due to our sin, (which was consistent with his
Godhead and holiness to suffer) but it was to make the sufferings of one
available for many. And Scotus gives a considerable reason for it, quia poena
ab una eximere Christum si valuisset, valuisset etiam ex duabus, Scotus in
quar. Sentent. did. 46. Q. 4. Art. 4.
atque ita ex omnibus eum emancipare. And I acknowledge there was not a
deficiency, but a redundancy of merit in his sufferings; the justice of God
cannot require any thing more at the hands of Christ our surety, or of the
sinner by way of satisfaction, and in this sense he is well pleased with Christ
as a public person; but if by a full propitiation he understand an immediate
discharge of the sinner from condemnation before faith, to apply the benefits
of Christ's death; this I deny, and will make manifest in its peculiar and
proper place; Where I shall show it is no wrong either to Christ, or the Elect
person, that the benefit of Christ's death is suspended till faith. And in this
sense I acknowledge, that the Elect had no actual right, or interest in Christ,
if you take it for jus in re, and not for jus adrem, because his death was
intended for their benefit; not for the reprobate, though they have not actual
benefit, and possession of the good things purchased until faith. In respect
of Gods, and Christ's intention in his death, surely an Elect person has more
right to the benefits of Christ's death then the reprobate, it being intended
effectually for Peter and not for Judas; and by virtue of this, faith shall be
given to apply it to all for whom Christ died, and so they have a right to the
thing; but in respect of any right in the thing it self, or actual discharge of
the sinner, I acknowledge in this respect, there is no present difference
between the Elect and reprobate; this is that which sounds so harsh in Mr.
Eyre's ear, which I shall sufficiently clear when I produce in its due place
Scripture-authority, and Arguments to confirm it.

I shall now only vindicate it from those monstrous absurdities, that he
unjustly loades it with.

First, he says, Nothing could be spoken more contradictory to plain
Scriptures; but produces not one place to confirm it, but referres us to such
Scriptures as he forces to speak in defense of his own opinion, where we shall
examine whether what we affirm or he maintains, be most agreeable to the
truth; only I shall instance in two Scriptures to relieve this truth.

The first is in Ephesians 2.1, 2, 3. where the Apostle tells the Elect
Ephesians, whom God had ordained to life, and for whom Christ died, that they
were dead in sins and trespasses; Wherein they walked according to the course
of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit
that now works in the children of disobedience; into which number in the
third ver. he puts himself and all believers before their conversion, and
says, that they were children of wrath by nature, as well as others; where the
Apostles scope is to show the freeness of Gods grace in saving them by faith
in Christ, by an argument drawn from the change of their estate; he tells
them the time was they were children of wrath, as unable to help themselves, as
the dead to raise themselves to life, therefore their deliverance was by grace.
Where by children of wrath, the Apostle must mean an estate and condition
opposite to their present estate of salvation, and justification, into which
they are now brought by the grace of God, and merit of Christ by faith.

Else first the Apostles Argument from the change of their estate were invalid.
Now if they would know when they were children of wrath, seeing God loved them
as elect from eternity, and they were redeemed by Christ; He answers, that it
was when they were dead in sins and trespasses, and walked according to the
course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the
spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, and then they were
children of wrath; but thus they did walk and live before faith and
regeneration were wrought.

2. Such an estate of condemnation is here meant, as others are in that are the
men of this world, children of disobedience, (...), children of unbelief, which
notes a refractory contumacious disobedience of unbelief seated in the will,
which is more then (...), which is remissible, (...) is irremissible, being a
note of final imperswasibility; 1 Timothy 1.13.
Paul was sometime a child (...), but not (...); and therefore when the
Apostle says, their condition by nature was such as theirs, that are children
of disobedience, a note of such that shall perish; surely they were such as
were in an unjustified estate.

3. If it be such an estate wherein they were dead in sins and trespasses, did
walk according to the prince of this world, and according to the prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now effectually works in the children of
disobedience, having their conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling
the desires of the flesh; surely this was inconsistent with salvation, and the
estate of justification; God cannot justify a man with imputed righteousness,
but at the same time he sanctifies him by imparted, Prove. 17.15.
and inherent righteousness: It is not agreeable to the purity and holiness
of Gods nature to justify a wicked man; for He that justifies the wicked, and
be that condemns the just: even they both are abomination to the Lord; and
what God condemns in others, he will not do himself, therefore they were not
then justified. Nor does the Apostle make a naked comparison between the two
estates and conditions derived from the first and second Adam; but compares the
same persons not barely in relation to these, but as being really in both these
estates, at a different time; being under the first before conversion, and
passing from it upon believing, where it is observeable, that the Apostle does
not say, ye are by nature children of wrath, which is all Mr. Air will
acknowledge, as you may see, page 111. but ye were children of wrath; he speaks
of a condition they were in, and delivered from.

The second Scripture is in the 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicatours, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor thieves shall inherit the Kingdom of God; such
were some of you, but you are washed, but you are justified in the Name of the
Lord Jesus. Where you see the Elect Corinthians were while unsanctified, such
as could not inherit the Kingdom of God, and therefore were in the same estate
with other persons till they were washed and justified; where he makes an
evident opposition between the time past and present, they were then such as
could not inherit eternal life, and therefore were justified; for if they were
then justified, what could hinder their salvation? And he says, but you are
justified; he does not say, but you were justified, restraining their
justification to the time present upon their faith, and sanctification being an
evidence of the truth of that faith, that makes him put their sanctification
before their justification; so that you see the Apostle affirms while they
were unsanctified, they could not inherit the Kingdom of God; that is, they
had no right to it by justification, and were incapable of it; but upon the
change of their estate by faith, they were justified by Christ, of which change
in the judgment of charity he concludes, by their sanctification: Now what can
be spoken more fully to clear this matter in controversy, that before faith
and effectual vocation, they are no more freed from condemnation then others?

2. He says, It is wide from the Orthodox Faith.

To which I answer, first by retortion, that then he himself is wide from the
Orthodox faith; because, page 66. he says the same thing in different terms,
Mr. Air vindic. page 66. Number. 2.
[Though the state of the loved and hated are different in the mind of God,
yet not in the persons themselves, till the different effects of love and
hatred are put forth.

Now an immanent act of Gods mind puts no present difference; for,
Praedestinatio nihil ponit in praedestinato, is a known rule.

Secondly, It has hitherto been the unanimous consent of the Orthodox, that
there is no difference between the Elect and reprobate, as to present
enjoyment, until actual faith; indeed they hold in this respect a difference,
which I never questioned; that although they be equally in a state of sin and
wrath, yet God has a purpose to bring the Elect infallibly out of that misery;
and to leave the reprobate, Romans 9.13.
in which respect God is said to love Jacob, and to hate Esau; and in this
respect, Acts 13.48.
all that God has ordained to life, shall believe; and whosoever the Father
gives unto Christ, they shall come; for, 2 Timothy 2.19.
The foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who are his; but on the
other hand, for the present there is no difference; both are children of wrath,
both are without Christ, both aliens to the Covenant of Grace, having no
promise of the pardon of sin, both without hope in the world, only Gods purpose
will in time make an actual difference between them; so Mr. Burgess of
Justifica. p. 188. Burgess. of Justific. p. 188.
but you are prejudicated against him; I will propound three others of
unquestionable authority; Holy and Learned Mr. Baines in his Commentary upon
Ephesians. 2.3. draws this observation from it.

First, then (says he) we have to consider how that the chosen of God before
their conversion have nothing in them d^ffering from other sinners; the
Election of God stands sure, Vide Calv. Institut. Lib. 3. Sect. 10.
but before he call effectually, it does put nothing in the party Elected; so
where you may see more to this purpose: And he gives two reasons why God will
have it so.

1. That the mercy of God may be magnified, and made manifest in the free grace
of Justification.

2. That love may be engendered in us, being justified; Mary who had many sins
forgiven, loved much; so that eminent servant of Christ, Dr. Tail. in his
Commen. upon Titus, chapter 3. v. 3. Dr. Tail. Tit. c. 3. v. 3. p. 591.
page 591. Whosoever are called unto the faith, have experience of a double
estate in themselves; once in time past, and another for the present; the one
of nature, the other of grace. And a little after: And good reason there is,
that he that is now beloved, should see that once he was not beloved; and that
he who now is in the state of grace, should see that he was once in the state
of wrath as well as others, which will cause him to love much: And indeed the
Elect could not be Elect, nor justified, nor washed, if they were always the
children of God; and were it not for this once, and time past, wherein there
was no difference between them and the reprobate, but only in Gods counsel and
possibility of calling. Learned Camero sets to his seal to this truth; Ad
Petrum in peccatis mortuum non magis pertinet Christi mors quam ad alium
quemvis, sed postquam Petro datum est credere est discrimen sane magnum.
Camero, opusc. misc. p. 534. And that he was no Arminian, is evident by what he
says in another place: Rectius faciunt qui Christum pro impiis sufficienter
(ut loquntur) satisfecisse docent, efficaciter autem pro solis piis. Came.
opusc. misc. p. 534. Sect. 6.

Thirdly, he objecteth that it is derogatory to the full atonement made by
Christ's death; If this could be proved, there needed no further argument to
silence me; yea, it were better my tongue should cleave to the roof of my
mouth, then that I should affirm any thing to abase the worth, or diminish the
reputation of Christ's sufferings; he deserves not to open his mouth to God for
mercy, that willingly opens his mouth to undervalue the merits and satisfaction
made by the death of Christ.

I therefore answer, that if Christ had died to purchase forgiveness of sins
whether we believe or not, this argument would have some strength in it, then
to suspend the benefit of Christ's death until faith, were to wrong the
satisfaction of Christ; but Christ did not so die for the Elect, that whether
they believe or not believe, they should be saved; therefore to suspend the
benefit of Christ's death till actual faith, is no wrong to the atonement and
satisfaction made by Christ's death.

Now because this is the maine argument to which Mr. Air trusts, and is the
only pillar and support of his opinion, That it was the will of God that the
death of Christ should be the payment of our debt, Mr. AIR, p. 138, 139.
and a full satisfaction for all our iniquities; and therefore it was his will
that our discharge procured hereby, should be immediate, because he says it is
contrary to justice and equity, that a debt when it is paid, should be charged
either upon the surety, or principal.

I will here lay down sundry conclusions, which may serve to vindicate our
doctrine, that the benefit of Christ's death is suspended until faith, as to a
formal justification of the sinner, and show the insufficiency and weakness
of his argument; from hence to conclude an immediate discharge of all the Elect
from the time of Christ's death, antecedent to their faith.

First, therefore I willingly acknowledge that Christ in his death was a common
person, and a surety for the Elect, taking upon himself by Gods eternal
appointment this work of redemption and reconciliation. That the act of Gods
Ordination, together with a particular command from the Father to lay down his
life, John 10.18.
and his voluntary consent and submission to become a surety for the Elect,
Heb. 10.7, 9.
(for it was not imposed upon him by constraint, therefore when he is said to
come to do his Fathers will, his own will is included; John 10.18.
And no man took away his life from him, but he did lay it down of himself;)
this act of Ordination in God, and submission in Christ, together with his free
dominion over his own life, (which dominion he had, both by virtue of the
hypostatical union, and the command of the Father to lay it down,) accompanied
with sufficient power to break through the sufferings he undertook, and to
raise up himself again; all this constituted Christ God-man, being perfectly
righteous, a fit person to become a surety; and now it was just and righteous,
that Christ an innocent person should be charged with the sins of the Elect.

Secondly, I grant that no creature that was only a creature, whether Angel or
man could or ought to undertake this work.

1. No Angel ought, because Gods justice required that satisfaction should be
given by the same nature that had sin; Bernard de pass. Dom. 1. Cap. 46.
nor was it meet he should be man only, that our redemption and salvation might
be attributed to none but him from whom we had our creation, for that reason
which Bernard alleges, because our redemption would more oblidge us to love,
then our creation; if therefore we had been redeemed by any other then him by
whom we were made, we should have loved him more then our Creator. Neither
could any pure creature be fitly qualified for this work; for whatever the
creature can do, is already debitum, a due debt, and therefore it cannot
supper-erogate, or merit any thing for us.

Thirdly, I grant therefore that Christ was God and Man, and that it was
needful he should be both.

1. He must be God that must satisfy God; for God was offended; and therefore
to make satisfaction, God in our nature satisfies for our sin: So that here is
God, satisfying God; that if the sin be infinite in the object, the
satisfaction is infinite in respect of the subject suffering, God in our
nature; and although his sufferings were not infinite in duration, (nor was
there need they should be, because he satisfied for such sins as should be
broken off by repentance; And his end was in suffering to satisfy, therefore
his sufferings must have an end,) yet his sufferings were unmeasurably great;
and what was wanting in the shortness, was made up in the sharpness of the
sufferings, and it was impossible Christ should be held under the sorrows of
death; the duration of the prisoner in the Jayle is no part of the debt, but
accidental to it, he lies there but till the debt be paid; Now Christ paid
all, so as fully to satisfy the justice of God; and hence there was no need of
his eternal suffering. Besides, it was needful he should be God, that his
obedience might be perfect, and meritorious, to dignifie his obedience, and
make it of infinite value, that he might merit and support himself under his
suffering, and raise up himself again, and perform the rest of the works of
the Mediatourship.

And it was needful he should be Man; for as he was God he could not suffer;
and that he might, as justice requires, satisfy in our nature, that our
pardon might not be an act of dominion only, and forgiveness, but an act of
justice and satisfaction.

Fourthly, I willingly grant that Christ did suffer whatsoever appertains to
the substance and essentials of the first death, or the death natural,
consisting in the separation of soul and body; and though the curse does not
require any one particular death, yet that the Lord might show the heinousness
of sin, which deserves the worst death of all, and that the love of Christ
might be manifested, and Gods justice declared; God the Father appointed it,
and Christ undertook it, to die the death of the Cross, a shameful and base
death, appropriated to the worst of malefactors, Phil. 2.6, 8.
to show the hatefulness of sin, and the greatness of Christ's humiliation,
and love in submitting to it; he humbled himself to the death of the Cross.

2. I willingly grant Christ's suffered and endured most grievous torments
immediately in his soul, (not by sympathy with the body only, but peculiar to
his soul; all that was due to the sins of the Elect, that was consistent with
his Godhead and Holiness; Catechismus Romanus. 4. Art. Symb. Aquinas, Part. 3
q. 46. art. 5, 6.
the Papists deny not that he suffered inward grief in his soul, and Aquinas
that he suffered the greatest sorrow that could be; but I affirm for quantity
Christ might, and did in this life endure the pains of hell, (he did not
locally descend into the place of the damned,) he did endure the same that was
due to us, for substance and kind, though not in all accidents that belong to
it; he suffered and felt that heavy wrath of God due to man's sin; his soul was
so struck with horror, that all faculties for a time left there proper
fruction, and did concur to relieve nature in that extremity; he lay under
the revenging strokes of Gods justice due to man's sin; it put him into a
bloody sweat in the forethought of it, and made him cry earnestly, If it be
possible, let this cup pass; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? God
for a time withdrew the solace and comfort he was wont to find in him; that
sensible refreshing of the light of Gods countenance, which was wont to fill
him with satisfactory sweetness, was for a time withdrawn, which is a part of
the second death, and answers to the pain of loss; yet in all his time the
union of the Manhood with the Godhead was untouched; though there was a
withdrawing of the sense and sweetness of the favor of God, his
righteousness and graces were no way diminished; he was most pure in his
passion, free from all sin; Christ brought none of this upon himself by his own
sin, but was called to this work; and in all this confl^ct his faith was
unshaken, crying out, My God, even when to his present sense and feeling he was
forsaken.

Fifthly, I willingly grant that Christ's death and sufferings was a very
valuable compensation for the sin of man; yea, he satisfied Gods justice to the
full, not by divine acceptance, God abated him nothing for the dignity of his
person, but he fully satisfied for the substance, what the justice of God could
fully inflict; yea, in respect of some circumstances, he suffered more then was
due; indeed in respect of the substance of his sufferings, neither, as Parker,
lib. 3. de discon. li. 51. p. 97.
Mr. Parker has observed, the love of the Father, nor the justice of God could
permit more to be imposed, then what was necessary for him to bear as a surety.

Quoad substantiam poenae nihil plus perpessus est Christus, quam quod per
legem debebatur, neque enim vel amor Patris, vel etiam justitia, permittere
potuit, plura Filio ut imponerentur, quam quae illi necessario, tanquam
sponsori ferenda erant.

Quoad circumstantias autem, patientis personam, patiendi causam, p^ssionis
efficaciam, plus quam sufficiens satisfactio Christi and a nobis dicitur.

In respect of circumstances, as the person of the sufferer, the cause of
suffering, and efficacy of the passion, it was more then the Law required, as
he shows; for Lex non requirebat, ut Deus moreretur neque, ut sine peccato
proprio quis moreretur; neque requirebat mort^m talem tantae efficaciae quae
esset, ut non mortem abolere^ solum sed etiam vitam introduceret, eamque illa
quam Adamus terresti perdedirat multis nominibus praecellentiorem.
the Law did not require that God should die, nor that any should die that had
not sinned, nor such a death of such efficacy, as not only to abolish death,
but to bring in life, and that by many degrees more excellent then that which
Adam had lost; so then Christ has fully satisfied the justice of God for the
sins of the Elect, so as that God neither will, nor can in justice require any
thing more at the hand of the surety, nor of the sinner for whom he died by way
of satisfaction.

Sixthly, It will not be denied that God may be said to be reconciled in some
sense by the death of Christ as a meritorious cause, by death removing the
cause of enmity, and meriting the favor of God for us; for although God loved
us from eternity, yet this was amor ordinativus, not collativus; God did bear
them good will in time, to make them heirs of grace and glory by Jesus Christ;
B^ll on the Covenant of Grace, p. 292.
and this excludes not, but includes the necessity of Christ's satisfaction; but
such as God did Elect, he did not love them as already made heirs of Grace, by
the influence of his love.

For the full understanding of this you must know, that although God d^d so
love the Elect, as to fore-ordaine them unto eternal salvation; yet it was
never the will of God that his Elect should for no space of time be children of
wrath, that is, subject unto death, and eternal damnation for their sins; but
he did decree to permit them to fall in Adam, and to be equally guilty of, and
liable to eternal death with others; for which cause the Apostle calls them
children of wrath as well as others. Man being created after Gods own Image,
free from sin before the fall, was intimately conjoined to God; God loving and
delighting in man, and man loving and delighting in his God; but man lapsed by
voluntary Apostasy from God, there is an avulsion of the creature from God,
and an aversion of God from the creature; and by this sin, the Covenant of
friendship between God and man is dissolved; so that God who loved man, created
by him as his child, and from eternity willing him good, (for I speak only of
the Elect) in justice cannot but hate him now, as corrupted by sin, as a rebel
against him; not by any change of affection, but of his outward dispensation;
and having included him under guilt as a son of Adam, he is equally involved in
the wrath due to that sin, which God has threatened with eternal death, and
resolved by an immutable decree, never to pardon it to any without a
satisfaction to his offended justice for the breach of his Law, that the truth
of his threatening may be fulfilled, and the authority of his Law preserved, and
the evil of sin discovered, and Gods exceeding love and mercy in a way mixed
with mercy, and justice may be manifested in the salvation of his Elect: So
that although there be a new relation in the Elect upon their fall in Adam unto
God; yet the change is in the creature, and not in God; for as the Schoolmen
well observe, these relations which are attributed unto God in time, as a
Creator, Father or Lord, put not any new thing in God; but there is an
extrinsecal denomination added to him; so that when the world is created, God
who was not a Creator before, is now a Creator; thus when sin took hold of
the Elect, he that once was a child of love, is now a child of wrath, not by
any new accident in God, but by a new effect in the creature; so that in this
estate, God cannot bestow upon him the good intended in election.

For the better understanding of this, that of Aquinas is of great use; God may
velle mutationem, where he cannot mutare voluntatem; God may will a change,
though he does not change his will: Thus in Adam, while he continued a man
after Gods Image, free from sin, God willed him to be the object of his love
and delight; and when he was fallen, to be the subject of his displeasure and
anger, in the effects of it, being liable unto his wrath, and eternal death;
yet is not here a change in God, but in Adam: Thus God with the same will
decreed from eternity, to make such a one a vessel of mercy, and yet to permit
him to sin, and fall in Adam, and so to remain a child of wrath, deserving
condemnation, wherein God cannot actually save him, (considering his decree,)
without a satisfaction by Christ applied by faith. Here is a change, and a very
great one in man, but not in God; a new relation, yet no new immanent act in
God. Thus we may understand that of venerable Beda in the 5. Beda in Romans 5.
ad Romans Deus miro modo quando nos oderat, diligebat; odit in unoquoque nostrum
quod feceramus, amavit quod fecerat: When God did hate us, he wonderfully loved
us; he hated that in all of us that we had done, he loved what he had made;
that is, as the Schoolmen say, Dilexit humanum genus quantum ad naturam quam
ipse fecit, odit quantum ad culpam quam homines contraxerunt: He loved mankind
in respect to the nature he had made, or as his creature, and hated him as a
sinner. But now through the satisfaction of Christ, God is so far reconciled,
that the cause of enmity is removed; although it was agreed upon between the
Father and Christ, as I shall show without any wrong to Christ's satisfaction,
that the benefit shall not be enjoyed till faith; yet the cause of enmity is
causally taken away by the death of Christ, as Aquinas speaks well in this case,

Aquin. p. 3 qu. 49. Artic. 4.
Non dicimur reconciliati, quasi Deus de novo nos amare inciperet, nam aeterno
amore nos dilexit, sed quia per hanc reconciliationem sublata est omnis odi
causa, tum per ablationem peccati, tum per recompensationem acceptabilioris
boni.

Aug. in Joh. Tract. 110.
And before him Augustine. Quod reconciliati sumus Deo per mortem Christi, non
sic audiatur, non sic accipiatur, quasi ideo nos reconciliaverit illi Filius,
ut jam amare inceperit quos oderat, sed jam nos Deo diligenti reconciliati
sumus, cum quo propter peccatum inimicitias habebamus.

Lombard. l. 3. distin. 19 page 596.
Lombard also gives in his suffrage in the like manner: Reconciliati sumus Deo,
ut dit Apostolus, quod non sic intelligendum est, quasi nos ei sic
reconciliaverit Christus, ut inceperit amare quos oderat, sicut reconciliatur
inimicus in^^ico, ut deinde sint amici qui ante se odorant, sed jam nos
diligenti Deo reconciliati sumus, non enem ex quo illi reconciliati sumus per
sanguinem Filii, nos coepit diligere, sed ante mundum, priusquam nos aliquid
essemus; ergo nos diligenti Deo sumus reconciliati? propter peccatum cum eo
habebamus inimicitias, and Paulo post, reconciliat autem cum offendioula
hominum tollit ab oculis Dei.

And Calvin concurreth in the same opinion, Calvin. instit. l. 2. c. 16. Number.
2.3.
In hunc fere modum Spiritus sanctus in Scripturis loquitur Deum fuisse
hominibus inimicum, in gratiam Christi morte sunt restituti; hujus generis
locutiones (inquit Calvinus) ad sensum nostrum sunt accomodatae, ut melius
intelligamus quam misera sit, and calamitosa extra Christum nostra conditio.

Hence then we see, that there is a reconciliation wrought by the death of
Christ, which imports not a change in Gods will, as if God did then first begin
to love, or will well unto us, as if he did hate, and will to damn us before;
for then we must admit of a proper change in the will of God, proceeding from
an external cause, which is contrary to Scripture, and sound reason: for as
Rutherford has well observed: Ruth. Apollexere. p 37.
Actus reconciliandi nihil novi ponit in Deo, neque meritum Christi, vel
divinam voluntatem movet, vel Deum ex nolente in volentem, ex odio nos habente,
in diligentem, (ut fabulatur Grevinchovius,) transmature potest. Grevinch. page
109.
1. Quia Deus est immutabilis. 2. Quia divinae voluntatis causa non magis dari
potest quam ipsius Dei.

But whereas we lay under wrath deserved by sin, Christ has causatively
removed by his death the guilt of sin, and so meritoriously reconciled us to
God; so that God is not only now placabilis by the death of Christ, but
placatus; for he was placabilis from eternity, or else he had never given
Christ; but now in respect of the satisfaction given, he is placatus thus far,
that we lie no more, (that are the Elect) under an indispensable necessity of
perishing, which we did before till satisfaction given; and this is the formal
effect of Christ's death, and this act of reconciliation, which is a transient
act done in time, compleateth not the action of Election, as Wallaeus seems to
affirm, Wallaerus Cont; Corvinum, c. 25. p. 155.
and superaddes no new thing in Gods will, which was not there before; but it
removes causatively, and meritoriously, that that was the cause of enmity,
which hindered God from being able according to justice (supposing his Decree)
to bestow the good things intended in Election, and this reconciliation (I
grant) is plainly held forth in these Scriptures, Romans 5.10. Isa. 53.10. Col.
1.21. Col. 2.14. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 Pet. 2.24. John 1.29. but this reconciliation
is not our formal justification, as I shall now prove, but virtual only. And
therefore I add,

Seventhly, That this reconciliation wrought by Christ, or removal of guilt,
causatively by his death and satisfaction, is not properly, and formally our
justification: I therefore affirm with Mr Rutherford, Ruther. Trial and
Triumph of Faith, p. 162.
that this was a paying of a ransom for us, and a legal translation of the
punishment of our sins; but it is not justification, nor ever called
justification; but rather, as he also judiciously has observed, it is
justificationis fundamentum, whose words are these: Ruther. Apol. exer^. p. 42.
Satisfactio ut a Christo praestita non est justificatio, quia est Dei
justificantis fundamentum; And therefore, his death was ever looked upon by
Divines, as the procatarctical, or outward moving cause of the transient act of
God in justification, which is properly our justification, it is a transient
act of God upon Believers, which he never did pass till then; so says Mr.
Rutherford, and therefore Mr. Air cannot shelter his opinion under Mr.
Rutherfords authority; Satisfaction, Ru her. Trial and Triumph of Faith. p. 62.
(says he) is given indeed by Christ on the Cross for all our sins before we
do believe, and before any justified person, who lived these fifteen hundred
years be borne; but alas, that is not justification, but only the meritorious
cause of it; and a little after, Justification is a forensical sentence, in
time pronounced in the Gospel, and applied unto me now; and never while this
instant now, that I believe.

Now for the further clearing and evidencing this truth, that we are not
actually justified until faith: Joh. 3.15, 16. Mark 16.16. Acts 13.38, 39.
Acts 16.31. Romans 10.2. Phil. 3.9.
I shall lay down sundry Propositions to make this manifest, and that it is no
wrong either to Christ, or the Elect, that this benefit is suspended until
faith, besides the clear light of the Scripture, as you may see in the Margin.

First, Therefore there is a twofold payment of a debt, one of the thing
altogether the same, which was in the Obligation; another of a thing not
altogether the same. That payment which is of the same thing, either by our
selves, or our surety, is not refusable by the Creditour; so that if we had
paid it, or Christ had been constituted a surety by us to pay it, then God
could not have refused it. And therefore Christ being constituted a surety by
God, and not by us, and paying not altogether the same, God might have refused
the payment, and therefore may also appoint how, in what order and time it
shall be accepted, whether to a present discharge, or upon a future condition
of faith to be performed by us, by the help of his Spirit working this in us.
It Is true, that Christ being admitted by the creditor, and taken into bond with
us, God cannot refuse to accept of Christ's death as a satisfaction; yet he
might appoint, as you shall see he did, how it shall be accepted, whether
absolutely, or upon some condition afterward to be performed by us. Here are
three things then to be explained and proved: 1. That the sufferings of Christ
were not altogether the same in the Obligation. 2. That therefore it is in the
power of the Creditour (at whose liberty and mercy it is to accept, or refuse
it, antecedently before his acceptance,) to appoint or ordain it to be
immediately available, or to be acceptable upon condition. 3. That it was
agreed upon between the Father and Son, that it should not be available to
discharge the sinner until actual faith.


1 Therefore I grant, which Mr Air alleges out of Mr. Owen, that if he speak
in respect of the substance of Christ's sufferings, there was a samenesse with
that in the Obligation in respect of Essence, and equivalency in respect of the
adjuncts or attendencies; yea, a supereminency of satisfaction and redundancy
of merit; yet was it not altogether the same in the Obligation.

For first, the Law in the rigor of it does not admit of a surety, but the
delinquent himself is bound to suffer the penalty, that acknowledges no
commutation of the person, or substitution of one for another; and therefore
God by an act of Sovereignty did dispense, though not with the substance of the
Laws demands; (for then we had had forgiveness without a satisfaction, and
considering his decree, he could not do it,) but with the manner of execution,
which in respect of the Law is called a relaxation; so then God relaxed his
Law, to put in the name of a surety, therefore the satisfaction is not
altogether the payment of the same debt; for Dum alius solvit, necessario aliud
solvitur; and therefore an act of grace must come in by the will and consent of
the Lord to whom belonged the infliction of the punishment, that another
persons sufferings may be valid to procure a discharge to the guilty person,
and that the satisfaction was made by another, and not by the party to whom
remission is granted, no Protestant will deny.

2. Christ did not bear the same punishment due to us in all accidents.

1. In respect of place, he did not locally descend into the place of the
damned. Nor,

2. In respect of time and duration, his sufferings had an end; though they
were infinite intensive, yet not extensive? in respect of duration, nor did he
suffer the loss of Gods Image, nor was he deprived of any measure of grace,
nor was he really (but as to present sense and feeling) forsaken, nor did he
lose his right to the creatures, nor did his body see corruption; all which are
effects of man's sin, and penal effects of it, as I apprehend. Therefore Christ
did not suffer altogether the same, though the sufferings of Christ so far as
were consistent with his Godhead and holiness, were of the same kind; and by
the dignity of his person, raised to a more then equipollency with ours, so as
to merit for us eternal life. Quid enim Majestas tanta, par ipsi Patri, poenis
suis non commeribitur Cyrillus Alex. de fide ad Regin.
, Cyrillus, Alexandrinus; and it conduced to a compensation in those
sufferings, which were unworthy the dignity of his person.

3. Though Christ were obliged to the same punishment, yet not altogether with
the same obligation; for his Obligation was arbitrary and voluntary; not
arising from the guilt of inherent sin, but by way of vadimony, and suc^ption;
our guilt or obligation was intrinsecally from the desert of inherent sin;
Christ's was only an obnoxiousnesse unto punishment from the imputation of sin,
ours from a desert of sin, called reatus culpae; which guilt is inseparable
from sin, which draws reatus poetus along with it, Christ was reatus
poenae, not culpae.

4. Christ's sufferings was to be a valuable compensation, not only for our
breach of the Law, but for our non-suffering, and therefore is not altogether
the same.

The second thing to be cleared, is this, that it being not the same, therefore
it requires some act of grace in the Creditour to accept it for a discharge
unto the guilty person (and herein undoubtedly the sinner has no wrong, for it
is mercy in God to accept it; the Law requires his personal sufferings, and
there is no promise made to any, that they shall have benefit by Christ's death,
but only to Believers.)

And this cannot be denied with any show of reason, for such a payment is
refusable, which is not altogether the same; and therefore unless the will and
consent of him to whom the infliction of the punishment belongs, it cannot
procure a discharge to the guilty person; for the offending sinner is the
proper subject of suffering, and the Law threatens the offender, and the
surety is not the offender; and none but he that had power to make the Law, can
dispense with any thing in the Law; therefore that the Law may be dispensed
with, in respect of the manner of execution, by transferring the punishment
upon another, and that this may be accepted as a full satisfaction for the
offender, as if he had in person suffered, this must be an act of grace in the
Lawgiver, receding from his own right; and therefore might constitute and
ordain, how and in what manner it shall be accepted, and none that I know will
deny it an act of special grace in God to accept of the sufferings of Christ
for us, to free us from our personal sufferings; and therefore I pass from
that unto the third thing.

3dly, That it was the will of Christ in making satisfaction, and of God in
admitting of this satisfaction, that it should not procure pardon of sin
presently from the time of Christ's passion; but when man is turned unto God by
faith, seeking and humbly entreating for pardon. Now to manifest this, we must
premise:

1. That it was an act of special grace, not only to us, but to Christ himself,
that should be constituted a Mediator of a New Covenant between God and us, by
virtue of whose mediation and sufferings we should be forgiven, and made heirs
of eternal life; Christ as he is the second person in the Trinity, in respect
of his Godhead, is equal with the Father, and so not subject to any
preordination, or predestination as an act of grace; but Christ considered as
God-man in respect of his Mediatorship, is a servant of God, and so subject to
Predestination; and Gods singular grace in his Election to this office, is as
much seen as in our Election unto life; for the manhood could never deserve to
be united personally to the Son of God; and thus it was a great honor put
upon Christ, Heb. 5 5.
when he was put into the Priestly Office to make atonement for us.

2. It was at the commandment of grace he made satisfaction, it was an act of
free grace to us, and Christ as Mediator was a servant of God, Isa. 42.1. John
10.18.
and wholly at the will of the Lord in this work; at his commandment he laid
down his life, and at his will and pleasure the benefit of his death is
extended to particular persons, and denied to others; therefore Christ says,
Power is given him over all flesh, John 17.2.
to give eternal life (but it is with restriction) only to as many as the
Father had given him. Now the sufferings of Christ were of sufficient value to
redeem the whole world; but yet it is available by Gods eternal will only for
the Elect; and if it be no wrong to the sufferings of Christ to be limited by
the will of God to the Elect only, and Christ submits to it, why should it
be thought any injury to Christ's sufferings, that at the will and pleasure of
God the very Elect should not partake of it until faith, in that order that he
has appointed?

3. It is an act of grace that the sufferings of Christ, though in themselves
they be adequately proportionable to the justice of God, should be accepted for
us; therefore God may at his pleasure appoint the manner how, whether
absolutely and immediately, or upon a future condition? For, as Scotus says
well, Meritum Christi tantum bonum est nobis, Scotus, lib. 3. did. 19. qu.
vind. p. 74.
pro quanto acceptabatur a Deo: The value of Christ's merits is to be accounted
to us, only so far as God accepts it; and therefore to that which Mr. Air
and his adherents urge, that satisfaction was given, and accepted.

I answer, by distinguishing upon acceptance; This may be taken in a two fold
sense, either in respect of the surety Christ, and the price paid; or in
respect to the sinner, and the actual application of it.

1. In respect to Christ, and the value of his sufferings, it was a full
satisfaction, that God neither can (having admitted Christ a surety) require
more at the hands of Christ, nor any thing else of the sinner by way of
satisfaction to his justice; but he never accepted it in respect of the sinner
to effect his freedom and present discharge, without some act of his
intervening to give him interest in this satisfaction. Nor do I judge faith to
be a moving cause, or organical instrument either of Christ's satisfaction, or
of Gods acceptance of it for us; Faith does not make Christ's satisfaction to
be meritorious; Faith is not the condition of Christ's acquiring pardon, but of
the application of pardon; the dignity and worth of Christ's merits and
satisfaction, arise from the dignity of his person; nor is faith the moving
cause of Gods will to accept of Christ's satisfaction for us, that arises from
Gods will of purpose ordaining it for us. And therefore Mr. Rutherford speaks
appositely, Ruth. Ap^^. p. 42.
Nos credendo non efficimus vel (...), ut Deus Christi mortem pro peccatis
n^stris acceptet, neque ulla causalitas externa movere potest Dei voluntatem.

4. It is of great consequence toward the clearing of this, that the death of
Christ does not procure an immediate discharge to the sinner, to consider that
the death of Christ is not a natural and physical cause of removing and taking
away sin; for then the effect must immediately follow; but it is a meritorious
cause, which is in the number of moral causes; and here the rule is not true,
Posita causa ponitur effectus; for here the effect is at the liberty of the
persons moved thereby: and hence sometime the effects of moral causes precede
the cause, as for the death of Christ God pardoned the sins of such as died in
the faith long before Christ was borne; and sometime it follows a long time
after, at the agreement and liberty of the persons that are persuaded thereby
to do any thing.

5. Christ by his death did not absolutely purchase reconciliation, and an
actual discharge from the guilt of sin for any, whether they believe or not
believe; for then faith were not necessary to salvation; but at the most, to
consolation; and final unbelief would condemn none of those for whom Christ
died; but the Scripture says, He that believes not, shall be damned; and,
Mark. 16.16. John 8.24.
If you believe not, ye shall die in your sins; and it makes faith necessary to
salvation; hence when the Jailer said, What must I do to be saved? Acts 16.3^.
1 Pet. 1.9.
Paul and Silas answered, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.
And salvation is expressly said to be the end of faith; when therefore we say,
that Christ died absolutely, we must know that the word absolutely may be taken
two ways.

1. As it is opposed to an antecedent condition to be brought by us by the
power of our own free will, so that upon this shall depend the fruits of
Christ's death. Or,

2. Absolutely may be taken as opposed to any prerequisite condition ordained
by God as a certain order and means to obtain the fruit of Christ's death,
which condition is the fruit, and effect of Christ's death, and in this latter
sense, the death of Christ was not an absolute purchase of reconciliation; it is
true, the Arminians hold that Christ has purchased pardon for us upon
condition of believing, which believing they make not a fruit of Christ's death,
but of their own free will, and thus they make Christ to open a door of hope
for us; but it is possible that no man may enter in and be saved, and thus by
them we have only a salvability by Christ, but no certainty of salvation; but
we affirm no such matter, and say, that Christ satisfied Gods justice, so that
God is not placabilis, but placatus, not appeasable, but appeased; and God is
now reconciled, and will give pardon, but in that order and method himself has
appointed, which is faith; which faith God has predestined us unto that shall
be saved, and Christ has purchased it for us as well as remission of sins, and
therefore it shall infallibly be wrought, that there may be an actual
application of Christ's death unto justification; now in this sense the death of
Christ is not absolute, so as to exclude any condition, and qualification
wrought by the Spirit of Christ to apply his death. Johan. Came. opus misc. p.
5.32 col. 2.
And to this purpose learned Camero has expressed himself; A Christo
satisfactio exigi non potuit ni Deus eum considerasset ut eorum caput pro
quibus satisfecit, fructus ergo satisfactionis ad eos solos redire potuit, qui
membra forent hujus corporis, ii autem sunt soli fideles: credo igitur Christum
pr^ me satisfecisse, quia vere satisfecit, sed satisfactionem illam deo novi
mihi esse salutiferam, quia mihi fidei meae sum consciu; Neque tamen fructum
satisfactionis ab ipsa satisfactione divello, Christus enim pro te satisfecit,
sed ea lege si tu id factum credas, ut si captivum redimerem pretio numerato,
ita tamen ut ni ille se redemptum agnoscat meo beneficio habeatur pro non
redempto. Et paulo post, page 534. col. 1. sect. 4. Illud nempe est quod dixi,
pro nemine Christum (...) satisfecisse, verum hac lege addita, ut qui natura
sumus e mundo, mundo exempti vera fide Christo inseramur. That he was no
Arminian, is evident to all that have read him. And a little after in the 2.
Col. p. 534. he answers an Objection. Sed ais in omni satisfactione tria
tantum requiri. 1. Vt numeretur summa quae contractum aes exaequet. 2. Vt
numeretur creditori. 3. Vt numeretur ejus nomine, qui eam debebat. Id quidem
verum est quoties creditor non id praecipue spectat in satisfactione, ut cujus
nomine satisfactum est, is beneficium agnoscat. Caeterum quando praecipuus
satisfactionis finis hic est, ut debtor agnita sponsoris munificentia in
illius amorem rapiatur, aio debitum quidem solutum esse debitoris nomine, sed
solutionem tum demum ratam fore quum debtor beneficium agnoverit.

And accordingly we find in Scripture how God has limited the benefit of
Christ's death unto Believers; John 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him, should not perish. And in Romans 3.25. Romans 3.25. John 6.40.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. And,
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life. And, Mark. 16.16.
Whosoever believes not, shall be damned; nay, is condemned already, John
3.18, 36.
and the wrath of God abides upon him.

Now that is a superficial, and senseless Cavil that Mr. Air makes against
this, Page 135. that such places as these are, do show only who have the
fruition and enjoyment of the benefits of Christ, to wit, they that believe;
but the true scope of these places is to show, not only who shall be saved, and
have the benefit of Christ's death, to whom this privilege belongs; but to show
when, and how Christ's death became effectual, namely upon, and by believing; so
that Christ's death it self is not available unto salvation, without faith to
apply it. And out of his own Concessions I argue against him: If only Believers
have the fruition and benefits of Christ's death, then while they remain
unbelievers they have no fruition or enjoyment of them, or else Believers are
not the only subjects of these privileges; But they are communicable, both to
such as believe, and such as believe not, Mr. Air, chapter 9. page 90.
which is contradictory to Mr, Eyre's answer to the letter of the Scripture;
and against this gloss of Mr. Eyres I may retort his own argument against Mr.
Woodbridge, Chap. 9. That interpretation of Scripture which gives no more to
faith then to other works of sanctification is not true, and the reason he
adds is, because the Scripture does peculiarly attribute our justification
unto faith, and in a way of opposition to other works of sanctification; But
Mr. Eyre's interpretation of those Scriptures that require faith as necessary
to salvation, that they do not declare the persons that shall be saved, and
have the fruition and enjoyment of the benefits of Christ, attributes no more
to fairh then to other works of sanctification; for works of sanctification
declare this. Thus the Apostle makes it an evidence of a person in Christ, to
whom there is no condemnation, that He walks not after the Flesh, but after
the Spirit; and in the same Chap. If ye by the help of the Spirit shall
mortify the deeds of the body, Romans 8.1, 13.
1 John 3.14.
ye shall live. By this we know, that we are passed from death to life, because
we love the Brethren.

Mr. Air, Vind. p. 135.
And in the same place he objecteth, that the Apostle does not say, Without
faith Christ shall profit us nothing. But I answer, Though this is no where
expressly spoken, yet it is evidently implied, and is the intendment of the
Holy Ghost: For when Christ says, That unless they believe, that they shall
die in their sins; and he that believes not, shall be damned; is not this
equivalent to this Proposition, That without faith Christ shall profit you
nothing? 2 Cor. 13.5.
And does he not bid the Corinthians, Examine themselves, whether they be in
the faith: Prove your own selves, know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates? where though I think the word (...), does not signify
reprobates, as opposed to the Elect, yet at the least it implies as much as
unjustified. And whereas he says, that if we can show this agreement between
the Father and the Son, that none should have actual reconciliation by the
death of Christ till they do believe, he will yield the cause; let him but
stand to his word, and the Controversy will soon be at an end.

For the making good of this over and above what is written, I premise,

1. That I suppose Mr. Air denies not that there was a Covenant passed
between the Father and the Son, about reconciling the Elect believers by the
death of Christ; for that is evident from many Scriptures, Isa. 42.6. Gal.
3.16. And by those places wherein the things promised to Christ our Head and
Mediator, are expressly mentioned, Heb. 1.5, 6. Acts 10.38. Ephesians. 1.22. Isa.
11.12. Isa. 49.18. Isa. 53.10, 11. Acts 2.27. and all the types prefiguring
Christ's death declare it; but the question is not, whether there were an
agreement between the Father and the Son? but, whether they agreed that none
should have actual reconciliation till they believe?

2. I suppose Mr. Air does not mean that we should show him where the
Scripture does syllabically repeat these words; and I judge him so rational,
that what can be proved by undeniable consequence from the Scriptures, he will
acknowledge it as authentic as a literal expression.

3. I take it as a truth that will not be denied by Mr. Air, that the Father
and the Son had both one and the same will, and that they fully and mutually
agreed between themselves concerning the time and manner of our reconciliation
with God; so that what the Father willed, the Son willed, and vice versa. And
so I join with him, and argue:

1. If God the Father in his promise to Christ, or his Covenant with him about
his death, and the effects of it, did mention faith as the means by which the
effects of his death should be applied; then there was such an agreement, that
Christ's death should not purchase actual reconciliation without faith: But the
Father in his Covenant with Christ about the effects of his death, made mention
of faith for the application of it: Ergo. The consequence of the major cannot
run the hazard of suspicion; for what God would do upon Christ's death he
promised, and more then he promised Christ could not, nor did expect; for in
all this work of dying, he was a servant of God, subject to his good pleasure;
Now God promised to Christ what he did intend to do, and Christ could expect no
more.

And the assumption I prove from Isa. 53.10, 11. which Mr. Air acknowledges,
a Covenant made with Christ, page 138. When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands. He shall see of the travel of
his soul, and be satisfied: By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many. These words are delivered as in the Person of God the Father,
with whose words the Prophet began, as we may see from Chap. 52. v. 3. Vide our
English Annotations, and they clearly hold forth the effect and fruit of
Christ's passion; where observe a plain promise to Christ, or Covenant with him
about dying, and making his soul an offering for sin, When thou shall make his
soul an offering, or as the Hebrew, if his soul, or when his soul shall make it
self an offering; for the second Person Masculine, and the third Foeminine are
in letters, and sound the same; so I take it the speech of the Father
(introduced by the Prophet,) speaking unto Christ, that when his soul shall
make it self an offering for sin, then he promises he shall see his seed, that
is, his issue and posterity that should be borne to him as an effect of this,
which words do not import, that all his issue and posterity should be an
immediate effect of it; but he should see it, he should live and survive to see
it; after his resurrection he should die no more, but live for ever, and see
the fruit of his death; The will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, that
is, he shall daily see souls brought to salvation as a fruit of his death: He
shall see of the travel of his soul, and be satisfied. As a woman when her
travel is past, is filled with joy to behold the fruit of her womb; so Christ
should be satisfied to see a numerous issue of faithful souls begotten to God
by his death. And what that satisfaction is in particular, he tells him it
shall be the justification of many for whom he died, and then he tells him how
they shall be justified; He says, it shall be by Notitia sui.
his knowledge, or the knowledge of him; not his own knowledge taken
subjectively, the knowledge that he has of God, Vide English Annot.
or of them; but his knowledge taken objectively, that is, the knowledge
whereby they know him; and this is not a bare knowledge of Christ whereby we
are justified, for the devils themselves both know and acknowledge him; but by
knowledge is meant faith, the antecedent put for the consequent, because the
knowledge of him is the ground of trust. I shall not need to prove that
knowledge is put for faith. John 17.3. John 4.42.
And the words that follow are a reason, for he shall bear their iniquities;
though in the Hebrew the word is copulative, yet it is often used as a cause.
And if this be granted, it renders a reason why he should justify them,
because he did bear their sins; where the persons are described, whom he should
justify, not all promiscuously, but Believers, whose sins he undertook to
discharge; for he did bear the sins of none but Believers.

Now let Mr. Air tell us why God speaking to Christ of our justification by
him, should say that Christ should justify us by his knowledge, or by faith in
him.

1. His death alone antecedently to faith, did justify those whose iniquities
he did bear; unless it were to declare his will that his death should be
effectually applied only by faith, and that none should have immediate benefit,
but expect it by faith.

2. That that was Gods intention in giving Christ, was the intention of Christ
in dying; But God in giving Christ, intended not the benefits of Christ's death
unto any until faith; Therefore Christ died not to purchase immediate
forgiveness unto any until faith, and by consequence there was a mutual
agreement. The Major is beyond all contradict on, because of the unity of heart
and will between Christ and God; therefore he intended not his death for any,
nor in any other way then God intended it.

The Minor is written as with a Sunbeam in Scripture, John 3.14, 15, 16.
John 3.14, 15, 16. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness: Even so
must the Son of man be lifted up: That whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have eternal life. For God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son: that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life.

In which words you have a threefold cause of man's salvation.

1. The principal, Gods love, ver. 16. 2. The meritorious, Christ death. 3. The
instrumental, our faith.
Secondly, You have a comparison between Christ and his Type, in two things,

1. That as the Serpent must be lifted up for a means of healing, or else it
could not heal, and none would look to it; so there was a necessity of Christ's
being lifted up upon the Cross, God must deliver him up to death, and he must
be considered as dying; or else there is no salvation by him.

2. The end, that such as did look to it, might be healed of the stingings of
the fiery Serpent; so this was the end of Christ dying, that whosoever believe,
should not perish. Now, as the Scripture shows, those stingings were deadly,
and none were healed but such as looked to the brazen Serpent; so are the
stingings of sin deadly, and none are healed by Christ, but such as believe.
Now, as Mr. Woodbridge observes, they were not first healed, and then did look
up to see what healed them; but they did first look, and then were healed: so
we have nor first everlasting life given us, and then we believe; but first we
believe, and then we have everlasting life.

Now to this Mr. Air answers nothing, but denies it was the intent of the Holy
Ghost to show in what order we are justified in the sight of God; but in so
doing, he does not only senselessely beg the question, but does overthrow that
wherein the truth and verity of the type consisted: for as the brazen Serpent,
though endued with a healing virtue, yet it healed none till he did look; so,
though Christ as dying be sufficiently able to save, yet saves not any till he
look to him by faith, and in so doing does destroy that that was the main end
of God in giving Christ, and of Christ in dying, that upon believing we should
be saved.

And therefore I come to the third thing considerable, and that is Gods end in
giving Christ, and Christ's end in dying, both these are expressed in the same
words, the Son was lifted up, that whosoever believes, etc. and Gods end was,
that whosoever believes, etc. where the verity of the major is confirmed, that
they had the same end.

Now the Minor is no less evident; for if Gods end in giving Christ to die for
us, and Christ's in dying were to limit the benefit only to Believers, then it
follows by undeniable consequence, that until faith none are actually
justified by Christ's death, otherwise the benefit of Christ's death is equally
extended to Believers, and unbelievers; and if he says, faith is only a
consequent condition, and not antecedent, then he must corrupt the Text, and
alter the sense of the Holy Ghost, and say, that God gave Christ to give
eternal life, and Christ was lifted up to purchase eternal life, that they
for whom he was so given, and so died, might believe; and thus eternal life
must be antecedent, and the cause of faith, and not faith antecedent or any
cause of eternal life.

And therefore as Gregory Nazianzen answered to one that affirmed, Gregorius
Nazianzenus, Epist. ad Cledon. Dialog.
Deum potuisse sine mente hominem servare, potuit etiam utique sine carne,
voluntate sola, sicut and alia omnia quae effecit, and effecit corporaliter:
toll ergo una cum mente and carnem quoque, ut omni ex part perfecta sit
amentia tua: So may I say to Mr. Air, who affirms that we are justified
without faith; God might have done it, and without the sufferings of Christ,
had he so decreed it; take away therefore the death and satisfaction of Christ,
with Socinus, (as your doctrine of eternal justification does, as shall in its
place be made evident) and thus you shall declare your self to be perfectly mad.

A third argument is taken from Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood; whence I argue, The agreement between
the Father and the Son, was suitable to Gods eternal decree; for Christ cannot
be a propitiation for sins otherwise then God has ordained him: If God in his
decree has ordained Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood
only, then it was their agreement Christ's death should not be available until
faith; But God in his decree has ordained Christ to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood. The consequence of the major is evident, because their
agreement must be suitable to this decree. I believe there is scarce a man of
that face and forehead that will deny the Assumption, they are the words of the
Apostle. Nor let Mr. Air here wilfully mistake, as if we affirmed that faith
made Christ's death of a propitiatory nature, as if it received its value and
worth from faith, this were ridiculous to make the isntrumental cause a
meritorious cause; but it makes Christ's death to be peculiarly appropriated by
God, as a propitiation for him in particular that believes, and never till
then.

A fourth Argement is this, If Christ himself cannot save an unbeliever so
remaining, then it was the will of God the Father and of Christ, that his death
should nor be available before fairh; But Christ himself cannot save an
unbeliever so remaining; Therefore it was the will of the Father and the Son
that his death should not actually save until faith. The consequence is as
immovable as the earth; for God the Father, and Christ the Mediator did not
will that which was impossible for Christ to do, therefore they did not will
that antecedently to faith, an unbebeliever should be justified, and by
consequence that the benefit of Christ's death should not be enjoyed before
faith. The Minor is proved from Romans 11.23. And they also, if they abide not
still in unbelief, shall be graffed in: for God is able to graffe them in
again. Where the Apostle speaking of the hope there is of calling the Jews
again that were cast off for unbelief, from being any members of the visible
Church, and so from being members of Christ's body, and from all present hope of
salvation; shows, that though their case be seemingly desperate, yet it is
possible for them to be saved, by an argument drawn from the power of God, God
is able to graffe them in again; yet he limiteth this absolute power of God,
that this is possible, If they abide not in unbelief, (where though it be true,
God is able to remove their unbelief, and to give faith, yet so long as they
abide in unbelief, they cannot be graffed in again, and so saved; yea, the very
power of God is here limited from saving, (to wit, by his own immutable will)
not to save an unbeliever, and an unbelievers wilful rejecting of the grace God
offers; Mark 6.5. compared with Matthew. 13.48.
and thus in Mark 6.5. Christ in his own country could do no mighty work
there, because of their unbelief; their unbelief was so great, that Christ
marvelled at it, and was in a manner hindered. Calvin upon the place says,
Marcus negans Christum potuisse, eorum culpam amplificat a quibus impedita fuit
ejus bonitas. Nam certe increduli, quantum in se est, Dei manum sua contumacia
constringunt; non quod Deus quasi inferior vincatur, sed quia illi non
permittant virtutem suam exequi: Mark denying that Christ could do any mighty
work there, amplifies their sin by whom his goodness was hindered. For
certainly the unbelievers, as much as in them lies, do bind the hands of God
by their contumacy; not as if God being inferior in power is overcome, but
because they will not permit his power to be executed. And truly God has
declared his immutable purpose in the Gospel, that whosoever believes not
shall be damned; hence Christ cannot save an unbeliever so remaining; therefore
until faith this benefit of Christ's death is not obtained.

^ The whole energy and efficacy of Christ's merit in respect of influx and
derivation upon others, depends wholly upon the will of God ordaining and
accepting it, which appears if you consider it in reference to the Elect and
Reprobate; for why is it effectual unto one, and not the other? it is the will
of God only that makes the difference, because God has ordained it for the
Elect, and accordingly will give faith to apply it, and not to the other.

Now my fifth Argument shall be by retortion of Mr. Eyre's first argument
against Mr. Woodbridge, There is no such Covenant does appear; Ergo, there is
no such thing. This has been accounted a good argument amongst Christians.

I may draw the like argument from Scripture negatively thus, It is no where
written that God accepted the death of Christ for unbelievers, that they should
be justified antecedently unto faith; Ergo there was no such will in God, and
consequently not in Christ. As for those Scriptures which Mr. Air brings, and
sets them upon the rack, to force them to give evidence to his cause; the
Reader may expect their answer in the Aanaskeuastical part of this discourse,
where it properly belongs.

6. God the Father and the Son intended the benefit of Christ's death only for
the members of Christ; and till they be the members of his mystical body, they
cannot be partakers of the benefit of his death, and have communion with him in
it; for as none partake in Adams sin that were not in him by a natural union,
so none but such as are in Christ by spiritual and supernatural union can be
partakers of his sufferings and satisfaction; but none are members of Christ's
mystical body until faith; therefore until faith it was the will of the
Father and the Son, that none should partake in the benefits of his death.
This argument shall be more fully vindicated ere long from the objection Mr.
Air made against it in our discourse.

7. If Christ in his intercession, (which is the best Index and Interpreter of
his mind, and intention in his death) limits and restraines the benefits of
his intercession to Believers, then it was his mind and intention in his death
to limit the benefits thereof unto Believers; because Christ's intention of the
benefits of his death, and the fruit of his intercession are of equal
latitude, and by consequence what was his mind, was the Fathers mind; for
Christ and his Father are one, and have the same will; but Christ limits the
benefits of his intercession unto Believers, as we may see in John 17.20.
Christ prays for them that shall believe in him; John 17.20. Heb. 7.25.
nor do these places only declare who shall have the benefit of Christ's
intercession; but how, and when it shall be obtained; by faith, by coming unto
Christ; for if they did obtain it before faith immediately from his death, what
need were there of Christ's intercession for that which they did already enjoy?
From whence I argue,

8. That that destroys the end and use of Christ's intercession, cannot be
agreeable to Scripture. But to make Christ's death to justify us actually and
immediately, this destroys the end of his intercession; for Christ is now in
heaven an Advocate for sin, that it might be pardoned to them that believe: so
that Christ in his death took it away meritoriously, and now he is in heaven to
intercede for all that by faith seek for the benefits of his death, that it may
be formally applied.

Yea, the children of God though they fall not from the state of justification
by new sins, they lose not their right to heaven, yet they lose their aptitude
for heaven, and by every new sin they contract a new guilt, and without a new
remission of the sins committed they cannot be saved; and hence Christ is a
daily Advocate to intercede for us, as St. John says, My little children, 1
John 2.1.
if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. I might add to these many m^re, but these are sufficient to
demonstrate this truth, and will prove a burdensome stone to Mr. Air, if he
endeavor to contrad^ct them.

And as for those Arguments which he, Chap. 14. uses to prove the actual and
immediate reconciliation of the Elect before faith, they have all the same
unhappiness to fall, like arrows, far short of the mark intended, and have
most of them the same common fate to be guilty of a miserable non sequitur, as
shall in my reply to them in its proper place appear.

Now the next thing to be superadded for a full vindication of this truth, is,
that this suspending the benefits of Christ's death until faith, is no way
derogatory to the atonement made by Christ's death, which may as easily be
proved, as that Pilate was guilty of Christ's blood.

And I prove it thus, 1. If there were such an agreement, as the arguments
above declare, then what wrong is it to the atonement made by Christ's death,
that the effect of it should not be enjoyed until faith, when as it was the
mutual agreement between the Father and the Son to have it so? it was his will
to have it so, and volenti non fit injuria, there is no injury to him that is
willing.

2. If the death of Christ were in value a sufficient ransom for the whole
world, the very Reprobates not excepted, and yet without injury and wrong to
Christ's satisfaction, it is by the will of God ordaining, and so accepting it
to be only effectual for the Elect, which comparatively in respect of the
Reprohates is a small number; why shall it be judged a wrong to Christ's
satisfaction, that the benefit of it for whom it is intended, should be for a
time suspended, for gracious and good ends at the will of the Father, to make
them see what they are, and deserve, and what need they have of Christ, and to
raise up their desires after him, and to increase their love unto God for
Christ, and also for the honor of the Lord and his Christ; that though he
justify the ungodly, yet that he does not justify them so remaining, that his
enmity and hatred against sin may the more appear, and that wicked men might
not think God a justifier of the wicked in their abominations, which is
contrary to the purity of his nature and justice to do: why should this be
thought more injurious to Christ's satisfaction, then a peremptory excluding of
all the race of the Reprobates from salvation by his death?

But, 3. If notwithstanding the suspending the benefits of Christ's death until
faith, the death of Christ be no less satisfactory to divine justice, and the
intrinsecal worth and value of his merits no whit lessened, and the efficacy,
and certainty of the effects of Christ's death be no less established by our
Doctrine, then if the effect did immediately follow, then this is no impairing
of the atonement made by his death; but the premises are true, which I evidence
thus:

1. We willingly grant that the death of Christ was a full and complete
satisfaction to divine justice, and a valuable compensation for the sins of
those that shall be saved; and God did not accept less at the hands of Christ,
then was due to our sins; but he made satisfaction, ad ultimum quadrantem, to
the last farthing; the justice of God can require no more, either at his hands,
or at the hands of those for whom he suffered by way of satisfaction; and hence
in his resurrection he gave him a public acquittance, and sent his Angel to
roll away the stone from the Sepulcher, as a public Officer to testify his
acquitting him from the debt of our sins, and so he sets him at liberty, and
brings him out of prison.

2. The intrinsecall value and worth of Christ's merits is no way diminished:
Christ did not compound with the Father, as broken debtors with the creditour,
making him to take less then was due; nay, as we have showed in some respect
(if you consider the dignity of the person) there was more laid down then the
Law required, though in regard of the substance of the punishment it was that
which the Law required, and the justice of God, and the love of the Father
could require no more; the prorogation or deferring the actual enjoyment of
the thing purchased by that satisfaction, arises not from any impotency or
defect in Christ's sufferings, but from the liberty of Gods will, who in mercy
accepts of that which a surety has done for us, which in it self was
refusable, till by an act of grace it was admitted as available for us; but in
that time only that the Father should appoint, whose will Christ as a
Mediator, and Servant was obliged to obey.

3. The death of Christ is no less efficacious, and certain in the effects of
it, then if an immediate participation of it were granted; the efficaciousnesse
of Christ's death is not to be valued by the time of application (it being a
moral cause, and not a physical, or natural cause of justification, but by the
powerfulness of the impetration, and the certainty of application,) now we
grant that it has by way of merit procured reconciliation; and hence our
deliverance is called redemption, Romans 3.24.
which was made by the payment of a full price; now the price being paid for
the Elect, the effect shall follow in the time appointed; Gal. 3.13. Ephesians. 1.7.
Heb. 9.12. ^ P^t. ^.18.19. 1 Cor. 6.2^.
hence we grant, that there shall be a certain application o^ the benefits of
Christ's death to all the persons for whom it was intended, though they have not
actual possession, and that leads me to the last particular, that Mr. Air
lays to the charge of this Doctrine, that it is disconsolatory to the souls of
men, in laying the weight of their salvation upon an uncertain condition of
their own performing. To which calumny I might return no other answer then the
Senate of Rome is reported to have given to a certain Oration made by Julian
the Apostate to the dishonor of Constantine, and repeated before them, Ames.
Coro. praefa ad eccles. belgicas.
Modestiam majorem optamus Authori, we wish more modesty to the Author. But
that I may for ever silence this objection, I reply that Mr. Air cannot but
know, that the Orthodox that maintain Justification by Faith, do yet utterly
disclaim faith as a condition, either in an Arminian or a Popish sense.

1. The Arminians hold that Christ died indefinitely for all without
distinction, and that he died no more for Peter then for Judas; and that he
paid a sufficient satisfaction for all, so that God may now freely remit the
sins of all.

2. They maintain a potestative, or voluntary condition, which they borrow from
the Jurists, whereby, it being left free to their own will, whether they will
believe or not; the effect of Christ's death is rendered uncertain, whether they
shall be saved or not, and so they affirm all to be redeemed; so as that it is
possible none may be saved; they hold as it were a potential reconciliation,
which is by the act of faith to be completed, which faith they affirm not to
be the effect of Christ's death, but of their own free will. So the
Remonstrants, Nihil ineptius, Rem. Apol c. 8. p. 95.
nihil vanius, quam fidem merito Christi tribuere; si enim Christus meritus est
fidem, tum fides conditio esse non poterit: They say, Nothing is more foolish,
nothing more vain then to ascribe faith to the merit of Christ; for if Christ
has merited faith, then it cannot be a condition; and they laugh at it as a
ridiculous conceit, Rem. Apol. c. 9. p. 105.
that God should work the condition which he prescribes. Their words are, Anne
conditionem quis serio, and sapienter praescribet alteri sub promisso praemii,
and poenae gravissimae comminatione, qui came in eo cui praescribit efficere
vult, haec actio tota ludicra, and vix scena digna est. And this Mr. Air takes
notice of as the Remonstrants opinion, page 145. where he recites the same
passages.

2. The Papists make faith a meritorious condition, which justificeth us, per
modum causae efficientis and meritoriae, as a proper efficient and meritorious
cause; this is the Doctrine of the Papists, as Bellar. Bellar. Lib. pr. de
justifica c. 17
sets himself to prove in his 17. Chap. Libr. pr. de justificatione.

Now we utterly disclaim faith to be a condition in either of these senses; we
say, that Christ died only sufficienter for the Reprobate, but efficiently for
the Elect; Christ did not die indefinitely, and indis criminatim alike for all,
but he died effectually for Peter, and not for Judas; and whereas we make faith
the condition of the Covenant, without which the benefits of the death of
Christ is not applied to us, we mean not in an Arminian (much less in a
Popish) sense, that faith is an uncertain condition left to the power or
freedom of our will; but we constantly affirm, that God has infallibly
ordained such unto faith as shall be saved, Acts 13.48. John 6.37. Master Air,
p. 144. sect. 9.
and Christ has merited this grace of Faith for us, which Mr. Air is pleased
without all charity to affirm, that his adversaries cannot mean faith a
condition in this sense, as that which God will bestow, and is the fruit of
Christ's death. And he says, Mr. Woodbridge denies it to be a fruit of the
Covenant, and well he might, as it is a Covenant made with us; for it is an
absolute promise made by God as a fruit of his Election, and Christ's
redemption, that he will work this faith whereby we shall be brought into
Covenant with him; for when God promises to write his Laws in their minds, in
so promising he promises faith, Jer. 31.38. Heb. 8.10.
and then adds, And I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.

And we affirm, as Christ has merited this grace for us, so he is become a
surety of the Covenant, to see all that God requires on our part be performed;
and hence as a head he will by his Spirit in due time infallibly, and
efficaciously work this faith, and so become a Savior, not only by his merit,
but by efficiency, actually applying the fruit of his death. And this he will
irresistibly work, Ephesians. 1.18.
putting forth the same Almighty power that was put forth in raising himself
from the dead; so that we do not, as Mr. Air falsely affirms (which I believe
he was not ignorant of) lay the whole weight of our salvation upon an uncertain
condition of our own performing; we make faith to be Gods gift, though it be
our act. And we make the salvation of the Elect as sure as himself, and
therefore our doctrine is no way disconsolatory to the souls of any; only we
do not strengthen the hands of the wicked, making them to refuse to return, by
promising them life as he does, Ezekiel. 13.22, 23.
by telling them of their eternal justification, and of their being actually
reconciled from the time of Christ's death; Isa. 48.22.
for we know of no comfort belonging to the wicked, while unregenerate; for,
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked; but so are all unregenerate
persons Antecedently to their faith.

And for a further clearing of my mind in this particular, I add, that if by
uncertain Mr. Air mean, as oftentimes the word is so taken, for that which in
its own nature is contingent, in respect of the second cause; because what is
contingent usually among men, is uncertain, and not in respect of God to whom
by his predeterminating will, even contingent things come to pass necessarily,
though they come to pass contingently in respect to us; I deny not but in this
sense it may be called uncertain, or contingent, and this is no more then what
is unanimously acknowledged by the Orthodox, and that no way hinders the
salvation of the Elect.

And by this time I hope the Reader plainly sees this truth of Christ, that
the very Elect are without Christ, and without hope in the world, as the
Apostle affirms, until faith; that they have no actual right or interest in
the death of Christ until faith; and so as to their present estate, there is no
difference between them and Reprobates, being children of wrath, as well as
others; this is that which the tender ears of Mr. Air cannot bear; but I
believe it sounds not so harsh in the ears of a judicious Reader, as being an
undoubted truth of God; but let it be compared with that filthy and dirty
opinion of Mr. Air, more beseeming the Gnostics of old, or the present
Ranters of this age, then a sober Christian, which is this, Master Air, page
61.
That the Elect while they are unregenerate, while they lie like swine
wallowing in the mi^e of sin, antecedently to faith are justified; and so
though Infidels, and wicked, yet divine justice cannot charge upon them any of
their sins, nor inflict upon them the least of those punishments which their
sins deserve; but contrarily he beholds them as perfectly righteous, and
accordingly deals with them as such, who have no sin at all in his sight. And
I doubt not but the naming of his will vindicate mine, and render his justly
abhorred to an utter nauseating; saying, Durus est hic sermo, who can bear it?
And those monstrous absurdities which he charge our Doctrine with, I doubt
not but the intelligent Reader sees, that they are as unjustly fathered upon
us, as his deformed error is by himself styled (with the same likeness of
truth) to have the complexion of a saving truth.

CHAP. II. Containing a Vindication of my Argument drawn from the Parallel
between the first and the second Adam, showing that as no man is liable to
condemnation by the first Adam, but such as are in him by natural generation,
descending from him; so no man is freed from condemnation, till they be in
Christ by supernatural and spiritual regeneration.
AGainst this Error of the Antecedency of Justification to Faith, I used in my
Sermon. at N. Sarum this Medium. As by the first Adam no man is guilty of eternal
death, but he that is a member of him by natural generation; so Christ freeth
no man from condemnation, justifies, and reconcileth no man till he be a
member of him by supernatural generation; But this is not before faith, John
1.12. To as many as received him, to them gave he power; (...), liberty, right,
power, privilege, or prerogative, to become the sons of God, even to as many
as believed on his Name: Which were borne, not of blood, nor of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, but of God. Therefore no man stands reconciled before God,
though Elect persons, till by faith they are incorporated into Christ, and have
this privilege to be the children of God.

Now let us see what Mr. Air replieth to this, he says that this makes much
against me: Mr. Air, p. 6.
for, says he, " If the righteousness of Christ does come upon all the Elect
unto justification, in the same manner as Adams sin came upon all men to
condemnation, as the Apostle shows, it does, Romans 5. then it must follow that
the righteousness of Christ was reckoned, or imputed to the Elect before they
had a being, and then much more before they do believe in him; for Adams sin,
it is evident that it came upon all men to condemnation before they had a
being: For by the first transgression, (says the Apostle, ver. 12.) sin entered
into the world, and more plainly, death passed upon all men. The reason
follows, because in him, or in his loins all have sinned: so Mr. Air.

For answer whereunto, I shall premise this, that I did not affirm that we are
no way guilty of Adams sin before we have a being: For I willingly grant that
of Augustine, Adam erat nos omnes, omnes eramus ille unus Adam; certum manif
stuque est alia esse propria cuique peccata, in quibus hi tantum peccant,
quorum peccata sunt, aliud hoc unum in quo omnes peccaverunt, quando omnes ille
unus homo fuerunt, Aug. de peccat. merit. and Remist. l. 1. c. 10.
Adam erat nos omnes, omnes eramus ille unus Adam, certum manifestumque est
alia esse propria, etc. Adam was as it were we all, we were all that one Adam;
it is most certain and manifest, that some sins are proper to every one in
which they only sinned, whose sins they were; this one sin is another in which
all have sinned, seeing all were that one man; and it is a general received
truth among the Orthodox, that there was an inexistence, or being of all men in
Adam. And therefore I willingly grant that we did no less sin in Adam, then
Levi paid tithes in Abraham, Heb. 7.6. because as he was in the loins of
Abraham when Melchisedech met him, so were we all in the loins of Adam; and
when I said that no man is guilty by the first Adam of eternal death, but he
that is a member of him by natural generation; I intended nothing but to show,
that we are not guilty of Adams sin, so as to be actually and formally sinners,
(though virtually we are until we be in him by natural generation, and so
actually members;) and so I grant, we are virtually justified from the death of
Christ, not formally.

And, 2. I intended to show, that as Adams sin is not ours, but as we are in
him; so Christ's righteousness is not ours, unless united to him; this
premised, I shall now reply to Mr. Eyre's Objection, That I apprehend in his
answer a double Error:

1. He takes that for granted, which will not be yielded, that the Apostle
says, We were formally constituted sinners by the disobedience of Adam, as we
are by his opinion formally, not only virtually justified at the death of
Christ, Vide Mr. Air, page 68.
so he expresses his meaning, p. 68. and herein he is contrary to all Orthodox
Antiquity; Learned Wotton does deny it in express terms in his answer to
Hemingius his Argument, whose words are these, Wotton de Recon. pecc. par. 2.
l. 1. c. 9. p. 148.
Primam propositionem nego, quia sumit pro concesso, Apostolum dicere nos Adami
inobedientia formaliter factos esse peccatores, quod parum liquet, certe alia
fuit antiquorum Theologorum sententia; and recites for that end, Chrysostom.
Theophilact. Pacianus, Anselm, Haymo, Hugo Aeterianus, OEcumenius, Calvin. Who
so please to read them, may find them in the forecited place of Wotton. We
therefore affirm, that although Adams sin was not altogether another man's, but
in some sense ours, because we were seminally in him, that were virtually
sinners in him; and that act of his in eating the forbidden fruit, was as truly
ours, though not so completely, and perfectly as his, for we are not formally
constituted sinners, till we are actually members of him by natural generation.

2. A second Error I conceive him guilty of, is, in that he says, That the
righteousness of Christ does come upon all the Elect unto Justification, in
the same manner as Adams sin came upon all men to condemnation, (and it is so
much the worse that he will father it upon the Apostle, which he no way
intended in that place,) that as Adams sin came upon men to condemnation before
they had a being, that so the righteousness of Christ was imputed to the Elect
before they had a being; To which I answer, that it is a manifest untruth, for
the sin of Adam descends upon us, not only by imputation, but by propagation,
so does not the righteousness of Christ, that is ours only by imputation. The
sin of Adam becomes ours by virtue of a natural union, in whom we are seminally
antecedently to our birth; but Christ's righteousness becomes ours by
spiritual and supernatural union, to whom we are strangers, and alienated from
him by nature; we are virtually united to Adam, because we had existence in him
as in our first Parent before we had a being; but we were actually sinners when
we had an actual being, because we had a compl a^ being out of our cause: but
we are not actually united to Christ before faith; Wotton de R^con pecc. par.
2. l. 2. c. 2^ p. 210
Hence learned Wotton in answer to this Obj^ction, says, Nos unum fuisse cum
Adamo, and credentes unum esse cum Christo, and si utrumque vere dici possit,
tamen alio, atque alio modo haec vera ess^ intelliguntur, unum suimus cum Adamo
originaliter; and (liceat enim his verbis uti) seminaliter, ut arbor ejusque
omnes rami in glande, aut alio quovis semine inesse dicuntur, hac ratione fit
ut non minus vere in Adamo peccasse, quam Levi apud Apostolum, Heb. 7.9.
decimatus esse in Abrahamo affirmatur; jam vero long alio modo in Christo esse
censemur, non natura, aut proprie, sed improprie, and per similitudinem
quandam. Praeterea semper ex quo creatus est Adamus, unum cum illo, and in illo
fuisse deprehendimur, ut cum illo etiam quodam modo peccare potuerimus. Quod de
nostra cum Christo conjunctione, sive unione affi mari non p^test; uniri enim
nos Christo, and cum illo conjungi oportet, priusquam unum esse cum illo
possimus existimari; wh ch for the Readers sake I will English: Although it may
be truly said, that we were one with Adam, and believers are one with Christ;
yet this is to be understood in a different manner; we were one with Adam, and
in him naturally, originally, and (let it be lawful to use these words)
seminally, as a tree and all his branches are said to be in the (...), or in
any other seed. By this reason it comes to pass, that we know that we sinned
no less in Adam, then Levi by the Apostle is said, Heb. 7.9. to have paid
tithes in Abraham: But now we are reputed to be in Christ in a far different
manner, not by nature, or properly, but improperly, and by a certain
similitude. Moreover, from the time that Adam was created, we were always one
with him, and in him, that with him we may be said after a sort to have sinned;
which cannot be affirmed concerning our conjunction with, or union to Christ;
for it behooves us to be joined and united to Christ, before we can be esteemed
to be one with him; and he adds, Quare tum primum in Christo esse incipimus,
quum in illum credimus; Wherefore we then first begin to be in Christ, when we
believe in him.

And let me add that, there are many different considerations, and
circumstances between the bringing in of salvation by the one, and condemnation
by the other; and the Apostle gives instance in Romans 5.15, 16. And besides
these there are many other. I shall think fit to add but one, Vide John
Goodwin, Treat. Justifica. part 2. page 17.
taken nootice of by Master John Goodwin in his Treatise of Justification, and
in h^s words: The sin of Adam by which he brought condemnation upon the world,
was as well the act of all his posterity as his own; in which respect they may
as truly be said to have brought condemnation upon themselves as Adam; but the
obedience by which Christ brought salvation into the world, can with no
propriety of speech, nor with any consistence with truth, be said to have been
theirs, or performed by them who are saved by it; so that these cannot now be
said with any more truth to have saved themselves, then if they had not been
saved at all: It is said indeed, that God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. but it is no where said that the world was in
Christ reconciling it self to God. Let no man blame me for his authority, fas
est and ab host doceri. And the ground of Mr. Eyre's mistake (if it be not
wilful) is, that he thinks the Apostle does compare the disobedience of Adam,
and the obedience of Christ, as causes of the same kind, which produce their
effects after the same manner, which was not the intent of the Apostle; but to
show that Christ's death is no less efficacious unto Justification to them that
are his, one with him, then the sin of Adam was to condemnation, to them that
were in him; but not to show that we were in Christ as we are in C^nfertur
autem A la nus cum Christo tum in re simili, cum in contraria; siwiles enim
sunt in eo quod uterque quod suum est cum suis communicate, sed in eo plane
dissimiles quod ille pecatum in suos natura derivat ad mortem, Christus vero
suam justitiam cum suis communicate per gratiam ad vitam, Beza large Ann. on
Romans 5.12. Wotton de recon peccat. par. 2. l. 1. c. 9 p. 149
Adam, that as we were in Adam antecedently to our being, that so the Elect are
in Christ antecedently to their birth and faith; for, as in the next Argument
that I shall vindicate, I shall show that we are not united to Christ until
faith. And the very same answer does Wotton give to Hemingius, whose words are
these: Quod ad assumptionem attinet, sumet ille pro concesso, Apostolum Adami
inobedientiam tanquam ejusdem generis causas comparare, quae eodem plane modo
effecta sua producant. At vero id potius agere videtur Apostolus, ut Christi
obedientiam non minus ad justificationem valere quam Adami in obedientiam ad
condemnationem, imo Christi justitiam majorem habere vim ad justificandas
homines quam Adami peccatum ad nos condemnandos; which because it is the same
in effect with mine, I shall spare to English.

The next words of Mr. Air relating to this business, are these, Now as in
Adam the (...), that is, all that shall perish were constituted sinners before
they had a being, by reason of the imputation of his disobedience to them: so
in Christ the (...) all that shall be saved were constituted righteous. Besides
the former errors it is guilty of, I find a double violence offered to the
sacred Text.

First, in that he limiteth the (...), the all that sinned in Adam, to them
that shall perish; as if the Reprobates only sinned in Adam, and not the Elect,
and as if they were not in the same sin and condemnation; which it may be he
does, because he is of his brethrens mind, the rest of the Antinomians, who
affirming that they are justified from eternity, and so God sees no sin in
them; and he himself says, page 61. That the Divine Justice cannot charge upon
them any of their sins, nor inflict upon them the least punishment which their
sins deserve: But contrarily he beholds them as persons perfectly righteous,
and accordingly deals with them as uch who have no sin at all in his sight.
And yet this man is offended to be called an Antinomian, though he is not
ashamed to be one; but against this gross conceit, because it is sufficiently
confuted by others, I will say no more, but allege two Scripture-test^monies;
1 John 1 last ver.
The first is in the 1 John 1. the last verse. After the Apostle had said, that
the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin; chapter 2.1.
yet he says, If any man say, we have not sinned, he makes God a liar, and
his Word is not in us. And in the second Chap. ver. 1. for the sins of the
justified he is an Advocate to procure pardon; 1 Cor. 11.30
My little children, if any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous. The other is that of the believing Corinthians, For this
cause many are sick etc. Nor will the Antithesis bear him out, for the Apostle
does not compare the Elect with the Reprobates, but all that sinned in Adam,
(which is all mankind) with all that shall be saved by Christ.

A second violence offered to the Scripture (such men are fit to make their own
Creed) is, in that he says that the (...), all that shall be saved, were
constituted righteous; the Text says no such matter, but (...), not (...),
(...) that shall be made righteous, not were made righteou, which if Mr. Air
might have done the office of a Gamaliel to the Apostle, he would have
counseled him to say, were made righteous; and if Mr. Eyre's opinion of an
actual justification, from the time of Christ's death be true, he ought to have
said, were made righteous; but the Apostle says they shall be made righteous:
No wonder if he misrepresent what I said, when he makes so bold with the
Apostle and sacred Text; and here let me return that most justly upon Mr.
Air, which he says to Mr Woodbridge, Vide Mr Air, p. 10.
This is not to interpret Scripture, but to deny it; such a liberty to alter
tenses, and forms of speech at our pleasure, will but justify the se^uits
blasphemy, that the Scriptures are but a leaden rule, and a nose of wax, which
may be turned into any form; Turpe est doctori cum culpa redurguet ipsum

But now it is observable in this diversity, that the Apostle says, not many
were made righteous; Hosius lib 3. de Auth Scrip. etc.
As in Adam many were made sinners, but many shall be made righteous; by this
it is observable, that the Apostle does contradict what Mr. Air has affirmed,
that the righteousness of Christ came upon the Elect in the same manner
antecedently to their birth, as the sin of Adam came upon all to condemnation
antecedently to their being. And the reason of this diversity is, because the
Apostle had respect to all those Elect who have not yet believed, either
because as yet they were not in being; and those that were in being, were not
all as yet called. And truly this is a very great difference between the manner
of communicating Christ's righteousness, and Adams sin; for we being semin^lly
in Adam, Vide Downh. Cov. of Grace, p. 296.
and having a natural relation to him, sinned in him, as being in (...) ^oynes;
and hence we were as truly sinners in him, though not as completely, and
formally sinful as he. And by generation the sin of Adam is actually
communicated to all his posterity, and to all alike, (because we were all alike
in him.) When they actually exist, and no sooner are they partakers of the
human nature, but they are formally constituted sinners, and partake i^ ^is
sin. But now it is a manifest error to think that we are all thus seminally in
Christ, and have any such union with him ^n^ecedently to faith, as shall be
made hereafter more evident, or that the community of his person is equivalent
to such an un^on; and therefore the righteousness and obedience of Christ is
not communicated to all from the time of their participation in the humane
nature, (as for Infants their case is of a peculiar consideration, and the
fuller answer to that I refer, till I shall speak to his Argument drawn from
them.) We are not then in our generation, much less before, made partakers of
Christ's righteousness, but in our regeneration, when faith is ingenerated by
the Holy Ghost in our souls.

Hence then, that we should not dream of being borne just, as we are borne
sinners, which indeed were a contradiction to imagine, that we should be borne
both just and sinful under the guilt of sin at the same time, and that we
should not neglect the grace of justification, as though we had it already, and
brought it into the world with us, as we brought sin in; The Apostle speaks of
it in the future tense, to signify that we are not immediately constituted
righteous, but must expect this benefit in our effectual vocation, when we are
brought to faith; for, Whom he predestined, them he calls; and whom he
calls, them he justifies, and no other, and properly never till then; and to
this purpose, Dr. Downham, Cov. of Grace, p. 296.
Reverend Dr. Downam expresses himself in his Treatise of the Covenant of
Grace. And hence we see there is not the same reason for the imputation of
Christ's righteousness to all the Elect before their birth or faith, that there
is for the imputation of Adams sin unto his posterity before they have a being,
because (as Mr. Burges has observed) the issues of the first Covenant fell
upon Adams posterity in a natural and necessary way; Mr. Burg. of Justific. p.
180, 186.
but the issues of Christ's death do come in a supernatural way. This I
acknowledge for truth; let us see what Mr. Air answers to it.

Mr. Air, p. 7.
[Mr. Air says, This reason is of no validity to him, for the issues of Adams
disobedience came not upon his posterity by virtue of their natural
propagation, for then his sin should be imputed to none till they are actually
propagated. And the sins of other parents should be imputed to their posterity
as much as Adams, because they descend as naturally from their immediate
parents, as they do from Adam: So that the issues of Adams sin may be said to
descend to his posterity in a supernatural way, i. e. by virtue of Gods
Covenant which was made with him, as a common person in behalf of all his
posterity, and in the same manner do the issues of Christ's obedience descend
unto Gods Elect by virtue of that Covenant which was made with Christ, as a
common person in their behalf; and therefore unless they can show a proviso,
or restriction in the second Covenant, more then in the first, why life should
not fl^w as immediately to the Elect from Christ's obedience, as death did from
Adams disobedience, the Arguments will stand in fore.

But this answer is of far less validity, and implies much unsoundnesse, as I
shall evidently demonstrate; for the right understanding of this, we must
inquire what is meant by the issues of Adams disobedience.

2. Whether this become ours by imputation, propagation, or by both.

First, then I suppose Mr. Air must mean that single act of disobedience,
which was Adams sin, and is made ours, with the effects of it: Now if you look
upon that barely as a simple act, it was more Gods then his act, in respect of
the substance of the action; for, In him we live, and move, and have our being;
and did not he uphold us, and concur with us by his natural concourse, we
could put forth no action; and thus far in genere entis it was good; but if
you look upon the sinfulness of that act, as it was a transgression of the Law
of God forbidding him to eat, so it was evil in generis moris, and from Adam as
from the principal cause, by the abuse of his free will, and a double effect,
or guilt attended this offense:

1. Reatus culpae, the inward guilt of sin, or desert of damnation, which is an
inseparable adjunct, and consequent of sin.

2. There is Reatus redundans in personam, or reatus poenae, which is a guilt
of punishment obliging the sinner to eternal wrath, which is separable from
it. This is a consequent of sin, by virtue of Gods Law adjudging punishment
unto sin, in which repsect as it is from God as a punishment of sin, it is
good, and God may separate this from sin.

Now Adam when he committed this sin, did sustain a double person.

1. His own.

2. The person of all his posterity, whom he did as a common person represent,
hence his sin had a double respect.

1. To himself, and so his sin was his personal and actual transgression, and
so it was peccatum originans properly, and not peccatum originale; it was the
first wellspring, and head, or fountain of sin, and of all the effects of it;
not properly that which we call original sin, which is the hereditary
corruption of our nature.

2. It had respect unto his whole posterity, which were in his loins, Heb.
7.8, 9.
whereby all sinned in him, as Levi paid tithes in Abraham, and so it was the
sin of the whole nature of mankind, actually by generation to be derived upon
every person descending from him by natural and ordinary generation, in which
respect Adams sin was after a sort voluntary to the whole nature of mankind,
considered in Adam.

Now the question is, whether this sin of Adam (for if we enquire of original
sin, it is without all controversy derived to us by generation, and natural
propagation,) the question is, whether this sin, together with the demerit of
it deserving and obliging Adam and all his posterity unto death, in whom they
all sinned, whether this be ours by imputation, or by propagation? To which I
answer, that it is not only ours by imputation, and by virtue of Gods Covenant
made with him as a common person, in the behalf of all his posterity; but it is
partly ours by this imputation of God, by virtue of the Covenant made with Adam
for us; and partly by propagation by virtue of that natural union between us
and Adam. That relation we stood in unto him, being in him as the common root
of all mankind; and without this union or relation, God neither did, nor could
in justice impute this sin, (as far as I yet can understand,) it being that
which is the ground of Gods imputing that sin to us. Hence Augustine in answer
to the Pelagian argument, That Nulla ratione concedi potest, August. Tom. 7, de
peccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 3. cap. 7.
ut Deus qui propria peccata nobis remittit, imputet aliena, that is, that it
can by no reason be granted, that God who forgiveth us our own sins, should
impute another to us: Says, Deus quando parvulis imputat peccatum Adae, non
imputat peccatum omnino alienum, sed suum ipsorum etiam peccatum, quia etiam
ipsi in Adamo peccaverunt; Tunc enim Adamus totum humanum genus in se uno
continebat: Apud Zanch. Tom. 4. lib. 1. de peccat. orig. p. 45
Ideo in illo omnes homines quot quot ex ipso futuri erant, per ipsius semen,
erant unus homo; vita enim, and anima unius hominis tunc quicquid futurum erat
in futura propagine continebat. God when he imputes to little ones the sin
of Adam, does not impute that which is altogether another man's, but their own
sin, because they sinned in Adam; for then Adam contained all mankind in
himself alone: Therefore all men that were to descend from him by his seed,
were one man; for then the life, and soul of that one man, contained whatsoever
was to be in that future lineage.

And Zanchy to the fifth Argument of Pighius, which was this, Zanch. Tom. 4.
li^. de peccat. orig page 53.
Pugnat cum Dei non solum clementia, verum etiam justitia, quod peccatum unius
omnibus in universum hominibus imputet ad peccatum, and condemnationem: That it
cannot consist with the clemency and justice of God, that the sin of one should
universally be imputed to all unto sin and condemnation. To which he answers.
Respondeo, pugnare si peccatum mere alienum imputaret, sed imputat illud quod
and ipsorum est, hoc est, totius naturae; in ipso enim Adamo omne^ peccaverunt.
That is, It were inconsistent with his clemency and justice, if he should
impute that that is purely another sin; but he imputes that which is their
own, that is, the sin of the whole nature.

Now I take this as an error of great consequence that Master Air says, that
we are not sinners by Adam, or that the issues of Adams sin came not upon his
posterity by propagation but by virtue of the Covenant made with him as a
common person in the behalf of his posterity, for many reasons.

1. Because he makes Adams sin only to be ours by imputation, or an act of
pure and absolute Sovereignty, and Prerogative, and no way an act of justice,
when as it is a mixed act; not only an act of Prerogative and Sovereignty in
ordaining Adam to be a common person, and so his sin to be the sin of the whole
nature; for God could have ordered it so, had it been his pleasure, that this
sin should only have been personal, as his other sins after the fall are. But
it is an act of justice also, for death is inflicted as a punishment upon all,
which is an act of justice. The reason follows in the fifth of the Romans,
Because in him all have sinned, so that death is the wages of that sin, because
it is our sin, all sinned in him; and it is not only Adams sin, but their own
sin by virtue of their relation to him, being in his loins. And to make the
bare and strict imputation of another man's sin, (which is no way ours, but by
imputation, the sole ground and foundation of that heavy judgment, and
punishment of condemning all mankind to eternal death, which is one of the
most weighty acts of Gods judgment, that was ever executed in the world, is to
represent God, not so much as a just Judge, as one that delights in the death
of his creature, in the blood and ruin of his creature,) when as he professes
that as he does live, he has no delight in the death of a sinner, much less
of a creature, that were not a sinner, if it were not for his imputation. And
although I doubt not but God may as an act of Sovereignty, adjudge an innocent
creature unto pain and misery, if it were his will; and that it would less
reflect upon God to say he dit it, because it was his absolute pleasure, then
to pretend or conceive that the bare imputation of the act of Adams sin was the
cause of it; yet I have no warrant to say that ever God did, or will do such an
act to make the creature miserable, merely to show his Sovereignty. And what is
there in the imputation of Adams sin, if this imputation be grounded upon his
will, and not that natural union and relation between Adam and his posterity,
to free it from such an act of pure Sovereignty; therefore I look upon it as an
act of justice, as well as prerogative, the equity of which act lies much in
the relation of Adam and his posterity to one another.

2. I urge, as before I hinted, If death entered by sin, then Gods imputation is
not the only cause of it; But it entered by sin, as the Apostle says, Death
passed upon all, inasmuch as all have sinned.

3. Then Adam was only the occasion of our sin, but God the Author; for if
Adam had sinned, if God had not imputed it, we had not been sinners; But this
is an insufferable blasphemy to make God the Author of sin; Therefore Gods
imputing it, is an act of justice, and not of Sovereignty only.

4. This overthrowes the community of his person, for if it be merely an act of
his will, he might have done this though Adam had not been a public person.

5. This ascribes to God a fallible judgment in esteeming him a sinner that
is innocent, and is not a sinner but by his imputation.

6. This ascribes injustice to God, to impute sin to him that is no sinner,
but by his imputation, which the sinner would be delivered from, and consents
not to it, as the regenerate that bewail it, and earnestly desire to be
delivered from it.

7. The very necessity that there was for Christ to be borne of a Virgin,
conceived of the Holy Ghost, to prevent his being a sinner, confutes this
conceit; for if Adams sin be ours only by imputation, let but God not impute
Adams sin to Christ, and he intended not so miraculously to be borne, for it
behoved him to be like us in all things; and why not by the help of man to be
borne, if Adams sin be ours by imputation only, and not by propagation also?
Thus you see how many errors Mr. Air is driven unto, to hold and maintain
one. Nor are his reasons of any weight that he produces to prove, that the
issues of Adams disobedience came not upon his posterity by virtue of their
natural propagation, for then his sin should not be imputed until they are
actually propagated; if he meant of an actual and formal imputation of sin, it
is granted that sin is not so imputed till an actual being. For the
understanding of this, we must know what imputation of sin is; it implies
either an estimation and judging of a sinner to be a sinner, or an adjudication
of punishment for that sin, or the execution of that punishment; now look, in
what manner we are sinners, in that manner is the imputation, for Gods
judgment must be according to truth; now as we are but seminally, potentially
and virtually sinners, because we had but a virtual existence in Adam, (for it
is a known rule, and of approved verity, Operatio rei consequitur esse rei, The
acts and operations of things still follow the being of things, and are
suitable and proportionable thereunto,) so we are reputed by God only virtually
sinful in Adam, and so not actual sinners, nor so reputed by God, nor formally
obliged to punishment; nor any punishment actually, or formally to be
inflicted, till we have an actual existence; hence by virtue of that Covenant
made with Adam, we are not actually and formally constituted sinners till we
are actual members, and so his argument will return upon himself. For if the
righteousness of Christ come upon us in the same manner to Justification, as
Adams sin to condemnation, then as we are not actually sinners, till we have an
actual being; so neither are we actually justified, till we be actual members
of Christ by faith.

His second Reason halteth right down, and is pitifully inconsequent, for it
does no way follow, that if the sin of Adam be ours by propagation, that
therefore the sins of other parents should be imputed to their posterity, as
much as Adams, because they descend as naturally from their immediate parents,
as from Adam; but rather the consequence should be, Therefore our next parents
do as truly transmit and propagate that sin, as Adam to their children; and
this is true, and will advantage your cause nothing, nor hinder ours; but it
follows not that their personal sins should be imputed, as was Adams first
sin: For if no more of Adams sins be imputed then that first transgression, why
should the sins of any other parents be imputed? And the reason is not alike,
for none but Adam could be a public person representing all mankind; and that
sin was not only personal, and proper to Adam, but common to the whole nature,
and that by the will of God ordaining him a public person. For it is a mixed
act in God, when he does impute Adams sin, partly arising from his Sovereignty,
and partly from his Justice grounded upon that natural relation, although I
deny not upon other considerations the sins of the immediate parents sometimes
are, and may be imputed to the children. And whereas he says, Unless they can
show any proviso, or restriction in the second Covenant more then in the first,
why life should not as immediately flow from Christ's obedience to the Elect, as
death did from Adams disobedience, the Argument will stand in force.

I answer, here needs no other proviso, or restriction, but only to show that
we are not in Christ in a natural way, as we are in Adam; and therefore the
benefits of his death cannot immediately follow our birth, or be antecedent to
it, but is limited to the time of our ingraffing into Christ; and the parallel
holds firm; for as in Adam we all virtually sinned, and so were virtually
condemned; so we grant, Christ has meritoriously redeemed us, and we are
virtually justified in him; and as sin is not actually imputed unto any of
Adams posterity, till they have an actual being, and are actually members of
Adam; so are not we actually justified, till we be actual members of Christ by
faith. As for the Logical Axiom, Non entis nulla sunt accidentia, it was used
in my next Argument, and therefore I shall consider it in its proper place.

CHAP. III. Containing an answer to M. Eyre's exceptions against my Argument
deduced from our union with Christ, showing that where there is no union, there
can be no communion; his unjust charge refuted, and the nature of our union
with Christ further declared.
MY next Argument against which Mr. Air is risen up to offer violence, was
drawn from our union to Christ. Where there is no union, there can be no
communion, for union is the ground of all communion, which I made evident by an
induction of the several unions in the world; and that there was no communion
where there was not a preceding union; But we are not united unto Christ until
faith; Therefore we had no communion with him in his death to an actual
justification. And in the further prosecuting of the Argument, I showed that
this union is such a union, whereby the person of a Believer is united to the
person of Christ; therefore it did presuppose the pre-existence of the person
before he could be united, and that this union was a thing accidental as to the
nature of man, and it being attributed to us as the subjects of this union, it
must require our existence; for an accident cannot subsist without its subject,
because Where I take accidens pro omni quod de pendenter habe esse ab alio qu^
tenus opponit. sub stantiae, ne stricte pro om^ quod inhaesive solum existit in
alio.
Accidentis esse est in esse vel dependenter esse, and unless the subject
exist nothing can be truly predicated of it; for, Non entis nullae sunt
affectiones, and that this union was the formal effect of faith.

Now let us see what Mr. Air says to the Argument.

First, he says, that I called our union with Christ a personal union, which
seems to fav ur that absurd notion, that a Believer loses not only his own
proper life, but his personali^y also, and is taken up into the nature and
person of the Son of God. I am sorry that I must confute him as the fellow did
Bellarmine in one word; -- and his shameless dealing in this respect, is the
more injuriously evident, in that I did not only tell him in our conference in
public before a great multitude of witnesses, that I neither said nor did own
any such thing; but did decla^e that I said and meant that it was such a union,
whereby the person of Christ is united to the person of a Bell ever; yet is he a
man of that face and forehead, to print and declare that to the world, which
he has God, Angels and men, if not his own conscience, to witness against
him; but this he has done to render me odious to the world; the Lord forgive
him, and let him see the evil of these, and the like slanders against me and
others of his brethren that differ from him. And let him now know, that I
utterly abhor that Familistical notion, that there should be an hypostaticall
union between Christ and a Believer, for Christ is one person, and a Believer
another, Apage Theologiam hanc erco relegandam. I forced my self publicly to
oppose it, as you may see in the Epistle before my Sermon, and whether your
Doctrine or mine do most favor that absurd notion that the Reverend Doctor
does condemn, Dr. Chambers.
that a Believer, loses not only his own proper life, but his personality
also, and is taken up into the person, into the nature and person of the Son of
God, I desire no better Umpire to determine.

I affirm, that the union made between us and Christ by faith, is such a union
whereby the person of a Believer is united to the person of Christ; What is
here that savours of such a notion? yea, Mr. Hooker, Souls union. page 7, 8.
what is there which our Reverend Divines have not said before me? Reverend Mr.
Hooker in a Treatise, called the Souls Exaltation, and in the Sermon called
the Souls Union with Christ, expressing what this union is, and how it is made
by faith, has this passage; he says, It is a total union, the whole nature
of a Savior, and the whole nature of a Believer are knit together; and page 8.
Christ is the Head of the Church, not only according as he is God, but as he is
God and man; and a Believer is a member, not only according to his body, but
according to his body and soul; whole Christ being the Head, and the whole
Believer being a Member; therefore a whole Christ, and a whole believer must be
joined together.

Perkins, 2. Vol. in Com. upon Gal. 2.20. p. 216. and so 1 Vol p. 36.78. The
whole person of every faithful man is verily conjoined with the whole person of
our Savior Christ God and man.
And the like testimony we have from Reverend Mr. Perkins; Of this conjunction,
says he, two things may be noted.

The first, that it is a substantial union, in that the person of him that
believes, is united to the person of Christ; but Master Air makes all the
Elect to be one person with Christ antecedent to their faith; Because, says
he, they are given to Christ, and Christ to them, and are said to be in him,
that they are called his sheep, children, before they believe, which savours of
this notion more then mine, making them one person in Christ before they had a
being; sure then their personality by him is swallowed up in the person of the
Son of God, if he can find them being, existing, and actually justified as one
person with him, before they have either being or faith.

He says that this is called a mystical and spiritual union, because it is
secret, and invisible, apprehended by faith, and not by sense and reason;
surely this is not only apprehended by faith, but it is made, and is a formal
effect of faith; the Spirit works this faith, by which we are united to
Christ. And it has hitherto been the unanimous Doctrine of all our Divines,
that this mystical union is made by faith, which Mr. Air opposes, and will
have it to be antecedent to it.

I will instance in a few. Mr. Reynolds in his Sermon upon the Life of Christ,
page 450. says, Consider further the formal effects of faith, which is to
unite a man unto Christ; by means of which union, Christ and we are one body;
and being thus united, the death and merit of Christ is ours. So, page 478.
Consider faith in its inherent properties, so it is not more noble then the
rest, (that is, then other graces) but consider it as an instrument appointed
by God for the most noble offices; so it is the most superlative, and excellent
grace.

The first of these offices, (says he) is to unite to Christ, and give
possession of him; the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.17.
that Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith. And a little after, This union
to, and communion with Christ, is on our part the work of faith, which is as it
were the spiritual joint and ligament by which Christ and a Christian are
coupled. John 14.19.
In one place (says he) We are said to live by Christ, Because I live, ye
shall live also, in another by faith: How, by both? by Christ as the Fountain,
by Faith as the Pipe, conveighing water to us from the fountain; by Christ as
the Foundation, by Faith as the Cement; and in answer to an Objection, page
479. Mr. Reynolds Life of Christ.
do not other graces join a man to Christ as well as Faith? Union is the
proper effect of love, therefore we are one as well by loving him, as by
believing in him. To this (says he) I answer, Love makes a moral union in
affections, but Faith makes a mystical union; and a little after, page 480.
Between Gods love and ours comes faith to make us one with Christ.

And then the second Office of Faith, (he says) is to justify, in the same
place. So Mr. Shepherd in his Sound Believer, page 111. Look as disunion is the
disjunction or separation of diverse things one from another; so union is the
conjunction, or joining of them together that were before severed: Hence that
act of the Spirit in uniting us to Christ, can be nothing else but the bringing
back the soul unto Christ, or the conjunction of the soul unto Christ, and into
Christ, by bringing it back to him, that before lay like a dry bone separated
from him. Thus, 1 Cor 6.^7. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit with
him; John 6.35.
the Spirit therefore brings us to the Lord Christ, and so we are in him. Now
the coming of the soul to Christ, Heb. 3.12.
what is it but Faith? our union therefore is by Faith, not without it; for by
it, we that were once separated from him by sin, John 6 37.
and especially by unbelief, are now come, not only unto him, as unto the
loadstone, but (which is most near) into him, and so grow one with him, etc. I
speak not this as if we were united to Christ without the Spirit on his part,
for the conjunction of things severed must be mutual, if it be firm; I only
show that we are not united before faith by the Spirit unto Christ, but that we
are by faith (wrought by the Spirit, whereby on our part we are first conjoined
unto him; and then on his part he by the person of his Spirit, Perkins 1 Vol.
Chap. 36 order and causes of damnation. page 78.
is most wonderfully united to us: So Mr. Perkins after he had showed that the
whole person of every faithful man is verily conjoined with the whole person of
our Savior Christ, God and man; he says, the manner of their union is this, A
faithful man first of all, and immediately, etc. The bond of this union is
this; this union is made by the Spirit of God applying Christ unto us, and on
our parts by faith receiving Christ Jesus offered to us. And for this cause it
is termed a spiritual union; So page 299. in his Exposition of the Creed,
showing that the mystical union makes us one with Christ, and this is by the
Spirit; he says, Hence the bond of this conjunction is one, and the same
Spirit descending from Christ the Head to all his Members, creating also in
them the instrument of faith, whereby they apprehend Christ, Perkins 2 Vol. in
his Ep st. Gal. 3.27. page 265.
and make him their own. So Mr. Perkins in his second Vol. propounds this
Question, How are all Believers made one with Christ? (Where he makes them
only, and never till then subjects of this union.) Answ. By a Donation on Gods
part, whereby Christ is given unto us, and by a receiving on our part; and a
little after adds, that faith is our hand to receive Christ, and this
receiving is done by a supernatural act of the mind, whereby we believe Christ
with his benefits to be ours.

And to this purpose Amesius in his Medulla Theolo. Receptio Christi est qua
Christus oblatus homini conjungitur, Amesius in Medulla Theo. cap. 26. de voca.
Number. 17.18. l. 1. p. 118. 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal 3.27.
and homo Christo, Joh 6.56. In me manet, and ego in eo.

Hujus conjunctionis respectu nos dicimur esse in Christo, and induisse
Christum, and inhabitari a Christo, Ephesians. 3.17, etc. and Number. 26 Receptio
activa est elicitus actus fidei qua vocatus jam totus in Christum recumbit, ut
suum Servatorem, and per Christum in Deum. The receiving of Christ is that
whereby Christ offered, is united to man, and man to Christ; He abides in me,
and I in him, John 6.56.
Joh. 6.56. In respect of this conjunction we are said to be in Christ, to put
on Christ, and Christ to dwell in our hearts; this active receiving of Christ
is an elicite act of faith, whereby he that is called, does now wholly rely on
Christ as his Savior, and by Christ on God. John 3.15, 16.
I may spare pains of relating any more testimonies of such a known truth; and
yet Mr. Air will have this mystical union to be apprehended, not made by faith.

Secondly, Mr. Air excepteth against it as propounded universally, that there
is no manner of union between Christ and the Elect before they do believe.

1. They are his own words, not mine, for there is a unity of natures in which
they agree, and a certain relative respect or union, very improperly so called,
between Christ and his Elect; but a mystical union I know none till faith; and
were there any real union before, yet Mr. Air might have known that rule,
Analogum quando per se positum stat pro famosiori Analogato, and so it ought to
have been taken for this famous union, or implantation by faith.

Thirdly, He acknowledges, that That conjugal union between them, which
consists in the mutual consent of parties, is not before faith. And is not
this to yield the cause? Ephesians. 5.23, 32.
is not this the mystical union spoken of in Scripture, and so called in
relation to the similitude it bears to the marriage-union? and is there any
more mystical unions then one? and that made by faith; has the wife any right
or property to the body, name, goods of the man till she be married to her
husband? So till this conjugal marriage-union between Christ and a Believer, he
has no actual right, or property to the Body, Name, Goods and Purchases of
Christ.

Fourthly, And yet he adds, There is a true and real union, that by means
thereof their sins do become Christ's, and Christ's righteousness is made
theirs. Shall we not need any more proof of this but your bare word? where is
it written there is such a union before faith? by whom is it besides your self
so called? and by what name is that union distinguished from the mystical union
by faith?

But let us hear this proof; God from everlasting constituted and ordained
Christ to be as it were one heap or lump, one vine, one body or spiritual
corporation, wherein Christ is the Head, and they the Members; Christ the Root,
and they the Branches; Christ the first fruits, and they the residue of the
heap; in respect of this union, it is that they are said to be given unto
Christ, and Christ to them, to be in Christ, Ephesians. 1. That they are called his
sheep, his seed, his children, his brethren before they are Believers; and by
virtue of this union it is, that the obedience and satisfaction of Christ
descends particularly to them, and not the rest of mankind. Oh rare invention!
Oh mysterious union hidden from all ages, but now revealed and discovered by
Mr. William Air, a discovery as far excelling that of Columbus, as heaven
exceeds earth! This is such a mystical union, as that it is not only not to be
apprehended by sense and reason, (because against both) but not to be
comprehended by faith neither, because it is no where written; but let us weigh
the strength of his words, which carry this sense, Because God from everlasting
constituted, and ordained Christ to be a Head, and Believers to be Members;
therefore there was such a union from eternity. As good consequence as this,
your Book is in print, therefore it is all true. But I take this to be a gross
error, that the Elect and Christ were united from eternity: For,

1. Gods decree ordaining Christ to be a Head, is terminus diminuens, and does
not signify that Christ was actually a Head, having members united to him; but
it signifies Gods purpose what he did decree to be done in time, and it is the
continual panalogizing of Mr. Air, and the Antinomians, to confound the
decree, and the execution of the decree; God decreed to send Christ into the
world, was he therefore actually sent? No, not till the fullness of time came;
Gods decree ordaining Christ to be a Head, and they to be Members, does not
actually constitute Christ a Head, and they his Members.

2. That that is not, cannot be united; for union requires necessarily the
pre-existence of the persons or things united; But now Believers did not exist,
much less exist as Believers from eternity, Christ had not a mystical body
from etern^ty; Therefore he was not a Head from eternity.

3. This union to Christ is reciprocal, whereby Christ is united to a Believer,
and a Believer to Christ, and requires ligaments, and bonds to make this union;
the Spirit on Christ's part, Faith on ours: But they that exist not, are not
subjects capable of receiving the Spirit, or of Faith, without which this union
cannot be made.

4. The Scripture no where speaks of an eternal union, therefore there was no
such union; and as he tells us, We must pardon him if he believe not our
unwritten verities A^^d he must pardon us if we believe not his written
vanities.
. And therefore when it is said, that God chose us in Christ, Ephesians. 1. This is
not to be understood, as if we were then existing, and had a being in Christ;
but it shows the way and order how God would save us; he ordained to save us
in and through Christ, and for his sake; not that Christ's merits were the cause
quoad actum eligentis, (in respect of the act of Election) but quoad terminum
sive salutem ad quam eligimur; but in respect of the end, or salvation unto
which we are elected or ordained. And so Dr. Twisse, a man of eminent worth and
accurate judgment in his Vindiciae. Interca non dicimus Christum in negotie
Electionis babere rationem causae meritoriae respectu actus eligentis, sed
duntaxat respectutermini, salutis videlicet aut vitae aeternae ad quam
eligimur. Nam Deum eligere nos in Christo ad vitam aeternam, nihil aliud est
qu^m Deum constituisse nos ad obtinendam salutem per Jesum Christum. Doctor
Twist. Vind. l. 2. digress. 10. sect 2. page 74. c. 1. Perinde est ac si
dixisset, elegit nos ad salutem, etc. Ibid.
In the mean while we do not say that Christ in the business of Election, has
the consideration of a meritorious cause in respect of the act of God choosing,
but only in respect of the term or end, to wit, of the salvation or life
eternal unto which we are chosen: for that God should choose us unto life
eternal in Christ, is nothing else then that God has ordained us to obtain
salvation by Jesus Christ; and as he adds, Perinde est, etc. Even as if he
should have said, He has chosen us to obtain salvation by Christ: Hither also
appertains the next verse, wherein is taught that God predestined us, that
we should be his sons by Christ Jesus, implanted into Christ by faith; Hinc
enim nos filios Dei fieri profitetur Apostolus, Gal. 3.26. Omnes est is filii
Dei per fidem in Christo Jesu. For from hence the Apostle professes, that we
are made the Sons of God, Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the sons of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, and therefore are not sons antecedently to faith, as Mr. Air
would have it; for though we are so called, this is to be understood
consequenter, and not antecedenter, because they shall be made such; and
whereas the Scripture says, he died for enemies, and the ungodly; therefore in
these places, where they are called his sheep, children, his brethren, before
faith, this is to limit, and restrain the death of Christ to such as shall be
so made, not that they are so de facto already, but are so called in respect of
certainty, and what they shall be. But to return to that of Master Air, that
God has chosen us in Christ, as if we then existed in him; Let the Reader
observe how unhappily he joyneth with Arminius, who seems such an enemy to
him, Arminius Exam. p. 3^.
says, Apostolus ait nos in Christo electos esse, The Apostle says, we are
elected in Christ; And as something is put out of the Text by Arminius, so
something is put in; God chose us before the world in Christ our Head, this
Arminius plainly asserts, Exam. p. 158. and accordingly Mr. Air says, God
constituted from everlasting Christ a Head, and (says he) in this respect we
are chosen in Christ, that is, as in a Head; the Text says no such matter; and
as Arminius leaves out those words, that we should be holy, by which means the
sense of our being in Christ is made obscure, which if added, would make it
plain in what sense these words [in Christ] should be taken, that is, these
words show to what we were chosen, to wit, to obtain holiness; and how; to
wit, in Christ, that is, for Christ's sake, like as it is said, verse. 3. God
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ
Jesus, that is, for Christ's sake: So Dr. Twisse in his answer to Mr. Cotton
upon these words of his, that he says, God chose us before the world in Christ
our Head, p. 9. where, because it is very material to this passage, I shall
recite what he further says: Mark (I pray you) says he, speaking to Master
Cotton of Arminius, how he works upon each; to be elect in Christ, is with him
to be elect being in Christ, for nos in Christo with him, is nos existentes in
Christo, and seeing we are not in Christ but by faith, (where let the Reader
observe the Doctors judgment, that we are not in Christ but by faith, which is
contradictory to Mr. Air,) Hereupon he makes the object of Election to be
fideles, the faithful, or in Christum credentes, such as believe in Christ.

We answer first, we may take as great liberty to interpret it for explication
sake, by supplying a participle of the future tense thus, Elegit nos futuros in
Christo, He chose us hereafter to be in Christ, (like as it follows) who has
predestined us to be adopted. Now we are adopted by faith, Gal. 3.26.) as he
takes liberty to supply a participle of the present tense; especially
considering that when we were Elect, to wit before the foundation of the world,
we were not at all, and consequently not fideles, Believers.

Secondly, we answer, that the complete sentence considered at full, does
manifest in what sense this phrase [in Christ] is taken. He chose us in Christ,
that we should be holy; this shows to what we were chosen, to wit, to obtain
holiness; and how? to wit, [in Christ]; that is, for Christ's sake; like as
ver. 3. it is laid, God has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things in Christ Jesus, that is, for Christ his sake; and like as 1 These. 5.9.
it is said, God has ordained us to obtain salvation through Jesus Christ; so
here in conformable exposition, 1 Thessalonians. 5 9,
when it is said, God has chosen us in Christ, that we should be holy, a fair
meaning may be this, God has ordained us to obtain holiness through Christ
Jesus.

To this I will super-adde the testimony of Dr. Twisse, and the rather, because
you allege him for your defense in the Doctrine of eternal Justification.
Christus (fateor) caput est Electorum, and praedestinatorum, sed non formaliter
consideratorum. Neque enim praedestinati qua praedestinati, sunt membra
corporis Christi, sed potius futuri sunt membra ejus, nam quod est membrum
Christi procul dubio existit. Neque enim membrum Christi, est terminus
diminuens existentiam, at praedestinati qua praedestinati non existunt, nam
predestinatio fuit ab aeterno, sed praedestinati non extiterunt simpliciter ab
eterno, hodie multi sunt Electi, qui procul dubio adhuc non nascuntur. Rursus
unio illa per quam fimus ejus membra fit per fidem, Ergo quotquot Christi
membra sunt oportet esse fideles, at non omnes praedestinati ex quo primum
praedestinati sunt evestigio fideles evadunt. Adhaec, cum caput non potius fiat
aliquorum quam illi aliqui fiant membra corporis ejus, sequitur Christum non ab
aeterno fuisse caput, cum non ab aeterno corpus habuerit mysticum, aut membra
cujus ratione proprie dicitur caput Ecclesiae suae. Membra vero corporis cum
fiant per vocationem, unde dicitur (...), idque per vocationem efficacem; and
consequenter per fidem, apparet Christum non prius dici posse caput quam sint
aliqui, qui credant in ipsum; loquor de Christo Mediatore, and Redemptore. Dr.
Twisse, Vind. li. b 2. digress. 10. page 74. Col. 2.

I confess Christ is the Head of the Elect and predestinate, but not formally
considered: For neither the predestinate as predestinate, are members of
Christ's body, but rather shall be members of it; for, what is a member of
Christ, without all doubt existeth: For neither is a member of Christ a term
diminishing existence; But the predestinate as predestinate do not exist, for
predestination was from eternity; but the predestinate do not simply exist from
eternity. This day there are many that are Elect, which undoubtedly are not yet
borne.

Again, that union by which we are made his members, is made by faith;
therefore it is needful, that all that are his members should be Believers; but
all the predestinate do not prove Beli verse as soon as they are predestinate.
Moreover, seeing a Head cannot sooner be a Head of any then they can be members
of his body; it follows that Christ was not a Head from eternity, because he
was not a mystical body from eternity, or members, in which respect he may
properly be called the Head of his Church. But seeing they are made members of
his body by calling, from whence it is called the Chu ch, and that by effectual
vocation, and consequently by faith; it appears that Christ cannot first be
called a Head before there are some who believe in him, I speak of Christ the
Mediator and Redeemer.

Now, 1. That we were not united unto Christ at the time of his passion, when
our sins were laid upon him as our surety.

And, 2. That we are not united antecedently to our faith, I prove by these
ensuing reasons.

Although it be willingly acknowledged that Christ was a common person in his
death, and a surety for all the Elect, and what he did was for them; yet this
constitutes not the mystical union between Christ and us; this only rendered him
capable of having our sins imputed to him, and served to lay a foundation for
our partaking in his righteousness, when we should be implanted into him by
mystical union through faith.

1. Christ is united to us, as he is a Head, and we his members; but the
consideration of Christ as dying for us, Ratio capitis non est ratio causae
meritoriae, Dr. Twiss. in answ. to Mr. Cotton. p. 10.
and so becoming a meritorious cause of our salvation, is different from the
consideration of Christ as a Head; for in his death as he is our Mediator,
purchasing salvation by the merit of it; he is an efficient moral cause of
salvation, and in this channel runs the meritorious cause; but Christ as he
is a Head, is an efficient physical and natural cause of salvation, and thus
only he is a Head by actual pouring out his Spirit upon the Elect in the
appointed time for their conversion, whereby they are brought to faith, and so
united to Christ. Now the moral cause may exist long before the effect follow,
and therefore does not necessarily require the existence of the subject, but
the efficient natural cause has its effect immediately following, and
therefore when Christ will as a Head unite any to him, (the person must exist;
for that that is not, cannot be united;) and then as the Head diffuseth nerves
to the several members, and conveighs animal spirits, by which the members are
quickened, and live; so Christ conveigheth his Spirit into their hearts to work
faith, by which they are united to Christ, and so partake of righteousness and
spiritual life from Christ.

2. To make a mystical union between Christ and the Elect before their birth,
or faith, be it when it will, whether from eternity or Christ's death, Mr. Air,
p. 8.
will necessarily establish that Familisticall notion, that Mr. Air fasteneth
upon us, That the personality of a Believer, or Elect person, is taken up into
the nature and person of the Son of God; for it makes them and Christ to be but
one person; for as yet they have no being; therefore if they be, they must be
in him, and subsist in his person, and so this child is fairly laid at his
own door, that he would father upon us: but we say no such thing; for this
union being by faith, and not till we exist, Christ is one person, Peter
another, Paul a third, and so as many distinct persons as are mystically united.

3. If they were truly in Christ before their personal being and union to
Christ by faith, then they and Christ being but one person, all and the
singular parts of Christ's obedience and sufferings, together with all, and
singular the effect, thereof, and benefits may be attributed to them; because
they being one with him personally, are said to do it in him, as we that were
all one in Adam, united to him by a natural union, tanquam in rad^ce humani
generis, as in the root and common parent of all mankind are said to do what
Adam did; but all and every part of Christ's obedience and sufferings, with all
the singular eff^cts and benefits cannot be attributed to any sinner believing
in him; for of whom with any show of truth; and without horrible blasphemy may
it be said that He gave himself for us an offering, and a sacrifice to God, for
a sweet smelling savor unto God? Ephesians 5.2.
That by the eternal Spirit of God he offered up himself without spot to God?
that the chastisement of our peace was upon him, H^b 9 14. Isa. 53.5.
and that by his stripes we are healed? For this can agree to none but Christ
personally, Isa. 63.3.
not mystically considered. And Christ is said to tread the Wine Press of his
Fathers anger alone; but if they were then truly in him, then all the Elect of
God did tread this Wine Press with him, and mystical Christ was crucified,
not Christ alone that was the Son of God. And therefore we see most absurdly,
Mr. Air, p. 9.
that Mr. Air applies that to Christ mystically considered, which is peculiar
personally to Christ the Son of God, Matthew 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; What if this were spoken to
Christ as a public Person and Mediator for the Elect, does it therefore
follow it was meant of Christ mystical? certainly the consequence will never
be granted upon his bare word.

4. If we were in Christ when he died and suffered for us antecedently to our
birth, so as to be mystically united, having no subsistence but in the person
of the Mediator, then we were punished in him, and gave satisfaction in him,
and so no place is left for pardon of sin in our justification; for if we were
punished in Christ, and suffered in him, then what place is left for pardon?
for pardon and punishment are contrary; He that suffers the full weight of
punishment is not pardoned, and to this purpose Polanus in his Comment. upon
the 9th. Dani. the 8th. Quest. Polanus in Dan. c. 9. ver. 24. quaest. 8.
Neutiquam proprie loquendo sumus puniti in Christo, cum Scriptura diserte
doceat nos esse justificatos in Christo; quod si sumus in Christo justificati,
and absoluti, non igitur damnati, and puniti, Ephesians. 1. v. 6. Ait Paulus de Deo
nos gratis sibi acceptos fecit in illo dilecto, nos ergo Deus non punivit, sed
omnium nostrum poenam Christo imp^suit, Isa. 53 6.
sicut dicitur, Isa. 53. v. 6. Jehova facit ut incurrat in eum iniquitas omnium
nostrum. Christus torcular calcavit solus, nos non calcavimus. Neque vero idem
est nos esse punitos in Christo, and Christum esse punitum pro nobis, seu
nostro loco. Nam si Christus est punitus nostro loco, sequitur nos non esse
punitos, sed poenam nobis esse remissam: and quid quaeso est aliud remissio
peccatorum, quam condonatio, and culpae, and poenae? Quomodo igitur haec
consentient Deum nobis remisisse peccata, and tamen punivisse nos propter
eadem? Proinde sic ex Scriptura statuendum, Deum Christo paenam nostrorum
peccatorum imposuisse, ut nobis illam remitteret: proprio filio suo non
pepercisse ut nobis parceret. If any man object that Polanus does not
absolutely deny that we were punished in Christ, but that we cannot properly be
said to be punished in him.

I answer, Nor do I absolutely deny it, if that Doctrine, that we were punished
in Christ be understood in respect of imputation, (to wit) that God for the
merit of Christ's passion forgiveth our sins upon believing, as if we had
suffered and made satisfaction, I willingly grant it, but then we were not in
him as one person making satisfaction; for the person of him that suffered for
us, is distinguished from them for whom he suffered, and by Mr. Eyre's opinion
that we were really one in him, and with him before our birth, and faith can be
understood no other way, as I conceive.

5. That to make us to be one with Christ antecedently to our birth when he
suffered for us, destroys the ground of imputation of Christ's righteousness;
for those which were truly in Christ in all his obedience and sufferings, to
them that obedience and sufferings cannot be made over by imputation; for what
need is there of imputation, or what place is left for it, when those to whom
it should be imputed, because of their union with Christ, did themselves
perform it? wherefore, either there was no such union, or that imputation must
be denied. But the obedience and sufferings of Christ are evidently by
Scripture declared to be ours by imputation: Romans 4.5.
Hence our faith is said to be imputed to us for righteousness; And Christ was
made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; we are
made righteousness, as he was made sin, that was by imputation, therefore we
were made righteous by imputation; 2 Cor. 5.21.
hence that union Mr. Air contends for, I cannot say, mole ruit sua, but for
want of weight falls to the ground.

The next thing that we have undertaken to prove is, that there is not any
mystical union between Christ and us intecedently to faith, which I demonstrate
from Scripture-grounds thus:

First, if Christ prays for those for whom he died that they may believe, and
that (believing) they may be united to him, then before faith, such (for whom
Christ died) are not united to him; But Christ prays for those for whom he
died, that they might believe, and that (believing) they might be one with him.
The consequence of the Major is as evident as reason can make it, unless we
make Christ to pray in vain, to pray for that which was already done; if
therefore they were not one in Christ, and the Father as the Father was in
Christ, and Christ in the Father before, as this prayer intimates they were
not, then this union was not antecedent to faith. The Minor are the words of
Christ, John 17.20, 21. and need not a grain of allowance; Christ in this
place prays for those for whom he was to die, that after his death they might
believe; the isntrumental cause of that faith, is set down to be the word of
the Apostles; the final cause of that believing, is, that they might be one,
that is, that they might be as members of the same body by faith, nearly united
to one another; the manner how is declared by the near conjunction between the
Father and Christ.

Secondly, he prays not only that they may be one, or at unity among
themselves, Diodat in Lecum. 171. John 21.
but also that they may be one in us; that is, as Diodat upon the place, in the
communion of the Holy Ghost, by which they may be mystically united to me, and
by me to thee, (and truly this latter union to Christ is the ground of the
former, of being united to one another;) now if they were mystically united
before, this would make Christ either ignorant of this union, or his prayer to
be in vain, to pray for that that was done long before from eternity, (as Mr.
Air says,) but either of these were fearful impiety to imagine, therefore
this union is not till faith.

A second Argument I frame from the same place is this: They that are not
really united as members of the invisible Church to the rest of the members,
and mystical body of Christ, are not united to Christ; But before faith, no
man is a true member of the invisible Church, and so united to the rest of the
members of the mystical body; Therefore not to Christ. The Major will not be
denied by any, but such as are baptized into a spirit of error; the Reason is
plain, because the union between the members is a fruit of our union to the
same Head; but no man is united to the company of Believers to have a true
fellowship and union with them, but a true Believer; For what communion has a
Believer with an Infide? and Christ prays that they might believe, that they
might be one, that is, that they might be mutually united, as by one faith, as
members one of another, and the same body: So Piscator upon the place, Pisca.
in ^oc 17. Job. 21. in Anal.
Vt per unam fidem inter se devincti, tanquam membra unius corporis, cujus
caput est Christus, mutuo amore sese complectantur, That being knit together by
one faith, as members of one body, whereof Christ is Head, they may with a
mutual love embrace each other; now a true communion of love cannot be between
true Believers, and those that are yet unbelievers, therefore neither between
them and Christ. And hence I argue,

3. Christ and Belial are not united: Every unbeliever is a son of Belial:
Therefore they are not united. 2 Cor. 6.15.
The word Belial is as much as (...), an uncalled man, nequam, a very wicked
man, a man that will profit none, but is hurtful to all, in Hebr. (...); the
Hebricians agree not from whence it is derived; but the signification given is
either a man that will profit none, or good for nothing, or one that will be
subject to no yoke; I deny not but Interpreters do think many of them, that
Satan is in this place understood, and Beza says, it very well agrees to him,
though he take it for a wicked man; and Bullinger and Calvin take it for the
Devil, the head of all wicked men: but I see not why it may not be taken here
for a wicked man, and not for Satan; for it is ordinary in Scripture by this
word to understand very wicked men; so in Deuteronomy it is taken for an
Idolater, Deuteronomy. 13.13.
and of such is the Apostles discoursing here, that Believers should have no
communion with Idolaters; and so Elies sons being very wicked, 1 Samuel 2.12.
are called sons of Belial. And it is very agreeable to the scope; for in the
verse before, he exhorts them not to be unequally yoaked together with
unbelievers; he blames them for having too much familiarity with Heathens,
whether in marriages, or in their feasts, eating things sacrificed to Idols; he
would not have them draw in the same yoke, by which Metaphor he would dissuade
them from keeping company with them, and so partaking with them in their sins.
His Argument is drawn a contrario, Your condition and profession is as contrary
to theirs, as righteousness is to unrighteousness, as light and darkness;
and therefore as there is no fellowship between righteousness and
unrighteousness, between light and darkness, so neither should there be
between you and them; yea, Christ has no communion with Belial, and you should
be like Christ; Christ and the devil can as well agree, as a Christian and a
wicked man; a Christian is called by the same name, and should be as Christ in
the world: Now as Christ has no communion with Belial, whether you take it for
the Devil, or a wicked man, is all one; Therefore neither should you.

Now then, if Christ and a wicked man have no communion, then have they no
union: But they have no communion; who will make such a swine the member of
Christ? 1 Cor. 6.15.
Shall I take the member of Christ, and make it the member of an harlot? God
forbid. And with the like abhorrency would Paul hear of making a member of an
harlot a member of Christ, a son of Belial a member of Christ: 1 Cor. 6.11.
But such is every unbeliever, (though elect;) the Apostle tells the
Corinthians, they were Idolaters, Fornicators, such as could not inherit the
Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.17.


4. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit; But an unbeliever and Christ,
is not one Spirit: Therefore they are not joined. The Proposition is expressly
written, and the Minor is evident, because an unbeliever is one that walks
according to the Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. 2.2.
the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, or unbelief; for
so it signifies rather then disobedience, it signifies imperswasibility, and
contumacy in not believing.

5. He that is none of Christ's, is not joined to Christ; An unbeliever is none
of Christ's, (in respect of incorporation.) The proposition shines brighter
then the Sun at noonday. The Assumption is proved from Romans 8. He that has
not the Spirit of Christ, is none of Christ's: But an unbeliever has not the
Spirit of Christ; Surely the Spirit of Christ is a holy sanctifying Spirit, and
will not dwell in such an unclean stie, as the heart of an unbeliever.

6. He that has no fellowship with God, has no union with Christ: But an
unbeliever has no fellowship with God. The Major will admit of no
contradiction, the Assumption I prove from the first Epistle of John, chapter 1.6
He that says he has fellowship with God, and walks in darkness, is a liar,
and does not the truth; an unbeliever walks in darkness, practicing the
unfruitful works of darkness; he will contradict common sense and experience
that denies this.

7. He that is in Christ, is a new creature: 2 Cor. 5.17.
But an unbeliever is not a new creature: Therefore he is not in Christ. There
is none but an Atheist can cast a stone at either of these Propositions.

8. Where there is perfect resistance, there is no union; But between Christ
and the heart of an unbeliever there is perfect resistance; Therefore there is
no union between Christ and him, Christ will not be united to an unbeliever;
hence he brings all the Elect to faith; nay, it were dishonorable to Christ to
be joined to an actual unbeliever; the mystical body of Christ would be a
monstrous, het erogeneous body, if it consisted of Believers, and Infidels; and
an unbeliever resists the grace and Spirit of Christ, seeking to draw him to
faith, as Stephen told the Jews, They were a stiff-necked people, they did
always resist the Holy Ghost; so is it true of every unbeliever: Rom 8.7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God, it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can it be. By this time I doubt not but the Reader sees how I
have more then enough confirmed this truth, That without faith there is no
union to Christ, and that Mr. Eyre's opinion runs cross to the very vein of
the Gospel. I will only add a testimony or two more.

Beza sets his seal to this truth, Sed hoe demum sciendum, nos per fidem
Christo ipso uniti, Spiritus Sancti vinculo, Beza in his large An upon G^l.
4.28.
ut bonorum ipsius fiamus participes, ut omnes fideles hac ratione sint unus
Christus mysticus, ut loquitur etiam Apostolus, 1 Cor. 12.12. Beza in his large
Ann. upon Gal. 4.28. But this finally we must know that we through faith by the
bond of the Spirit are united to Christ, that we may be partakers of all the
good in him, that all Believers by this means may be one mystical Christ.

So Learned Calvin, Calv. in Romans 8.4.
Suam justitiam nullis communnicat Christus, nisi quos Spiritus sui vinculo
sibi conjungit: Christ communicates his righteousness to none, but such as he
unites to himself by the bond of his Spirit.

Davenant also consents with us. Absque fide, D^venant, De m rte Christi, page
60.
sive ante fidem nulla nobis actualis conjunctio cum Christo, ac proinde ex
merito mortis ejus nulla remissio peccaetorum, nulla justificatio, nulla cum
Deo Patre reconciliatio: Without faith, or before faith we have no actual
conjunction with Christ, and therefore from the merit of his death there is no
remission of sins, no justification, no reconciliation with God the Father.

So Zanchy: Ait, and ponent sibi caput, non autem ponetur; Docet ergo etsi
Pater ille, Zanch. Tom. 5. in Commen. in Hoseam, cap. 1. page 28.
est qui caput hoc dedit Ecclesiae, and singulis Ecclesiae membris, ut est,
Ephesians. 1. nemini tamen caput esse posse, nisi quis illud propriae voluntatis
assensu (de adultis loquor) sibi ipse ponat. Sibi etiam quisque hoc caput vere
and coram Deo ponit, cum illud sibi a Patre in Evangelio oblatum, fide sua, and
propriae voluntatis assensu suscipit, amplectitur, etc.

Vt enim uniamur huic capiti Christo, spiritus propriae fidei per sese omnibus
(etiam ipsis parvulis) pernecessarius est; Justus enim ex sola sua fide vivet,
non aliena, sicut nec quis doctus est aliena, sed sua, quae in ipso est
Doctrina: He says, and they shall appoint themselves one head, Ephesians. 1.22.
not shall be appointed; he teaches therefore, that although the Father be he,
who has given this Head to the Church, and to the singular members of the
Church, as it is, Ephesians the first; yet notwithstanding he can be a Head to
none, unless to him who by the assent of his own will (I speak of them that
are of age) appoint him a head to himself. Every man also does appoint this
Head to himself truly, and that before God, when he does receive, and embrace
by his own faith and proper assent that Head offered to him by the Father in
the Gospel.

For that we may be united to this Christ as a Head, the spirit of every man's
own faith is very necessary to all, even to Infants; For the just shall live by
his own faith, and not by another; as neither any man is learned by another
learning, but by that learning which is in himself.

So also I will add one Testimony more from Zanchy, because Mr. Air shelters
his opinion of justification from the time of Christ's death under Zanchies
authority. John 6.56. Zanch. De tribus Elo. l. 40. cap. 3. p. 106. Tom. 1.
Qui edit meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and ego in eo;
Alludit ad illam incorporationem, quae fit inter edentem, and bibentem, and
inter cibos comestos: cibus extra nos manens, minime nos nutrit, cibus sumptus,
dum in nobis manet, nutrit and vivificat, etc. Idem contingit nobis cum
Christo, extra nos positus, non alit, a nobis sumptus, nutrit, and vitam
adfert, atque conservat; He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
dwelleeh in me, and I in him. Up-which words Zanchy says, He alludeth to that
incorporation which is made between the eater and the drinker, and between the
meat eaten, meat without us does not nourish us, but inwardly taken; while it
abides in us, it nourishes and quickens us. The same happens to us with
Christ, Christ without us (that is, not united.) does not nourish us; but taken
by us, it nourishes, and brings, and preserves life. Where you see, Zanchy
makes Christ not to justify, and save us while we are disunited; but when
applied and united by faith, then he saves us.

I will end all with CAMERO, Si quis ergo proprie loqui velit, dicet Christum
pro solis credentibus satisfecisse, Johan. Camero in opus^. Mise. p. 531. col.
1.
ii enim soli membra illius sunt. Sicuti ergo Adam suos tantum peccato infecit,
ita Christus peccatum in suis tantum abolevit, Christi vero membrum non est
ullus, qui in Christum non credit: Audi quid dicam, fides te facit Christi
membrum, at fides illa te non servasset nisi Christus pro te satisfecisset: If
any man therefore will speak properly, he will say, that Christ satisfied only
for Believers, for they only are his members. Therefore even as Adam infected
only his own with sin, so Christ has abolished sin only in his; but no man is
a member of Christ, but he that beleiveth. Hear thou what I shall say, faith
makes thee a member of Christ, but that faith would not save thee, unless
Christ had satisfied for thee.

To what has been spoken, I shall superadde some considerations about this
union to Christ, taken from the several similitudes, under which this union is
set forth in Scripture.

First, It is compared to the Marriage-union; Now as before marriage, the wife
has no right nor title to the name, body, goods of the husband; so before
faith, the soul has nor that right to Christ, his Body, Name, Goods,
Purchases: Therefore this union is not made till faith, and in this Mr, Air
yields the cause, that the conjugal union is not till faith.

Secondly, It is expressed by a body consisting of diverse members; Now, Romans
12.4, 5.
as no member is a true and living member of the body, but that which by
nearness, and vital ligatures is united to the head, from whence every member
receives strength, and sensation; 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
so no man is a living member of Christ's body, until by faith on his part, and
by the Spirit as by vital ligatures he is bound and united to Christ, whereby
he receives the life of justification and santificaction, and lives by a life
derived from Christ as the Head; but no man but a Believer is thus united as an
integral part of this body.

Thirdly, It Is compared to a building or house, whose stones are closely
cemented together, and do all lie directly and perpendicularly upon the
foundation: Ephesians. 2.2^, 21.
Now as a stone in the quarry is not united in the building, till it be hewn,
and squared, and then by the hand of some Architect laid directly, and evenly
upon the foundation; so a man in his natural estate, till he be drawn out of
this condition by the Spirit of God, 1 Timothy 3.15.
and hewed and squared out of the Spirit of bondage, and by the same hand of
the Spirit, as the chief Master Builder brought to faith, 1 Pe^. 2.5.
and built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief cornerstone, he is not a lively stone in this
building; this is done by the work of the Spirit, an unbeliever has not the
Spirit dwelling in him.

Fourthly, it is compared to an ingrafture of a branch in a tree: Now a branch
may be in a stock two ways.

1. By contiguity, or continuity, or corporal adherency to the stock, and so
every branch that is dead may be in the tree, but these partake not of the
juice, and nourishmnt of the stock, and such branches the husbandman will cut
off, and cast into the fire.

2. A branch is in the tree by a real participation of the sap, and influences
of the root; Thus a man may be in Christ two ways:

1. By external profession of faith, (for that which makes us to be in Christ,
any kind of way is faith;) now if our faith be a dead faith, such as makes us
come to Christ to shelter us from the fire only, and it derive not spiritual
life and sanctification from Christ; this man is a dead branch, which the
Father will cut off, and cast into the fire, if it so abide; and until a true
faith, such as is peculiar to the Elect, all are but dead branches; yea, the
very Elect themselves, until effectual vocation, and were never truly in him.

But, 2. There is a living, operative, precious, unfeigned faith, which so
unites the soul to Christ, that now it partaketh of the power of his death; it
is crucified with him, and dies to sin, and yet also it lives, and is
partaker of the quickening Spirit and power of Christ's Resurrection, whereby it
lives, and the life it lives in the flesh, it lives by the faith of the Son of
God, Gal. 2.^0.
and it lives unto God as its end, as well as from God as the principle of its
life; this is the true branch, that partaketh of the sap and influence of the
Root Christ Jesus unto a heavenly life; and none are such branches, but such as
are truly cut off from the stock of Nature, and ingraffed by faith into Christ.

That which Mr. Air adds in the Margin by way of Comment upon Heb. 2.11. He
that sanctifies, Mr. Air, vind. page 8.
and they that are sanctified, are all of one, (...), whereunto says he, some
do make (...), others (...) to be the substantive, and referres his Reader to
Junius his Parallels, lib. 3. This is brought to prove our union before faith,
and therefore he (says) (...) is the substantive made so by some, but I
believe none can be produced; as for Junius, he says no such matter, but says
it must be taken either in the Masculine gender, and relate to (...), as the
substantive; they are of one father, or (...) in the Neuter, and so it
signifies they are of one common Lump, or Mass, agreeing in the community of
nature; and indeed this is most agreeable to the Scope of the place; for as he
had showed, ver. 10. that it was convenient for Gods justice, that our
Mediator should by his death satisfy Gods justice; in the 11th. ver. he
shows how he could die, and how it could be accepted in our stead; he
answers, because he was one endued with the same nature; for He that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are of one; that is, all of one
common Father, as Adam, or are of one and the same nature and substance; and
what is this to prove a mystical union before faith? and it is observable, that
he makes those that are the sons to be brought to glory, such as are
sanctified, and Christ is not ashamed to call these Brethren; but as for
unbelievers that are not sanctified, Christ will never call them Brethren; and
such as he calls sons, he does not intend to call them so antecedently to
their faith, but only to show who shall be brought to glory by his death, and
that is only sons. And by Mr. Eyre's leave, it is wholly excentrical to this
place to compare Christ to the first fruits, and those for whom he died to the
residue of the heap, as he does in quoting that place.

Mr. Air, p. 8.
That which he presupposes likewise, that by virtue of this eternal union, the
sins of the Elect do become Christ's, and Christ's righteousness becomes theirs,
will seem not only a Paradox, but little better then blasphemy if thoroughly
examined, for the humane nature of Christ was not existent from eternity, and
to what end should their sins be imputed to the Divine Nature? (who can bear
the thought of it without trembling?) And surely at our union with Christ, our
sins become Christ's, as well as his righteousness becomes ours; yea, before,
when he was actually a surety for us, but not from eternity.

He adds, that by virtue of this union that they are said to be given to
Christ, and Christ to them.

Page 8.
I answer, that when the Elect are said to be given to Christ, that is, that he
should die in particular for them; this includes not any actual Donation of
them to Christ by mystical implantantation, but it signifies Gods ordination,
and constitution whereby he did ordain, that the benefits of Christ's death
should be for them, though not to be applied to them from the time of this
ordination; and this may very well stand, and yet they not united until faith.

In the next place, I shall take notice of Mr. Eyre's slight answer to the
Reverend Mr. Conant since deceased, who as Moderator in our first Conference,
proposed the Objection drawn from Romans 16.7. Romans 16.7.
where Paul speaking of Andronicus and Junia, says, they were in Christ before
me; but if this union be eternal, or antecedent to our birth and faith, one
cannot be in Christ before another. He says, he returned no answer, and the
truth is, he can return no solid answer. And though he now insult since the
decease of this Reverend Servant of Christ, and says, he passed it over,
because there was little difficulty in it; yet when he was living, he was no
more able to stand against him in an Argument, then Dagon before the Arc, then
Stephens adversaries who could not resist the Spirit by which he spoke. But let
us consider the force of his Answer.

It is evident (says he) the Apostle speaks not there of their spiritual
union with Christ, which is invisible to man, for God only knows who are
hi^; but of such a being in Christ as is by external profession, and
Church Communion, in respect of which the whole visible Church is called
Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. And hypocrites as well as the Elect are said to be in
Christ, and to be branches in him. And thus it is acknowledged, that one is in
Christ before another, according as they are called and converted, whether
really or in appearance: It does not follow that union to Christ is successive,
or that it is an act done in time depending upon conditions performed by men.

His first Answer is, This is not meant of spiritual union with Christ; his
reason is, because that is invisible to man.

First, This is over-boldly asserted, that he says, it is evident that this is
not meant of spiritual union with Christ, when there is nothing said but what
may rather evidence the contrary.

1. Either this was a true union, or they were but hypocrites; but it is too
much rashness to say they were hypocrites.

2. They were such as were of note among the Apostles, chief Evangelists; I
think (at least in the judgment of charity,) they should be such as were truly
in Christ.

3. The Apostle endued with a great Spirit of discerning, judged them so; he
says, they were in Christ, therefore we should judge it really.

4. It Is such an union and in-being in Christ, as Paul himself afterward had;
but his union was real, he meant and understood a real union in respect of
himself, and what he affirms of himself, he says the same of them, and that
they had this privilege to be in Christ before him.

5. This was no such great privilege, for the pen of an Apostle to commend
them far above himself; if he thought only it was an union in profession, in
show only, and not in truth.

Secondly, That which leads him to judge it was not a real spiritual union with
Christ, is, because this was invisible to man; because, says he, God only
knows who are his.

But, 1. Might he not here well exempt the Apostles, who were by an
extraordinary gift endued with a Spirit of discerning, and especially were they
guided in their Epistles written for a rule of life, whereof this is a part.

2. Let it be granted for a truth, that no man can know infallibly the
Election, or regeneration of another, but by special Revelation; then no man
can absolutely say of such, who live holily in respect of conversation, whose
actions are materially good, and nothing appearing to the contrary, but that
they are in Christ really; none can say they are not in him really, therefore
an (...), or suspense of judgment had been better, then for him to say rashly,
it is evident the Apostle speaks not of spiritual union with Christ, when he
says, these that were of chief note among the Apostles, were in Christ, and
nothing appearing to the contrary. Malem Corberum metueret quam haec
inconsiderate diceret.

3. Does not the Apostle judge of Apelles as a real Christian a little after,
when he says, he was approved in Christ; and of Rusus, that he was chosen in
the Lord? in the 12th. verse. and was he guided by Revelation there, and not
here? did not he elsewhere say of the Thessalonians, that he knew their
Election, 1 These. 1.4.
speaking of them as of the better part, because it is more then probable;
where God will have his Word preached, there he has some people; and St. John
writing to a religious Lady, styles her Elect, because he had seen her and her
children walk in the truth; and if these persons were not known to be such by
Revelation, yet had they strong ground for a judgment of charity; and why we
should not look upon the union spoken of as real or spiritual between them and
Christ, I am yet to seek for a Reason.

But further he says, this is meant of a being in Christ by external
profession, and Church Communion: but can he or any other say it is meant of no
more?

2. From hence I gather, faith gives a real implantation; for if an
hypocritical faith will give a man an external denomination of being in Christ,
it is in the resemblance it has to true faith, and true faith must do more, or
else an hypocrites faith were as good as the faith of an Elect person: Yea,

3. Mr. Air acknowledges that one is in Christ before another, as he is
called and converted really, or in appearance; if really converted, then really
in Christ, then let us take it for granted, that Andronicus and Junia were in
Christ really before Paul, then Paul was not in Christ; for if he were really
in Christ, this cannot be true that they were really in Christ before him, for
he was in Christ, and that really (according to Master Air) from eternity.

But I desire Mr. Air to let us see the Scriptures, and hear his grounds for a
twofold union to Christ, and both real unions, one from eternity, the other at
conversion or faith, and if he prove it, -- Erit mihi magnus Apollo.

In the last place I shall now take notice of what he says to that Logical
Axiom, Non entis nulla sunt accidentia, in his Book page 7. where I desire the
Reader to observe his mistake, for I applied it to union with Christ, he to the
imputed righteousness of Christ. I said that union with Christ, is a thing
accidental to man, and that being an accident, requires that the subject
united, of whom this is denominated that he is united to Christ, must be
existent, because an accident cannot subsist without its subject; whether it be
an accident by inhesion, or adhesion, both subsist dependently, and without the
subject they subsist not; concerning union, he objecteth nothing from this
Axiom, therefore I will hear what he says concerning imputed righteousness.

Object. He says, It does not follow that Christ's righteousness cannot be
imputed to us, before we have an actual created being, because accidents cannot
subsist without their subjects: For as much as imputed righteousness is not an
accident inherent in us, and consequently does not require our existence;
Christ is the subject of this righteousness, and the imputation of it is an
act of God.

Answ. What if imputed righteousness be not an accident inherent, but an act
of God; yet in relation to us, it is an accident by extrinsecall denomination;
and when it is imputed to us, it is terminated upon us, and we are denominated,
and constituted righteous by it, and therefore it requires as much our
existence, as if it were an inherent accident; for can he be made righteous and
truly denominated so, that is not a man, nor any thing in rerum natura? can any
thing be predicated truly of that which is not? can Paul be said to be learned,
before he had a being? Surely this Axiom, Non entis nullae sunt affectiones,
will be an unshaken truth when you and I shall cease to speak for it, or
against it. I have spoken to the Logic of it, and Mr. Baxter to the Divinity
of it; and who ever read it, will find it to be (as he has justly styled it)
a very odd passage: only this I shall add; We are speaking of imputed
righteousness, and he says, Christ is the subject of it, if he mean of the
righteousness imputed, he says true; but if of the righteousness as imputed,
it is a very odd passage indeed; for what need that to be imputed to Christ,
which is subjectively inherent in him already; but take this righteousness as
imputed, and so we are the subjects recipient of it, or the objects upon whom
it is terminated, and therefore it necessarily requires our existence. Now to
justify the imputation of Christ's righteousness to us before we have a being,
he urges that of the Apostle, Romans 4.17. that God calls things that are not,
as though they were: to this I shall give that answer which Davenant de morte
Christi, Davenant de morte Christi. page 61.
page 61. puts into my mouth: Quanquam Deo quidem tanquam jam facta sint, quae
ille ut fiaent ab omni aeternitate disposuit, nobis tamen non aliter accipienda
sunt, nisi secundum modum illum dispensationis, quo ab aeterno decreta, and in
tempore complenda nobis and in actum perducenda sunt: Although truly to God
those things are as if they were now done, (because nothing is past, present,
and to come with him,) which he has decreed that they should be, and ordained
them from all eternity; yet to us they are not otherwise to be taken, then
according to that manner of dispensation, wherein they were decreed and in time
to be fulfilled to us, and to be brought into act.

Mr Air objecteth further that the righteousness of Christ was actually
imputed to the Patriarchs before it was wrought, and our sins were actually
imputed to Christ before they were committed; so I see no inconvenience to say
that Christ's righteousness is by God imputed to the Elect before they have a
being.

To which I answer, there is not the like reason; for both the righteousness
of Christ, and the sins of the Elect are both moral causes of their effects,
which work according to the will and pleasure of him that is moved thereby;
hence God the Father is moved to give pardon to such as believe, as an effect
of Christ's death, and it is at the will of God when to give it, therefore the
effect sometimes goes before the cause; as if a man promise to give a man five
shillings for going so far upon his errand, the man may give it before he
has taken a step, though he give it only for that reason, here the effect
goes before the cause; and thus he gave pardon to such as did believe in
Christ before his death. Sometimes it follows after it, and not immediately
always; thus God pardons us that believe, since the death of Christ, and
that not from the time of Christ's death, but it may be long after upon
believing, and so our sins were a moral cause of punishment; God might impute
this to Christ before they are committed by us; for a moral cause will admit
of the effect to go before it self, that is the cause of it, and both the
Patriarchs to whom Christ's righteousness was imputed, and Christ to whom our
sins were imputed, were existent; and the merit of the one, and demerit of the
other may be communicated at the will of God moved thereby, because there are
subjects capable of this imputation; but now Christ's righteousness which is
imputed to us, cannot be imputed, for want of a subject to whom it may be
imputed; for how can that which is not, be made righteous? and it is the will
of God it should be imputed to none but Believers; hence then till faith, this
benefit is not enjoyed.

Thus have I vindicated my second argument, and for the third which he
objecteth against, That God made a Covenant with Christ, that the Elect should
have no benefit by his death, till they believe, I have defended and confirmed
that already sufficiently. As for this Argument which he brought for the
Negative, drawn from Matthew. 3.17. This is my well beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; I hope I have given a satisfactory answer to it already, and it
is answer enough to deny his Assumption, as I then did, that this voice, This
is my well beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, was not terminated or spoken
to Christ mystical, but to Christ personal, yet as a public person and
Mediator. And to make Christ mystical, and Christ the Mediator the same, is
unheard of Divinity; nor does it speak him any great Gamaliel in Theology that
affirms it. As for the scandal he raises upon me, that I compared my self
to Christ, and him to Judas, and used him uncivilly in language; I deny it, and
have many to bear witness of me to the contrary; and for the answer to it, I
refer the Reader to the Epistle to the Reader: And I now shall address my
self to some short answer to his Book, and as by the grace of Christ I have not
hitherto (my conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost) written any
thing which I knew, or suspected as unsound, so I trust I shall not err, or
handle this subject deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commend my
self to every man's conscience, as in the sight of God, to whom I commend thee,
Religious Reader, and to the Word of his grace, who is able to build thee up,
and give thee an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ.

CHAP. IV. Showing four material differences between us, and M. Air, wherein
he has departed from the Orthodox faith, concerning the Doctrine of free
Justification of a sinner through Faith in Christ, reduced unto four several
Questions, which are in this Chapter clearly stated.
THE Doctrine of Justification through Faith in Christ, is deservedly styled
Doctrina stantis vel cadentis Ecclesiae, and therefore the differences amongst
Christians in this point, are not of so small concernment, as Curcellaeus
judges, that they ought not to breed a Controversy, for it is a fundamental
Article of our Christian Religion; yea, all Religion lives, or dies with it,
nothing concerns the glory of God more, the honor of Christ, or the comfort
of a Christian, and such goats as shall soil with their feet these waters,
Ezekiel. 34.18.
or with the Philistines throw dirt into this well, do at once strike at the
glory of God, the honor of Christ, the peace and safety of the world; and
being commanded to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the
Saints, let not the world wonder, that I who am by Mr. Air represented as
Heterodox in this point, stand up both to defend it, and my self against those
errors, wherewith he has darkened and obscured this blessed truth, and
endeavored to render me and his Brethren that dissent from him, as those that
have overthrown the freeness of Gods grace, in making Justification the effect
of Faith, and Faith the condition of the Covenant of Grace. The matters in
controversy depending between us may be reduced to four Heads, or unto four
several Questions.

1. Whether Justification be an immanent, or a transient act? whether it be
from eternity, or a transient act of God done in time?

2. Whether all the Elect for whom Christ died, be actually justified, and
reconciled to God antecedently, not only to their faith, but to their birth?

3. Whether a Believer be justified by faith instrumentally? and when the
Scripture says, we are justified by faith, whether this is understood only
tropically, by taking faith for the object, Christ? or whether it be taken
subjectively for the act with connotation to the object?

4. Whether faith be the condition of the Covenant of Grace, God has made with
us?

For the first Question, Whether Justification be an immanent or transient act?
whether we be justified from eternity, or whether it be a transient act of God
done in time? Here are three terms to be explicated.

1. What Justification is? 2. What an immanent act is? 3. What is meant by a
transient act?
1. Then by all the Orthodox it is unanimously affirmed, that the word
justify, or justification, is not to be taken in this question, sensu
Pontificio, as the Papists take it, that is, sensu Physico, in a physical
sense, as if to justify signified to make just by infusion of an inherent
righteousness, as Bellarmine and his confederates take it; for till
Etymologies have gotten the supremacy above the Scriptures, as the Pope above
the Kings of the Earth; and so long as the written Word is acknowledged the
only Touchstone of divine Truth, and that Christ's righteousness, and our works
cannot be admitted as corrivals, that sense must no way be acknowledged and
received in this dispute; yet let this be observed against this new Doctrine of
Infidels Justification in the state of their unregeneracy; (though they remain
adulterers, murderers, parricides; yet if Elect, say they, they are justified
even then, when they are in the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.2.
led captive by him at his will and pleasure. Though they walk according to the
course of the world, the Spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience: for, Mr. Air acknowledges he is well pleased with the
unregenerate, though not with their unregeneracy. That GOD when he justifies a
man through the righteousness of Christ imputed, does at the same time begin
to justify him physically, he does infuse an habitual and an inherent
righteousness of Sanctification; for God justifies none, whom he does not
sanctify at the same time.

Secondly, Justification may be taken sensu forensi, in a juridical or
judiciary sense, as in Romans 8 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? it is God that justifies, Prove. 17.35. He that justifies the wicked,
and condemns the just, they both are an abomination to the Lord. And so it is
opposed to accusation, or condemnation, and thus it is an act of God judicially
declaring a Believer to be innocent or righteous, and acquitting him from all
blame and punishment. I need not spend time to open this, it is sufficiently
done already by our Justificatio est sententia Dei gratiosa, qua^ propter
Christum fide apprehensum absolvit fidelem a peccato and morte, and justum
reputat ad vitam. Ames. Medul. chapter 27. sect. 6.
Divines against the Papists; Justification therefore is a gracious sentence of
God the Father, whereby for Christ's sake apprehended by faith, he does absolve a
sinner from sin and death, and does esteem him righteous unto eternal life. It
is a sentence pronounced, as the use of the word declares, which makes not a
natural, but a moral change in the person justified; for it is not as Aquinas
and his followers imagine, a physical motion by a real transmutation from a
state of unrighteousness to a state of righteousness; so as that the term
from which this motion is, should be sin, the term unto which it tends, and
ends in, should be inherent righteousness, as if it stood partly in remission,
and partly in infusion of righteousness: What act this is, I will declare by
and by; or let me describe it thus with Mr. Hooker, It is an act of God the
Father upon the Believer, whereby the debt and sins of a Believer are charged
upon the Lord Jesus, and by the merits and satisfaction of Christ imputed, he
is accounted just, and so is acquitted before God as righteous.

First, It is an act of God the Father, a judicial act acquitting and absolving
the sinner, and an act of God the Father, (not to exclude the Son and Holy
Ghost;) for Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, The works of the Trinity
terminated upon the creature, are communicable to all three persons. For the
Son and Holy Ghost were offended by man's sin, as well as the Father, being one
and the same God with the Father; but it is called an act of the Father, and
rightly applied to him, because of that old and known rule among Divines,
Wheresoever we find the Name of God put in opposition to Jesus Christ, it must
not be understood essentially, but personally: Hence when it is said, God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their sins, and that
God sent forth him, to wit Christ, a propitiation through faith in his blood,
it must be understood of God the Father; and so, John 3.16. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, etc. And plainly Christ says, Father, forgive them, etc.
And Christ is an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 1.2. Now it is applied to the
Father, because the sin of Adam was directly against the Fathers work, for Vt
res se habent ad esse, ita ad operari, every thing does work according to its
being. Now the Father being the first person in the Trinity, he works in order
first, and hence Creation is attributed to the Father, and Redemption
attributed to the Son, and Sanctification to the Holy Spirit. Now Adams sin
was directly against the Fathers work, for his work appeared in Adams Creation
after the Image of God; therefore the Father being principally offended,
forgives.

Secondly, It is an act of God the Father upon the Believer, therefore it was
not an immanent, but is a transient act done in time; for a man is not a man,
much less a Believer from eternity; and what this act is, I shall here a
little explain.

It is some act of God done upon believing, and never till then, for although
we acknowledge no new imm^nent act in God, which cannot be admitted without a
change in God, with whom there can be no variableness, nor the least shadow of
turning; yet a transient act may be safely acknowledged, which leaves a change
upon the creature, and not in God.

And here I willingly acknowledge we are all much in the dark, not being able
to understand how God does act or work, and therefore would not
over-confidently assert how he does it, or what that transient act is; but when
God works faith, I am sure there is a moral change wrought in the sinner;
there is not only a new relation put upon the sinner, but a real
righteousness is imputed; yea, a physical change is wrought at the same time,
for all grace habitually is infused together with faith,

And I willingly acknowledge this transient act of God does presuppose an
immanent act in God, for he works nothing upon the creature, but what he
first purposed in himself to act; and God does upon believing actually remit
sins, and accept as righteous the person that believes, which terms of
remitting sin, not imputing it, or imputing righteousness, though they sound
as immanent acts, yet are to be sensed as transient, because done in time, and
leaving a real change upon the creature, and it is utterly impossible that any
new act of understanding, or will should be in God, unless therefore with
Vorstius we assert the mutability of God, which is horrible blasphemy to
imagine, we cannot acknowledge any new immanent act in him. And the truth is;
we must with sobriety sit down, and count it knowledge enough to know what is
written, and be contented that an infinite God should do something* which our
finite understandings cannot comprehend; for if he shall act or do nothing, but
we must know how it is done, and why, this is to make God finite and not
infinite. And to give in the utmost of my thoughts in this, I conceive the case
is in this transient act of forgiveness, as in the creation of the world; God
did do that which he did not do before, but he did not then begin to have a
will to create; but he willed from eternity that the world should exist in
time, as an effect of that will it was made, whether by an executive power
distinct from that will, I dare not determine; but made it was, and was not
from eternity, and here is a new relation unto God, he is a Creator that
before was not, this is but a relative respect, and an extrinsecal
denomination, and there is no intrinsecall mutation in God, but a great change
is wrought; for that that was not, now is.

So when God forgiveth a sinner upon believing, God does do that which he did
not do before; he does not begin upon believ ng to have a will to pardon him,
but he willed from eternity to give him faith, and forgiveness of sins upon
believing; now in time the sinner elected is brought to faith, and the sinner
is actually and formally discharged, according to the tenor of the New
Covenant, for the righteousness of Christ apprehended and applied by faith,
not by any new act of Gods will; I dare not determine, but pardoned he is, and
justified he is, his state is truly changed, and that coram Deo, in the sight
of God, and a new relative relation there is in God to this person, as a
Father; a great change wrought in the sinner, but none at all in God; and the
Believer is the subject, upon whom this act of God passes, Acts 13.39. Acts
16.31. Romans 4.24. John 8.24. John 3.36, 16. John 17.20.
he is the adequate subject of it; for all Believers are thus justified, and
none but Believers. God did not will that our sins should be immediately
forgiven, but mediately by faith, as in John 3.16. Gods end in giving Christ,
was that only. Believers should have benefit by his death; and John 17.20.
Christ prays for them that believe on him; and surely he had the same
intentions in his death that he had in his intercession. And I added that the
sins of Believeres were laid upon Christ; thus Christ was made sin for us, 2
Cor. 5.21. Isa. 53.16.
that knew no sin, and the Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us all, and by
the merits and satisfaction of Christ imputed we are accounted just, and so are
acquitted before God as righteous: Hence God is said to be in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their transgressions to them, 2
Cor. 5.
and we are said to be justified freely by his grace through the redemption
that is in Jesus, Romans 3.24, 25. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood: And,
Christ is made to us righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and redemption.

I shall now come to enquire what is meant by an immanent act, and whether
Justification were from eternity, and what is meant by a transient act.

First, Then by an immanent act, I understand such an act, as is terminated in
agente, in the agent, and not in any thing without it. There are some actions
which do remain in God, and are terminated in himself, being confined in his
own breast, within the compass of his own understanding and will; not but that
they may have an external object, but nothing in these immanent acts has any
thing without them for the subject or term.

As for example, a man may purpose and intend to do something in his mind and
heart, as to relieve a poor man's wants; this thought and purpose of heart is an
immanent action, and so long as it remains in his mind and breast, and he
reveal it not, and do not yet act accordingly, this is yet an immanent action,
and the poor man is not yet actually the better for it; but if he declare his
mind, and does practice what he intended, here is a transient act, for now he
does outwardly express and perform what he did inwardly purpose: Now the poor
man is comforted, and his wants actually relieved; Let us refer this to God,
there are some Cabinet, secret thoughts, and purposes in God from eternity,
about justifying a sinner through the righteousness of Christ apprehended and
applied by faith, which Christ God will prepare and give to procure a
sufficient righteousness, and will also give faith to the sinner, to believe
on Christ for salvation; Such thoughts as these are, were in the mind of God
from eternity; these thoughts were immanent acts in God, and work no present
change upon the sinner, who had no being from eternity; and until God do
actually declare, and fulfill the thoughts of his heart, the sinner is not
justified, but only God really intends it.

Secondly, There are actions in God which pass from God upon the creature, and
do work a change and alteration upon the creature, and these we call transient
actions; when therefore God does not only declare by his Gospel, what his
thoughts were to his Elect in pardoning them through faith in Christ, but does
in time give Christ for them, and them to Christ, by drawing their hearts unto
Christ's by faith; now God actually performs the thoughts of his heart, and as
he intended upon believing to justify them for Christ's sake, so now as soon as
he has brought them to faith, he does actually forgive them all their sins,
justify their persons, and accept them as righteous in Christ. Now of this
sort are all Gods actions that relate to man, except Predestination, which is
an immanent act of God; and all the rest; Justification, Sanctification,
Adoption, are transient acts of God: for all these imply a positive change in
the creature, and do put something, either physically, or morally into the
justified, adopted, sanctified, etc. But concerning Predestination, Tritum est
in Scholis, eam nihil ponere in Praedestinato; It is generally received by the
Schoolmen, that Predestination puts nothing into the predestinate, or makes no
present change (indeed virtually it is the cause of all those transient actions
that are done in time). And Aquin. p. 1. q. 13. artic. 2. c.
Aquinas gives a reason of it; Quia Praedestinatio est pars Providentiae,
Providentia vero non est in rebus provisis, sed est quaedam ratio in intellectu
provisoris; Because Predestination is a part of Divine Providence: Now
Providence is not in the things foreseen, or provided for; but is a certain
purpose, or counsel in the understanding of the foreseer. And hence all our
Divines are wont cautelously to distinguish between the decree and the
execution of the decree; they grant the Decree has no cause but the free will
and wise prudence of God; but the Execution of the Decree depends upon faith,
because Pardon, Reconciliation, is granted to none but Believers.

Let me add in the third place, that an immanent action is from eternity, and
is the same with Gods Essence; for whatsoever is in God, is God, but a
transient action is the same with the effect produced: Hence Gods Decrees are,
as Mr. Burgess Mr. Burgess, Justifi. p. 168.
rightly observes, the same with his nature; for an act of Gods understanding
or will, is not any thing distinct from his understanding or will, but the very
same with it. Scheib. Met, l. 2. ca. 3. De Deo. p. 137.
Actus vitales Dei, ut est ejus intellectio, and volitio, habent ibi realem
identitatem ad essentiam divinam; All vital actions in God, as his
understanding and will are, have a real identity, or samenesse with his Divine
Essence, for otherwise the simplicity of Gods nature would be overthrown:
therefore though we may conceive distinctly of them, yet they are not really
distinguished in God. But now in transient actions it is otherwise, for they
are the same with the effect produced; Mr. Air will have it to be an immanent
action done from eternity, not a transient act done in timo.
Gods transient act in creating, is Creation, and in justifying, is
Justification. By this that has been said, it appears that Justification is
a transient, not an immanent action. For though I deny not that God did from
eternity, with an absolute, fixed, and immutable will, purpose in time to
justify his people through faith in Christ, which faith he will also give, and
Christ did merit; and if this will satisfy Mr. Air, as he says it will, if
he be not a Reuben, as unstable as water, and fall from his word, the
controversy is at an end.]

Yet this is not Justification, no more then Gods purpose to sanctify is
Sanctification, as shall be made to appear in its place; Justification leaves
a positive change upon the person justified, He is thereby passed from death to
life, from a state of hatred into a state of love and friendship; but an
immanent act leaves no such change, nor do I mean with Aquinas and the
Papists, a physical change; as when the Lord makes a wicked man, a holy man;
an unclean man, a chaste man; a passionate man, a meek man; this is a natural
change, and is the work of Sanctification; but it is a relative and moral
change. Take a man that is in prison for some capital offense, and also
exceeding sick, a double change may be wrought upon this man: First, let his
offense be forgiven, and he set at liberty, he is now a free man, acquitted,
and set at liberty, that before was in bond, a dead man; here is a relative
change, but he may be as sick still as he was, when in prison; let the
Physician come and heal his distemper, here is a cure wrought, his health
restored, this is a natural, physical change; so it is here upon Justification,
there is a relative change wrought; We that were debtors to the Law, and liable
to death and condemnation, our sin through faith in Christ is pardoned, now we
are acquitted and set free from condemnation, here is a change of our estate;
but then also by Sanctification the Lord heales our natures. Now Justification
is a transient act of God in time upon the Believer, acquitting him for Christ's
sake from the guilt of sin, and through his righteousness imputed, he is
accepted unto life eternal.

The second Question is, Whether all the Elect for whom Christ died, be
actually reconciled, and justified from the time of Christ's death, antecedently
not only to their faith, but their birth also?

1. It is not denied upon neither hand, that the Elect are the persons, and the
only persons for whom Christ intentionally and effectually died.

2. It is not denied that the death of Christ is the meritorious cause of
salvation, and that a full satisfaction was made thereby to the justice of God
for the sins of the Elect.

3. It is acknowledged that Christ in his death was a common person, making
satisfaction for the Elect, and such as shall believe; and by virtue of Christ's
death they shall infallibly be brought to faith, and that God has thus far
accepted of this satisfaction, as that he neither will, nor can require any
thing more at the hand of the sinner by way of satisfaction, nor at the hands
of Christ, and that in regard of the price paid we are redeemed.

4. It will not be denied but that by the death of Christ God may now freely
give us the pardon of sins, which without the satisfaction of Christ, supposing
his eternal decree not to pardon us without a satisfaction, he could not do.

5. We deny not but Christ's Resurrection from the dead, was a manifest sign,
that the full price of redemption was paid, and that God gave him a public
discharge from the guilt of our sins, and that he rose again as a public
person for our justification, that we may be said virtually to die, and suffer,
and rise with him, and virtually to be justified in his justification. But it
is denied by us, and affirmed by Mr. Air, that we stand actually justified,
and reconciled to God from the time of Christ's death antecedently to our faith
and birth, and that it was the will of the Lord to give us a present discharge
from the time of Christ's death, but God has limited the benefit of this until
faith: So that no person in the state of unbelief and unregeneracy, is a
subject of Justification; this we affirm, and Mr. Air denies, who will have
all the Elect, though Infidels, and in their unregenerate estate, under the
power and dominion of sin to be actually justified.

The third question is, Whether a believer be justified by faith
instrumentally? and when the Scripture says, we are justified by faith,
whether this be understood tropically by taking faith for the object Christ,
excluding the act, or whether it be taken properly for the act with connotation
of the Object.

Now here first it is agreed upon all hands, by Pretestants and Papists,
Orthodox and Socinians, Antinomians, Remonstrants and Contraremonstrants, that
it is plainly ass^rted in Scripture, that we are justified by faith. It cannot
be denied, because it is syllabically written, the only contention is about the
sense. I would there were more contending for the Grace, then for the right
understanding of the Word.

1. Then to believe signifies an act of the understanding, yielding assent unto
Divine Testimony; but because the will Ames. Med. cap. 3. Number. 2^
consequently is moved by that assent, to embrace the good assented unto, and
offered in the Gospel, therefore faith that is truly saving and justifying,
consists in both faculties; therefore we reject their opinion, that will have
it to be only an act of the understanding, yielding a true Wotton, De reconci.
lib. 1. par. 1. c. 13. n. 1. p. 78.
assent to Divine Testimony upon the authority of the Revealer; though this be
necessary to salvation, this comprehends not the whole nature of justifying
faith, which is seated in the heart; for with the heart man believes unto
salvation.

Nor, 2. Can we rest in their opinion who define it by assurance, and say, it
is an assurance grounded upon Divine Promises, that Christ died for us in
particular, and that our sins are forgiven. For this assurance is a consequent
of faith, and Justfication, and an Proprium objectum fidei justificantis est
Christus vel miscricordia De^ in Christo, non propositio sive Axioma, Ames.
Bell. Ener. Tom. 4. Lib. 5. Cap. 2. Sect. 22.
Axiom or Proposition is not the object of faith, but Christ; and it is a
relying upon Christ for pardon, not a believing that I am already pardoned; it
is therefore a Fider est acquiescentia cordis in Deo tanquam in authore vitae
vel salutis aeternae, ut per illum ab omni malo liberemur and omne bonum
consequamur. Ames. Medul. c. 3. number. 1.
fiducial act or recumbency upon God in Christ for pardon.

3. It is questioned, Ames. Medull. c 27. de justificat. n. 15, 16.
whether Faith in the point of Justification of a sinner, be to be taken
tropically, or properly? Master Air will have it to be taken tropically only,
and in a figurative sense; for the obedience of Jesus Christ, and his
righteousness, by excluding faith; so that by faith with him is as much as by
Christ, or by the righteousness of Christ. To which I answer, that we deny not
but faith is to be taken metonymicaly, when we speak of the matter of our
righteousness, for which we are justified; and in this sense we are not
justified by faith, that is, the grace of faith, as the matter of our
righteousness, for it is no where said that we are justified for our faith,
(...), though it be often said we are justified (...), by our faith, tanquam
per organum, as an instrument, of which by and by. And therefore our Divines do
acknowledge, we are justified by faith objectively taken; but to take faith
altogether for Christ, and to deny it as an instrument of applying Christ's
righteousness, was never the meaning of our Divines, and it were altogether
irrational to imagine, as if by faith were meant Christ, excluding faith from
Justification; for as it is an instrumental cause, which our Divines
unanimously acknowledge, it is taken subjectively for the act and grace of
faith it self; And thus Ames. Med. Theol. cap. 27. sect. 14.
Ames says, Est autem haec justificatio propter Christum, non absolute
consideratum, quo sensu Christus est causa ipsius vocationis, sed propter
Christum fide apprehensum: This Justification for Christ is not for Christ
absolutely considered, in which sense Christ is the cause also of vocation, but
for Christ apprehended by faith; so that Christ alone absolutely considered
does not justify. Musc. Loc. Com v. Artic. in quo justifice mur.
So Musculus expressly, Quaerendum est hoc loco quo medio justificemur, Deoque
reconciliemur. Est autem duplex medium in hac causa, unum in quo justificamur,
alterum per quod justificationis hujus gratiam apprehend^mus; utrumque
necessarium est, neutrum enim sine altero justificat: We must seek in this
place by what means we are justified and reconciled to God. But here is a
double means in this cause, one in whom we are justified, another by which we
receive this grace of Justification; both are necessary, neither justifies
without the other. Musc. in loc. Com. de justifi. Artic. in quo justificemur.
And so Calvin, Inst. l. 3. 11. number. 7.
Calvin calls it the instrumental cause of Justification. Sciendum est esse
causam instrumentalem duntaxat, instrumentum scilicet percipiendae justitiae
qua justificamur: We must know therefore it is only an isntrumental cause, to
wit, an instrument of receiving that righteousness by which we are justified.
It were endless to reckon up all that give in their suffrage Willet. in
Synopsi, Art. 6. De fide, p. 982.
for this instrumentality of faith for Justification; only I shall add one
Author more, Mr. Rutherford in his Apologetical Exercitations, because Mr. Air
alleges him in defense of his opinion, that he says, Perkins Reformed Cath.
Differ. 2. We say otherwise, faith justifies, because it is a supernatural
instrument, etc. p. 5 0 vol. 1. Chemnit. and Bucan. and Ursin. and Scheib. Met.
de causa, c. 22. Titu. 784.
that fides non est organica causa divinae satisfactionis, etc. which is true
and rightly alleged; yet he says to the act of justifying, Subordinatur fides
tanquam organica causa, Ruth. Apol. Exe^. p. 37. and more to this purpose, page
51, 52. And faith is an instrument, because it has the properties of an
instrument, prima est, ut subsit alicui.

And the first is, that it be subservient to the superior agent, by whom it is
directed; thus it is an instrument wrought by God, the pcincipal efficient
cause of Justification, and is subservient to his act of justifying us, and
directed by him to this end.

Secondly, That it has an influx into the effect of the principal agent by a
proper causality, and that is by receiving Christ offered. I see no danger in
making it such an instrument; for we are not said to justify our selves,
because this grace is wrought of God. And what if man be causa secunda, Ep^es.
2.8.
yet is he not therefore a second cause between God and the action, for God
does immediately work it, and man is purely passive in respect of the habit;
and although we might answer, that the act of receiving is equivalent to a
suffering, being a renouncing of all our own righteousness, and so
acknowledge it as a passive instrument only, yet for my part I look upon it as
a lively active instrument of Justification, as Ball, Covenant of Grace. page
19.
Mr. Ball does, which is amongst the number of true causes, and that it is not
only causa sine qua non, a cause without which the thing is not done, which
indeed is no cause at all, for that is only present in the action, and does
nothing therein; but as the eye is, as Mr. Ball observes, an active instrument
for sight, and the ear for hearing, so is faith for justifying: If it be
demanded, whose instrument it is; it is the instrument of the soul, wrought by
the Holy Ghost, and is the free gift of God.

Nor do I fear hereby to be made the Author of our Justification, or to be
made injurious to God or Christ, seeing faith is wholly Gods work, though our
act, and it has this place and office of receiving Christ unto Justification
by the appointment of God himself; Ephesians. 2, 8,
and upon this account alone the Apostle acknowledges, though we be saved by
faith, yet it is no less of free grace, because, it is the gift of God.

The fourth and last Question is, Whether Faith be the condition of the
Covenant of Grace?

1. Here we must enquire; what is the Covenant of Grace?

2. In what sense Faith is the condition of the Covenant?

First, What is the Covenant of Grace?

The Covenant of Grace, is that free gracious Covenant of reconciliation, which
God of his mere mercy in Jesus Christ made with man fallen into sin and misery,
wherein he has promised pardon of sin, and eternal happiness by Christ, upon
condition that he Mark. 16.15, 16. John 3.16. Romans 10.6, 9, 10. Gal. 3.11.
believe in Christ, promising also to give unto all those that are Acts 13.48.
John 6.44.
ordained unto life, his Holy Spirit to enable them to believe, and so He will
be their God, and they shall be his people.

The Covenant of grace under the Old and New Testament, is for substance one
and the same under various dispensations. Gal 3.16, 17.
The distance between God and man is so great; that although the reasonable
creature do owe obedience to his Creator, yet he could never have God obliged
to him to give him fruition of himself, and eternal happiness, but by some
voluntary act of condescension on Gods part, which is expressed by way of
Covenant; there is not therefore a mutual obligation of debt between God and
man, for that is founded on equality; but there is no such equality between God
and the creature, much less between God and the sinner; it is therefore a free
Covenant that God makes with man, and of his abundant rich grace in Christ.
The Author of this Covenant is God, our merciful Father in Christ-Jesut; the
impulsive moving cause from within, was his own free love; the outward moving
cause was man's misery, and Christ's merits: Ezekiel. 16.6.
When I passed by thee, I saw thee polluted in thy own blood, I said unto thee,
live. The fall of man was the occasion of this Covenant; God permitted man to
fall, that he might show the abundant riches of his mercy in our redemption.
For mercy might have freed us from misery by preventing our fall; but the
exceeding abundance of Gods rich mercy, is more seen in recovering us out of
the misery into which we were fallen. And the grace of God was much seen in the
time of giving this Covenant at the very fall, before judgment was given upon
the delinquents, that they might not be swallowed up with wrath, and before
Satan had made too great a waste upon the creation, and especially upon man
drawn by his temptation into condemnation with himself.

This Covenant was made with Christ, Vide The Assemb. larger Catechism.
and in him with all that believe; for since God and man were separated by sin,
there was no Covenant could pass between them, With Christ personal, that is,
considered as a public person; but not with Christ mystically considered.
but in and through a Mediator reconciling both parties: The first Covenant
was a Covenant of friendship, the friendship between God and man was broken off
by sin, this is a Covenant of reconciliation: There is no reconciliation to God
but by Christ, therefore this Covenant was made in Christ, and for the sake of
Christ with us; so that there are three parties contracting. 1. God the party
offended. 2. Man the party offending. 3. Christ the Mediator between both. The
Scripture says, Gal. 3.16.
The promise (or Covenant) was made to Abraham and his seed. He says not, And
to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ. This
Christ was not Christ mystical, as Beza, Piscator, and many expound it, as Mr.
Rutherford has well observed; but Christ personal. The reason which they
allege is, because if it be meant of Christ personally considered, so it would
not agree with the scope of Paul, who proves that life eternal is promised to
all Believers. 2. It would follow say, they, that life eternal is given to
Christ only. But with their leave, says Ruth. Trial and Triumph of Faith,
Sermon. 7. page 5^.
Mr. Rutherford, this is not sure; for the truth is, the promise is not made to
Christ's person singly considered, nor to Christ mystical: For, 1. The promise
is made to Christ, in whom the Covenant was confirmed, verse. 17. 2. In whom the
Nations were blessed, verse. 14.3. In whom we receive the Promise of the Spirit
through faith, verse. 15. Who was made a curse for us, ver. 13. Now, not any of
these can agree to Christ mystical; Christ mystical did not confirm the
Covenant, nor give the Spirit, nor was he made a curse: but Christ Mediator is
he to whom the promises are made, and in him to all his heirs and kindred, not
simply in his person, but as a public person, and Mediator; and upon
believing we are truly in him, and so Abraham's seed, and so heirs according to
the promise. And here it will be good to consider the relations of Christ to
this Covenant: 1. Heb. 8.6.
As he is the middle person between contrary parties, he is the Mediator of the
Covenant. 2. As he deals between both parties, Mal. 3.1. Heb. 7.22.
he is internuncius, the Messenger of the Covenant. 3. As he undertaketh for
the parties at variance, he is the surety of the Covenant. And, Heb. 9.16, 17,
Isa. 55.4. Rev. 1.5.
4. As he signeth the Covenant, and confirms it with his blood, he is the
Testatour of the Covenant. 5. As he saw, and heard, and testifies all that the
Father has promised to believers, he is the witness of the Covenant.

Now as the Covenant was made with Christ in the behalf of the Elect, yet it
follows not they were in Covenant before they believe, for God Covenanted
with Christ to be their God that shall believe in him; hence until we believe,
we are not actually in Covenant with God; and Christ contracted with the
Father, not only to die for us, but to bring us to faith; he is a surety to see
the condition of the Covenant performed on our part; and therefore we must be
brought to faith before God is properly said to be in Covenant with us, and
faith then is the condition of the Covenant in reference unto us.

Now in what sense faith is the condition of the Covenant, I shall here
explain.

First, Faith is not the condition of the Covenant in a Popish sense, as if by
the performing this condition of believing we did merit, and earn eternal life,
and salvation were the wages of faith, and God ex debito bound to give it.

Secondly, Faith is not an Antecedaneous condition, Dicunt nostri fidem non
esse conditionemmo ventem Dei voluntatem, and tamen salutem nostram esse
conditionatam quod est verissimum; nam Deus non vult nobis aliam vitam quam
quae antecedanem habet fidem, and tamen nullo modo movetur Dei voluntas a fide
nostra. Ruth. Apol. Exerc. p. 3^4.
moving God to give Christ to redeem us, and to propound the Gospel to us, as
if God did not, or could not propound the Covenant of Grace to us, nor offer
the Covenant to us till we believe; the price of redemption was paid without
any condition that it should be paid, though not without a condition for the
application of it.

Thirdly, We do not understand faith a condition in an Arminian sense; for such
a condition by way of contract and bargain, by a free voluntary act of our
own, performed by the power of free will, withour the predeterminating and
assisting grace of Christ, by virtue of which God is oblidged to save us, and
give us the benefits of the Covenant. We take it not in such a juridicall
sense, as the Jurists do, for a condition in a strict proper sense, upon which
the benefits of the Covenant depend; nor do we take it in that manner, as the
first Covenant did, that as our works personally performed by us in obedience
to the whole Law, were the condition of the Covenant, and the matter of our
righteousness, that so the To credere, or act of believing performed by us,
should stand instead of the righteousness of the Law, in whole as the
Arminians, and in part as the Papists.

But we take faith for a condition in this sense, for an Evangelicall
qualification wrought in us by the grace of Christ, without which we are not
justified nor saved, and shall not enjoy the benefits and blessings of the new
Covenant, as a cause of life, not efficiently, as works in the old Covenant,
but instrumentally by applying by Gods order and constitution Christ and his
benefits to the Believer: And thus the Scripture says, He that believes shall
be saved, he that believes not shall be damned, and that the wrath of God
abides on him There it was, and there it shall rest, till by faith it be
removed.
; works are required as conditions of those that shall be saved, but faith is a
condition of Justification. And because this faith is freely given, salvation
is no less of free grace, then if this condition were not required; nor is it
absurd that the same thing should be freely promised of God, and yet required
as a duty of us; it is we are bound to believe and repent, and yet faith is Gods
gift, and Christ is exalted as a Prince and a Savior to give repentance unto
his people for remission of sins.

CHAP. V. Containing a brief description of M. Eyre's opinion, showing wherein
he departs from the Orthodox faith, together with a brief Synopsis of the
several errors, unsound opinions, and selfe-contradictions, that he has
entangled himself in, in the defending of his error of eternal Justification.
HE is an unfit man to establish another in the truth, who himself is l ke a
Reed shaken with the wind, inconstant to himself, Vide Mr. Air, page 62.
as well as disagreeing from the truth; such in this Chapter shall the Reader
find Mr Air, (so far as relates to his Book) I trust in Christ to manifest;
and therefore let the judicious Reader observe and judge. Now for his opinion,
as far as I can gather from his Book, I conceive it to be this:

First, He says that Justification in Scripture is taken variously, pro
volitione Divina, and pro re volita.

1. For the will of God not to punish, or impute sin unto his people: And,

2. For the effect of Gods will, to wit, his not punishing, or his setting of
them free from the curse of the Law; that is, Justification is taken by him
actively, for Gods eternal will not to punish, and passively for the effect of
that will, as it is terminated upon the Elect, or Believer. And he says, that
he looks upon Dr Twisse 's judgment as most accurate, who places the very
essence and quiddity of Justification in the will of God not to punish. Wherein
first let the Reader observe his departing from the received judgment of all
Orthodox Divines, except three or four, in making Gods eternal will to be that
wherein the Essence of Justification consists; it is well known that
unanimously they agree, that Justification is not an immanent, but a transient
act done in time: And the Scripture no where calls Gods eternal will
Justification; and if the essence and quiddity of Justification consist in
this, it is marvel the Scripture should never call it so; and so often as the
Scripture speaks of Justification, should speak of it in an improper sense,
passively taken, as terminated upon us. Besides, the will of God not to punish,
is but terminus diminuens, a decree, or will not to punish in time. Besides,
this is not the whole of Justification, for it is a will, not to punish
according to the tenor of the Gospel and Covenant of Grace, which requires
faith. But I shall argue against this in a more proper place.

Now if we take it thus, as Mr. Air will have it, his opinion is this:

Justification is an eternal immanent act, or will in God not to punish, and
impute sin unto his people, antecedently not only to their birth and faith, but
to the death of Christ; nor is the death of Christ the cause of this
Justification, (though with him Justification thus taken, is most accurate, and
properly taken,) and so he makes Christ no cause of the act of Justification,
for he will acknowledge no other transient act, and immanent there is none.

1. And this act is not purely Page 67.
negative, as the non-imputation of sin to a stone, but privative, being the
non-imputation of a sin realiter futuri inesse, which how Scholastically it is
spoken? (being a privative act of a privation in a positive decree of God, when
neither the subject nor the sin are in being; and as if sin were debitum
inesse, that that ought to be in us, for privation is properly understood of
these.

2. And this non-imputation is actual, though the sin not to be imputed be not
in actual being; [a will not to impute it hereafter, may be actual, but to call
that an actual non-imputation, is improperly spoken.

3. This act of justifying is complete in it self, for God by his eternal and
unchangeable will not imputing sin to his Elect, none can impute it, etc. Here
is a complete Justification then without a satisfaction, for which Socinus will
give him the right hand of fellowship, and many thanks for a gratuity.

And yet he adds, that this renders not the death of Christ useless, surely
as to this act it is useless And Mr. Air acknowledges no other act of
Justification.
; and if it be the meritorious cause of the effects of this Justification, how
was that Justification complete, whose effects could not be obtained without
the death of the Son of God? Where let the Reader observe also, that he makes
Christ no more the cause of Justification, then of Election, for he adds by
way of similitude, As the love of God is complete in it self, but yet Christ is
the meritorious cause of all the effectt of it; Page 67. and so Page 66. As
electing love precede, etc.
so this act of justifying is complete in it self, but yet Christ is the
meritorious cause of all the effects of it.

Moreover he says, That the Lord did not impute sin to his people, when he
purposed in himself not to deal with them according to their sins, when the
Father and the Son agreed upon that sure and everlasting Covenant, Page 64.
that his Elect should not bear the punishment which their sins should deserve.
Surely the Lord must then by Mr. Air impute it to Christ, and so Christ was
man, and a sinner from eternity, and crucified from eternity, and all this in
Gods mind, and there Judas and Pilate, and those that murdered Christ did
exist too, and what will not this bring in? And Mr. Air, p. 8.
the ground of this is, that he conceives God constituting, and ordaining
Christ a Head, and the Elect his Members, they were by this mystically
implanted before they were borne, even from eternity.

And Justification thus taken, (says he) makes no change in God, nor yet if it
be acknowledged a transient act, Mr. Air, p. 65.
would it make a change in him, it would add a relative respect, and an
extrinsecall denomination; and so in making it an immanent act, there must be a
new relation of the person justified to God; but he adds, it makes a great
change, if you take it for the delivery of the sinner from the curse of the
Law. Surely he that is not, is not capable of an actual change, which you must
hold, or your justification is not complete, because the deliverance is not a
present deliverance.

Secondiy, Let us come to his passive Justification: If Justification (says
he) be taken as most commonly it is, for the thing willed by this immanent act
of his, to wit, our discharge from the Law, and deliverance from punishment; so
it has for its adequate cause and principle the death and satisfaction of
Christ.

And thus by his death he obtained in behalf of the Elect, not a remote
possible conditional reconciliation, but an actual and immediate
reconciliation. Where he ascribes a meritoriousnesse to the death of Christ in
respect of the deliverance, but not in respect of any act of Gods deliverance,
as if we could be just^fied, and none to justify; for in the same place he
denies Christ's death to be the cause of Gods will not to punish, (and that
justly) and yet he will not acknowledge another act, as we do, a transient act
of God, whereof Christ's death is the cause, and yet some act he must find out,
or we cannot be justified.

Now his opinion from hence is this, That Christ at his death standing as a
common person, and representing all the Elect who were mystically united to
him, he by his death gave full satisfaction to divine justice, by which they
satisfied in him, and in his Resurrection receiving a public discharge for
himself and them, and they are now actually and formally reconciled and in
favor with God, even while they remain unregenerate persons.

Wherein in two things he differs from us, and departs from the truth.

1. In holding a mystical union between Christ and the Elect before faith.

2. In that he says that from the time of Christ's death all the Elect are
actually reconconciled, both these I have already disproved in the Vindication
of my Sermon, but shall add some arguments in its place against the latter.

Thirdly, When it is said we are justified by faith, he takes it altogether
objectively; He says, Faith is taken objectively, for Christ and his
righteousness justifies in the sight of God; if taken for the act, it only
evidenceth justification, page 76. as if by faith were meant Christ, excluding
faith from any hand in Justification, which if it were the Apostles meaning, he
might have put in the Name Christ, and left out Faith, and his meaning had been
more plain, which in this weighty controversy of Justification, (though the
Trope be more elegant) had been more needful: And in many places where he
speaks of Justification, he expressly sets down Christ as the object of
our faith, and yet adds faith, as that grace by which this object is
apprehended.

Let us take that place in Gal. 2.15, 16. We who are Jews by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles, Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of
the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: even we have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the woe ks
of the Law. Here the Apostles Scope is to show, that the believing Jews (into
which number he puts himself, and Peter and Barnabas,) seeing that they could
not be justified by the Law, did for this end that they might be justified,
believe on Christ, that they might be justified by the faith of Christ, where
he makes Christ and his righteousness the object of faith, and the matter of
their Justification; and he expresses how Christ's become theirs by faith, and
it were a senseless interpretation to take Faith for Christ, and not for the
Grace of Faith; as if the meaning should be, that they were justified by the
Christ of Christ, where he must exclude Christ or Faith, for one is redundant;
nor does the Apostle mean this of a declarative Justification, for then there
is no reason nor truth in it; for to say, that the works of the Law may not
evidence our Justification, these being as able to declare it as faith, as it
is said, Little children, let no man deceive y u: he that does righteousness,
1 John 3.7.
is righteous; that is, is declared thereby to be righteous. Besides, to make
Paul to say, that they believed that they might be justified, that is, that
they may know by believing that they had been justified before, had been to
make the Apostle reason at a very low ebb, as if the doing a thing for a
certain end, were a certain means to assure that the end has been obtained
already. Besides, it destroys the Scope of the Apostles Argument, in reproving
Peter for his dissimulation; building up that in his Practice, which in his
Doctrine he did destroy; the Jews thought the observation of the Law necessary
to salvation, and hence made conscience of keeping company with Gentiles, and
eating things forbidden by the Law; but Peter and the rest of the Apostles
knew, that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, and therefore did
renounce hopes of salvation by that, and believe in Christ for Justification,
and this he taught; And when he came to Antioch, before certain Jews came down
from James, he used his Christian liberty, and did eat with the Gentiles; but
when they were come down, he withdrew himself; he separates from the Gentiles,
by which practice he did as it were teach a neccessity of keeping the Law as
necessary to salvation: Now Paul blames his practice, that when he knew a man
is not justified by the Law, but by faith in Christ, he did yet in practice
hold up the necessity of the observation of the Law; so that the Apostle is not
speaking how a man may know his salvation, but how salvation is obtained. So
the Apostle speaking of the righteousness by which we must be justified, in
Rom 3.11. says, Romans 3.11.
it is a righteousness witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even a
righteousness that is of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ; where by
Faith, is necess^rily understood the grace of Faith, and not Christ, who is
expressly set down in the next words, where the scope of the place is to show
by what we must be justified, and he says, not by the works of the Law, but by
the faith of Christ; if Christ without Faith justify, why does the Apostle
mention Faith? for he is not speaking here what does evidence our
Justification, but by what we are justified.

I shall pass to the fourth particular in Mr. Air, he says, Mr. Air, p. 3.
That in the New Covenant there is no condition required to entitle us to the
blessings of it, and that Faith is not the condition of the New Covenant,
because then men must be Believers before they are justified, for the condition
must be performed before that benefit which is promised can be received: But
men are not Believers before they are justified, the Scripture witnesses that
the subject of just^fication as a sinner, or ungod^y person, Romans 9.5. and 5.8,
10. Now the Holy Ghost never calls Believers ungo^ly, or wicked, but Saints,
Faithful, holy Brethren, children of God, members of Christ, the Covenant with
them ^s absolute made with Christ, and all the conditions in the Covenant are
promised. Page 191.
]

And he takes the condition as a part of the Covenant, because promised; so,
that believing with him is a consequent of the Covenant, not antecedent to it;
where he wholly departs from the received truth of Christ, and speaks that
which is as contrary to the Scripture, as darkness is to light.

For, 1. He destroys the nature of a Covenant which is, and necessarily
requires a mutual stipulation, else it may be a promise, but no Covenant.

2. Salvation is undoubtedly a fruit of the Covenant, but without faith there
is no salvation.

3. He destroys the order of the Gospel, which says, believe and thou shall
be saved, he says, thou art saved, believe, and thou shall know it; and that
faith is a fruit of this salvation, not a cause.

4. The Gospel says no where that a sinner under the reigning power of sin,
and remaining so is a subject of Justification; but the contrary; 1 John 1.6.
If we say we have fellowshep with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do
not the truth.

The meaning then of this Scripture, that God justifies the ungodly, is not as
if the person to be justified, must needs be ungodly in the midst of his
profaneness, delighting in it; but by ungodly is meant, a man that has not a
perfect legal righteousness, not an unsanctified man, as if he were a
justified person; this is a profane Justification indeed, not agreeable to the
nature of a Holy God; But the meaning is,

1. That God has found out a way to justify the ungodly by faith in Christ,
which the Law knows not, nor the wisdom of men and Angels could have
contrived how God might do it, salva justitia, supposing his decree. And
therefore when we say that God justifies the ungodly, we understand it,

2. In sensudiviso, not in sensu composito; that is, not that he is so when
justified, as the Scripture says, The lame man shall leap, Isa. 35.6. Mark 11.
the tongue of the dumb shall sing, and the blind see, and the deaf hear; but
no man will say that the lame as lame can leap, and that the dumb remaining so,
can sing, and that the blind as blind, see; and so no man should dream that
the ungodly as ungodly are justified; for in order of nature, our Faith goes
before Justification, though there be no priority of time between our
ungodliness and Justification; for immediately before our says, we are
ungodly, and upon the creation of faith, we are justified, and sanctified at
the same time, and our ungodliness done away.

And what if Faith be promised, and freely given, it is a fruit of the Covenant
as made with Christ, but not as the Covenant was made with us; God covenants
with Christ to save all that he died for, and that shall believe; so that upon
believing they shall have the fruit of Christ's death, and the fruit of the
Covenant of Grace; Christ undertakes for them to make them believe; hence faith
is wrought, and given, and then they are Christ's Members, and so in Covenant,
not before; for God promised salvation to none, but such as believe; Hence
Christ teleth the world. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which sees the Son, and believes on him, John 6.40.
may have everlasting life: Surely he willed nothing but agreeable to his
Covenant with Christ, therefore he covenanted that Believers only should be
saved; for where he says, that it is the will of the Father, that they that
believe should have everlasting life; the contrary also is meant, that he that
believes not, should not be saved.

I shall not prosecute his opinion any further here, I will now lay down some
animadversions upon several passages in his Book, wherein his manifold errors,
unsound opinions, and self-contradictions shall be manifested, which he has
cast himself upon in defense of this one error, and has verified that old
saying, Dato uno absurdo, mill sequuntur.

First, He blames us, as if we did agree with Arminius, in holding a
conditional reconciliation, (which we utterly disclaim) and yet he himself
symbolizeth and agrees with Armininius in that very thing which occasioned
that error of Arminius, Armin. Exam. p. 31. and 158.
in holding a temporal, suspensive and conditional decree, for Arminius
because the Scripture says, we were chosen in Christ, will have it to be nos
existentes in Christo, that we had an existence, or being in Christ. And seeing
we are not in Christ but by Faith, hereupon he makes the object of Election to
be fideles, and so this decree to be temporal, and suspensive upon the will of
man, in whose power it is to believe; though herein Arminius was more in the
truth then Mr. Air, in that he judges we are not in Christ, but by faith,
which Mr. Air denies. But for us we acknowledge no such temporal decree, nor
do we hold this condition of faith to be an effect of our free will, but an
absolute effect of Gods free grace. And in two other things he joyneth with
Arminius, who seemingly is a mortal enemy to him.

1. They both stumble at the same stone, for the Arminians think it absurd,
that the same thing should be donum promissum, and officium requisitum, a gift
promised on Gods part, and yet a duty required on our part. Rem Apol. c 9. page
105.
Thus the Remonstrants, Anne conditionem quis serio, and sapienter
praescriberet alteri, sub promisso praemii, and poenae gravissimae
comminatione, qui eam in eo cui praescribit efficere vult, haec actio tota
ludicra, and vix scena digna est, Nihil ineptius, nihil vanius quam fidem
merito Christi tribuere, si enim Christus meritus est fidem, tum fides conditio
esse non poterit, c. 8. p. 95.

They think it a ridiculous conceit, that any should prescribe that as a
condition which he intends to work in them, or for them; and that faith, if
it be merited by Christ, cannot be a condition. Vide Mr. Air, page 175.
And says not Mr. Air the same? page 175. But I appeal to the Reader, whether
it does not sound very harshly, that the same words should be formally both a
Precept and a Promise; and that God should require a condition of us, and yet
promise to work it in us, how shall we distinguish between Precepts and
Promises?

I am sorry to see such a manly Divine as Mr. Air to be at a nonplus, where
there is no difficulty. I take it for granted, that any Member in Mr. Eyre's
Church can show where faith is commanded, and therefore it lies upon us as a
duty, and yet also can show where it is said to be the gift of God; Surely, if
the same thing may not be commanded and promised, either we have no duty to
perform, or God has not promised to give what he requires or us: for it is
said, he has wrought all our works in us, ^^a. 16.12.
and for us, and yet he calls it our work still, because our duty and act,
though it be his grace inabling us; he commands us to repent, Mark 3.2. yet
Christ is exalted as a Prince, to give repentance to Israel, Acts 5.31. We
grant it cannot be a condition and a promise; if you take a condition in a
strict proper sense, as the Jurists and Arminians take it for a condition
performed by our own free will, but we take it in another sense, for a
suspensive condition of the efficacy of Christ's death, (and this is essential
to a condition) appointed by God to apply Christ's righteousness to us, which
condition he has purposed to work, and Christ has merited, and therefore
shall be infallibly given; and therefore the benefit of Christ's death is no
less certain, then if it were actually enjoyed.

2. The Arminians hold that no man's will is predetermined by God, for fear they
should destroy the liberty of his will; and Mr. Air says in his Epistle
Dedicatory to the Parliament, Though God does move effectually, and persuades
men's hearts, yet he does not necessitate them to believe. If he mean it of a
necessity of coaction only, we grant it; but if of necessity of infallibility
and event, we deny it; and he agrees with Arminius, for God does so
effectually move, as to necessitate them, and irresistibly works upon their
wills, over-powering them, and of unwilling making them willing, that they
necessarily do believe, though they freely do it at the same time.

Secondly, He charge us that dissent from him, in making Faith the condition
of the Covenant, as if we did agree with Arminians, Socinians and Papists, when
he is not ignorant that we manifestly differ from them, and own not faith as a
condition in any of their senses; we make it not any meritorious condition, as
the Papists; nor any act performed by our own free will, as Arminians; nor the
matter of our righteousness, as Socinians, and Arminians, and Papists do,
neither in whole, nor in part. And somewhere he says in his Book, that Mr,
Calvin has observed, That if we were accorded with the Church of Rome in all
other points, save in this, (to wit, of Justification) it were impossible to be
reconciled; and I must needs say, I see no material difference between them,
meaning between us that differ from him and the Papists; and yet, page 50. he
says that Bellarmine says, Bellar. de justific. l. 1. c. 17.
Faith it self is our righteousness, and that it does justify us impetrando,
promerendo, in choando justificationem, that it does obtain, merit, and begin
our Justification; which of the Orthodox says so, or with the Arminians that
in the Covenant of Grace, God requires faith, which in his gracious
acceptance stands instead of the obedience to the Moral Law? But to this
wilful slander, I shall tell him what in this case is the judgment of learned
VOSSIVS, Vossius, Praefatione, to his defense of Grot. against, Herm. Ravensp.
In confesso est apud omnes, haereticis cum melius quam Catholicis consulere,
qui callidum fidei Christianae hostem ita in tabella populo spectandum offert,
quasi dogmati faveat Catholico, cui bellum (...) indixit, strenuum autem
veritatis defensorem ita depingit, quasi cum haeretico colludat, quem fortiter
oppugnat. He is a better friend to Papists then Protestants, who shall describe
the Papists that err fundamentally, as favorably as the Protestants who hold
the foundation, and strenously defend it, as if they did agree with Papists,
with whom they are at an irreconcilable difference.

Mr. Air, p. 10.
Thirdly, Mr. Air makes a sinner (if he be an Elect person) remaining under
the reigning power of sin, a subject of Justification: For he says, God is
well pleased with his Elect in Christ, whilst they are unregenerate, though he
be not well pleased with their unregeneracy, or any of their actions in their
unregenerate estate.]

But how can this be agreeable to the Holy Nature of God, to justify a sinner
so remaining? For he that in this sense justifies the wicked, is an
abomination to the Lord; and what God condemns in us, he will not do himself.
The Papists object against us that hold Justification by imputed, and not
inherent righteousness, that it is contrary to the holiness, justice, and
purity of Gods Nature to justify us that are ungodly, without an inherent
rightsousnesse. To which the Protestants answer, that God at the same time does
begin to sanctify whom he does justify, and he does bestow a righteousness
of Sanctification, as well as of Justification; but Mr. Eyre's opinion lies
justly liable to their exception, God cannot justify any person, or be well
pleased with him that is not a member of Christ, and to make an unregenerate
man a member of Christ's body, what a monstrous deformity would this be, and
wrong to Christ, to make a limb of the Devil, a member of Christ? Let a man be
the greatest sinner imaginable, practicing and delighting in sin; yet he is a
justified person, and a member of Christ. If Elect, why does Mr. Air require
the members of his Church to be Saints, not only by profession, but by inward
sanctification, as that that shall make him a Churchmember and yet holds an
uregenerate person is a member of Christ's body? will he require more holiness
in a Churchmember, then in a Christ-member? And what an unreasonable assertion
is it for him to say, God is pleased with the Elect whilst they are
unregenerate, though he be not well pleased with their unregeneracy, or any of
their actions in their unregenerate estate? Is it possible God can be well
pleased with their persons, and yet none of all their actions please him? is
that tree a good tree that never did, nor can bring forth good fruit? As the
Scripture makes no man's actions accepted, when their persons are not accepted,
so neither does it make their persons acceptable, but their actions (some of
them at least) must be acceptable. And if their persons be justified, all their
sins are pardoned, and many of their actions are for the matter good, and
commanded; and when all the sin in their best actions is done away, how can
they displease God, seeing nothing displeases God but sin?

Fourthly, He says, that the state of the loved and hated, Mr. Air, p. 66.
compared with page 5.
are different in the mind of God, yet not in the persons themselves, till the
different effects of love and hatred are put forth; and yet finds fault with
me for asserting the same, that there was no difference between the Elect and
Reprobate, as to their present condition, whilst the Elect are unregenerate,
but only in the purpose of God intending to make a difference, by bringing the
Elect unto faith in Christ, that they may be justified, which was all I said or
intended.

Fifthly, He says, Gods eternal decree to justify, Mr. Air, p. 64. compared
with page 140.
is Justification, because it secures men from wrath, and by this immanent act
of God they are discharged and acquitted from their sins; Then what need
Christ to die? here is forgiveness without a satisfaction, Christ's death was
not the c^use of this immanent act, or will in God. And yet he contradicts
himself, for page 140. he says, that sin lay as a block in the way, that God
could not salva justititia bestow upon them those good things intended toward
them in his eternal Election. Surely Justification is one of the good things
intended in Election, and therefore God could not bestow this salva justitia,
till their sin was satisfied for; but with him they were according to the first
place discharged from sin by this immanent act, yet Christ's death was not a
cause of this act; and if they were actually discharged from sin, how did that
lie as a block in the way to hinder any of the good things intended? And he
cites a place which he owneth out of Mr. Rutherford, page 140. God might will
unto us that which he cannot actually bestow upon us without wrong to his
Justice, and this he understands of Gods saving and pardoning us; but if we
were actually discharged, we were actually pardoned, and that without the merit
of Christ's death, and satisfaction to his justice.

Sixthly, He interprets, page 60. what is meant by Gods sight, when it is
said, We are justified in his sight; this phrase he says, is variously used.

1. Sometimes it relates unto the thoughts and knowledge of God, etc.

2. Sometimes it relates more peculiarly unto his legal justice, and although
in articulo providentiae, in the Doctrine of Divine Providence, seeing and
knowing are all one; yet in articulo justificationis, in the article of
Justification they are constantly distinguished throughout the Scripture, and
God is never said to blot our sins out of his knowledge, but out of his sight:
Now says he, page 62. If we take it for the knowledge of God, we were
justified in his sight when he willed and determined in himself not to impute
to us our sins, etc. and this was from eternity. And with him the 63. page the
essence and quiddity of Justification stands in this will of God not to punish,
this is properly Justification in his judgment, and then God knew them to be
righteous; yet he says, in the article of Justification, knowledge is
constantly distinguished from sight, throughout the whole Scripture, and God is
never said to blot sins out of his knowledge, as much as if he should say, If
you take this phrase as it is never to be taken, then we were justified from
eternity. And the Scripture does not acknowledge this eternal Justification;
for when it speaks of the Doctrine of Justification, it speaks of blotting
out sins out of his sight, and this is to be referred to his legal Justice,
(and this is the most proper and genuine use of it, says he,) and so we were
just^fied in the sight of God when he exhibited, and God accepted the full
satisfaction in his blood for all our sins; and yet this Justification is not
the most proper acceptance of Justification, for that was from eternity, and
yet we were then most properly justified in his sight; how well this agrees,
let the Reader judge.

Seventhly, He takes Faith objectively, Mr. Air, p. 47. Page 58, 76.
(not for the act with connotation of the object,) but for the object excluding
the act, as if the word Faith signified Christ; and yet when we urge him with
such places where it is said, We are justified by Faith, and the like, he
understands it of a declarative Justification, and so takes Faith
subj^ctively, not objectively: So he takes it, p. 73. In this sense men are
said to be justified by the act of Faith, in regard Faith is the Medium, or
instrument whereby the sentence of forgiveness is terminated on their
conscience.

Eighthly, Page 63.
He affirms that the judgment of Dr. Twisse is most accurate in placing the
essence and quiddity of Justification in the will of God not to punish, page
63. yet he says, (and that truly in respect of this immanent and eternal act
of God) that the merits of Christ do not move Gods will not to punish, or
impute sin to us; yet he acknowledges no other act, that Christ's death is
the meritorious cause of; he says, it is the meritorious cause of the effects
of this eternal Justification; Page 67,
but the Scripture makes Christ's death the meritorious cause of some act of
God justifying us; can Christ cause the effect, and not the act? Merit is an
outward procatar^^ical cause, moving the principal agent extrinsecally ad
agendum; and hence God is said, for Christ's sake to forgive us; Christ's death
does morally work upon him by way of motive and objective moving, and is a
remote cause of the effect, and God as the principal efficient, is the
immediate cause; and what influence then can this remote cause have to produce
the effects of Justification, and no way by any causal influx to cause the act?
Though I still willingly acknowledge, that the internal moving cause, is Gods
own will, for nothing out of God can be the cause of his will, unless we make
God beholding to another for his being.

9thly, He gives a very superficial slight answer to those Scriptures that
speak of receiving remission of sins by believing, Acts 10.43. Acts 26.18.
Though it be said, whosoever believes shall receive remission of sin; it is
not said, (says he,) by believing we obtain remission of sins; true, who would
make an isntrumental cause the meritorious cause of remission of sins? but if
by obtaining be meant no more then a receiving, and possessing what we never
had before, so we do by Faith obtain remission of sins; he distinguishes
between the giving of remission, and the receiving it, as if one were long
before the other; To which I answer, If you take giving for the will of God
ordaining to give remission, so it is long before receiving, but that is not an
actual bestowing of the thing purposed; but if you take it for an actual
collation of the thing given, it implies the receiving of it; for Relata se
mutuo ponunt, and tollunt; thus giving and receiving are together, and so
forgiveness of sins was not given till received; Mr. Air means, by our
receiving remission, nothing but the comfort and knowledge of it, but that
interpretation will not agree with the Apostles mind; for he does not say,
Whosoever believe shall have the knowledge, or comfort of the remission of
sins, but shall have remission of sins; and that place, Acts 26.18. most
expressly makes it manifest, for before their receiving this forgiveness,
they were under the power of Satan; surely they that are under Satan's power,
are not yet pardoned; what has Satan to do with a pardoned sinner? This were
a wrong to Christ's satisfaction, if it were accepted for a present discharge,
and yet they left under Satan's power; but Christ himself says, those that he
sent Paul unto, namely, the Gentiles, were under the power of Satan, because
they were yet under spiritual blindness, and he is sent to turn them from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive
remission of sins; not that they might receive the knowledge of a deliverance
from the power of Satan they had already, or the knowledge of the remission of
sins, but remission it self; now Justification stands in remission of sins,
therefore if they received it not before, they were not justified.

Tenthly, He gives a worse answer to that place, Ephesians. 2.12. where it is
said, that the Elect before Faith or spiritual Regeneration in their natural
estate, were without Christ, without God, and without hope in the world, that
is, says he, page 73. before faith, they had no knowledge or comfort, either
of Gods gracious volitions toward them, or of Christ's undertakings in their
behalf; it is such a chaffy, illiterate exposition, that it more befits a
Green-apron-Preacher, then such a Gamaliel, it needs not a grain of salt; but
all the salt in the world will not make a savoury interpretation of it, to keep
it from the dunghill, What were these Ephesians when dead in sins and
trespasses, dead in conceit only, and truly alive to God, and dead in their
apprehensions only? were they children of wrath in their apprehensions? why
then, they were more afraid then hurt; what needed they then the work of
Creation, the Almighty power of God that was put forth to raise Christ from the
dead, to raise them from this estate; could no body cure this conceit with
another? that if they did but think all was well, that thought would be to them
as the Resurrection from the dead; What, were they without Christ in the world,
because they knew not Christ was there? Why then let some frenzy take them, and
bereave them of their reason, as Mr. Air was in this interpretation, and they
are un-Christed again; or let them fall asleep, and they are again without
Christ, without God, without hope in the world. And so they and their Christ
will bid good morrow, and goodnight, so often as they rise, or go to bed: But
the true scope and sense of the place is this, the Apostle sets himself to
prove the freeness of Gods grace in Christ to the Ephesians, which he does, by
calling upon them to remember what their former deplorable estate was in
Ethnicisme, when they were Gentiles in the flesh, by comparing it with their
happy estate since their conversion to the faith; and therefore that wonderful
change, shows that their salvation is wholly of grace; in their former
condition they were then in the flesh, that is, in their natural and sinful
estate, as they descended from their parents in a state of sin, living after
the flesh, in which estate they could not please God.

2. They were without inward and outward circumcision, they had none of the
sign and seal of the Covenant of Grace, of that righteousness that is by
faith, but were despised by the Jews, who gloried in their circumcision; but
they had not so much as this outward circumcision in the flesh, much less the
circumcision of the heart: Now uncircumcision was a sign of a people that were
wholly strangers to God and the Covenant of Grace.

3. They were without Christ, without any knowledge of Christ; Christ was not
so much as preached to them, and they had no faith in him, and so (...), as
Diodat upon the place says, they neither had union nor communion with Christ,
nor, no knowledge of their union or communion with Christ, as if they were
mystically united, as Mr. Air ignorantly, or wilfully affirms; but without
union or communion; they were not yet members of Christ, and so they lived as
it were without Christ in the world, strangers to Christ, at a distance from
Christ. Such as were sometimes afar off from Christ, and God, as ver. 13.
declares, Calvin in Locum:
and as Calvine upon the place, procul a Deo and saluie, even as far as
heaven and hell asunder, and were strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel;
that is, they were without the Pale of the Church, out of which ordinarily
there is no salvation, and were strangers from the Covenant of Promise; that
is, as Piscator says, Piscator in Locum.
the Promise of the Covenant of Grace, wherein God promised remission of sins
through the merit of Christ, and the renewing of their hearts by the efficacy
of Christ, did not belong to them; Dickson in Locum.
and as Dickson upon the words says, alieni a jure ad applicandum sibi pacta,
and promissiones Dei, they were destitute of all right to apply the Covenants
or Promises of God to themselves: And they were without hope in the world, that
is, they had no hope of eternal life; so Piscator; haec enim nascitur ex fide;
for this is begotten by says; they could have no good well grounded hope for
heaven, Spem merit o conjungit promissionibus de Christo, nam absque his quic
quid sperant homines frustra speraent: He deservedly joined hope to the
promises concerning Christ; for without these, whatsoever men hope for, they
hope in vain. Truly, (as he says) there can nothing be hoped for, that is not
promised; and without the Covenant there is no Promise. And without God in the
world, they acknowledged many gods; nay, knew the true God as Creator of heaven
and earth; but knew him not in Christ, and did not worship him according to the
light of Scripture, and so were without all true knowledge, and spiritual
worship of God. And from all this it follows that they were unjustified in
this estate, and it destroys the scope of the Apostles argument, to take it
as Mr. Air takes it, only for the want of knowledge of their happy estate,
whereas the Apostles scope is to show how miserable they were when in this
estate, how happy in the change, or deliverance from it; but here is no change
signified by Mr. Eyre's interpretation, but only their condition was the same,
and as good then as now, only they did not know it; Is it possible a man of
reason should be so far blinded, or hardened to shut his eyes against the
clear light of the Scripture? Dreadful are Gods judgments in delivering men up
to error, that will not receive the truth in the love of it.

Eleventhly, Page 66, 67.
He makes the merits of Christ no more the cause of Justification, then of
Election; he makes the merits of Christ only the meritorious cause of the
effects of Gods eternal will to justify, as may appear, page 66, and 67.
Although (says he) Gods will not to punish, be antecedent to the death of
Christ; yet (says he) we are justified in him, (but he does not say for him,)
though the Scriptures speak it plain enough, because the whole effect of that
will, is by and for the sake of Christ, as though electing love precedeth the
consideration of Christ, yet we are said to be chosen in him, because all the
effects of that love are given by, and through, and for him, and to the like
purpose he speaks in the 67. page etc. Col. 2.14. Heb. 9.12.
But the Scriptures do plainly ascribe a meritoriousnesse to the death of
Christ, that we have redemption through his blood, he has obtained eternal
redemption for us, Ephesians. 4.32. Ephesians. 2.16.
and that God for Christ's sake had forgiven the Ephesians. And that he has
reconciled both (that is, Jew and Gentle) unto God by the Cross; and therefore
Christ is not only the cause of the effects of Justification, but of the act of
Justification, God being moved thereto by the death of Christ; but where says
the Scripture, that God elected us for the sake of Christ? it is true, it
says, we were chosen in him, and he accepted us in the beloved; but this does
not imply that we had a being in Christ, when elected, and that God elected us
for Christ's sake, as if Christ were the cause of our Election, Vide Dr. Twiss,
Vind. Lib. 2. Digress. p. 74. Interca non dicimus Christum in negotio
electionis habere rationem causae meritoriae respectu actus cligentis sed
duntaxat respectu termini, etc. Ib.
quoad actum eligentis, which Arminius mightily contendeth for, that he might
bring in faith; if not as a cause, yet as a prerequisite of our Election. And
none of ours except Rolloc maintain it; and yet though he calls Christ the
foundation of our Election, all that he says ends in this, that Christ is
therefore the foundation of our Election, because he is the meritorious cause
Bonorum Electione praeparatorum, of good things which are prepared by Election;
but Christ is not only the cause of the effects of Justification, but of the
act of Justification, for God does forgive us for Christ's sake, and then see
what a good friend Mr. Air is to the merits and satisfaction of Christ, when
he seemingly pleads for it, as if we wronged the merits of Christ by suspending
the benefit until faith, wrought by himself, as the effect of his death, and
he wholly denies it as to the act of Justification.

Twelfthly, He says, that Justification is by Faith evidentially, and Faith is
from Justification causally, Mr. Air, p. 79.
and he sees no absurdity in it, p. 79. which is to place the Cart before the
Horse, and as preposterous as to wear his Shoes upon his head, and his Hat upon
his feet. That Faith may in a sense evidence Justification, I deny not, but
that it is the effect of Justification, is as good sense as that the daughter
brought forth the mother; Justification may be an effect of Faith, and so the
Scripture makes it, but not a cause of Faith: For it is neither the efficient,
nor material, nor formal, nor final, therefore it is no cause; for all causes
are reducible to these four Heads.

1. It is not the efficient principal cause of Faith; I hope he will not rob
Gods free grace, and the Holy Spirit of his Honor (as he does Christ of his
merit,) of being the sole efficient cause of faith; Faith, it is the gift of
God, and the effect of the Spirit, which works faith by the hearing of the
Word: it is a known rule, Posita causa proxima ponitur effectus, and if the act
of Justification should be the cause of Faith, then according to him being
justified from eternity, we must be Believers from eternity, but how contrary
this is to sense, reason, and experience, I need not speak; and no man did ever
yet dream, much less speak of Justification being the efficient cause of
Faith.

2. It is not the formal cause of Faith, for the formal cause does ingredi
compositum, it is part of the substance of the thing, or effect produced; the
formal cause is always intrinsecal to the effect, and concurreth to the
substance and essence of it, but Justification is a thing wholly extrinsecal
and adventitious to the nature of Faith; the formality of Faith lies in an
adherency to Christ, or a recumbency upon Christ for righteousness, not in the
act of Justification.

3. Justification is not the material cause of Faith, for the same reason
above named; the material cause is that which in union with the form, makes
up a substantial compounded body, but Faith is no such thing, it is not a
substance, but a quality, and has no matter properly so called; and as for the
matter improperly so called, it is either materia in qua, or circa quam, it is
either the subject, or the object; but Justification is not the subject, or
object of Faith; not the subject, for the subject of Faith is a Believer; nor
is Justification the object of Faith, for in things that have matter improperly
so called, the subject and the object are the same; the object of Justification
then is a Believer, the person of a Believer, not his Faith.

4. And lastly, Justification is not the final cause of Faith, for I am not
justified that I might believe, but rather I believe that I might be justified;
and salvation is made the end of faith, Gal. 2.16. 1 Pet. 1.9.
and not faith the end of my salvation; and thus it appears, that Faith is
not from Justification causally.

Thirteenthly, He says, page 83. that he does not press every man to believe
that he is justified, Mr Air p. 83.
but to believe there is a sufficiency in Christ for his Justification, and to
rely upon him, and him alone for this benefit; but how contrary this is to his
own principles, let the Reader judge: for he constantly affirms, that the
Elect are justified from eternity, and from the death of Christ antecedently to
Faith, and faith does not instrumentally apply Christ's righteousness unto
Justification, but Faith does only evidence Justification to the conscience:
Surely, when you press men to believe, you press them to believe they are
already justified, and not to rely on him for this benefit; for if they be
justified already, what need have they to rely upon him by faith for it? they
may according to you rely upon him for the evidencing of this to their
consciences, but not for the benefit which they had in Christ before they were
borne. And what diminution is it of the grace of Christ, if they were justified
from the time of Christ's death, to tell them there is a sufficiency in the
death of Christ for Justification? when according to you there is an efficiency
in the death of Christ; forasmuch as they were not virtually only, but actually
and formally, as you affirm, p. 63. justified at his death: Nor will it help
you to say, you speak there of the non-elect, for we are bound to press all
men to believe, as you there acknowledge; and it is not known who are Elect,
neither to the Minister nor to the people; therefore in pressing the Elect to
believe a sufficiency, you extenuate the merit of Christ's death, if they were
actually justified, as you affirm: And there is the same ground of Faith to
all, the ability of Christ to save, and Gods indefinite offer of salvation to
whomsoever the Gospel is preached.

Fourteenthly, He affirms Faith, if it evidences our Justification, is a
sign, is a dark and unsatisfying evidence, as other works of Sanctification
are, 1 John 3.14.
where he contradicts the Apostle, who says, By this we know that we are
passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren; not we hope, not we
conjecture, but we know, it is a sure and steadfast sign. Little children, let
no man deceive you, 1 John 3.7.
says John, he that does righteousness, is righteous; is thereby, viz. by his
doing righteousness declared to be a righteous person; Romans 8.1.
and in Romans 8.1. he says, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus; and he givesh this as a sign, Romans 8.13.
Who are in Christ, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; does
the Holy Ghost, by Paul, give us a dark unsatisfying evidence of our being in
Christ. What is more frequent then this; he that is in Christ, is a new
Creature, they that mortify the deeds of the body shall live: Gal 5.24.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts
thereof? are all these dark and unsatisfying evidences? then the Apostle did
not well to propound them as satisfying evidences of the persons that are in
Christ, and shall be saved; but we had rather suspect Mr. Eyre's opinion, then
question the Apostles judgment or unfaithfulness to propound dark, and
unsatisfying evidences of Justification.

2. He says, that nothing that follows Faith, is so apt to evidence or prove
Justification as Faith, because it is the first of all inherent graces; but I
take this for an error, and that works are every way as declarative of
Justification, if not more, is an apparent truth: For first, if we speak of
evidencing Justification to others, it is more; for says the Apostle, Thou
have faith, show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith
by my works, James 2.18. And Abraham was in this sense justified by his works,
If any man shall say he is a justified person, Verse. 2^. 1 John 1.6. James 2.20.
and yet lives in the practice of any known sin, I shall be bold to tell him
he is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and works of Sanctification are no
less declarative of Justification in evidencing it to the conscience, then
Faith: For how shall I know my says is a true faith, an unfeigned faith, and
peculiar to the Elect; but by the effect of a true Faith, the works of
Sanctification, therefore if the truth of my faith be evidenced by my works,
then the truth of my justification is no less evidenced to my conscience by
works then by faith; nor is his reason of any worth, because it is the first of
all inherent graces; this may prove it to have an excellency in that respect
above other graces, but that it has for this reason an eminency above other
graces in evidencing Justification, is a lame consequence, of which Master
Eyre's Book is too full.

Fifteenthly, He affirmerh that we should not be justified freely by grace, if
any condition were required of us in order to our Justification; I take this
also for a manifest error, if it be understood aright, of an Evangelical
condition ordained and wrought by God for the applying of Christ's
righteousness to Justification. Indeed, if you take a condition in a strict
sense; for a condition performed by us without the help of grace, meriting, and
obliging God to give us the righteousness of Christ; in such a sense it is
true, it is inconsistent with grace: but such an Evangelical condition wrought
by the grace of Christ, without which we are not justified, salvation is no
less of grace, though it be by faith, as the Apostle speaks: Ye are saved by
grace through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God; where
the Apostle speaks of the grace of faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
and says, we are saved by it; and yet he says, We are saved by grace,
because it is Gods gift.

Sixteenthly, He says, page 99. that all the blessings of the Covenant of
Grace are given us freely, Page 99.
and not upon conditions performed by us, ( viz. by our own strength,) yet God
has his order and method in the bestowing of them, etc. If all the blessings
of the Covenant be alike absolutely, and freely given, and alike merited by
Christ, and yet God may for order and methods sake, defer some blessings of
the Covenant without wrong to Christ's merits and satisfaction, why is it any
wrong to Christ's death, if Justification merited by Christ, be suspended until
it be fitly applied by faith, (that God may not justify a person under the
reign and power of sin, which is not agreeable to his Holiness and Justice?)

Seventeenthly, In his 103. page he is guilty of a double error: First, ^ag.
103.
in making God to impute sin to men before there was any Law to offend, or any
breach of that Law committed by man: And secondly, in Sin is apparently the
cause only of condemnation, but not of Gods purpose. Dr. Twisse, Exam. Mr.
Cot. p. 54.
confounding Gods hatred of Justice, with his negative act of non-election, or
preterition, which ought to be distinguished. He says, Though men will not
impute sin, or charge it where there is no Law to convince them of it; yet it
follows not but God did impute sin to men before there was any Law promulged
or before the sin was actually committed; for what is Gods hating of a person,
but his imputing of sin, or his will to punish him for his sin? Now the Lord
hated all that perish, before the Law was given. To which I answer, that Gods
preterition, or non-election, though it be justly called a hatred negatively,
yet this was an act of Sovereignty, and not of Justice: nor is this hatred an
imputing of their sin, nor was their sin foreseen the cause Reprobatio neque
damnationis neque peccati quod incretur damnationem est proprie causa, sed
antecedens tantum. Ames. Medul. c. 25. s. 40. 1 John 3.4. Romans 5.13.
of this act; And they that were not, could not have any sin imputed, yea, it
charge God with untruth, and with unjustice, to impute sin before committed;
for the very formality of a sin consists in the privation of that rectitude
the Law requires, or in the transgression of the Law: Now, where there is no
Law, there is no transgression; therefore the Apostle proves, That before the
Law was promulged, there was some Law given, and transgressed, by which sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, which was that Not the Moral Law
existing in the mind of God, before it was declared, as Master Air seems to
intimate in the same place.
positive Law forbidding Adam, and in him us to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of
good and evil; and had there been no Law; there had been no trangression; but
now from eternity there was no Law given, nor any person to whom it should be
given, and therefore from eternity there was no transgression; and therefore to
make God impute that which was not, is to ascribe unto God a fallible
judgment, and to make God to esteem them sinners before they were men; yea,
and in justice too will it charge upon God, to make him impute sin to them
which they ^^ver committed, and for this to hate them, and pass them by, and
not Elect them; Here is a complication of errors in this passage, God does not
esteem any person a sinner till by (...) act that he is guilty of, his Law be
violated, nor adjudge any man to punishment, nor execute, or inflict any
punishment until sin be committed: So that Gods imputation of sin follows
that act of sin, and does not precede it; and is a transient, not an immanent
act. And a little after he contradicts himself, A man is not a sinner before
he do commit sin, either by himself, or representative, which necessarily
supposes a Law, for sin is the transgression of the Law; Why then it
necessarily follows, no man was a sinner from eternity, and so God did not
impute it; but let it go for one of his Paradoxes, the Law and sin had a
coeternall existence in the mind of God, together with his own eternal
Essence.

Eighteenthly, When we urge Mr. Air with those Scriptures, He that believes
not, is condemned already, and the wrath of God abides on him, and that the
Elect are children of wrath, as well as others; and tell him, a man cannot be a
child of wrath, and a justified person at the same time, then the argument will
not hold, and is invalid, as you may see in his slight Answers to Mr.
Woodbridges Arguments from these Scriptures, Page 110, 111, 112. compared with
page 138.
page 110, 111, 112. and yet when he comes to prove that we are justified
immediately from the time of Christ's death, he can use the same Argument, and
then it is a divine Oracle; his words are these, p. 138. It was the will of God
(says he) that his death should be available for their immediate
reconciliation, for they could not be children of Christ, and children of Wrath
at the same time; and because this deserves a more full examination, and it was
an Argument used by my against Mr. Air in our conference, I will reserve what
I have to say further to it, to another place.

Ninteenthly, He says, That the Elect Corinthians had no more right to
salvation after believing, then they had before.] Unhappy man, Mr. Air, page
122.
that he should be the father of so many foul errors, what had the Elect
Corinthians when they were Idolaters, Fornicators, Adulterers, effeminate, and
abusers of themselves with mankind? had they then as much right to the
Kingdom of Heaven, as after? What will this man make the Kingdom of Heaven to
be, that admits of such Sodomites, and Whoremongers, to be the actual heirs
of it? If they had a right to the Kingdom of Heaven, they were a blessed
people; Oh blessed Sodomites! Oh blessed Whoremongers! if this Doctrine be
true; here was all the unhappiness of these Sodomitical Saints, they knew not
their happiness before, they had as much right to salvation as before, only
they had more knowledge of it after believing; but if they had as much right,
why does the Apostle say as such, they could not inherit the Kingdom of God?
Be not deceived, no such shall inherit the Kingdom of God; why then, what a
wrong is this to them, when they have a right to the Kingdom of God? Do any
persons more deserve the same style of the Gnostics of old, to be called the
dirty Sect, then such panders for the flesh as these? But I hope, such as fear
the Lord will take the Apostles caveat, and not be seduced by such filthy
dreamers, to believe that when they lie in Dalilahs lap, they are as dear to
God, and have at much right to the Kingdom of Heaven, as when they lie in
Abraham's bosom.

Twentieth, He says in page 129. That the best actions of the unregenerate are
impure, and sinful, which though they are all pardoned unto all the Elect for
the sake of Christ, yet they are not acceptable to God; but in themselves most
abominable, and loathsome in his sight. But are their persons acceptable and
justified, so as to have as much right as ever they shall have to the Kingdom
of God? And are their best actions, such as are their praying, hearing, for the
matter good, and duties commanded? and are all the sins pardoned, which make
them only evil in Gods sight, and yet are they abominable and loathsome in his
sight? who will believe you? can the want of faith (which is by you pardoned)
hinder the acceptance of their works, and not the acceptance of their persons?
Nay, what do you affirm of the actions of the Regenerate more, then may be
said of the actions of the Elect unregenerate? if they be justified persons, as
you say they are; for the best works of unregenerat, justified Infidels, as you
will have it, are (as you say) of the regenerate, pleasing to God, not only
comparatively, because better then the works of Reprobates, or then the sins of
unregenerate persons, but absolutely, 1. Abstractly, as you affirm of the
others, and in themselves, for they are such things as are lawful, and
commanded; and if they fail in the manner of doing it, in faith, hope, and
love, this is but a fail in the manner; and Gradus non variat speciem, and the
Regenerate Elect, fail in the measure of faith, hope, and love; neither in
them does their faith, hope, or love, merit the acceptance of their duties And,
2. Concretely, as they are acted by justified persons, and so pass through the
hands of pardoned persons, and the sins are washed away in Christ's blood; this
want of faith, hope, and love, is pardoned: I pray tell me now, what real
difference you make between the duties of an Elect unregenerate person, and of
a Regenerate person.

Let not the ignorant Reader mistake me here, I affirm not that any duties of
an unregenerate person are acceptable to God, or that the want of faith, hope,
and love, makes but a failing only in the manner and circumstances of the
duty; but I have only presented the Reader with a glass, to let him see that
Mr. Air for all the seeming difference he makes between the actions of the
Elect Regenerate, and unregenerate; yet indeed makes none, and according to
him it cannot be found.

Page 18.
Thus the Reader may see, that one truth of Mr. Air verified, where he says,
We may no more judge of Books by their Title, then of strumpets by their
foreheads; and although his Tittle-Page hold forth the Gospel-language of free
Justification, yet if thou read the Book, thou shall find Esaus hands, though
thou sometimes hear Jacobs voice; And therefore the Reader that is
judicious, will not be like a silly fish taken with the bait, though it swallow
the hook. I have given thee a few Animadversions, but a judicious Reader will
observe more. This is enough to give the Reader warning to preserve him from
the infection of this air: And I hope sufficient to reduce them that are led
captive by him into the same Error.

CHAP. VI. Proving that we are not justified from Eternity.
HERE I shall premise these few things.

First, That as we hold Justification to be a transient act, done in time, so
there is no transient act, but it presupposes necessarily an immanent act in
God.

And therefore secondly, I acknowledge there was an eternal, and an immutable
act of Gods will, decreeing to justify his Elect in time, through faith in
Christ.

Thirdly, As for that conditionate decree, which Arminians make in God, making
the condition antecedent to the act of Gods will, I no way acknowledge, and
judge it absolutely inconsistent with Gods Nature and Essence; but such a
conditional decree, as is so called subsequently, not in respect of God
willing, but in respect of the thing willed, sive objecti voliti, is not
repugnant to him especially in such contingent effects as come to pass by
virtue of his decree ordaining them; Thus God wills salvation to the Elect,
which salvation they shall be brought unto by faith in Christ; not that faith
is the cause of the act of Election, or God willing their salvation; yet it may
be the cause of the thing willed, a subsequent condition wrought by God for the
execution of his decree: And therefore when the Orthodox acknowledge Election
to be absolute, they understand it not exclusively to the means which God has
ordained for the obtaining of salvation; for God in the same eternal act did
ordain the end and the means; hence Paul tells the Thessalonians, that God
has from the beginning chosen them to salvation, through sanctification of the
Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2.
and belief of the truth; and Peter says, The strangers he wrote unto,
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the
Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. And as I
acknowledge this to be an eternal decree, (Because he chose us in him before
the foundation of the world, that we should be holy,) so I willingly grant it
to be immutable; for he that changes his purpose, does it for want of wisdom
in deliberating, or for want of power to execute it, neither of which can be
ascribed to God without blasphemy. And hence the Scripture says, The
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his.

Fourthly, I grant that Christ was elected, and constituted to be a Head, and
all the Elect were predestined to be his members, and in this sense we were
chosen in him, (not existing) but only we were pre-ordained unto salvation by
him. And that this act was one in God, in respect of whole Christ mystical:
although I deny, that the Elect were by this act of God mystically united unto
Christ, which is done upon believing; yet I grant a certain relative respect,
and mutual relation between them. In which sense the Elect are called his
people, before he saved them from their sins, and while they were not yet
converted, and his sheep for which he laid down his life, although not yet
brought home to him; yet was not Christ the meritorious cause of their Election
(much less their foreseen faith, or good works,) although he be the cause of
the effects of their Election; as therefore this salvation unto which we are
predestined, is the act of God, so Christ is the effect of Gods love of
Election, and the means of salvation, and our salvation is the end, in respect
of us; but as this salvation is our good, so Christ is the cause of it.

Fifthly, Though Christ were thus predestined to be a Head, and the Elect his
Members, yet was not he a Head actually from eternity, nor the Elect actual
members, because he had not a mystical body from eternity; and although God
decreed from eternity to justify the Elect through faith in Christ, yet were
not they actually justified: For Praedestinatio enim an^e applicationemgratiae
nihil ponit in praedestinatis, sed latet solum in praedestinante. Ames Medul.
Theol. cap. 25. sect. 2.
Predestination makes no internal difference between the Elect and Reprobate,
until actual grace be given for applying the things intended in Election; nor
does Predestination necessarily presuppose the existence of its term
Praedestinatio enim nec terminum nec objectum suum necessario praesupponit ut
existens, sed ponit ut existat ita ut vi praedestinationis ordinetur ut sit.
Amesii Medul. c. 25. s. 8.
, nor object, but the futurity of both. Having premised these things, (which I
have the rather more fully done, because he represents me and such as differ
from him, as Arminians and Papists,) I shall now prove that we were not
justified from eternity.

1. Gods decree to justify, is terminus diminuens, is a term of diminution,
and therefore is not actual Justification; it is amor ordinativus, but it is
not amor collativus; it is a love ordaining, and preparing good things for us,
but not an actual bestowing them; Justification is an actual bestowing of some
special mercy, a discharge from the guilt of sin and death, a passing us from
an estate of death into an estate of life; this may be intended, but is not
actually performed by Predestination, for it is a known rule, Praedestinatio
nihil ponit in Praedestinato: but I will not strangle the question so by the
prejudice of a word or two, therefore I argue,

2. The Scripture no where speaks of an eternal Justification; Therefore we
were not justified from eternity. The Antecedent is acknowledged and made use
of by Mr. Air, and a negative argument in matters of great concernment, is of
necessary consequence, it is not written, therefore there is no such thing: now
let Mr. Air produce one Scripture, wherein the decree of God to justify is
called Justification, and I yield the cause,

3. That that is an act of God done in time, was not done from eternity; But
Justification is an act of God done in time; Therefore it was not from
eternity. The Major needs no proof, the Minor is no less evident, Gal. 3.8.
Gal. 3.8.
The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through fainh,
preached the Gospel before unto Abraham, saying, in these shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed, where the Apostle makes it a work to be done in time,
that God would justify the Gentiles through faith, not that he had justified
them; whereas if he had meant Justification was eternal, it had been senseless
for him to say, that God would do that which was done already; nor is this
meant of a declarative justification in foro conscientiae, for it is such a
justification as Abraham had, but Abraham was not only justified in his
conscience, but before God; So, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. God has reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ. And God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their transgressions to them; But Christ did reconcile us
in time, and not from eternity; Therefore God did not justify from eternity.
Christ reconciles us to God, not only as God, but as God-man, by h s death, but
Christ was not God-man, and died not from eternity; Therefore, etc.

4. That action of God which makes a real change in the creature, is a
transient action done in time, because it passes from God to the creature, and
some way works a change; But Justification is such an action of God that
makes a present change; Therefore it is a transient, not an immanent act. The
Major is clear, for what action soever is terminated in patiente, or upon the
creature, is certainly transient, because it does not remain in God; and if
transient, it must be temporary, for no creature did exist from eternity. The
Minor will invincibly remain a truth, for it is most certain, that by
Justification the state of a sinner is changed; he that was in the state of
condemnation, is now in the state of salvation; Justification is opposed to
condemnation, He that is under condemnation, is not justified, and he that is
justified, is freed from condemnation.

Now let us see what he answers to this, page 65. where he answers this
Objection, that Justification imports a change, which cannot be attributed to
the simple decrees of God.

He answers, That if Justification be taken for the thing willed, the
delivery of a sinner from the curse of the Law, then there is a great change
made, etc. but if we take it for the will of God not to punish, then we say
Justification does not suppose a change, as if God had a will to punish his
Elect, but afterward he altered his will to a will not to punish.

Where let the Reader observe the vanity of his distinction, in separating the
thing willed from the act of Gods will; for the whole nature of Justification
does not consist in the thing willed, to wit, a delivery of the sinner from the
curse of the Law, but in some act of God as a Judge declaring his will to
deliver. Take a man condemned to die by a Judge, this prisoner may by power be
rescued from the sentence for the present, but is he therefore justified, and
acquitted in Law by the Judge? Justification is an act of God delivering the
sinner, or acquitting him from the crime, or accusation laid to his charge, and
so from condemnation; and where this is, there is necessarily a change.

2. Observe his equivocation, and fallacy in the second member of his
distinction; if we take it for the will of God not to punish, and then
Justification does not import a change, as if God had a will to punish his
Elect, but afterward he altered his will not to punish them; we are speaking
of a change made by Justification upon the sinner, he says, there is none made
in Gods will, quid hoc ad rhombum? and who said that God did first will, and
then cease to will, and then take up a new volition? truly, Arminians feign
such a mutability in God, but the Orthodox abhor it: Nor does Mr. Air
rightly understand, at leastwise represent the Orthodox Doctrine; we say, and
that truly, that God by one act of his will, willed that he that is a sinner,
and remains so in unbelief, should be liable to condemnation, and that upon
believing he shall be freed from condemnation, that before faith he should be
in a state of sin, and consequently of damnation, and upon faith that he should
be justified, and delivered from it. Here is no change in Gods will, but in the
object; a great change in man, but not in God; God may velle mutationem, when
he does not, as Aquinas says, mutare voluntatem: God may will a change in the
creature, when he does not change his own will; as a Father may will at his
death, and accordingly bequeatheth an estate to a prodigal child, and in case
he will become a new man, he shall possess and enjoy it; but if he will not,
he shall go without it; here he wills a change, but does not change his will:
So it is in the present case.

I will here also take notice what he adds, The change of a persons state
arises from the Law, and the consideration of man thereunto, by whose sentence
the transgressor is unjust: but considered at the tribunal of Grace, he is
righteous, which is not properly a different estate before God, but a different
consideration of the same person: God may be said to look upon him as sinful,
and righteous; as sinful in reference to his state by nature, as righteous to
his estate by Grace.]

I answer, The change of a man's state arises not from the Law, (for that
condemns him) but from an act of God acquitting him from the Law; if God did
not acquit him, the Law would not; It Is true, the Law pronounces him guilty,
because a transgressor, and so does God, whose Law it is; for it was the will
of God, so long as he remains a transgressor, without a righteousness to
deliver him, that he stould be in a damnable estate, and upon such a
righteousness as God has provided in Christ, if he believe, and be clothed
with this righteousness, he shall be saved: Now it is true, this man's state is
really changed, but God is not changed; for he willed according to his
righteous Law, his condemnation, he wills upon believing his salvation, and
this with one eternal unchangeable act of his will, and whom he has elected,
he gives faith, hence they are justified; here is a new effect of Gods love,
but not any new immanent act. Nor is there any truth in that, that God looks
upon a man at the same time as sinful, and righteous; if you mean by it an
estate of sin, and a righteous or justified estate, for this would ascribe to
God a fallible judgment, to judge them otherwise then they are; but if your
meaning be he may see at the same time what they were by nature, and what they
are by grace, it is not denied; but to look upon them as being in their natural
estate, and in a state of grace at the same time, implies an error in his
judgment, which is blasphemy to imagine, and is a contradiction in adjecto.

5. Christ's death is the meritorious cause of our Justification; But Christ's
death was not the meritorious cause of Gods eternal purpose; Therefore that
immanent act, or eternal purpose of God to justify us, is not our
justification. The Major is expressly delivered in the Scripture; Ephesians. 4.32. 2
Cor. 5.19. Romans 3.25. Heb. 9.12.
God for Christ's sake had forgiven the Ephesians, God was in Christ reconciling
the world, etc. and, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
faith, etc. He has obtained eternal redemption for us, etc. And to deny it,
were with Socinus that cursed Heretic, to deny the satisfaction of Christ. The
Minor is acknowledged by himself, page 67. It may be he will answer, as he
says in page 66, and 67. If Justification be taken for the will of God, so
Christ's death is not the Nihil movet voluntatem Dei nisi bonitas sua, Aquin. p.
1. q. 19. art. 2.
cause, etc. but if you take it for the thing willed, or effect of this will by
this immanent act of his, to wit, our discharge from the Law, etc. so it has
Christ's death for the adequate cause, but the vanity of this distinction is
discovered in the foregoing Argument; and here the Reader may see, he makes
Christ's death the cause of Justification passively taken, but of no act of God
in justifying. Besides, our deliverance from the Law, is an effect of
Justification, not Justification it self, which is an act of God for Christ's
sake forgiving us, upon which follows our delivery from the Law.

6. If we were actually and formally justified from eternity, then Christ died
in vain, or his death was not to purchase forgiveness, but to apply
forgiveness, or to manifest Gods love, not to satisfy Gods justice: But
Christ's death was not in vain; he died, not only to apply, but to purchase
forgiveness; not to manifest Gods love only, but to satisfy Gods justice;
Therefore the first consequence is evident, because his death was in vain, as
to the act of Justification: for as in the former Argument, Christ's death was
not the cause of that act, and Mr. Air acknowledges no other, and yet he will
have Christ's death to be the cause of the effect of that will; how can it cause
the effect, and be no cause of any act of Gods will? for we acknowledge it the
cause of the transient act of Gods will, which is properly our justification,
which act he will not acknowledge. The second inference is evident; for if we
were justified from eternity, then we were forgiven from eternity, and then
either Christ does but apply it at the most, for he did not purchase it, or
only he does but manifest Gods love to the world; but the Scripture is evident,
That he has purchased forgiveness, In whom we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of our sins; and he died to satisfy Gods justice;
hence, he is a propitiation for our sins.

7. This overthrows the merit of Christ's death, because, if we were justified
from eternity, then Justification is a due debt to the Elect, and then what
place is left for Christ's merit? for it must be bonum indebitum: that that is
properly merited, was not due before; but if we were justified, then it was
due, and so no room is left for Christ's merits.

8. That which will not secure the sinner from wrath, is not Justification: But
this decree will not secure the sinner from wrath. The Major is evident, for
how can he be justified that is not secured from condemnation? The Minor I
prove, because notwithstanding Gods decree Christ must die, there was a
necessity of Christ's death, (supposing Gods decree not to pardon sin without a
satisfaction;) I grant that Gods decree does eventualy secure the Elect, but
not actually; it is true, because a man is Elect, he shall not as to the event
be damned, but God will give faith to apply Christ's righteousness; but this is
not an actual acquittance, or discharge from sin, when the Apostle says, Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? that is, to such as are
declared, or evidenced to be Elect by believing, or effectual vocation. And
that the Apostle must mean so, is evident; the Apostle is comforting in that
Chapter Believers that are in Christ against condemnation: Now this he proves,
because they are Elect, The Elect shall not be condemned, but you are Elect;
Now how shall this be known? by faith and our effectual vocation: Hence in the
30. ver. he speaks of effectual vocation, as that that precedeth and is a
sign of Election; and hence we are commanded to make our Calling and Election
sure. Why is Calling put before Election? because our Election is unknown to
any, till it be evidenced by their effectual Calling. Now surely the Apostle
did not barely propound Election as a sign of Justification, without some
means to know it: for, how can a thing so secret be a comfort till it be
manifested? and how shall it be manifested, but by Faith and Sanctification?
therefore surely they being the subjects of his discourse, must be understood
by the Elect; Now if you take the Proposition, as an universal Negative, or
universal Affirmative, No Elect Believer can be justly charged with sin, or All
Elect Believers are freed from the charge of sin, both are true; but to take it
for the Elect antecedently to Faith, the Proposition is not true: for the Word
may, and does charge him with sin, for it threateneth damnation to him, but it
threateneth damnation for nothing but sin, and God does look upon him as a
sinner, and he ought to charge himself with sin; therefore though all Elect
Believers shall be freed from sin, yet all the Elect are not formally
discharged from sin. As for your weak and feeble endeavor to cast an Odium of
simplicity upon so learned a man as Master Burges, who is well known to be an
Aristotle to Mr. Air, that he should speak as weakly as if he said, Omne
animal is rationale, and to excuse it should say, that by omne animal he meant
omnis homo, and to prove the expression legitimate, should allege that homo is
often called animal, which is true; but very impertinent to prove, that omne
animal may be put for omnis homo; but it may be very justly retorted upon Mr.
Air thus, His opinion is, as if one should say, All the unregenerate
whoremongers in the act of their uncleanness, if they be Elect persons, are
Saints; and to excuse it, should say by Saints, he means justified persons;
and to prove the expression legitimate, should say, the justified persons are
often called Saints, which is true; but very impertinent to prove that
unregenerate Elect persons wallowing in uncleanness are Saints.

9. That which makes an Elect person never to be a sinner, not to be borne a
sinner, under the guilt of sin, so as to be a child of wrath, is contrary to
the Scriptures; But to assert with Mr. Air, that the Elect are justified from
eternity, is to make them never to be sinners, under the guilt of sin, and
children of wrath; Therefore it is inconsistent with the Scriptures to affirm
eternal Justification. For the Major, it is evident, that the Scriptures call
even the Elect sinners, children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. thus the Apostle
puts himself into the number, and says he, And they were children of
disobedience, under the power of Satan, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.
dead in sins and trespasses, workers of iniquity, and children of wrath as
well as others. And they could not be at the same time children of wrath, and
in the favor of God, and so he argues in his 138. page, in his second
Argument, to prove we are immediately and actually reconciled from the time of
Christ's death, he says, They for whom Christ died, could not be the children
of Christ at the same time, and children of wrath, and yet will not acknowledge
the truth of it, when we urge it against his eternal Justification; but let us
see what he answers to it in his 111. page in answer to this Scripture, he
says, it speaks most fully to the cause, but he answers two things.

First, That the Text does not say, God did condemn them, or that they were
under condemnation before conversion.

2dly. That the Emphasis of the Text lies in this clause, [That they were by
nature] children of wrath, that is, in reference to their state in the first
Adam; but this hinders not, but that by grace they might be children of love.

[1. He says, the Text does not say that God did condemn them,] I answer, it
says that that is equivalent to it; for it says, they were children of wrath;
by the wrath there, all Expositors agree is meant the wrath of God; and when
they are called children of wrath, it is an Hebraisme, signifying that they
were borne such, and surely subject to it, and obnoxious to divine wrath, and
guilty of eternal death; and to call a man a child of wrath, is to aggravate
the misery; as a son of perdition, is a hopeless, wretched, lost person; the
son of disobedience, a very graceless, disobedient wretch; so a child of
wrath, he is one to whom wrath is eminently due, as an inheritance is to a
child, and this is utterly inconsistent with the grace of Justification; for no
justified person can be truly said after his Justification to be a child of
wrath, liable to damnation, and guilty of it. For the clear understanding of
this, we must know what is meant by the wrath of God, to which the Elect are
subject.

First, By the wrath of God we must not understand any immanent affection in
God opposite to his eternal love of benevolence, or good will that he did bear
to his Elect; For,

1. There is not properly any affection in God that is a passion, to which God
is not subject.

2. God cannot hate, or be angry with his Elect, so as to cease bearing the
same good will toward them that he did from eternity. James 1.17.
This were no less then Vorstian blasphemy, for with him there is not the
least shadow of turning. This wrath then must be something that leaves them
liable to the same condemnation with the Reprobates, though with this
difference, that God bearing them this love of good will, will not leave them
in it, as he will the others; for which cause he is said to love the Elect, and
to hate the Reprobate.

I answer therefore, the wrath of God may be taken for that just and holy
immutable will of God to punish, and revenge the sins committed against him;
hence the Lord having created man, from whom as his creature he might justly
expect obedience, he therefore gives him a Law, and commands his obedience,
threatening his sin, or disobedience with eternal death or damnation; this
Law is given to all, both Elect and Reprobates, and all alike are bound to
yield obedience, and alike threatened in case of disobedience; now Adam in whom
we all were, as in our common Parent, being entrusted as a common person with
sufficient grace to yield obedience for himself and us, God makes a Covenant
with him, and in him with us, to give us eternal life in case of obedience,
and to punish him and us with eternal death in case of disobedience; he sinned,
and we all in him, and thus become liable to condemnation threatened; this is
the wrath here meant, when we are said to be children of wrath, that is, liable
to condemnation, and eternal death: Now the Elect are involved in this estate
as well as others; but now God from all eternity, bearing good will to his
Elect, and purposing to save them, and to leave the others under the
condemnation into which they are fallen, purposed to give Christ to take the
punishment due to their sins, and the wrath due to their persons, willing that
Christ should suffer what was due to them, and promising to give them
deliverance from this condemnation through Christ upon believing. Now Christ
being made a second Adam, ordained to be head of the Elect, the Elect must be
in him before they can be partakers of the benefit of his death, to give them
an actual deliverance from the wrath threatened; for we were not sinners in
Adam only by imputation, as an act of Sovereignty, but were in him in a natural
way, from whom we are descended; this natural union being the ground of Gods
imputation of Adams sin to his posterity, together with Gods ordaining him a
public person; now all sinned in him virtually, and were virtually guilty of
eternal death, and actually become subject to it at their birth; and hence the
Elect being borne of Adam, they become as yet members of him, and so are
subject unto death as well as others, and so remain till God cut them off from
the first Adam, and implant them into the second, this is done by faith; for
faith is not our righteousness, by and for which we are justified, but
answers to that which is the ground of our being partakers with Adams sin;
for we being one with Adam, in respect of original and nature, were in him, and
one with him, and were so involved in his guilt; even so by faith we are
implanted into Christ by a work of the Spirit, cutting us off by the Law from
the old stock upon which we grew, and by faith which he works in the Gospel,
he implanteth us into Christ, hereby we are only united, and now being one,
hence his death and sufferings in the merit of it is imputed to us, and hereby
are we actually acquitted and justified, and delivered from that wrath we were
subject to by nature. Hence then it is evident that we are children of wrath,
liable to condemnation at our birth, and then were not justified from eternity;
for if we were justified from eternity, then we never were borne sinners, under
the guilt of sin, liable to condemnation, for Justification is a removal of
this guilt; therefore the Scripture saying we are children of wrath by nature,
denies this eternal Justification, and so the Minor is also made evident.

2. I answer therefore to the second part of Mr. Eyre's answer, where he says,
that the Emphasis of this Scripture lies in these words, [by nature] where he
says, that in reference to their estate in Adam, they were children of wrath,
they could expect nothing but fiery indignation, yet this hinders not but
that by grace they might be children of his love, etc. Where observe, That the
Apostle does not speak of their natural estate, what it is as they are
descended from Adam, but he speaks of it what it was, as that which they were
actually delivered from, and are now not in the same state they were. And that
was a state inconsistent with the state of Justification, for it implies a
contradiction, that they should be in both at the same time, and that in
reference to God; it is true, they may be considered jointly in the mind of a
man, but no man can actually be in both these estates; sure, they are two
different estates, the Apostle is speaking of one in Adam, another in Christ by
faith, and at their birth they were in the first, in which they could expect
nothing but wrath, and God in that estate could not pardon them, keeping to his
own order of salvation, therefore then they were not justified; therefore when
he says, that this first estate hindered not, but that by grace they might be
the children of love, if he mean only that they might be the object of Gods
love of benevolence, and as an effect of it be brought out of that estate, it
is not denied; but if he mean that they were not then guilty of, and subject to
the wrath of God, and so were objects of Gods love of complacency, and
justified, and that they had as much freedom and deliverance from hell, and
actual right to salvation, it is denied, and he apparently contradicts the
Holy Ghost, who says, they are children of wrath, John 3.36.
and that while they remain in unbelief, the wrath of God abides on them;
there it was, and will remain till removed by faith; and it is not we that
suborne the Spirit to serve our turn, but he is found to bear false witness
against the Holy Ghost.

He adds, that God calls them his Sons and Children before conversion; be
it granted, yet this is not because they actually are so, but certainly shall
be made so; and to distinguish them for whom Christ died, from them that shall
perish, and to show that it was not for any thing in them, that he first set
his love upon them, therefore he calls them so, not because they were such
antecedently to their conversion, but consequently should be made such.

He adds likewise, that it is not any inherent qualification, but the good
pleasure of God that makes them his children; if he mean it is not any inherent
qualification that is the impulsive moving cause, inward, or outward, that
moves God to make, and take them for his children, it is readily granted; but
if he deny any inherent qualification, to be the means of bringing as into the
state of Sonship, that he has predestined us unto; he contradicts the
Holy Ghost, which says, John 1.12. John 1.1^.
To as many as received him, to them gave he power, not (...), but (...), right
and authority, privilege to become the Sons of God nor were we Sons from
eternity, but predestined to the Adoption of Sons, Ephesians. 1.5.
And ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

He further answers, page 112, by concession, Mr. Air, page 112, 113.
that the Elect in some sense are under wrath, because the Law does terrify
their consciences; but surely the Law does not only terrify their conscience^,
but threateneth death and damnation to their persons; and God by the Law, so
long as they remain unregenerate, and not only their consciences, as he
affirms, but their persons are under wrath, and the Law shows what their
estate is toward God, and how God does account of them, till they are
delivered from that estate by grace, and not only what he is by nature. For the
Law is the Law of God, and what power it has to threaten and condemn, it has
it from God, and therefore when that condemns, God condemns; if the person
be not already delivered from the damning power of it by Christ through
believing, so that it is not a mere scarecrow, or bug-beare to affright the
consciences of the Elect, when it cannot reach their persons; for it holds
their persons under condemnation, till by faith laying hold upon Christ, they
are delivered from the sentence of the Law; for Paul speaks of himself, and
the believing Romans, Romans 7.5.
that While they were in the flesh, that is, in their unregenerate estate,
wherein they could not please God, the motions of sins which were by the Law,
did work in our Members, to bring forth fruit unto death, the corruptions of
nature took occasion by the Law, forbidding sin, to commit sin more greedily,
and so to bring forth fruit unto death; i. e. death eternal, which is the wages
of all sin; and thus they did but heap up, and treasure up wrath for themselves
in that estate, till they were married to Christ, and so delivered from this
servitude and bondage of the Law, and of their corrupt nature. The Apostle in
that Chapter speaks not of being under the Law as a rule of life only, but he
speaks of being under the reign and dominion of it unto death, so as that a
man while under it is dead to Christ, and that he and the Elect Romans were
thus while they were in the flesh.

I will here add a word or two about his threefold distinction of the wrath of
God.

First, he says, It signifies the most just, and immutable will of God to deal
with persons according to the tenor of the Law, and to inflict upon them the
punishment which their sins deserve.

Secondly, It notes the threateni^gs and comminations of the Law.

Thirdly, It notes the executions of those threatenings. In the first and third
sense, the Elect never were, nor shall be under wrath; but in the second sense,
they are under the threatening of the Law, till they are able to plead their
discharge.]

Let us apply this to the Redemption wrought by Christ, and let us see how
great a friend he is to the Doctrine of Redemption; If you take the wrath of
God in the first sense, for the will of God to punish, according to the tenor
of the law, so they were not under wrath; if you take it in the third sense,
for the execution of wrath, they were never under it; for how could they be
under it, when God never intended it? what then did Christ redeem them from,
only the bare threatenings of the Law? why, so long as it was only a
threatening, and God intended not to execute it, what need Christ have died
according to him? surely Christ has delivered us from the execution of the
wrath, and there was a will in God to punish their sins, as well as the sins of
the Reprobate; though he would punish their sins in Christ, the sins of the
Reprobates in their own persons, and therefore Christ delivered us meritoriously
from the real effects of Gods wrath, not the bare verbal threatenings of the
Law.

I shall now show what effects of Gods wrath an Elect person still lies under,
till he be delivered through faith in Christ, and will cast it into a distinct
Argument thus:

10. If the Elect lie under the effects of Gods wrath till their actual
calling, then were not they justified from eternity; But the Elect lie under
the effects of Gods wrath. The consequence of the Major is evident, because a
man cannot lie under the eff^cts of wrath, and yet be delivered from that
wrath. The Minor I prove thus, by an enumeration of those effects according to
the Scripture, which are many.

1. To be in a state of alienation from God, so as to have none of their
persons, nor services accepted; Thus God is Psalm. 7.11.
angry with the wicked every day, yet so are the unregenerate, though Elect,
they are under the power of sin. And their prayers are rejected, The sacrifice
of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. Prove. 15.8.
And so are all the services of unregenerate men, though Elect persons, which
Mr. Air acknowledges, and they are truly called wicked persons, because they
are under the reigning power of sin.

2. They are under the sentence of damnation at their birth, for so says the
Apostle, Romans 3.19. Romans 3.19.
where he shows all persons in their natural estate are under the Law; that
is, the damning power of it, and become guilty before God; there was a time
that this was true: but if they be justified from eternity, then they never
were under this damning power, nor were guilty before God; for if they were
freed from eternity, when were they guilty? if there were any moment of time
wherein they were not free, then they were not justified from eternity.

3. They are subject to the curse of the Law, Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, therefore there was a time the Elect were under it; and if
under it, they were not justified from eternity.

Acts 26.18. Heb. 2.14. Tit. 1.15.
4. Yea, they are under the power of Satan; but he was not from eternity that
they should be under his power, they are in bondage to death, they have no
outward enjoyment sanctified, these and the like are sad effects of Gods wrath;
and how can they be justified, where these effects remain? and these all remain
till faith.

Acts 13.
11. The Reprobates were not condemned from eternity, therefore were not the
Elect justified. The consequence appears, Jude 4.
because contrariorum eadem est ratio, by Election the Elect are ordained to
life, by reprobation men are ordained to condemnation, these are contrary, and
among contraries there is the same reason: Now, if the Elect be justified,
because of Gods decree, then are the Reprobate condemned; but the Reprobates
are not condemned actually, therefore neither are the Elect actually justified.
Now this assumption is evident; for though Gods will be the cause of
reprobation, yet sin is the cause of the Reprobates condemnation; but God
cannot in justice condemn them for that which they never were yet guilty of;
it is true, God loved Jacob, and hated Esau before they had done good or evil,
they had not then according to Scripture done evil, and then God could not
condemn them, though he might pass them by, and not Elect them, which is
negatively or privatively called hatred.

12. If Gods decree to create the World, was not Creation, nor his will to call
Calling, nor to glorify Glorification, then his will to justify was not
Justification. To this Mr. Air answers, There is not the same reason, for
Creating, Calling, Glorifying, all which do import an inherent change in the
person Created, Called, Glorified, which forgiveness does not, it being
complete in the mind of God; To which I answer, that his reason is of no
force; for to be the subject of a moral change, does as necessarily require the
existence of the person, as to be the subject of a physical and natural change;
for, though the act may be perfect in Gods mind, yet the person cannot be
perfectly justified by that act, because he has not existence; can he be
pardoned, and acquitted, and declared just, that is so far from being an
offender, that he never yet was a man? The act of Gods will is perfect
concerning the sanctifying of a person before he have a being; but he is not a
subject capable, because as yet he is not; so God may will Justification, but
he cannot justify (deliver him from a state of damnation into a state of
salvation) till the person exist, who may be the subject of this change.

CHAP. VI. Showing that a man is not justified actually from the time of
Christ's death.
I Shall here first premise a few things, that it may be known what we affirm,
and what we oppose.

First, Then it is willingly granted, that Christ in his death was a Mediator,
and surety, and public person, and that what he did and suffered, was intended
for the benefit of the Elect.

Secondly, That Christ in his death made a full satisfaction to Divine justice
for all the sins of the Elect, so that the whole satisfaction is made, and the
price paid, and quoad meritum, the work is done; and in this respect he has
made an end of sin, because he has fully satisfied for it, so that there need
no more sacrifice for sin, Heb. 1.3. Dan. 9.24.
but he has purged our sins away meritoriously by his blood.

Thirdly, God is thus far well-pleased with this satisfaction of Christ, that
in respect of Christ our surety, God requires no more at his hands, nor at the
hands of those for whom he died by way of satisfaction, it being the full value
that his justice did require.

Fourthly, By his death he obtained in the behalf of the Elect, not a remote,
possible, conditional reconciliation, in an Arminian sense, as if our
redemption were to be completed by an act of our Faith, performed by the power
and liberty of our own free will, so that upon this condition to be fulfilled
by us, without the assistance of grace, the fruits of Christ's death shall
depend, for this had been to purchase for us only a salvability, not salvation,
and to make us our own Saviors; but Christ died absolutely to purchase
salvation, as absolutely is opposed to an Arminian sense of a condition already
explained; but if absolutely be taken to oppose Faith, as a condition to apply
Christ's righteousness, by the order which God has appointed in his Gospel,
which Faith God has ordained as a means to bring us into possession of Christ
and his righteousness, which faith God has ordained his Elect unto, and
Christ has merited, and shall be infallibly given for this end; In this sense
I deny, that Christ's death was absolutely a discharge from sin. And therefore
affirm, that an Elect person is not actually reconciled, so as to be
immediately justified, and discharged from the guilt of sin from the time of
Christ's death antecedently unto faith, nor did God accept of the satisfaction
of Christ for a present discharge to the sinner; but Christ having laid down
the price, the Father and Son did agree upon a way and order, when this
benefit shall become theirs, and that not to be till actual faith, according to
the tenor of the Gospel, which promises salvation only to him that does
believe.

Having thus explained my self, I now shall prove it by these following
arguments.

First, If Christ did not die absolutely for the Elect, that their sins should
be pardoned, whether they believe, or not believe, then are they not actually
discharged until Faith: But Christ did not die absolutely for the Elect, that
their sins should be pardoned whether they believe or not believe: Therefore,
etc. As for the assumption, it is such a sacred truth, that none that have a
spark of modesty or grace left will deny; for if Christ have died absolutely,
that they shall have pardon though they die in unbelief, let them show this,
and I will yield the cause; for if Christ had died to have the sins of the
Elect pardoned, whether they have faith or not, then an argument drawn from
Christ's satisfaction, and Gods accepting it so, would be nervous and strong to
prove an immediate reconciliation: but this can never be proved; for, Without
faith it is impossibe to Heb. 11.9. John 3.26. Acts 13.48.
please God: And, He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him; And,
As many as were ordained to life, believe^. And the Consequence of the Major is
proved thus; if Christ did not die absolutely to discharge them from sin
without faith, then he died for them conditionally, that they believe, and the
benefit of his death is limited until faith. Nor will it avail, to say that
faith is a subsequent condition, not antecedent, which I disprove by these
following Arguments.

1. If an unbeliever remaining so, cannot be the subject of Justification, then
Faith is not a subsequent, but antecedent condition of Justification: But an
unbeliever cannot be the subject of Justification; Therefore, etc. The Major
will not be denied where Reason dwells: the Minor I prove thus, because the
Scripture no where makes an unbeliever the subject of Justification.

2. Because then Justification is a privilege common to Believers, and
unbelievers; but the Scripture peculiarly, and solely applies it to them that
believe.

3. Because no man out of Christ, or disunited can be saved by Christ, for
Christ saves none but his Members; Christ is called the Savior of his Body,
Ephesians. 5.23.
and no unbeliever is a member of Christ; for as much as the mystical union is
made by Faith, for which I refer the Reader to my Sermon, and the Vindication
of it.

Secondly, Justification and Sanctification are inseparably joined: But were
not sanctified from the time of Christ's death, and antecedently to faith:
Therefore we were not justified. It is evident to experience, that
Sanctification is not in the least moment of time separated from Justification;
indeed we grant a priority of nature, and order, but not of time; Hence the
Apostle makes all that are in Christ new creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 John 1.6.
And if any man, says St. John, has fellowship with God or Christ, and
walks in darkness, he is a liar, and does not the truth; for then a man
might be the member of Christ, and the limb of the Devil at the same time; if
justified, he is a member of Christ; if unsanctified, a child of the Devil; 1
John 3.8.
He that commits sin, is of the Devil; nor can it be agreeable to the
purity of Christ's Nature, and Holiness to have an unsanctified member of his
body, nor will the purity and holiness of God the Father bear it, that any
should be his child that is not holy; nor can he that is a holy God, justify
a wicked wretch so remaining; Institu. Calvin lib. 3. c. 11.
whence Calvin in answer to Osiander, when he objected, Contumeliosum hoc fore
Deo, and naturae ejus contrarium, si justificet, qui reipsa impii manent. Atqui
tenendum est memoria, quod jam dixi, non separari justificandi gratiam a
regeneratione, licet res sint distinctae; It is contumelious and contrary to
Gods nature to justify those that remain wicked. To which he answers, But
we must remember that which I now said, the grace of Justification is not
separated from Regeneration, although they be several things.

Thirdly, If we were justified antecedently to our birth from the time of
Christ's death, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 6.9. John 3.
then we were never borne sinners under the guilt of sin; But this is contrary
to many plain Scriptures, that say, we were children of wrath, and such as were
unrighteous, and could not in our unregeneration inherit the Kingdom of God;
and for further proof, I refer the Reader to the ninth Argument against
eternal Justification.

Fourthly, If the state and condition of a man be truly altered, and changed,
and that before God upon believing, then was he not justified from the time of
Christ's death; But his estate is truly altered in the sight of God upon
believing; Hence it is said, that they are his people, which once they were
not, 1 Pet. 2.10. 1 Peter 2.10.
Which in times past were not a people, but are now the people of God; which in
times past were not under mercy, but have now obtained mercy; Hosea 1.10. Hosea
2.23.
which words are taken from the Prophet Hosea, upon which words Zanchy
observes, that a people are called Gods people three ways.

1. According to Predestination, thus it is said, God has not cast away his
people which he foreknew.

2. In respect of the Covenant under the Law, and so the Sons of Abraham were
Gods people, and they that were excluded from that Covenant, were none of his.

3. In respect to their exclusion, or admittance to the Covenant in the Gospel,
and thus the Elect Gentiles were once not a people, and then made a people to
the Covenant of Grace.]

And in this sense I add, all unregenerate, though Elect, are not Gods people,
until faith: And hence Zanchy says thus, that whereas the words should have
run thus, that in the place where it is said, ye are not my people, there it
shall be said, ye are my people, instead thereof he says it is said, ye are
the Sons of God, and he assigns three reasons, the third is, Vt melius hac
locutione indicaret rationem qua justificamur, and salvamur, nempe per fidem,
verbum Dei apprehensantem, (si enim filii Dei sumus, ergo nati ex Deo, si nati
ex Deo, ergo per semen Dei in nos illapsum, and a nobis apprehensum, and in
nobis retentum; semen Dei est verbum Evangelii in nos illabitur, per virtutem
Spiritus sancti, a nobis vero fide, quae it idem opus est Spiritus sancti, sola
recipitur, ergo sola fide fimus filii Dei. He speaks thus, that he may the
better declare the manner of our Justification, or Salvation, ta wit, by faith,
apprehending the Word of God, (where he takes faith not objectively, but
subjectively with connotation to the object;) for if we be the sons of God, we
are therefore borne of God; if borne of God, therefore by the seed of God
falling into us, and received, and retained by us. The seed of God is the Word
of the Gospel, it falls into us by the power of the Holy Ghost, but of us it
is only received by faith, which again is the work of the Holy Ghost, therefore
by faith alone we are made the sons of God; where you see that Zanchy makes
this great change to be by faith, and that such a change is made, is evident;
for before faith they are Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 2.26. Acts 26, 18. Ezekiel. 44.7.
Heb. 2.15. Mark 16.16.
dead in sins and trespasses, are children of disobedience, in whom Satan acts
and rules, by whom they are led captive at his will and pleasure; they are
under his power, they are unrenewed, uncircumcised, slaves, in bondage to
death, subject to damnation, children of wrath; but upon believing, are new 2
Cor. 5, 17, 2 Pet. 1.4. John 1.12. Ephesians. 1.5. 1 Pet. 1.3, 23.
creatures, partakers of the Divine Nature, they are actually instated into the
number of children, to which they were predestined, are begotten again to a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus from the dead, are borne again not of
corruptible seed, but incorruptible, the Word of God which lives and abides
for ever; But could this be affirmed of them ever since Christ's death? surely
no; therefore here is a change, and that before God, wrought in their estate by
effectual vocation, and therefore they were not justi^^ed before.

Fifthly, If we are exhorted to believe in God for pardon and remission of
sins, then were not we pardoned from the time of Christ's death before faith;
But we are thus exhorted to believe in God for the pardon of sins, Believe, and
thou shall be saved, Acts 16.31.
and the Scripture was written for this end that we might believe, and that
believing, we might have life through his Name. John 20.21.
The consequence is confirmed, because, if we were justified already before
faith, it were a needless exhortation to call upon us to believe for pardon,
when we are pardoned already, and therefore we might be called upon to believe
to get assurance of our pardon, but not to obtain pardon it self; it were an
exhorting us to seek for that by faith, which according to Mr. Air, is to be
evidenced, not to be obtained through faith, and so were a needless and a
groundless exhortation.

Sixthly, Such as were not mystically united to Christ at his death, could not
be justified actually by his death; But Believets that now live, were not then
mystically united; Therefore. The Major Proposition will need no shield and
buckler to defend it, for Christ justifies none but such as are in him; as the
first Adam brings condemnation to none but such as are in him, so the second
Adam gives life and salvation to none but such as are in him. The Minor is
proved, because that that is not, cannot be united; Believers were not then
existing. Besides,

2. This union is made by faith; They that were not existing, were not then
believers.

3. Christ's being a common person, is not sufficient to make the mystical union.

4. Christ as a public person, is a surety; but Christ as united to us, is a
Head, which are different considerations; in the one he is a meritorious, moral
cause of salvation, in the other a physical cause, or efficient natural cause.

5. The mystical union is by a work of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.
He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit; but if the mystical union be
made by Christ's being a public person, that needs not any new work of the
Spirit to join Christ and Believers together.

6. Those places, where it is said, Ephesians. 2.5. and 6.13. Ephesians. 2.5.6.13. Col.
2.13, 14.
and Col. 2.13, 14. That we were quickened with Christ, and are made to sit
together in heavenly places: And in Christ Jesus, we who were sometimes afar
off, are now made nigh; and that the handwriting of Ordinances was blotted out,
signify no more then that in, and through him, as a meritorious cause we
obtain such mercies, but they hold not forth Believers to be existing in him
before they had a being; and our sitting in heavenly places, is spoken only in
regard of the certain right we have thereunto, jus ad rem, though not jus in
re, and in a qualified sense, in Christ our Head who is already ascended.

Seventhly, Christ in his death was not mystically, but personally considered:
For, though he were a public person, and Mediator, yet as so, he was
personally, not mystically, considered in his death and resurrection, and the
Justification that he received from God; Therefore we were not justified
actually from the time of Christ's death. The Antecedent is thus made good,
because it was not Christ mystical that was crucified, but Christ the Son of
God; and, He trod the Isay 63.3.
Wine Press of his Fathers wrath alone; Christ mystical is not the Saviout of
the world, then the work of Redemption is to be attributed to every Believer,
and they are as truly Saviors of the world as Christ; but this is blasphemy to
imagine; and therefore if he were not mystically considered in his death, then
not in his Resurrection; nor in that Justification he received, and so by
consequence we were not justified by his death, nor were in him antecedently to
faith.

Eighthly, If we were pardoned from the time of Christ's death, then as
Bellarmine objecteth against our Divines that make faith an assurance, then it
is as absurd to pray for pardon of sin, as for the incarnation of Christ, and I
may add at for an immanent act in God, as to pray for predestination; because,
if it be a thing done already, then it is in vain to pray for that that is
done; Jame^ 5.15, 16.
but we are commanded to pray for pardon, as Peter taught Simon to pray for
pardon, Pray, that if it be possible, etc. And though the Elders of the Church
must pray for the sick, and if they have sinned, it shall be forgiven them; And
Christ teaches us to pray, Burgess Justifi. page 199.
forgive us our sins: Now in that prayer we do not pray, for assurance only,
but for pardon it self. For as Mr. Burgess has well observed to my hand, that
we must not depart from the literal sense of the words without an evident
necessity; But the plain sense is, that God would forgive our sin; our Savior
minding brevity, would speak his sense in the most perspicuous and clear
manner, that may be. And it is not as he observes so taken in other places,
when the Prophet Isaiah speaking of the Israelites, How their land was full of
Idols, Isaiah 2 94.
and both great men and mean men did humble themselves before them, prays,
Isa. 2.9. that therefore God would not forgive them; can any imagine that he
meant that God would not give them assurance of their forgiveness? And so,
Matthew. 12.32. the Evangelist says, All other sins may be forgiven but that
against the Holy Ghost: Now in that sense other sins are said to be forgiven,
in which sense that is denied to be forgiven, and that is denied to be
forgiven, not in respect of assurance, but really.

And so as he says, when it is applied to men, it is not meant of assurance;
For we are commanded to pray that God would forgive us as we forgive others,
and this last forgiveness it not meant of assurance; therefore neither is the
former.

Ninthly, Such as are under the power of Satan are not justified; But all
unbelievers are under the power of Satan; Therefore we were not justified from
the death of Christ antecedently to faith. The Major is not liable to
contradiction, because if a man be justified, he is accquitted by the Judge,
then what power has the Jayler to keep him in prison? neither will God nor
Christ permit a soul under Satan's power, that is discharged from guilt; that
very act of Gods, is his deliverance from the power of Satan. The Minor is
evident from Scripture, which says of the Gentiles, to whom Paul was sent by
special commission from Christ to open their eyes; It is said, that he was sent
to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, Acts 26.83.
from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ. Where
it is evident that these Gentiles were Elect, for whom Christ died, that when
he was in heaven, yet appeared in a vision to Paul, as he was going to Damascus
to persecute the Saints; And converts him, and then sends him as a special
Ambassador and Apostle to the Gentiles to open their eyes, to turn them from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God, etc. If they were from the
time of Christ's death justified, and pardoned, then they were not under Satan's
power, for that is inconsistent with Justification; and if they were pardoned
already, what need he send him to open their eyes, to turn them from Satan to
God, that they might receive forgiveness? this was the end why he was sent,
nor can it be meant of receiving the knowledge of their pardon, assurance of
their forgiveness; but that they might receive forgiveness it self.

And to this end also the Apostle Paul says of the Ephesians, That they walked
according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works
in the children of disobedience, intimating they were no less ruled and acted
by Satan, then other worldly men in whom he now effectually works.

Tenthly, If we were justified from the time of Christ's death, then the Elect
Jews are already justified, whom God will call in this latter age of the
world: But the Elect Jews are not yet justified: Therefore Justification is
not from the time of Christ's death. The consequence of the Major will not be
denied. The assumption I prove.

1. Such as are notingraffed as members into Christ's body, are not justified:
The Elect Jews yet uncaled, are not yet ingraffed into Christ's body. The major
is expressly confirmed, because Christ is the Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.23.
that is, only of his body; that the Elect Jews are not members of his body,
Ephesians. 1.23.
I prove, because they are not members of his Church, which is the body of
Christ.

2. They that are not called, are not justified: But the Elect Jews are not
called. The Major is proved from Romans 8.30. Whom he praedestinated, Romans 8.30.
them he called,, and whom he called, them he justified, and none else; and why
Mr. Air should deny that the Apostle does here set down the order of the
causes of salvation, contrary to all reason and authority, I cannot imagine,
but that he is not able to answer the Argument: and the contrary may be proved
out of the Text; for if in every thing else that relates to the salvation of
man in this place, the Apostle has observed the due order; why should we think
he has not assigned the right order of Vocation, and Justification? For here
the Apostle sets down the golden chain of salvation.

For the first cause is Gods foreknowledge, not a simple prescience or
foresight, a foresight of approbation, nor a foresight of men's faith or works;
but Pet. Martyr-Bullinger. Pareus. Erasmus.
whom he thus foreknew, or acknowledged, loved, and approved, without all cause
in them, moving thereunto, whom he thus foreknew with the knowledge of
approbation, so as to choose unto himself by that foreknowledge, so the Learned
render the word (...).

Secondly, whom God thus forknew he pedestinated, (...), he predestined, that
is, certainly appointed and ordained unto the end by certain means, he did
infallibly ordain them unto glory as the end, and appoint the means conducing
to that end, namely Christ and Faith, and whatsoever is needful to salvation.
Now when the Apostle speaks thus, who can judge but he means a special order
in this place?

Thirdly, in the next place he sets down the means, and that is effectual
Vocation, Whom he predestined, them he also called, that is, called them unto
faith.

Fourthly, Whom he called, them he justified, that is, pardoned for Christ's
sake, apprehended by Faith.

And lastly, Whom he justified, them he glorified; under which is comprehended
Sanctification, which will end in glory, which is the last link in this golden
chain, and it is against all reason to think the Apostle did not intend a
direct Series, and order of the causes of salvation in this place, from whence
then it may be concluded, those that are uncalled, are unjustified, so are the
Elect Jews. Therefore.

A third reason is, because they who are alienated from God, they are not
reconciled, and by consequence not justified; So are the Elect Jews yet
uncalled; Therefore, etc. As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your
sakes; but as touching the Election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake,
that is, as De Judaeorum gente in genere disserit, qui quod Evangelium, idest,
quatenus Evangelium non admittunc, nempe in praesenti conditi^ne sunt De^
exosi, etc.
Beza says upon the place, Quatenus Evangelium non admittunt, sunt Deo exosi:
quod ad Electionem attinet, etc. That is, as they refuse the Gospel, they are
enemies or hateful to God in the present condition for your sakes, which is to
be understood that God so ordered it for the Gentiles good, that upon their
rejection they might be called; but as concerning the Election, they are
beloved for the promises God made to their forefathers; but as to their present
condition they are hateful to God, therefore unjustified.

Eleventhly, That that makes the witness of the Spirit to be false, cannot be
true: But to make unbelievers, (though Elect persons) the subjects of
Justification does this: Therefore, etc. The assumption only needs proof,
Romans 8.15.
yet it is evident, because the Spirit does witness to the Elect unregenerate,
that they are in a state of bondage; whence that Spirit is called the Spirit of
bondage; but in this witness the Spirit is a Spirit of truth; therefore the
Elect unregenerated are not justified.

CHAP. VIII. Showing that we are justified by faith, and that when the
Scriptures speak of Justification by Faith, it does not understand it only
declaratively, but really in the sight of God, nor objectively excluding the
act, and the instrumentality of Faith is proved.
HEre also for a right understanding of the matter in hand, I shall premise,

First, That we are not justified by faith in the sense of the Papists, as if
it did justify us per modum causae efficient^^ and mor^^oriae as a proper
efficient and meritoriour c^^^e, which by its own worth or dignity deserves to
obtain Justification; so Bellarmine says, Bellar, De Justific. l. 1. c. 17.
it does justify, impetrando, promorendo, and inchoando justificationem. Nor,

Secondly, Do we say that faith justifies in an Arminian sense, as if the (...)
credere, the act of believing were imputed to us for righteousness, or that
Faith in the Covenant of Grace stands instead of that obedience we owe to the
Moral Law; so as that our imperfect faith is for Christ's sake accepted for
perfect ^ighteousnesse.

Thirdly, Faith does not justify us as the matter of our righteousness, as a
grace, or a work, or an act, or a habit; but the matter of our Justification,
is Christ's righteousness and obedience.

Fourthly, Faith is not to be taken objectively only, that is, for Christ, as
Mr. Air interprets it, though it be willingly acknowledged, that we are
justified by no other righteousness, then the righteousnese of Christ. But,

Fifthly, I take Faith subjectively and properly for the grace of Faith, and
that act of it whereby as a hand it lays hold upon Christ for Justification,
and so it is to be taken with connotation to its object; That if you ask for
what I am justified, I say, the only righteousness of Christ imputed; if you
ask by what I am justified, I answer, by Faith, as an hand to put on Christ, as
an instrument appointed by God to apply Christ, so that Faith is not the matter
of my righteousness; but answers in my participation of the righteousness
in Christ, to that which is the ground of my being partaker in Adams sin.

Sixthly, This grace of Faith is the free gift of God, not the birth or spawn
of free will, but the effect of Election, and a fruit of Christ's death.

Seventhly, When the Scripture says, We are justified by faith, it is to be
taken for this grace of Faith relatively considered as to its object; and by
applying Christ's righteousness, a Believer is justified really in the sight of
God by a change of his estate, from death to life; so that it does not only
declaratively evidence Justification to the conscience, but instrumentally it
justifies us, so as that I must be justified by it, though I am not justified
for it. These things premised, I shall now prove it.

It were needless to mention the Scriptures that expressly say we are
justified by faith, it being acknowledged that the Scripture clearly speaks
so; but only the difference is, how this is to be taken, whether properly,
metonymically, or both? to which last I incline in the sense explained: So that
neither Christ alone, nor Faith alone do justify; but that they are social
causes, though not coordinate, and ejusdem generis, of the same kind or
worth; but Christ is a moral meritorious cause, Faith the instrumental working
only virtute agentis principalis, by the power, order, constitution of the
principal agent, to the production of an effect far above its own native-worth,
or power.

Argument the first, against declarative Justification; The matter in
controversy between Paul and the Justiciaries in his time was not by what we
come to the knowledge of our Justification, but by what means we are justified;
it is of far greater concernment to be justified, then to know his
Justification; he said, we were justified by faith, they by the Law; whence I
reason, If faith (taken subjectively) for the grace of faith do only evidence
Justification, then we are no more justified by faith then by works; But the
Apostle ascribes more to faith then to works; Therefore faith does more then
evidence Justification. The consequence is evident, because works may evidence
Justification; nay, works are of a more declarative evidencing nature then
faith; Hence the truth of faith is evidenced by works, not only to others, but
to our selves; and that works evidence this Justification of a sinner, is
apparent, Romans 8.1. Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit; By this we know that we are passed, etc. 1
John 3.14.
Now the Assumption I confirm thus, that the Apostle attributes more to faith
then to works, because the Scripture no where says we are justified by works
in his blood, but it says we are justified by faith in his blood; And when the
Apostle speaks of Justification by faith, he means of a Justification
before God, as in that third to the Romans, he concludes by a sound argument,
that we are justified in the sight of God, and not before conscience: Thus, if
all have sinned, and are come short of the glory of God, and so are inherently
wicked, then we are not justified by what we can do; but we are all thus guilty
before God, therefore in his sight shall no flesh living be justified; He
speaks there a Justification in foro Dei, in the sight of God.

2. If faith do only declare that we are justified, then Paul did not say true,
in denying that by the works of the Law, or holiness, we are justified; for if
he spoke of a declarative Justification, he had no reason to deny that we are
justified by the works of obedience done to the Law, for works of
Sanctification do evidence this, 1 John 2.3, 4. 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 John. 3.14. 1
John 3.24. Romans 8.13, 14.

3. If when the Scripture says, we are justified by faith, be meant only we
are declaratively justified by faith, then we may as well say we are elected by
faith, as justified by faith; because faith will as truly evidence Election, as
Justification; hence we are commanded to make our Calling and Election sure; 2
Pet. 1.10.
but the Scripture says not we are Elected by faith, or through faith, but
chosen unto says; therefore faith has an influence into Justification, though
not into Election, and something more is intended then a declarative
Justification.

4. Then Faith is not a believing on Christ for pardon, but a believing on
Christ because I am pardoned; and if so, then an Axiom or Proposition,
according to Mr. Air, is the object of justifying faith, contrary to all the
Actus credentis non terminatur ad axioma, sed ad rem, fatentibus Scholasticorum
clarissimis. Amesii Medul. Theol. l. 2. c. 5 24.
Orthodox, who make Christ, or the mercy of God in Christ, the object of Faith.

5. Then Faith may be necessary to Consolation, but it is not necessary to
Salvation, contrary to the Scripture which says that salvation is the end of
Faith, and we believe unto the saving of our souls.

6. This inverteth the order of the Gospel, for that commands us to believe
that we may be justified; this says, we are already justified, therefore we
must believe; The Scripture says, We are justified by faith, This opinion, as
Mr. Woodbridge observes, makes us to be faithed by Justification.

7. Then it is not lawful to pray for pardon of sin, but for assurance, the
vanity of this is before discovered.

But Mr. Air will object, that when the Scripture says, We are justified by
faith; the meaning is by Christ, taking faith objectively, and exclusively. To
which I answer, that we deny not faith to be taken objectively, if you speak of
the matter of our righteousness; but that therefore faith is excluded, and
that the object justify without the act; I deny, and prove thus:

First, It conduces much to the belief of this truth, that faith is to be
taken subjectively with connotation to its object; or that faith subjectively
taken, is not excluded from Justification, because the letter of the Scripture
expressly in many places, affirms that we are justified by faith.

Secondly, I conceive the matter in controversy between Paul and the
Justiciaries, was not only precisely, and abstractively considered, what is the
matter of our righteousness that God requires for our Justification, for then
his direct answer had been the righ eousnesse of Christ, excluding faith, for
faith is in no sense the matter of our righteousness, for which we are
justified, for then faith and works had not been opposed, and we were then
justified by works; but I conceive the question was, what was the matter of
this righteousness, and how is this ours, as app areth by his answer: Now if
the righteousness of Christ be the matter of Justification, and is made ours
by imputation antecedently to faith, the Apostle did impertinently add faith
in the answer to the questions, that we are justified by faith in Christ, if
that be excluded from applying Christ's righteousness; for he is not speaking
here of a declarative Justification, what shall evidence it to my conscience,
and give me knowledge of it, but what justifies me? and seeing it is something
without, done for me, and imputed, how is it mine? not, how is it known to be
mine? Therefore faith is not exclusively taken.

Thirdly, If when it is said we are justified by faith in Christ, the object is
understood by the act, excluding the act, then why is it that in most places
where Justification is spoken of, that the object and the act are both
expressed, if by the object and act the same thing be intended?

Fourthly, It is not probable that the Apostle in such a weighty controversy,
wherein he did desire to speak clearly (and had most reason to speak clearly,
rather then elegantly, and obscurely) should take the act for the object, if
the act had no influence into Justification, (neither as the matter of
Justification, nor the instrument to apply it,) for danger might arise, and is
given by such an expression, to ascribe something to faith in the point of
Justification, if his intent were to exclude it, therefore he intended not to
exclude it; hence we justly ascribe instrumentality unto faith, in applying
Christ's righteousness to Justification.

Fifthly, If Abraham's faith by which he was justified, was subjectively taken
for the grace of faith, yet relatively considered to its object, then our faith
that are the children of Abraham, is so taken in the point of Justification,
this inference shines clearly like the Sun at noonday; But Abraham's faith was
subjectively taken, with relation to its object; Therefore. The assumption is
proved from Romans 4.3. Romans 4.3.
For first, besides the letter, where it is said, that it was imputed to him
for righteousness, that is, his faith, believing on God, so that faith is
described, verse. 17. in many excellent acts of that faith, ne there of which can
in propriety of speech be applied to Christ's righteousness, and why the
Apostle should impertinently break out into many expressions in the
commendation of his faith as a grace, when he is treating of the point of
Justification, and stir up us to the imitation of the like faith, telling us
that it was written for our sakes, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness, and that our faith (believing on God that raised our Lord Jesus
from the dead) shall be imputed to us for righteousness, if we so believe; if
faith has no hand in Justification, to apply Christ's righteousness to that
end, I can no way rationally imagine.

Sixthly, Nor can I see any supereminent excellency in that grace above all
other, as the Scripture expresses, and Divines acknowledge, if its noblest
effect of Justification be denied, but as works of Sanctification do as
evidently declare Justification as Faith, as I have showed; so the grace of
love far excels it in other respects; Therefore is it not exclusively
taken in the point of Justification.

Seventhly, Besides in Romans 4.5. it is said, That to him that believes, his
faith is imputed for righteousness; where something belonging to the Believer
is called his, to wit, the act of faith, which is his before the imputation of
it is made to him, and that is imputed for righteousness; that is, that act of
Faith relatively considered, is that that gives him a title to Christ's
righteousness, and so that that is due to Christ, is attributed to the act; and
hence that is said to be imputed for righteousness: Now that Christ without
faith justifies not, I prove by these follow arguments.

1. If Christ's righteousness will not profit a man without faith, the^ Christ
alone separated from faith, does not justify; But Christ's righteousness will
not profit any man without faith; Therefore, etc. The Major carries sufficient
light. The assumption is proved, because Christ says to the Jews; John 8.24.
John 6.
If ye believe not, ye shall die in your sins; and, Ye will not come unto me
that ye might have life; where though there be righteousness in Christ to
justify, he says, If they believe not, they shall die in their sins; and, He
that believes not, shall be damned; there was life in Christ, but for want of
coming, or believing, they did not partake of it. I am not ignorant what Mr.
Air will answer (as I conceive) to this, That Christ's righteousness will not
profit him that is a final unbeliever, and that Faith is a consequent condition
of Salvation, but not an antecedent means to apply Christ's righteousness. To
this I answer, that the Scripture speaks of unbelievers indefinitely, He that
believes not, shall be damned; and therefore it is understood of all
unbelievers, so long as they abide such, they are under condemnation. Let Mr.
Air produce one Scripture that holds forth an unbeliever the subject of
Justification, or one instance of a justified unbeliever; and if final unbelief
will hinder salvation, then temporal unbelief may hinder the application of it
for the time present; and so long as he continues an unbeliever, it is of the
same nature with final unbelief, because it keeps the soul from coming unto
Christ for life. To the second exception, that it is a subsequent, not
antecedent condition of Justification, I answer by a second Argument thus:

2. If Christ's righteousness be the end of faith, and is obtained by faith,
then it is antecedent unto the Application of it; But it is the end of faith,
and obtained by it. The Assumption only needs proof, and yet the Apostle
expressly affirms it; Romans 20.10.
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation. And, To him that believes, it shall be
imputed to him for righteousness; that is, Christ apprehended by faith, shall
be imputed to him for righteousness; It is not said, man believes with the
heart to the manifestation of righteousness, but unto righteousness,
righteousness being that which he attaineth by believing; and hence salvation
is called the end of faith, 1 Pet. 1.9.
receiving the end of your faith the salvation of your souls, and life is made
the end of believing, John 20.31. John 20.3^.
These things are written, that ye might believe, and that believing, ye might
have life through his Name; not that ye might know ye had life before ye
believed, but that believing ye might have life, and Christ is the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that believes, God did therefore cause the
Law to be delivered, that by the knowledge of men's sinfulness manifested by
the Law, they might fly to Christ for righteousness.

3. If no man have eternal life, but such as eat Christ's flesh, and drink his
blood, then no man antecedently to faith has eternal life, and by consequence
Christ justifies not without faith; But no man has eternal life, but he that
eats his flesh, and drinks his blood; Therefore. The Assumption are the words
of Christ, John 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you; where Christ compares himself to food. Now as food, though never
so good nourishes not, unless we eat and drink it, and it be incorporated into
our body, and become one with us; so unless we thus eat Christ, etc. that is,
unless we feed upon his death and sufferings by faith, and apply them by
faith, so as to be one with him, we cannot live by Christ; where observe,
Christ is the Food, Faith is the Hand to take this Food, and the Mouth to eat
it, without which this food will do us no good; so here, therefore he has no
life, and an unbeliever has not yet eaten.

4. Such whose minds and consciences are defiled, are not justified; but the
minds and consciences of all unbelievers, are defiled. The Major appears,
because when Christ justifies, he Heb. 10.22
purges from an evil conscience. The Minor is expressed, Tit. 1.15*
where he speaks indefinitely of unbelievers, and therefore it is understood
of all.

5. Such whose persons are abominable, who are Reprobates to good works are
unjustified; such are unbelievers, for he speaks there indefinitely of all
unbelievers.

Having then proved Justification not to be before faith, I shall now prove the
instrumentality of Faith unto Justification, and the consistency of it with the
free grace of God.

For the right understanding whereof we must know, what an instrumental cause
is, and wherein the nature of it consists, and whether an instrumental cause be
in the number of true causes, and to what it is reducible, and then apply it to
faith.

Now we must know that an instrument has diverse significations, I will not
trouble the Reader with all, sometimes it is taken for any thing which is
moved, and directed by a superior agent, thus the Platonists take it, and
according to this acceptance every agent but God is an instrument, and God
alone in this sense is the principal efficient cause of all things; and thus
Isaiah the Prophet seems to take it, Isaiah ^0.15.
when he calls the King of Assyria Gods Axe, and his Saw, in respect of God
that used him for the destruction of the Nations; and in this sense all causes
as they depend upon GOD in their working, are instruments: but we take it not
in this sense.

2. To omit the rest, an instrument according to the vulgar, and usual
acceptance of it, is any thing that is used by the superior agent, moving,
and directing it to the production of an effect superior to it self; for if it
be proportionated to the effect, it is not an instrument, but an efficient
principal cause. And I conceive five things are required to an isntrumental
cause.

First, That it be a necessary antecedent to the effect, not a consequent of
it; and I say a necessary antecedent, to distinguish it from a contingent
antecedent; not that the whole nature of an instrumental cause consists in
this; for a thing may be a necessary antecedent, and yet not a cause of the
thing, as the opening of a man's eyes is a necessary antecedent to sight, but
not a cause of sight, that is the eye, or the visive faculty.

Secondly, It must be moved, acted, and directed by the superior agent to its
end, as a Carpenter uses his artificial instruments to the building of a House.

Thirdly, That it be used to produce an effect exceeding the efficacy, and
activity of the instrument, so that the effect is more noble then the
instrumental cause of it; As a Minister is Gods instrument by whom men are
converted, and brought to faith; but is not called an instrument in respect of
the natural birth of a child begotten by him, because in the first the effect
transcends the efficacy of the instrument; but it is not so in respect of the
natural birth, because there is a proportion between the cause and the effect.

Fourthly, It must be subservient to the action of the principal agent; hence
the action of the principal agent and the instrument is the same.

Fifthly, That it have an influence into the effect by a proper causality.

I will apply this to faith, only I will here add whether it be in the nature
of true causes, and to what cause it must be reduced, because there are but
four Heads of causes: The Material, Formal, Efficient, and Final. Scalig.
Exer. 297. s. 3.
Some exc^pt that an instrument is not in the number of true causes, because it
does not move, nisi moveatur, unless it be moved: but this is not essential to
a cause to move, and not to be moved; for so the Efficient should not be a
cause, because it is moved by the end, and so all adjuvant sociall causes
should be excluded; Therefore it is a true cause, yet not a first cause, as
Plato and Galenus, ut refert. Scheib. Met. l. 1. c. 22. p. 308.
some imagine, but is reducible to one of those four Heads of causes, which
are generally acknowledged to be as above recited; Therefore I take it to be
reduced to the Efficient, and so it is an instrumental efficient cause, not the
external impulsive efficient cause of it, that is peculiar to the merits of
Christ.

Now that faith is such an instrumental cause I prove, because all those
properties of an instrumental cause above cited belong to it.

First, It is a necessary antecedent unto Justification, as I have already
proved, for without Faith no man is justified; it is not barely antecedent, as
causa sine qua non, as a cause without which a thing is not done, which is only
present in the action, but does nothing therein, and therefore is an equivocal
cause, and that is indeed none, having nothing but the name of it, but is that
by which it is done.

Secondly, Faith is moved, acted, directed by GOD the superior Agent unto this
end, GOD is the principal Agent in Justification; Acts 13.48.
Faith is wrought by GOD in the soul, for it is his gift, and directed by God
to this end, to bring us to Justification; He has ordained us not only to
life, but to Faith, as a means to obtain it: As many as were ordained unto life
believed. And whom ^e predestined, them he also called, and whom he called,
he also justified.
And if God had not appointed Faith as a means to apply Christ's righteousness
unto Justification, Faith could not produce such an effect; and God has
expressed his will, That he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes should not perish, but have eternal life. These two Propositions have
been sufficiently confirmed already.

Thirdly, That the effect, to wit, Justification does exceed the efficacy, and
act vity of Faith, I think none will deny; so if we consider the excellency of
the privileges of Justification, how thereby our sins are pardoned, we
reconciled, adopted into the number of Gods children, and so are made coheir^s
with Christ of eternal life; How could Faith merit or effect this? There is no
proportion between this grace, and the great things received by it.

Fourthly, It is subservient to the action of the principal Agent; not that it
is needful to God, as if he could not produce the effect without it, had it
been his will and pleasure, as a Carpenter depends upon his instruments in
working, without which he cannot build: But God judged it the fittest means to
apply Christ's righteousness to Justification, and has given to Faith this
peculiar office to apply it; so as that God has concluded with himself to
justify none unless they believe. Hence, though Justification be Gods act,
yet Faith which he works, and freely gives, is the means by which Gods
eternal will and purpose to justify, is executed, not by working any new will
in God, but being that condition upon which God has purposed, promised, and by
Covenant obliged himself to perform it; and thus it concurreth with God, and
God with it to the act of Justification.

Fifthly and lastly, Mr. Ball, p. 19.
It has an influence by a peculiar causality into Justification, as Master
Ball says on the Covenant of Grace, [As the eye is an active instrument for
seeing, and the ear for hearing, so is Faith for justifying] Hence the
Scripture frequently says, we are justified by and through Faith, which
indemonstrably shows the instrumentality of this grace; And although this act
be nothing but a receiving, and so equivalent only to a passive instrument; God
effects Justification, and passes the sentence, forgiveth the sinner; Faith
receives the mercy offered, receives Christ, and in him forgiveness, and so
believes unto Justification. Nor do we in so saying Deify Faith, nor commit
sacrilege against Christ; the power of life and death is Gods, and he
forgiveth, not Faith; Christ is our righteousness for which we are justified,
Faith is not our righteousness, but an active lively instrument of the soul,
wrought by God to apply this righteousness; and it is more properly called in
reference to God, his work, then his instrument; yet as it is subservient to
his end or work of Justification, I see not any reason why it may not as fitly
be called his instrument to our Justification, as any thing else he uses to
produce an effect by, may be called his instrument, not because he needs it,
but because he will not do it without it: And hence there is a twofold action
in Faith, as in other instrumental causes; one isntrumental, the other proper
and peculiar to it self. The instrumental action of Faith is, that it helps
the action of God in justifying, because now God according to his own
constitution in the Gospel may justify; which observing his own order, he
cannot do, until Faith, that which is proper to it, is as it relates to the
subject, and so it is an instrument of the soul to receive, and apply Christ's
righteousness unto Justification.

Nor have I asserted any thing in this that is inconsistent with the freeness
of Gods grace. For,

First, I make not Faith an uncertain effect depending upon man's free will,
upon which the act of Justification should depend; Acts 13.48.
but a certain effect of Gods eternal purpose, and a fruit of Christ's death,
which shall infallibly in Gods due time be wrought: Now all Gods purposes of
grace are free.

Secondly, I make not Faith the matter of our righteousness for which we are
justified, but ascribe that to the active and passive obedience of Christ.

Thirdly, Though Faith be our act, yet is it Gods gift; and therefore salvation
is no less of grace, though by Faith, then if it were without it; and if it be
an instrument helping the principal Agent, yet being wholly wrought by God, and
all the efficacy, and activity that Faith has, it has it not by any thing
intrinsecal to it, but extrinsec^^; and by G^d^ (...) the Covenant of Grace,
and merciful a^ceptance o^ it, this ^o way obsc^^eth the grace of God; and
therefore Paul ^^^th ^he inheritance is therefore by faith, that it might be of
grace; and, Romans 4.16.
Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, it is the gift of God,;
Faith, it is an emptying, soul-humbling, and a Christ-exalting grace; it
renounceth all its own righteousness, it goes out of it self into another,
relieth wholly upon Christ for righteousness, and receives heaven as an alms,
and all from God as a free gift; and the more faith there is in any, the less
pride, and resting upon any thing in our selves; Therefore hereby the grace of
God is no way the less free, though that be the instrument to apply Christ's
righteousness unto Justification.

Fourthly, we do not make Faith an antecedent condition, moving and inclining
Gods will to receive us into Covenant with himself, but we make it antecedent
to our being admitted to partake of the benefits of the Covenant.

CHAP. IX. Showing how weakly he has defended himself against the charge of
Antinomianisme, and likewise manifesting that the Authors brought by him in
defense of his Error, do some in the same place, and most of them jointly
bring in evidence against his cause.
MAster Air, Page the 19th. complains that his Doctrine is called an
Antinomian Error, page 19.
(which is somewhat like the temper of such evil men, page 27.
which the world is too full of, that are more ashamed to be thought to be
evil, then to do it.) And he says, if it be an Error, it is an
Anti-evangelical Error; Is not this a good Incidit in Scyllam, etc.
choice, to choose rather to be accounted a corrupter of the Gospel, then an
enemy to the Law, which is by so much the greater sin, as the Gospel excels
the Law? and although I willingly grant, and judge his Error to be
diametrically opposite to the Gospel; yet if the Antinomist be cast into his
right tribe, he will derive his pedigree from this Anti-evangelical principle,
and therefore this child will lie at his door still; but he purges himself
from this crime, by saying that it has been an old design of Satan to blast
the truths of God with odious nicknames: This I acknowledge, and he verifieth
it himself, by stiling the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, to be a joining
in confederacy with Papists, Socinians, and Arminians; for such he makes all
that dist^r from him, and enemies to the free grace of God; yet he will not see
this beam in his own eye, when he can see a mote in his brothers.

2. He says, that by all the Diagnosticks, which Divines have given us to
discern between Truth and Error, it has the complexion of a saving Truth, by
which I am contented to try it; and let me bear the blame of it, if the beauty
of that complexion vanish not at the warm breath of the nex^ Argument, as much
as Jezabels painted color faded, when the heat did transform her again into
her first deformity.

I admit of the rule that he gives to try it by. That Doctrine which gives
most glory unto God in Christ, is certainly true, and the contrary is as
certainly false. Now let such, as he says, that are least in the Church judge,
which opinion gives most glory unto God, his or ours; Either his which
asserteth, That an Infidel, and an ungodly person Mr. Air, p. 10.
so remaining under the reigning power of sin, even while he lies like a swine
wallowing in the mire of sin, committing uncleanness, and that with
greediness; yea, in the very act of it, if an Elect person, he was justified
from Page 64.
eternity in the decree of God, and from the time of Page 67, 68.
Christ's death being united to him, because they were then in him as a Page 7.
common person; and so while they are thus in their Page 60, 61.
unregenerate estate, being thus considered, God beholds them as righteous
persons, perfectly righteous, and accordingly deals with them, and Divine
Justice cannot charge them with the least sin, nor inflict upon them the least
of those punishments which their sins deserve: so that while they are thus,
they have as much Master Air, page 122.
right to salvation as ever they shall have, though they may by faith have more
knowledge and comfort of their happiness, yet they have no more right, nor is
their estate changed before God upon believing as to Justification, but only
their former blessedness is made Page 66,
evident to their consciences. This is the soil of that brutish opinion, and
although in so many words together, Master Air Page 76.
has not expressed his mind; yet it is fairly without any wrong to his
opinion, without wire-drawing per fidiculas consequentiaru^, by threeds of
consequences, which he disclaimes, collected, as may appear by comparing it
with the places quoted in the Margin.

Now we hold, and maintain, God purposed in his eternal decree to justify his
Elect in time, to that end he sent Christ in the fullness of time to die for
their sins, that a full satisfaction might be given to his Divine Justice, as a
foundation of Gods gracious act of Justification, which is not immanent, but
transient; and now by Christ's death the price is paid, and we are meritoriously
redeemed; but it was the will of the Father and the Son, that none should have
actual benefit, as to a present discharge from the guilt of sin until faith,
which faith is not the effect of free will, but a certain effect of Gods
decree, and fruit of Christ's death, which shall be given to all the Elect for
application of the righteousness of Christ, and his satisfaction unto their
actual Justification: By which faith we are united to Christ, and so partake of
the saving benefits of his death.

Now let the Reader judge which gives most glory to God in Christ, his or ours.

First, Does he ascribe the whole work of salvation to the grace of God, and
the meritorious purchase of Jesus Christ? so do we. Nor,

Secondly, Do we, as he falsely accuses us, make men moral causes of their
salvation, let him prove it if he can.

Thirdly, Nor do we say that Christ purchased only a new way of Salvation,
whereby we may be saved, if we perform the conditions required of us; we
acknowledge no condition to be performed by us by the power of free will, but a
condition as freely purchased and given, and as certainly bestowed as the
Salvation it self; so that Christ's death is no way rendered uncertain, or less
sure.

Fourthly, Does he say that God justifies the ungodly? so do we; but we dare
not say with him, that he justifies the ungodly so remaining under the
reigning power of sin; but whom he justifies, he also sanctifies at the same
time; for we think it dishonorable to God, to the purity and holiness of his
nature to justify a man while he is a servant of sin; The Lord is of purer
eyes then to delight in an unsanct^fied wretch, and it is a wrong to God, to
make him a Father of such an unclean beast, and such a profane ungodly person
his adopted child; though he did purpose to adopt him, yet he did not, he
could not adopt him without changing his nature: We judge it a wrong to Christ,
that a limb of the devil should so remaining, be made a member of Christ; For
he that commits sin is of the Devil; or, 1 John 3.8.
if he that has the Devil for his father, should have at the same time Christ
for his head; but all sinners that are under the reign of sin, have the Devil
for their father, John 8.44.
Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do, And
thus you may see which Doctrine ascribes most glory to God in Christ.

Thirdly, He purges himself from this crime by describing Antinomists in
Austins time, from Eunomeus their leader, of whom St. Austine says, Fertur
usque ad eo, etc. August. de Haeresibus, c. 54.
It is reported that he was such an enemy to goodness, that he affirmed,
though a man did commit, or lie in any kind of sin, it should never hurt him
if he had but that faith that he taught; and of the same strain were the
Gnostics, who for their filthy lives were called Coenosi, the dirty sect.]

And what says Mr. Air less, does he not say that the unregenerate while
they so remain, (that is, let them commit, or lie in any kind of sin,) yet if
Elect, they are justified, that is, secured from wrath, and so it shall not
hurt them; yea, though they have no faith? if those were the dirty Sect, I am
sure this is no better.

And he further says of the Corinthians whom the Apostle called unrighteous,
fornicators, adulterers, abusers of themselves with mankind, etc. such as
could not inherit the Kingdom of God,] That they had no more right unto
salvation after faith, then before; 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Mr. Air, page, 122.
so then by him they had right unto salvation, and these sins could not keep
them out of Heaven, when the Apostle says, as such they could not inherit the
Kingdom of God; Is not this as bad as the opinion of Eunomius? nay, of the
two, the first borne of abominations, because he will make God the justifier of
these, while they so remain.

Fourthly, He vindicates himself from Antinomianisme, by the authority of some
godly men that have asserted Justification in foro Dei, before faith, who were
never accounted Antinomians.

1. From the authority of Mr. Pemble in his Vindiciae Great. to which I answer,
That if Mr. Pemble saw reason to alter his judgment, as it seems he did in
his Treatise of Justification; Mr. Air upon deliberate thoughts, may find as
much reason, if he has as much ingenuity to change his mind, although he has
doated upon an erroneous opinion, as many persons do upon a vain fashion when
it is new; yet let him have but a little more time, and serious thoughts about
it, and he will see cause to lay it aside, as men do when their fashions grow
stale. And that Mr. Pemble dissents from him. I shall make to appear by a
testimony or two of Mr. Pembles, in his Book of Justification, which is
directly contrary to what he formerly asserted; in his first Sect. Cap. 3. page
22. of his Treatise of Justification, he has these words: The cond^tion
required in such as shall be partakers of this grace of Justification, is true
faith, whereunto God has ordinarily annexed this great privilege, that by
faith, and faith only a sinner shall be justified; and, page 23. speaking of the
Covenant of Grace, The other Covenant is the Covenant of Grace, the tenor
whereof is, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved; the condition
of this Covenant is faith; And, page 24. A sinner is justified in the sight of
God from all sin and punishment by faith, that is, by the obedience of Christ
Jesus believed on, and embraced by a true faith, (where he takes faith
subjectively and objectively,) which act of Justification of a sinner, although
it be properly the onl woe k of God, for the only merit of Christ; yet it is
rightly ascribed unto faith, and it alone; for as much as faith is that maine
condition of the New Covenant, which as we must perform if we will be
justified: so by the performance thereof, we are said to obtain Justification
and life; for when God by grace has enabled us to perform the condition of
believing, then do we begin to enjoy the benefit of the Covenant, then is the
sentence pronounced in our consciences, which shall be after confirmed in our
death, and published in the last judgment. So in page 57. We confess faith is
a work, and in doing of it, we obey the Law, etc. but now we deny that faith
justifies as a work, which we perform in obedience to this Law; it justifies
us only as a condition required of us, and an instrument embracing Christ's
righteousness; Thus his first authority is found to bear witness against him.

His second witness is Mr. Rutherford, whom he scoffingly derided, when in our
conference he told me with contempt, as appeared to them that heard him, that
it was Mr. Rutherfords judgment, which he hoped I did like well enough; and
here he suborneth Mr. Rutherford to serve his turn; and had he had the honesty
to quote his Author, and recite his whole mind, he had found but little
shelter for his opinion on his words, the place cited is this, Sane prius quam
Electus credit cessat ira Dei adversus ipsum, Rutherford Apol. Exercit. page 45.
omnesque effectus irae erga ipsius personam, idque propter Christi meritum.
Sed non virtute illius palmaris promissi Evagelici, Qui credit in Christum non
venit in condemnationem, nunquam enim removentur effecta irae Dei adversus
peccatum Electi virtute illius promissi, donec quis actu credit: Verily (says
he) before an Elect person do believe, the wrath of God cease against him,
and all the effects of Gods wrath toward his person are removed for the merit
of Christ, (but then you fraudulently withold the latter part of the sentence
which makes against you, as he did that cited Scripture to Christ;) but not by
virtue of that signal promise of the Gospel, He that believes shall be saved;
for the effects of Gods anger against the sins of the Elect, are not removed by
virtue of that promise, till he actually believe; for hence the Elect have no
consolation till faith.

Now if you say he meant our Justification was not evidenced to our consciences
till faith, and that is all he means; Ruth. Apol. Exercit. p. 44.
Hear what he says, Page 44. Dicent ergo Arminiani, nos hic Justificationem
sumere pro sensu, and notitia Justificationis, and remissionis, ideoque
(homines fide Justificantur) idem valet ac homines tum demum Justificantur,
quando credunt, hoc est sentiunt se justificari, cum anted essent justificati.
Nugae, and tricae Siculae: Nam justificari plus est quam sentire se
justificari: Nam, 1. Est actus Dei absolventis terminati in conscientiam
hominis, citati, and tracti ad tribunale tremendi Judicis, qui actus, ante hoc
instans non terminabatur in conscientiam. 2. Deus hoc actu, certum facit
conscientiae citati, innitenti fiducialiter in Christum, jam etiam in Christo
plenam expiationem omnium peccatorum factam. Ipse peccator actu fiduciali
recumbit in Christum sufficientem Salvatorem credentium, at vero actus Dei
terminatus in nos, non potest esse nudus sensus illius actus, quis sanus ita
argumenta retur cui paulo magis sobrium est sinciput?]

The Arminians will say, (for against them he principally deals in that Book,
and therefore opposes an Arminian condition of faith, and not ours) that we
take Justification for the sense, and knowledge of Justification and pardon;
and therefore to say men are justified by faith, it is as if we should say,
that men are then justified by faith when they believe, that is, when they
perceive they are justified, when as they were justified before.

These are but fables and trifles; for to be justified, is more then to know we
are justified: For,

First, It is the act of God absolving, terminated in the conscience of a
sinner, cited, and drawn to the tribunal of a dreadful Judge, which act before
this instant was not terminated upon the conscience.

Secondly, In this act God assures the conscience of a sinner cited to his
bar, fiducially trusting upon Christ, that now a full expiation is made of
all his sins.

Thirdly, The sinner by a fiducial act, relying upon Christ as a sufficient
Savior of Believers.

But the act of God terminated upon us, cannot be a bare sense, or knowledge of
that act; what sound man that has a sober brain, would so reason?

And immediately follows, Quamvis itaque in mente Dei peccata, etc. Although
therefore sins were remitted in the mind of God from eternity, (where let the
Reader observe, he is speaking against the temporal and conditional decrees of
Arminius, making God to elect upon foreseen faith;) yet is not a man justified
from eternity, that is, declared to be just in Christ, in his conscience, when
he is cited to Gods tribunal, (where he takes declared to be just, for a
transient act of God terminated upon the conscience, fotgiving, and declaring
this forgiveness, and not for a bare knowledge of this by a reflex act of
faith;) for although that act of justifying in God, note an immanent and an
eternal act of God; yet notwithstanding that act is not the whole integral and
formal reason of the Justification of a sinner, of which Paul in his Epistle to
the Galatians, and the Scripture speaks, Formaliter enim justificare, etc.
For, for God formally to justify, is to declare actually, to wit, in a
judicial act, that the guilty sinner trembling before his Judge, now has the
benefit of eternal absolution; and now first of all, and never till now, that
the effects of his divine displacency against their sins, do now cease, by
virtue of that divine promise, wherein Christ and all his benefits, and an
actual right to the Kingdom of God, and the dignity of Adoption, or Sonship
are promised to the Believer. Indeed he says, Page 43. N. 20.
that faith is not the instrument of Justification actively taken, as an
immanent eternal act of God; for no man, says he, by believing, does make God
to have a will not to punish sin, or to have a will to love us, (which the
Arminians plainly make) and therein he says true; yet he makes faith the
instrumental cause of Justification passively taken, as a declared act of God
terminated upon us, as that place declares; and in express words in page 37.
Ruther. Apol. Exer. p. 37.
which Mr. Air in his 32. page of his Book, when he boasted that Master
Rutherford made the opinion he did oppose the chief of the Arminians, and
Socinians, and Papists Errors, could not be ignorant of, for he there makes
faith the organical cause of Justification. In that place he says, the
Arminians would desire nothing more then this, that remission of sin is not
before actual faith: And that the Remonstrants in their Apology do say that
nothing is more false, Socinus part 4. de Salv. c. 10.
then that men have sins remitted before they believe, in which they make
Socinus more plausible, who says that sins cannot be forgiven by an act of
believing, if they are remitted before they believe; and Bellarmine who has
these words, how is that faith true whereby I believe my sins are forgiven? if
while I therefore believe they are not forgiven, but are to be remitted by the
act of faith, because every object is before his act; so the Remonstrants urge,
to which he says, I would have these three acts distinguished.

1. The act of satisfying for our sins performed by Christ, and of reconciling
us to God.

2. The act of God the Father accepting it, wherein he does acknowledge that he
is abundantly satisfied for all the sins of the Elect.

3. The act of Justification, cui fides subordinatur tanquam organica causa, to
which faith is subordinate as an organical cause, in all which Mr. Rutherford
means nothing but this, that God did not take up a new volition, but sins
were intentionally pardoned from eternity, Ruth. Apol. page 4.
which yet in his judgment is not justification: for, page 43. Homo non est
justificatus ab aeterno, quia homo non est ab aeterno; homini credenti non sunt
remissa peccata ab aeterno, qumiam non estab aeterno; nam justificatio, and
remissio hoc sensu-non sunt termini diminuentes: A man is not justified from
eternity, because a man is not from eternity; sins are not remitted to a
Believer from eternity, because he is not from eternity, and Justification and
Remission passively taken, are not termini diminuentes, are not terms of
diminution; where he plainly takes Gods eternal Justification, for terminus
diminuens, and so it is not Justification properly; and we are reconciled
meritoriously, and so causatively, and virtually our sins are remitted; but
they are not formally temitted in his judgment until faith, and to this act
of Justification faith is an organical cause, and so a condition in the sense
we take it of Justification, though not as the Arminians take it; and another
place most fully expresses his mind, Dicunt nostri fidem non esse conditionem
moventem Dei voluntatem, and tamen salutem nostram, esse conditionatam, quod
est verissimum: Nam Deus non vult nobis aliam vitam, quam quae antecedaneam
habet fidem, and tamen nullo modo movetur voluntas a fide nostra: Ours do say,
that faith is not a condition moving the will of God, and yet notwithstanding
our salvation is conditional, which is most true; for God wills us no other
life, then that which has faith antecedaneous to it, and yet notwithstanding
the will of God is not moved with our faith. I hope by this time the Reader
sees what cause Mr. Air has to be ashamed thus to abuse the sense of an
Author against his own mind, declared in significant terms to the contrary;
but no wonder when he dares misinterpret Scripture, if he misrepresent an
Author. And for a further satisfaction, that Mr. Rutherford dissenteth wholly
from him, I refer the Reader to his Treatise of the Trial and Triumph of
Faith, page 162, 163. p. 59, 60, 61, 62. p. 55. And to his Survey to the
Spiritual Antichrist, and in the second part of his Survey of the Secrets of
Antinomianisme, page 63. where he makes faith a condition of Justification.
And expressly he says, It is a new heresy of Antinomians to deny a
conditional Gospel; it is all one as to belie the Holy Ghost, who says, He
that believes shall be saved, he that believes not is condemned already. And,
page 107, 108, 109. and page 115. Salt-marsh dresseth up a man of straw to come
to Christ, 1. In all his dealing with God (says he) and so before ever he come
to Christ, or at his first believing, he believes his Sonship, that is, being
a hog, or limb of the Devil, he believes himself to be an heir of heaven,
etc. which his judgment is sufficiently known in both these Books, that I
wonder Mr. Air could with any modesty allege Mr. Rutherford in defense of his
Error.

His third Author is Reverend Doctor Twisse, and in all the Writings of this
Learned man, this is the only naevus which adhereth to him; but certainly he
did understand, and hold a necessity of personal Justification by faith, as far
as I can understand by any thing I have seen of his; in his examination of a
Treatise written by Mr. Cotton, page 55. Dr. Twisse, Exam. Mr. Co^. page 55.
he makes faith the condition of salvation, Certainly God will save any upon
condition he believes, and repents; and on the other side, neither is there any
unwillingnesse in God, but a willingness rather; yea, and that a resolute will
to damn any man in case he dies in infidelity, and impenitency; for we have
the clear Word for it, Whosoever believes shall be saved, whosoever believes
not shall be damned; and in page 95. page 95.
he says that Piscator a precise Divine spares not to profess, that fides
est causa salutis, which he no way contradicts; and in the same place says,
that works are causae dispositivae of salvation, according to the Apostles
phrase, who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the
Saints in light, and he says undoubtedly, Col. 1 12.
Gods purpose is not to give the Elect life, but upon condition of their
obedience and repentance; page 96.
so, page 96. As for the harmony you speak of between Gods purpose and
Covrnant, herein is your Error twofold.

1. In that you apply this to the world, wholly to reprobates, whereas it
concerns the Elect, as I have showed, as well as the Reprobate; the reason
whereof is, because it respects only the collating of salvation, and inflicting
of condemnation which have their course upon condition.

And therefore he makes another distinct decree in God concerning the giving,
and denying grace, for the performance of the condition of life, and this is
absolute without all condition. And so likewise in his Vindiciae Great. he has
these words; Rursus videamus quae sit praecepti vis, Doctor Twiss Vindic. great.
sect. 25. p. 196.
quo jubemur in Christum credere; itaque quemadmodum summa praecepti legalis
haec est, Si vis vitam ingredi serva mandata: ita praecepti, viz. Evangelici
summa est, Si vis consequi remissionem peccatorum, and vitam aeternam, omnis
tibi fiducia in Christo collocanda est, quod nihil aliud significat, quam
nullam aliam patere peccatoribus ad salutem viam, quam credendo in Christum:
Let us again see what is the force of the Precept, whereby we are commanded to
believe in Christ; Therefore, as the sum of the legal Precept is this, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments: So the force of the Evangelical
Precept is, If thou will obtain remission of sins and life eternal, you must
place all your trust in Christ, which signifies nothing else, but that no way
is open to sinners unto salvation, but by believing in Christ; where you see
expressly that he makes faith to have the same order of antecedency to
salvation in the Covenant of Grace, that Works had in the first Covenant, and
that it is a necessary antecedent, and condition of salvation, not of the
manifestation of this only to the conscience. I shall add but one testimony
more, because he chiefly builds his opinion upon this Reverend Doctors
authority, who yet differs as much in opinion from him, as the East is from the
West. Christus (fateor) est caput electorum, and praedestinatorum, sed non
formaliter consideratorum Nequeenim praedestinati qua praedestinati sunt membra
corporis Christi, sed potius futuri sunt membra ejus, nam quod est membrum
Christi proculdubio existit. Neque enim membrum Christi est terminus diminuens
existentiam; at praedestinati qua praedestinati non existunt, nam
praedestinatio fuit ab aeterno: hodie multi sunt Electi qui proculdubio adhuc
non nascuntur. Rursus, unio illa per quam fimus ejus membra, fit per fidem,
ergo quot quot Christi membra sunt opportet esse fideles; at non omnes
praedestinati, ex quo primum praedestinati sunt e vestigio fideles evadunt.
Adhaec cum non potius fiat caput aliquorum quam illi aliqui siant membra
corporis ejus, sequitur Christum non ab aeterno caput fuisse, cum non ab
aeterno corpus habuerit mysticum, aut membra cujus ratione proprie dicitur
caput Ecclesiae suae. Membra vero corporis cum fiant per vocationem, unde
dicitur (...), idque per vocationem efficacem, and consequenter per fidem,
apparet ergo Christum non prius posse dici caput quam sint aliqui qui credunt
in ipsum, loquor de Christo Mediatore, and Redemptore.

I confess (says he) Christ is the Head of the Elect, and of those that are
predestined, but not formally of the predestined: For neither are the
predestined as predestined members of his body, (wherein he differs from
Mr. Air toto coelo, Vide Mr. Air. page 8.
) but they shall be his members, for whosoever is a member of Christ, without
doubt existeth: Nor is a member of Christ a term of diminution lessening his
existence, but the predestinate as predestinate do not exist, for
predestination was from eternity; but the predestinate did not simply exist
from eternity; This day there are many Elect (without doubt) which are not yet
borne.

Again, That union by which we are made the members of Christ, is made by
faith; Therefore, as many as are Christ's members, it is needful that they be
Believers: but not all the predestinate, as soon as they are predestinate, do
presently prove Believers. Moreover, seeing a head cannot be a head in respect
of others, before they are made members of his body, it follows that Christ
was not a head from eternity; seeing he had not a mystical body from eternity,
or members, in which respect he is properly called the head of his Church;
seeing therefore, men are made members of his body by calling, whence the
Church is called (...) (a company of persons called out from the rest of the
world by the ministry of the word,) and that is by effectual vocation, and
consequently by faith; it appears that Christ cannot first be called a head,
before there are some that believe in him; I speak of Christ as Mediator and
Redeemer.

Where let the Reader observe that he plainly affirms a predestinate person
is not a member of Christ's body, and that the mystical union is made by faith,
and surely none are properly justified or saved before they are members, and
therefore before faith there is no Justification, nor Salvation.

His next Author is, Learned and Holy Mr. Parker, who says in his Book, de
descensu Christi ad inferos, that Christ was justified in his Resurrection, and
we in him, etc. I acknowledge the testimony rightly cited, but he understands
no more then that we were meritoriously, causally justified in the
Justification of Christ, but this is also a term of diminution, in respect to
a formal and actual Justification, till it be extra causas, it does not exist.
And that this Reverend man means no otherwise then we, that until faith we are
not justified or saved, Parker de descens. Christ. ad inferos lib. 3. sect. 49.
may appear from another passage in the same Book: Nulla siquidem ratione alia
salutem ad suos derivare poterat, quam qua ipsam damnationem transfudit Adam,
nempe (...) illa, qua omnes homines qui ei per fidem coadunantur, in eo
satisfecisse, quemadmodum per (...) similem, omnes Adami successores in eo
peccasse reputantur: Christ could no other way derive salvation to his, then
that wherein Adam transmitted damnation, to wit, that communion wherein all men
who are united to him by faith, are said to satisfy in him, as by the like
communion all Adams successors are reputed to have sinned in him. Where you may
observe,

1. That as Adam derived condemnation to none but such as were in him; so
Christ communicates salvation to none but such as are in him.

And, 2. That this union to Christ is made by Faith, hence by necessary
consequence none are saved and justified until faith; and he shows plainly
that we are not in Christ in a natural way, as we were in Adam, therefore he
sets down faith as the means, and none satisfied in Christ but Believers,
therefore none are justified but such; for Christ cannot derive salvation to
any but such as are in him, and before faith they are not in him.

His next Author is judicious Mr. Calvin, Fides porro ita justificationem
praecedit ut tamen dei respectu sequatur Calvin Antid. conc. trid. sess. 6, p.
282.
who says, that our Justification in respect of God does precede our faith; to
which I add, you might have had the ingenuity to let your Reader know that he
says immediately, fides ipsa nos in possessionem justitiae mittit, that faith
sends us into the possession of righteousness: And he means nothing but
this, that seeing God does offer forgiveness in Christ, and we receive and
accept it by faith, that in this respect Justification precede faith, but we
are not actually justified until faith, where I will by the way mind you of a
passage of learned Rivet, Rivet. Advers. Baily, Jesuit. Tom. 2. p 245.
against Baily the Jesu^t. Ne quidem dicimus Christi justitiam esse causam
formalem justificationis, diximus, eam consistere in relatione inter dantem,
and accipientem, sive inter condonantem, and eum cui condonatur, uno verbo
imputatione a part dei, and receptione ex part nostri. Truly we do not say
that Christ's righteousness is the formal cause of Justification, we have said
that it consists in the relation between the giver and the receiver, or between
him that pardons, and him that is pardoned; in one word in imputation on Gods
part, and receiving it on our part, so that now it is true, God offering
pardon, his act precede our part of receiving, but yet we are not in the
judgment of this Learned man, justified formally till we receive it. And this
is Calvin's mind, and many passages in the same discourse make against you; I
will take but one, which Mr. Baxter has observed to my hand, Nos autem
meminerimus fidei notuum a Christo estimandam esse, quia quod nobis offert Deus
in Christo non nisi fide recipimus, proinde quicquid nobis est Christus id ad
fidem transfertur, quae nos compotes, est Christi, and omnium ejus bonorum
facit, neque aliter verum esset illud Johannis, fidem nostrum esse victoriam,
qua mandus vincitur, nisi nos in Christum inserereret, qui solus est mundi
victor. But we have remembered before, that the nature of Faith is to be
estimated from Christ; because what God offers us in Christ, we receive it not
but by faith; whatsoever therefore Christ is to us, that is imputed to faith,
which makes us partakers of Christ, and of all his good things. Neither
otherwise can that of John be true, that faith is our victory whereby we
overcome the world, unless it did ingraf us into Christ, who is the Victor of
the world. And the truth is, Calvin is in express terms for us against you,
and I will manifest in a few passages: Calvin ad Council. Triden. Sess. 6. ad
Can. 9 Calvin Insti. l. 3. c. 11. N. 7.
Hominem sola fide justificari quum dicimus, fidem non fingimus charitate
vacuam, sed ipsam solam justificationis causam esse intelligimus, and so he
says: We gather, we do not take from Christ the power of justifying, when we
teach that he is first received by faith; but yet I do not admit of the
crooked figures of this Sophistor, (meaning Osiander, when he says that Faith
is Christ, (where let the Reader observe, that Mr. Air agrees with Osiander
in interpreting faith to be Christ, and it is the high way to Familisme, and to
think with Osiander, that the essential righteousness of Christ is ours; and
withal, how Calvin disliketh this interpretation, As if, says he, an earthen
pot were a treasure, because Gold is hidden in it. For the reason is not
unlike, but that faith although it be by it self of no worthiness or price,
may justify us in bringing in Christ, as a pot full of money makes a man
rich; therefore I say that faith, which is only the instrument to receive
righteousness, is unfitly mingled with Christ which is the material cause, and
both Author and Minister of so great a benefit. And again, Quo enim modo vera
fides justificat, Calvin's Inst l. 3. c. 17. N. 11.
nisi dum nos Christo conglutinat, ut unum cum illo facti participatione ejus
fruamur. So again, However we be redeemed of Christ, yet till we be by the
calling of the Father graffed into the communion of him, we are both heirs of
darkness and death, and the enemies of God; 1 Cor. 6.11.
for Paul teaches that we are not cleansed by the blood of Christ, until the
Holy Ghost works that cleansing in us, 1 Pet. 1.2.
which same thing Peter minding to teach, declares that the sanctifying of the
Spirit avails unto obedience, and be sprinkling of the blood of Christ; if we
be by the Spirit sprinkled unto cleansing by the blood of Christ, let us not
think that before such watering we be any other then a sinner is, without
Christ. Let this therefore remain certain, that the beginning of our salvation
is as it were a certain resurrection from death te life, because when for
Christ's sake it is given to us to believe in him, then we first begin to pass
from death to life.

Under this sort are comprehended they which have in the division above been
noted for the second and third sort of men, for the uncleanness of conscience
proves that both of them are not yet regenerate by the Spirit of God. And
again, where there is no regeneration in them, Calvin's ^ Inst. 3. Book 14. c.
N. 6, 7.
this proves the want of Faith, whereby appears that they are not yet
reconciled to God, nor yet justified in his sight: for as much as these things
are not attained to but by faith. The length of the Testimony has made me omit
the Latin, it is endless to repeat more, I conceive Calvine sufficiently
vindicated by what is already cited.

Your next Author is Zanchy, lib. 50. de Natura Dei, c. 2. p. 539
Zanchy, who though in the words cited something favors your opinion, yet he
means only that we were virtually justified in Christ, and in other places is
most expressly against you. And to avoid prolixity, I will give his Testimony
only in English.

The fourth benefit, says he, is Justification, that is, the forgiveness of
our sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness, for this follows
faith: So also he says, in a twofold sense it may be said, and understood that
a man is justified by faith, instrumentally and formally, and in both senses we
are justified by faith alone; in the first sense, because by this as an
instrument fitted for this matter, we receive the grace of God and
righteousness of Christ; in the latter sense, as by the only obedience and
righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, we are formally justified, as
the faith apprehending is taken for the thing apprehended.

So again, Zanch. Loc. Com. Theol. Epist. ad Ephesians. Loc. 2. p. 83.
there are three things required to this that we be partakers of salvation, and
without which we cannot be saved.

First, As the fountain of all benefits, the grace of God, his eternal favor,
love, and mercy to us.

Secondly, The other is the complement or fulfilling of the promises and
figures of the Old Testament, concerning our redemption by blood, and the
offering up of a Lamb without spot, whereby sins might be expiated.

The third benefit necessary to salvation, and sine Zanch. de tribus El^. lib.
5. page 195, 196.
quo reliqua duo nobis inania, and inutilia sunt, est vera Dei cognitio sive
fides, nam sine fide est impossible placere Deo: Without which the other two
are vain, and unprofitable, is the true knowledge of God, or faith, without
which it is impossible to please God. Zanch. Tom. 8. de justisi. fidei loc.
undecim. p. 781.
Once more; the wrath of God (says he) rests upon all sinners so long as
they continue to be sinners, (that is, unsanctified persons, that is his
meaning,) therefore sin is a division between God and man, it is a turning of
the face of God from the sinner; nor can it otherwise be, seeing it is
repugnant to his righteousness to have any fellowship with sin; whence the
Apostle teaches, that a man is an enemy to God, until he return into favor
through Christ, whom therefore the Lord receives into conjunction; He is said
to justify, because he cannot receive into favor, nor unite any man to
himself, but of a sinner he makes him righteous.

The next Author is Chamier; and it cannot be denied but he has the words you
have cited, but it is no hard matter to prove that he contradicts you and
himself in other places. I will instance in one, Itaque semel habeto, nos
Legis, and Evangeli^ discrimen cum quaerimus, Itaque semel habeto, nos Legis,
and Evangelii discrimen cum quaerimus, utrumqu^ nominare c^ntracta illa
significatione secundum quam Paulus opponit leg^^ ^perum legi fidei. D^inde
proprium, verum, certum discrimen conditionem operum and fidei, hoc ^st. legem
operam proponere salutem sub condition legis perficiendae, at legem fidei
e^^dem proponere sub condition tantum credendi, in ^hristum, nimirum ut
utrinque sumatur con^ttio eodem sensu. Cham. Panstrat Tom. 3. Lib. 15. Cap, 3.
Sect. 26.
etc. Therefore take it for once, that we when we seek a difference between the
Law and the Gospel, do name both in that short signification, according to
which Paul opposes the Law of Works to the Law of Faith, therefore the
condition of Works and Faith do constitute a proper, certain, and true
difference, that is to say, the Law propounds salvation upon condition of
fulfilling the Law, but the Law of faith propounds the same salvation under
the condition of believing only in Christ, to wit, that on both sides a
condition be taken in the same sense, that is, that they have the same order to
their respective Covenants, otherwise faith is not a condition, so as to be the
matter of our righteousness as the fulfilling of the Law is.] Thus you see how
he makes Faith the condition of the Covenant antecedent to salvation thereby
expected.

As for Maccorius we yield you his Testimony, but could produce if need were a
hundred for one of greater name and note.

Your last is Dr. Ames, whose testimony you might have left out, because he
speake^h far more against you then for you in the same place, for he says that
it was quasi concepta, as it were conceived in the mind of God, and so the
like phrase is to be given to the death of Christ, as it were, or virtually
pronounced; but he does not say it was so really and formally, as if we were so
justified from eternity, or from the time of Christ's death; yea, a little
after, which you could not be ignorant of, he says, Est autem haec
justificatio propter Christum non absolute consideratum, Ames. Medul. l. 1. c.
27. s. 14.
quo sensu Christu^ est causa ipsius vocationis, sed propter Christum fide
apprehensum, quae fides vocationem sequitur tanquam effectum, and justitiam
Christi, ex qua apprehensa justificatio sequitur, unde and justitia dicitur
esse ex fide, Romans 9.30.10.6. and justificatio per fidem, Romans 3.28. This
Justification is for Christ's sake, not absolutely considered in the sense
wherein Christ is the cause of effectual vocation, but for Christ's sake
apprehended by faith, which faith follows effectual vocation, as the effect,
and the righteousness of Christ being apprehended, Justification follows;
hence it is said that righteousness is of faith, Romans 9.30.10.6. and
Justification by faith, Romans 3.28. And in the sixteenth Section thus:

Neque est proprie loquendo, specialis siducia, Nor is it to speak properly a
special trust or assurance, (speaking of justifying faith,) whereby we
apptehend or know the remission of our sins, and our justification: Fides enim
justificans praecedit justificationem ipsam, ut causa suum effectum, sed fides
justficationem apprehendens necessario praesupponit, ac sequitur
justificationem, ut actus objectum suum circa quod versatur: For justifying
faith goes before Justification, as the cause before its effect, but Faith
comprehending Justification, necessarily presupposes it to go before, as the
act its object about which it is conversant; so that faith as it is assurance,
follows Justification; but as it is a resting on Christ for pardon in its
justifying act, so it goes before Justification, as the cause goes before the
effect. Thus having examined his authorities, we see that if they may be
impartially examined, and permitted to speak their own mind, they all give in
evidence against the cause that he maintains.

CHAP. X. Containing a vindication of such Scriptures as are brought by Mr.
Woodbridge for Justification by faith, and mis-interpreted by Mr. Air,
together with an answer to such Scriptures as he has brought to defend his
Error of Justification antecedent unto faith.
THE first Scripture is, Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith we have
peace with God.

1. He will have the Comma to be placed after justified, as thus, being
justified, by faith we have peace with God.

But first, This is a reading contrary to the common acceptance of the place
by all men.

Secondly, It offers violence to the Text; for the scope of the place is to
show the efficacy of faith unto Justification, as may appear by the illative
particle therefore, which has not relation only to the words immediately
foregoing, but to the sum and substance of the whole Chapter; for the fourth
Chapter contains an Argument to prove Justification by Faith, and not by the
works of the Law, drawn from the example of Abraham the Father of the faithful
after this manner: By what means Abraham the Father of Believers was
justified, By the same it behooves his children to be justified, that is, all
Believers; but Abraham was not justified by any works, neither preceding nor
following his faith, but by faith: Therefore we must look for Justification by
faith only. In the third verse he confirms the Assumption, because Abraham
believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, that is, his faith was
imputed, not in an Arminian sense, but his faith properly taken, in relation to
the object, and hereupon he commends exceedingly the faith of Abraham, the
grace of faith, and sets it forth in many excellent properties, which can no
way agree to the object, and then stirs up us to an imitation of this faith,
telling us that it was not written for his sake only, but for ours also; and
assures us that our faith also shall be imputed for righteousness if we
believe; then he describes the object of this faith, God in Christ, as raising
Christ from the dead; where he sets forth the two main pillars of Faith,
Christ's Death and Resurrection; and this is illustrated by Gods end in both
these, 1. He delivered him to death for our offenses, that is, to satisfy for
our sins.

2. He raised him again for our Justification, to declare he was absolved from
our sins, and so had made full satisfaction: hence then he draws down this
conclusion, and shows a new effect of faith, and so a new argument, Being
therefore justified by faith, we have peace with God; as if he should say, By
what we have peace, we are justified: But by faith we have peace, therefore we
are justified.

Thirdly, Neither can faith be taken here for the object excluding the act, but
for the grace and act of faith, with relation to its object; for then we shall
make the Text admit of a Tautology, for the meritorious cause is expressed;
Therefore, here by faith the act must be understood, for it is said, Being
justified by faith, we have peace through our Lord Jesus, there Christ the
meritorious cause of Justification is expressed, therefore the same thing is
not understood by faith; yea, here, says Beza, Beza in Loc.
three causes are enumerated of our salvation: Tres hic enumerat causas nostrae
pacis Apostolus, fidem, Deum and Jesum Christum, non coordinatas, and ejusdem
generis, sed subordinatas, incipiente Apostolo a causa nobis per Dei gratiam
data intrinseca, and instrumentali, nempe fide, cujus scopus, and objectum est
Deus Pater, interveniente Jesu Christi propitiatione: Here says Beza, the
Apostle does enumerate three causes of our peace, Faith. God, and Jesus Christ,
not coordinate causes, and of the same k^nd, but subordinate; The Apostle
beginning from an intrinsecal instrumental cause, given us by the grace of God,
to wit, Faith, whose scope and object is God the Father, by the intervention of
the propitiation of Jesus Christ.

A second Scripture is, Gal. 2.16. We knowing that a man is not justified by
the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
Law; where Mr. Eyre's gloss to evade the force of this Scripture, is, that the
phrase [that we may be] is as much as that we may be manifested and declared,
and know that we are justified.

To this I answer, that the Apostle is not speaking here of a declarative
Justification, but of a Justification real before God; therefore when he
speaks of not being justified by the Law, he means not a declarative
Justification; and therefore when he speaks of Justification by faith, he means
not a declarative Justification, for then the opposition is not ad idem; for
look in what sense he takes it in the first member of the opposition, it must
be taken in the same sense in the latter member; but it is nor meant of a
declarative Justification in the first, therefore neither in the latter: For
that neither was the question between the Apostle and the Justiciaries, nor
could the Apostle say with truth, that works do not evidence Justification. As
for Justification in foro conscientiae, it is not Justification properly, but
the knowledge and assurance of it; Justification is to be considered as an
action of God, for it is God that justifies. The Apostle gives an account why
he and the believing Jews did believe in Christ for Justification, because
they knew that they could not be justified by the Law: Now there is no way but
by the Law, or by faith in Christ, therefore they did believe in Christ; where
Justification by the faith of Christ, is made the final cause of their
believing; Now if they did therefore believe that they might be justified, how
can that that was the end of their believing, evidence that they were just^fied
already before they did believe? and here let the Reader observe, that both the
act and object is expressed; and if as Mr. Air ordinarily understands the
object by the act, why are both expressed? Therefore the grace of Faith
relatively considered, as apprehending Christ's righteousness, is that by which
we are justified.

The third Scripture being, Romans 8.30. I have already vindicated in my tenth
Argument against eternal Justification.

A fourth place which he has abused, is, Romans 4 22. where it is said, that it
shall be imputed to us if we believe, that is, faith in Christ shall be imputed
to us for righteousness, as it was to Abraham; for there is but one way
whereby both he and we are justified. Mr. Eyre's answer is, That this particle
[if] is not conditional, but declarative, and so he takes the meaning to be
this; Hereby we may know, and be assured that Christ's righteousness is imputed
to us if we believe; where observe that he wrongeth the scope of the Apostle,
which is to encourage us to believe, as did Abraham, from the good effect of
it; for hereby righteousness shall be imputed to us if we believe, he speaks
of a future mercy to be obtained, and Mr. Air tells us of an assurance that
we shall have, that it was done already; where he changes the time past for
the time present, and so overthrows the Apostles scope, and puts a
declarative sense upon the words for a conditional; This is not to interpret
Scripture, but to suborn the Spirit to serve his own turn.

And hence I argue against him, If the imputation of righteousness be a thing
that is not already, but shall be imputed if they believe, then the particle
[if] is not declarative, but conditional: But the imputation of righteousness
is not a thing then done, but was to be done; Therefore. And for this the words
are plain, it shall be imputed if we believe.

A fifth Scripture is, Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that
through his Name whosoever believe, shall receive the remission of sins.

He says, it is not said by believing we obtain remission of sins; and a
little after, we obtain remission by Christ, but we receive it by faith.

I answer, There is an ambiguity in the word obtain, if by it he understand we
do not merit, purchase forgiveness, we grant it, for whoever made the
instrumental the meritorious cause of forgiveness of sins? but if by it he
understand a receiving the remission of our sins through Christ, which then,
and never till then was received; we say thus, forgiveness is obtained by
faith, as a cause to apply Christ's righteousness for Justification; nor is
this receiving a receiving of the knowledge of remission, as a thing before
done, and the knowledge of it only now obtained by faith; for it is said, that
by faith we receive remission, not the knowledge of remission; all the Prophets
testify this, we receive remission, not the sense of the remission of sins.
Therefore Mr. Eyre's interpretation is contrary to all the Prophets witness.
Besides, were we justified from eternity, as Mr. Air will have it, when by Gods
eternal act this remission was given, it had been an injury to God. Besides, an
improper speech to say, All that believe shall receive remission; They should
have said, ye were remitted before, if ye believe, ye shall know it,

The six^h Scripture is, Acts 13.39. By him all that believe shall be justified
from all things, from which they could not, etc.

[He says, that this shows the excellency of the Gospel above the Law, and
that here is nothing at all of the time of Justification; though he affirm,
that he that believes is justified, yet it follows not the Elect are not
justified before faith, much less that a man is justified by the gracious act,
or habit of faith.]

I answer, let it be granted he commend the Gospel-sacrifice for sin above the
sacrifices of the Law, yet he says, that by obtaining the Law they could not
be justified; and what they could not have by the Law, or any sacrifice therein
offeted, that may be obtained by Christ through faith; where if his purpose
were to exclude faith from Justification, he might have said only, by him we
are justified from all this, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses; but he describes the persons and the condition expressly; and if
Believers only are justified, then unbelievers are not, and faith is necessary:
Therefore though we be not justified by it, as the matter of our
righteousness, yet as the instrument to apply it; and the Apostles limiting
this to Believers were vain, if unbelievers also were the subjects of it.

A seventh Scripture to which he has done violence, is, 2 Cor. 5.21. where
Christ is said to be made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him; where this is made the final cause, why our sin was imputed to
Christ, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, and he will
have Christ's being made sin, and our being made the righteousness of God in
him, formally the same act in God: For he says, this phrase [that we might be
mad^] does not always imply the final cause, but sometimes the formal. And so
his meaning is, that Christ was at the same time made sin for us, and by that
act of God we were made the righteousness of God in him.

To this I answer, First, it offers violence to the Text; for that does not
say, that we were then made, but that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him, it laid the foundation for this.

Secondly, Let him assign any other end that God had in this act in respect to
us, if this were not his end; surely had it not been for this, God would not
have imputed our sins to Christ.

Thirdly, That which he says, is manifestly false; for this phrase [that we
might be] always does express the final cause, his instance does not prove
the thing in hand; He says, That when light is let in that darkness might be
expelled, the immission of light is formally the expulsion of darkness.

I answer, if it be granted, this hinders not, but that it might be the end
why the light is let in, as in a room that has shuts to keep out the light,
the room is dark; now let a man that desires light open these shuts, at the
same time the light does physically expel the darkness, and yet it was the
end of the man in letting in the light to expel the darkness.

Fourthly, The imputation of sin to Christ and righteousness to us, are two
different acts, and have two different effects, and therefore are not formally
the same; for by imputing sin to Christ, he is charged with the guilt of it,
and is obnoxious to death; and the imputing righteousness to us, is a
discharge from the guilt, and we are made capable of life: Now if this were
formally our discharge, then we are discharged, and so made righteous before
Christ had made satisfaction, even so soon as our sin was imputed; but this is
a manifest contradiction; for it is not Christ's being charged with our guilt,
but his making satisfaction that procures our discharge; but this is but one
drop of that river of contradiction, that flows from him as from a fountain,
with which his Book swells like the river of Jordan, till it is foardable by no
reason, nor any humane understanding.

4. I deny that the imputation of sin to Christ, and the non-imputation of it
to us; If you speak of a formal non-imputation, and discharge, (or else you say
nothing to the purpose,) is but one and the same act in God; they are two
distinct acts, terminated upon two distinct subjects. The first upon Christ,
the second upon us.

Imputation of sin to Christ, is a transient act done in time; for God did not
charge Christ with our sin from eternity, and every transient act requires the
existence of the subject, upon which it is terminated, or produces it, as did
Creation. And therefore we that had no existence, could not be the subjects of
a formal non-imputation, which is an actual discharge from it; and therefore,
that which you answer to this objection, we were nor then, and therefore
righteousness could not be imputed, by propounding another objection, Our sins
were not then, therefore they could not be imputed.

I answer, the reason is not alike; for the nonexistence of a subject to whom
any thing should be impated, is of greater efficacy to hinder the imputation,
then the nonexistence of a sin; for the term or subject of a transient act,
is of absolute necessity to be, or to be produced by the act; but there is no
such necessity of the thing that is imputed, the act may be without that, but
not without the other. Besides, a sin is a moral cause of punishment, and
therefore the effect, which is punishment, (which is that that is meant by
imputation of sin,) is at the will of him that is moved thereby; and therefore
sometimes goes before the cause, as in the death of Christ, for which the
Patriarchs were justified before Christ had given satisfaction, and sometimes
after it; therefore the punishment might be inflicted on Christ before the sin
was committed.

I shall now address my self to give an answer to such Scriptures as he has
alleged in defense of his own opinion.

The first is, Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

From whence he argues, that if the well pleasednesse of God, which is here
declared, is terminated upon Christ mystical, and not to Christ personal, then
God was well pleased with all his Elect, (who are Christ mystical) when this
voice came from heaven, and consequently before many of them do believe.

To which I answer, that I take it to be, and have proved it an err^r, to say
that the Elect as El^ct, are mist cally uni ed to Christ; for union necessarily
pre-requireth existence, and Christ had not a mystical body from eternity.

2. I deny, as then I did, the assumption, and say the well-pleasednesse of God
was terminated upon Christ personal, and not Christ mystical: And the meaning
is, This is my beloved Son in whose person I am well pleased, and with whose
work and office as a Mediator I am well pleased; but it was not the intent of
God there to say, for his sake I am actually well pleased with all the Elect,
antecedently to their faith.

Now I prove it was spoken of Christ personal, and not Christ mystical.

1. If Christ considered as Mediator be personally considered, then this is
understood of Christ personal, and not Christ mystical: The antecedent is
true: Therefore the consequence. The reason of the consequence is, because this
is spoken of Christ as Mediator; But Christ mystical is not the Media^our of
the world, for then we have so many Redeemers and Saviors of the world, as are
united to Christ, and then Christ alone did not tread the winepresse of his
Fathers wrath.

2. Christ mystically considered, was not baptized by John: But this beloved
Son in whom God was well pleased, was baptized by John: Ergo.

3. This was terminated on him, to whom the Heavens were then opened, and upon
whom the Spirit descended like a Dove: But this is true only of Christ
personally, not mystically considered.

4. This voice was terminated on him, for whose sake God is well pleased with
such as believe; But God is not well pleased with believers for the sake of
Christ mystically considered, but personally; Ergo.

5. This voice is terminated upon him, who is by a peculiar generation and
Sonship so a Son, that it is incommunicable unto others; But this belongs only
to Christ personal; Therefore this voice was not terminated upon Christ
mystical.

6. Now to all this I add this, that the consideration of Christ as a pub^ick
Mediator is not sufficient to denominate him to be a Head, and the Elect his
Members, so as to make a mystical uninion between them, it may constitute him a
public person and surety; but to make him a Head mystically united to any, it
requires the existence and faith of the person united. Now whereas you say
that Mr. Woodbridge did uncivilly interpose, and others, or else you had urged
more; it is to make the world believe I could not answer you; whereas you could
drive on your Argument no further by a new Medium: and then you appealed to the
people, which occasioned that interposition you complain of.

And here I shall answer to such Arguments as you use, p. 124, 125. to prove,
it was terminated to Christ mystical.

Your first is drawn from the authorities of Musculus, Calvin, Beza, Pareus;
None of all which acknowledge no more then that it testifies that great love of
God, in whom God is well pleased with such as believe, showing the only way of
appeasing God, and reconciling God to man; but none of them do affirm Gods
actual well-pleasednesse with any persons before faith, but that Christ is he
by whom Gods wrath is turned away, as the only Mediator to reconcile God and
man; but none did before you dream, that this Son in whom God was well pleased
was the mystical Christ, or that this voice was terminated upon Christ mystical.

Secondly, You say it is against the scope of the words to limit them to the
person of Christ, they being a solemn declaration of Christ's investiture into
his office of Mediatorship; We grant it is a solemn inauguration, or instalme.
of Christ in this office, but deny your consequence, that because Christ is
here considered as Mediator, therefore, what is so spoken to him, is
terminated to Christ mystical, (though it might be spoken for their benefit and
comfort that shall believe.

Thirdly, You say there is no reason why those words should be terminated to
the person of Christ, seeing that God was never displeased with him; nor had
our Savior any doubt or suspicion of it, and therefore it was needless that
God should declare his well-pleasednesse to him in his own person.

I answer, this was spoken for to satisfy us, that Christ was a Mediator well
fitted for this work, that God was well pleased in him as one endued with
sufficient ability to reconcile; and God was well pleased with him, because he
never displeased him; and therefore was the more fitting person for this work;
and therefore though it be granted Christ needed not this testimony, and that
it was spoken as an encouragement to us to believe in him: Yet it follows not
that therefore God was well pleased with us for his sake before we believe,
because he is well pleased with Christ, and his Mediatory work.

Fourthly, You say the well-pleasednesse of God is to be extended unto them,
for whom Christ offered up his sacrifice: But Christ did not offer up his
sacrifice for himself. I deny your Major, and do say, that in this voice God
did declare for the benefit and comfort of them that do believe that God was
well pleased and satisfied with Christ, and his Mediatory work, that they may
know they believe on him who is a person in whom, the Lord takes infinite
delight; and therefore he being so dear to God, they shall find favor for his
sake that believe; but that therefore he is actually well pleased with them,
whether they believe or not, yea, when they live under the power of sin, I
take it to be no less then presumptuous boldness to determine, and it carries
a spirit of contradiction to the whole Gospel.

And to this end the Apostle says, Without faith it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11.6. To which you say, the Apostle speaks there of men's works, and
not of their persons.

I answer, it is manifestly false; for he speaks of their persons, as well as
of their works. For,

1. He says, by faith the Elders received a good report, that is, all of them
in general; but with whom were they thus reported of? surely by God himself;
hence he declared his thoughts of them, thus Abraham is called the friend of
God; and Noah, Thee only have I found righteous; and David is called a man
after Gods own heart.

2. In particular Abel, he by faith offered a more excellent sacrifice then
Cain, by which he obtained testimony that he was righteous; God did not
testify only that his action was righteous, but that he was a righteous
person, and so Enoch, by faith was translated, etc. and he received this
testimony that he pleased God, that is, that his person pleased God, for would
God translate him to heaven for a righteous action, if his person had not
pleased God? And the very scope is to prove that he was a Believer, and by
consequence that his person did please; for without faith it is impossible to
please God, and so Mr. Perkins, and all Interpreters that I know speak of it.
Besides, is it possible that men's act^ons can please, where their persons
please not? Surely no, God had first respect to the person of Abel, then to his
offering; and he had no respect to Cain, and then he regarded not his offering,
therefore their persons as well as their works did please, and both by faith;
for let their actions be never so conformable to the rule, unless their
persons be accepted, their services cannot be accepted, and their best actions
being mixed with sin, need Christ, and must be accepted through Christ, as
well as their persons. And whereas a little after you make an Elect person to
be pleasing to God, but none of his actions; it is altogether against reason,
to imagine that a tree should be good, that never did, nor can bring forth good
fruit; and if all the sins, of the Elect, be pardoned, because they are
justified, what is there in their actions wherewith God can be displeased, when
their want of faith and conformity to the rule is pardoned?

Secondly, those Scriptures which are usually alleged by him and others of
that opinion for eternal Justification, are principally these two, Ephesians. 1.4.
2 Timothy 1.9, 10. In the first it is said, God chose us in Christ before the
foundation of the world; and in the 6th. verse. He has made us accepted in his
Beloved.

I answer, It is one thing to say, God did choose us in Christ before the
foundation of the world, and another to say, God justified us, and reconciled
us: Gods Election denotes Gods will of purpose to justify and reconcile, and
is terminus diminuens, amor ordinativus, not collativus; it is a term of
diminution, and does not actually collate the things purposed; it is true, that
Justification and Reconciliation, is a fruit of Gods Election, but it is not
coeternal with it; and when it is said, he chose us in Christ, this, as I have
showed by the testimony of Dr. Twisse, does not denote any existence that we
then had in Christ, but only the way and means by which we obtain the things
purposed in Election, to wit, in Christ, or for Christ's sake. And therefore as
it is not said, that we were sanctified from eternity, though he chose us in
Christ, that we should be holy; so neither are we justified from eternity, for
there is no difference, because a man cannot be the subject of a moral change,
to pass from a state of death and life, till he do exist, (though he may be
predestined to be the subject of such a change in time) any more then he can
be the subject of a physical or natural change. Nor does that passage in the
6th. Verse confirm it, where it is said, He has made us accepted in the
Beloved; for that is to be understood of the Elect Ephesians, as they were now
regenerate, and not to be referred to Gods eternal purpose. And all this is
made more manifest, in that those that were Elect, and chosen in Christ, are
said to be children of wrath, without God, without Christ, and without hope in
the world, which, as we have showed, is inconsistent with the state of
Justification.

The second place in Timothy, where it is said, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.
That grace was given us in Christ before the world began; but is now made
manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, holds forth no such
thing as eternal Justification; but grace is said to be given in respect of the
firmness, and immutability of Gods purpose: Therefore in this place, Gods
giving is not an actual collation, but an eternal preparation of grace to be
given infallibly to the Elect. And thus Augustinus, Apostolus datam dixit
gratiam, August de Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 34.
quando nec erant adhuc, quibus daretur; quoniam in dispositione, ac
praedestinatione Dei jam sactum erat quod suo tempore futurum erat: The Apostle
says, Grace was given when they were not as yet, to whom it should be given,
because in the appointment and predestination of God that was done, which in
its time should be done; Vide Junius, Calvin.
and to this Junius and Calvin give in their suffrage with him.

The other Scriptures alleged by him are in page 128. which relate to the
death of Christ, from whence he would prove, because it is said that we were
then reconciled, and had redemption in his blood, therefore we were justified
before faith, from the time of Christ's death; But observe how the places
brought for our Justification from Christ's death, do utterly overthrow the
eternity of Justification: For, if we were then enemies, and then reconciled,
then was he not reconciled from eternity.

That in Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, signifies nothing but that the price of redemption was
paid by him, and we have forgiveness of sins, because it is purchased for us,
but it is not actually given: For although Christ's death be the meritorious
cause of Justification, yet is it not the only cause; and therefore we are not
actually justified, till all those causes be actually, which have an influence
into it; Col. 1.20, 21.
and that in Col. 1.20, 21. signifies no more, but that peace is thus far
made by the blood of his Cross, that now the cause of enmity is removed by a
satisfaction made by the death of Christ, and God is now willing to forgive
such as believe; whence he adds, these mercies named shall be enjoyed if they
continue in the faith grounded, Ver. 23.
and settled, and be not moved from the hope of the Gospel.

Ephesians. 2.13, 14.
And the like I affirm of that place, Ephesians. 2.13, 14. and of that in 2 Cor.
5.19. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
we are causally and meritoriously reconciled; Th^s was Gods design in Christ,
in giving him to die; but God and they were not actually reconciled, that
believe not; Hence the Apostle exhorts in the same place the Corinthians to
be reconciled to God; and when God justifies, and is actually reconciled, the
reconciliation is mutual; there is a change in Gods disp^nsation, though not a
change in his affection; and when it is sa^d, that we are said to sit with him
in heavenly places, this is spoken in regard of a right purchased, Ephesians. 2.6.
and the certainty of the thing to be obtained, though we do not yet personally
sit with him; and all such places as speak of our being enemies to God, and
that while we were enemies we were reconciled, signify nothing but this, that
we were translated out of a state of enmity, into a state of actual
reconciliation by Christ, as soon as we believe, Romans 5.10.
as that, Romans 5.10. for in the first verse he speaks of them that were
already justified by faith; and in the 11th. We have now received the
atonement, so that there he speaks of actual believers, not that they
received this while they remained unbelievers, and enemies to God; and if you
understand it of what was done for us before we had faith, and were
regenerated, it signifies nothing but the reconciliation meritoriously made by
removing the guilt of sin by a sufficient price paid, even while we were
actually in the state of enmity; but the paying of the price is not the whole,
nor the formalis ratio justificationis: For this price paid, is part of the
matter of our righteousness; but the formal nature of Justification stands in
the imputation of this righteousness, which is an actual bestowing of it, and
in our receiving of it by faith, then, Mr. Air, page 132.
and not till then are we formally justified. Here Mr. Air objecteth two
things.

First, That Christ did not only pay the price of our reconciliation,

1. This is petitio principii, a begging the question, to say, God did accept
it so as he did not impute sin to us, (that is, at the same time when our sins
were imputed to Christ.)

2. I add, that Gods imputing sin to Christ, is virtually a non-imputing it to
us; but not formally, and therefore not a formal Justification.

3. I add, that the non-imputation of sin contains not the whole nature of
Justification, unless under it be comprised the imputation of righteousness.

Secondly, He objecteth, that the payment of the full price for our

To this objection I have already given sufficient answer; but because it is
the maine Argument to which he, and all of his judgment trust; I will here
also give a solution to it.

I answer then, by denying the consequence: For, in the first place, payment of
a debt is refusable when it is not the same in the obligation; but now if there
were nothing else to say, but this, this were enough to prove it not the same;
dum alius sol^it, necessario aliud solvitur: while another pays the debt,
another thing is paid. But secondly, if a surety of our own appointment pay the
debt, then it may also be available, but the surety is provided by God, and not
by us. And thirdly; he paid not the same, but the value. Fourthly, besides,
Christ's death was meritorious for the discharge of another; not only by the
intrinsecal value, but by the constitution of God; for if God had ordained it,
it might have been efficaciously sufficient, even for the Reprobate; Therefore
as Scotus Scotus, lib. 3. distin. 19. qu. vin. p 74.
says well, Christi meritum tantum bonum est nobis pro quanto acceptabatur a
Deo: Therefore if it wholly depend upon the will of God to accept it, and how
far he will accept it, it is not injustice for God not to give a present
discharge; for though he did accept it for them, yet not for an immediate
discharge; and why is it any more wrong to Christ's death to suspend the
application of it until faith, then to deny the efficacy of it to a far
greater number, if God had so accepted it? Seeing Christ's death shall be as
effectual to all intents and purposes, and as certainly applied, as if
presently the benefit were obtained, for faith also is merited, and shall be
given: And God did suspend it till faith, as that which in his wisdom he saw
most convenient. Because,

1. Faith answers to that which is the ground of our being partakers in Adams
sin, it unites us to Christ.

2. Hereby God does not justify an ungodly wretch so remaining, which is
contrary to the purity and holiness of his Nature.

3. Hereby Christ is not made a Patron of wicked men remaining so under the
reigning power of sin.

4. Hereby the Doctrine of the Gospel is freed from scandal, it is no Doctrine
of licentiousness.

5. Hereby God will have Christ to be acknowledged as a Redeemer, the soul to
see his need of Christ, and to prize his love, and he will have him to
acknowledge, and take him for his Lord, that will have benefit by him; and
therefore until then it is the will of the Father and the Son, that the
benefit of this satisfaction shall not be enjoyed until faith; And, Volenti
non fit injuria. If the Reader desire further satisfaction, let him peruse the
Vindication of my Sermon upon this subject.

CHAP. XI. Containing an answer to those Arguments Master Air has brought to
prove the antecedency of Justification to faith, that we are actually
reconciled from the time of Christ's death, and that faith is not an antecedent
condition of Justification.
FIrst he says, that the Essence and Quiddity of Justification consists in
the will of God not to punish, and that he endeavors to prove by two
Arguments.

1. Because the definition which the Holy Ghost gives of Justification, is most
properly applied to this act; and (says he) it is a certain rule, Cui convenit
definitio, convenit definitum, that is Justification, to which the definition
of Justification does agree. Now, says he, the definition which the Psalmist
and the Apostle gives of Justification, is Gods not imputing sin, and his
imputing of righteousness.

To this I answer by acknowledging the Argument; but I deny that the
non-imputing of sin, and the imputation of righteousness is the whole
definition of Justification; but it is a non-imputing of sin, and imputing of
righteousness according to the tenor of the Gospel, by virtue of that signal
promise, He that believes shall be saved: And this is intended by the Psalmist
and Apostle, if it be a full definition; for Justification is a forensical,
judicial act; now according to the tenor of the first Covenant, which
requires personal and perfect obedience, we cannot be saved: Now God has made
a new Covenant with us by Christ revealed in the Gospel, wherein he has
promised, whosoever believe shall be saved: Now when God as a fruit and effect
of this Covenant, does not impute sin, and impute righteousness to a person,
this is truly Justification; but thus God deals with none until actual faith.

Secondly, I answer, Gods eternal purpose is not formally a non-imputing of
sin, but a purpose of not imputing it: Therefore till this purpose be brought
into act, we are not pardoned and justified; for although his will be actual,
yet his non-imputation is not actual, but to be done in time; for neither is
the sin in actual being, which how it can be remitted before it be committed,
let him show; for it is not actually, but potentially a sin; And therefore, in
what sense it is a sin, in that sense it is remitted only, and neither is the
sinner to be pardoned in actual being, but Justification is a change of the
state and condition of the person justified, passing him from death to life,
and that for Christ's sake; but how can the state of the sinner be changed, who
is yet unborne? and never was yet actually a child of wrath? and Christ's death
is not the cause of Gods eternal will and purpose; and consequently, if that be
Justification, we are justified without the merits of Christ, and then Socinian
doctrine takes place; but the Scripture expressly mentions Christ's death as
the cause of our Justification, for which God justifies us; In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins; and, God has set him
forth a propitiation through faith in his blood; and for Christ's sake God is
said to forgive the Ephesians.

Thirdly, Whereas you, say the words, (both in the Old and New Testament,)
whereby imputation is signified, which are (...), and (...), do both of them
signify an act of the mind and will, an immanent act.

I answer, that sometimes when they are related to men, they so signify; Genesis
15.6. Genesis 38.15. Numb. 18.17. Psalm. 32.1. Psalm. 106.31. Romans 4.6, 8.
yet that they are so taken, when attributed to God, I absolutely deny; but do
always hold forth a transient act, and not an immanent act; as, Genesis 15.6.
Genesis 38.15. Numb. 18.27. Psalm. 32.1. Ps. 106.31. Romans 4.6, 8. 3 Cor. 5.19. nor
can any place be produced relating to God as his act, where it is so taken; for
it will ascribe a fallible judgment unto God, to say that he imputes not sin
to a justified person, that is to say, he judges and esteems them not to
have sinned, for Gods judgment is according to truth; and therefore such as
have sinned, he looks upon them as such as have sinned, and he cannot esteem
them such, as never did sin; though he may, if he will pardon them deal with
them as with such as have not sinned, and in this sense he imputes it not when
he pardons.

Secondly, His second Argument is thus, That which does secure men from wrath,
and whereby they are discharged, and acquitted from their sins, is
Justification. By this immanent act of God all the Elect are discharged, and
acquitted from their sins, and secured from wrath and destruction: Ergo.

To which I answer, 1. By distinguishing upon your Major proposition, that
which does secure presently, actually, fully, and formally, from wrath without
any other cause intervening, is Justification. And then in taking the
Proposition thus, I deny the Minor, that Election does presently, actually,
fully, and formally discharge the sinner from guilt and wrath; it is but a
purpose in God to do it, the sinner is not thereby discharged; Hence as soon as
he is borne, he is a child of wrath, which he could not be, if he were
justified from eternity, and so continues until faith; and the death of
Christ is a necessary cause intervening between this decree, and the discharge,
for which he is discharged; and without which, (supposing the decree, he cannot
be secured from wrath,) and Mr. Air himself acknowledges, p. 140. that sin
lay as a block in the way, that God could not salva justitia, bestow upon the
Elect those good things intended in Election: How then did Gods decree secure
them from wrath, if he mean only eventually, it does secure, because they shall
not have sin imputed to the condemnation of their persons; this is true, but to
little purpose, to prove a present formal discharge, such as Justification is:
Therefore when the Apostle says, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? The Apostle does not speak of the Elect antecedenter, antecedently to
their faith; but executive, or consequenter, as it is executed, and completed
in those that are Elected, as Mr. Burgess Mr. Burg. of Justif. p. 186.
has observed; Therefore, by the Elect he means the Elect Believers,
therefore if you resolve it either into a universal negative, No Elect person
can be justly charged with sin, or a universal affirmative, all Elect persons
are free from the charge of sin, if by the Elect, you understand the Elect
before Faith and Regeneration, both Propositions are absolutely false, for
otherwise Christ could not have been charged with our sin, if Election did free
us from the charge, then was there no necessity of Christ's dying, and then no
person is borne a sinner that is an Elect person, nor was ever under
condemnation, then neither was Adam a sinner under condemnation, for I take him
to be an Elect person, and then no man ever was under condemnation, for we
receive not guilt from him, unless he also were guilty, and we in him: But if
you take it for Elect Believers, then both Propositions are true, and this is
agreeable to the scope of the place; for he had said a little before, Whom he
predestined, them he called, and whom he called, (that is, unto faith,) them
he justified.

Mr. Air, p. 64.
As for the Answers which he gives to the Objections framed by himself, I have
considered them, and derected the weakness of them already. There remains but
one Objection which I have not yet given any Animadversion upon, and therefore
will do it here.

He says, it is obj^cted that hereby by making Justification to be Gods eternal
will not to punish, Justification and Election are confounded.

His answer to this is that they are not confounded, because Election includes
both the end, which is the glory of Gods grace, and all the means from the
beginning to the ending, conducing thereunto; his will not to punish, includes
precisely, and formally only some part of the means.

To this I answer; that according to Mr. Eyre's opinion, there is no
distinction at all between Election and Justification; for if it be the same
act of Gods will, if the object be the same, if the end of God in both be the
same, if the means conducing to that end be the same, then is there no
difference at all according to him; bur the antecedent is true, Therefore. That
with him it is the same act, page 61.
is evident, page 62. for he acknowledge no transient act, but an immanent
eternal act of his will, purposing salvation in Christ, that the object is the
same needs no proof, the end is the same, the glory of Gods grace in both,
and that the means conducing to that end is the same; Let him that has but a
spark of reason judge, for if the act be the same, the object the same, and
the end the same in both; why the means should not be the same, no reason can
be imagined, and let him assign what means God has appointed for the
execution of the eternal Election, and we shall easily show it that the same
thing God has appointed as a necessary Medium to effect our Justification
(according to his opinon,) which hold it to be one and the same eternal act of
his will: And let the Reader observe, that he makes no cause of our
Justification, but Gods own eternal good will and pleasure, as in the case of
Election, for Christ's death with him is not the cause of the act of
Justification, but of the effects of it, of the thing willed, and so Christ's
death with him is no antecedent means to effect the act of Justification, but
a subsequent mea^^ ^o fulfill the purpose of his will; and what a good friend
he is to the Gospel, to debase the merits of Christ, let the undestanding
Christian judge.

As for those arguments which he uses to disprove that our faith, page 52.
or faithful actions, are that Evangelical righteousness, by which we are
justified, makes nothing against me: For, if we speak of our Evangelical
righteousness, that is the matter of our righteousness, or that for which we
are justified, I acknowledge it is wholly in Christ subjective, and it is ours
only by imputation, and that faith is but the instrument to apply this; as for
that Reverend Mr. Baxter.
Brother and Servant of Christ, against whom these are leveled, he has since
explained his meaning, that he understands not faith to be the matter of our
righteousness, or a coordinate righteousness with Christ, but he calls it
our subordinate Evangelical righteousness; in which he disagreeth from us, and
I confess, (it had been more satisfaction to his Brethren, if he had not used
that term;) And therefore being not concerned in it, I pass them by.

The next File of Arguments that he brings up against our cause, we find in
the 9th Chapter, which though he will have them give fire, yet they do no
execution, nor will they stand the Field, and abide the shock of a solid
answer; which, because they are a company of tame Soldiers, we will take them
prisoners, and see how they will abide to be examined. He says, that faith
does not justify as a condition required on our part to qualify for
Justification.

Where I premise, that we understand not by qualifying us for Justification any
moral disposing, and qualifying us sensu pontificio, in the Papists sense,
inchoating our Justification, as if we were to be justified by something
inherent in us; but by qualifying we mean nothing but this, that according to
the tenor of the Gospel and New Covenant, it makes us subjects capable of the
act of Justification, for as much as the condition required is now fulfilled;
and as faith is Gods gift, so it is a passive condition; as it is our act, so
it is an active instrument, not elicited by the power of free will, but by
assistance of special grace,) whereby we apprehend Christ's righteousness for
Justification, and in this sense we are justified by faith according to the
Scriptures. Now let us consider his Arguments.

First, That Interpretation of the phrase, which gives no more to faith in the
business of our Justification, then to other works of Sanctification, cannot
be true, because the Scripture does peculiarly attribute our Justification unto
Faith in way of opposition to other works of Sanctification; but to interpret
Faith merely thus, that it is a condition to qualify us for Justification,
gives no more to Faith then to other works of Sanctification.

We shall reverence the Major, and let it go; but must commit his Minor to the
Marshalsie as a Rebel against reason: For though we make Faith a condition, and
a passive condition in the sense explained, yet this hinders not, but that it
may be an instrumental cause of Justification, and in this sense we give more
to faith, then to other works of Sanctification; Besides, we make not as he
affirm works necessary antecedents to Justification, necessary antecedents to
Salvation we do, but not unto Justification: For we acknowledge that of August,
to be true, opera non precedunt justificandum sed sequuntur justificatum. And
now I shall retort this Argument upon himself, That Interpretation of the
phrase, which gives no more to faith in the business of Justification then to
other works of Sanctification, cannot be true, because the Scripture does
peculiarly attribute our Justification unto Faith in a way of opposition to
other works of Sanctification; but to interpret Faith (subjectively taken,)
thus, that it justifies us only, because it evidenceth our Justification, is
to attribute no more to faith then to other works of Sanctification: Ergo. If
he answer that faith subjectively taken, for the grace of faith is not opposed
to works, because it is a work.

I answer, 1. If it be a work, yet it is the work of God, and not ours.

2. It justifies not as a work, but as an instrument to apply Christ's
righteousness: Nay,

3. I see not but the opposition stand as strongly, as if he took faith
objectively for Christ's righteousness, or obedience; for certainly the matter
of our Justification, is the obedience of Christ to the Law, and so we are
justified by works properly in the person of another.

Secondly, That Interpretation which gives no more to faith then to works of
nature, such as are found in natural unregenerate men, is not true, but to
interpret faith a necessary antecedent of our Justification, gives no more to
faith then to works of nature.

I deny the Minor; for, conditio sine qua non, a condition, whithout which a
thing is not done, may be a necessary condition; yet it is not so necessary as
that is, which is a cause by which the thing is done; the eyelids must be
opened as a necessary antecedent unto sight, But will you therefore say, it is
as equally necessary as the eye it self; so it is in the present case, sight of
sin, sorrow for it are necessarily required in the subject where God will work
faith; but it follows not that they are as equally necessary, and have as
much influence into Justification, as Faith.

The third Argument is this, That by which we are justified, is the proper
efficient meritorious cause of our Justification, but Faith considered as a
passive condition, is not a proper efficient cause of Justification.

I answer, by distinguishing upon the word [by]. That by which we are
justified, as the material cause of our Justification, or the matter for which
we are justified, is the meritorious proper efficient cause of Justification,
and in this sense we are not justified by faith.

2. It may be taken for the instrument by which that righteousness for which
we are justified is apprehended and applied, and in this sense we are justified
by faith, and taking it in this latter sense, I deny the Major: Nor is faith
only the instrumental cause of Justification, in foro conscientiae, as a little
after you affirm, though it be taken properly for the act of believing; but in
foro Dei, nor a bare condition without which, but a condition by which, by
virtue of Gods Covenant it is obtained; and therefore I acknowledge a true
causality in faith unto Justification.

Fourthly, That which makes us concurrent causes in the formal act of
Justification with God and Christ, because our Justification in respect of
efficiency, is attributed to them, is not true, but to make faith morally
disposing us to Justification, makes us concurrent causes with God and Christ
in our Justification.

I answer, 1. He attributes more to us then we affirm; we say not that faith
does moraly dispose us to Justification as he takes it in the Argument, [it is
no meritorious moving cause of Justification, nor is all moral disposition a
moral causality.]

2. The Major is not universally true, for Faith is a social cause, but not a
coordinate cause of Justification; Besides, what Faith does, it does it,
virtute agentis principalis, and by virtue of Gods Covenant, not as our act,
nor by any inherent worth in it self.

1. Nor does it follow from hence, that if any condition be required in order
to our Justification, then it is not free, for the very condition is freely
given, nor is it left to be performed by the power of our free will, this would
hinder the freeness of Justification.

2. It is not denied that we are concurrent causes with the merits of Christ,
but Christ and Faith are not causes ejusdem generis; for Christ's righteousness
is that for which we are justified, Faith is only that whereby this
righteousness is received, and applied unto Justification.

Fifthly, That Interpretation which makes Works going before Justification, not
only, not sinful, but acceptable to God, and praeparatory to the grace of
Justification, is not according to the mind of the Holy Ghost; but to
interpret Justification by faith, that faith is a condition, which does
qualify us for Justification, necessarily supposes a work, or works which
have not the nature of sin, but are acceptable to God, and preparatory to grace.

The Major we shall let pass as innocent, the Minor has guilt, and weakness
more then enough to be imputed to it.

1. We say, Faith does not us qualify as an inherent disposition, preparing us
for a Justification, to be effected by it as an inherent grace, only it puts
the subject into a capacity of being actually justified by the righteousness
of Christ, according to the tenor of the Covenant.

2. Faith does not justify as a Work, but as an instrument to apply Christ's
righteousness.

3. Though Faith be a Work, it is not ours, but Gods; and therefore none of our
Works justify.

4. Though there be a priority of nature in Faith unto Justification, yet there
is not any priority of time; but the same moment that Faith is wrought, we are
justified.

Sixthly, That Interpretation of any phrase of Scripture which involveth a
contradiction, is not to be admitted; but to say, Faith is a passive condition,
that does morally qualify us for Justification, implies a contradiction.

I subscribe the Major with both hands, and should be loath such a pouring
shower of contradictions should fall from my pen, as have done from yours,
which were enough to drown the reputation of a man, that would be counted one
of the more manly sorts of Divines. And I deny your Minor, it implies not a
contradiction to say, Faith is a condition of Justification. Your proof is
this, to be both passive and active in reference to the same effect, is a flat
contradiction. Now, that is active which is effective, which contributes an
efficacy, whether more or less, to the production of the effect, a condition
has not the least efficacy.

I answer, therefore it is peccant against the Law of opposition, for i^ is not
(...), for Praedicatum non disponitur cum subjecto secundum eandem subjecti
partem, and naturam. For faith is active and p^ssive in a different sense; if
you take faith in genere physico, it is act^ve; if you take it in genere moris,
it is passive, for it is only a condition making us c^^^ble, (according to the
Covenant) of Ju^^ification, not merito^^ously deserving, or by it self
effecting Justification; but it is not a^ the same time active and p^^siv^ in
genere phisico, nor active and passive at the same time in genere moris, and
therefore here is no contradiction. Besides faith, as it is an act, it is
active, and some way helps the agent, (not that God needs it, but because
he will not justify us without it;) but in regard that this is a receiving, it
is equivalent to suffering, and is a going out of our selves, renouncing our
own righteousness, and so is rightly judged passive, though formally it be an
action, yet virtually it is but a passive reception.

In the next place we shall consider his Arguments, which he brings in the
14th. Chapter, to prove that there was no Covenant between the Father and the
Son, to suspend the effects of his death until faith; and that it was the will
of God, that his death should be available to the immediate and actual
reconciliation and Justification of all the Elect antecedent to Faith. Now
because these Arguments are his Triarii, his Soldiers in the rereward in which
he puts most confidence; if we can but rout these, the day will be our own.

His first Argument runs thus, There is no such Covenant does appear, Ergo
there is none. A negative Argument I acknowledge in matters of great
consequence, is availeable; Therefore I deny his Assumption and all those
Scriptures, which promise Justification upon believing, and that limit the
benefit of Christ's death un^ill faith, is proof enough to prove there was a
Covenant between the Father and Christ to suspend the benefits of Christ's death
until faith, but because he will see the place; we refer him to Isa. 53.10.
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he
shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand. He shall see the travel of his soul, and be satisfied; by his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities.
Mr. Air acknowledges this place holds forth the Covenant between God and
Christ about the effects of his death; if you take the words as a prediction of
the Prophet, they hold forth a promise of God to Christ of the fruit of his
death, when God should make his soul an offering for sin, or when his soul
shall make it self an offering for sin, for the words will bear it: Now this
promise is virtually a Covenant, and does not limit the benefits of his death
to the present time; but first presupposes this work to be done, and then as a
fruit of this, he shall see his seed, (not all his seed presently,) but he
shall see it, and prolong his days; the pronoun is wanting, and therefore the
words have a twofold sense given them; some expound them of Christ, who after
his Resurrection should die no more, others of his issue, and race of the
Saints, and say the Authors of our English Annotations, the ancient Greek and
old Latin go both that way, and so take the meaning, he shall see his seed
that shall prolong its days, with a supply of the relative, and if so, this
makes clear against Master Air; But however, take it which way you will,
there is enough to evince it; He shall see of the travel of his soul, and be
satisfied, that is, he shall see that as the fruit and effect of his death,
which shall give him full content, he shall be much refreshed, and gladded as a
woman after hard travel, that sees the fruit of her womb, and he shall live to
see it. And then follow the words, which are the words of God delivered as in
his person, for Christ was not the Prophets servant, But by his knowledge shall
my righteous servant justify many, that is, by the knowledge of him, not his
knowledge taken subjectively, but objectively, that is, the knowledge whereby
they know him; where knowledge is put for faith, as, This is life eternal to
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; and so Paul
counted all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ his
Lord. Now here God describes how Christ shall justify many by his knowledge,
or by faith on him: Whence I argue, If God in the Covenant made with Christ,
did mention faith as a means by which he should justify many, that is, all his
seed that should be the travel of his soul; then was there such a Covenant,
that the fruits and benefits of Christ's death should not be enjoyed until
faith; for it is added, that he shall bear their iniquities; not that this
should be a present discharge, but to signify that none else but Believers
should be pardoned, because he shall bear their sins, and theirs only; but if
they be justified before faith, then he bears the sins of unbelievers, and so
unbelievers, and Believers are the subjects of Justification contrary to the
Scriptures. But God made such a Covenant, and made mention of Faith in it, as a
means whereby he should justify many, not that Faith is the cause of Gods
acceptance of the merits of Christ, but of applying it to us.

Secondly, That which Mr. Air adds, that our Savior after he had tasted
death, to bring many sons to glory, boasts and glories in this achievement,
Behold, I and the children which thou have given me, Heb. 2.13. Therefore it
was the will of God that his death should be immediately available for their
reconciliation, for they could not be the children of wrath, and of Christ at
the same time.

I answer, Mr. Air has dealt fraudulently in citing this Scripture, for he
has left out the 11th Verse. which is the true Key to unlock this, and to show
us who are there called his children; for these that are called children, are
called brethren in the 11th. Verse, and the same persons are understood without
all question, and who were his brethren, why, they that were sanctified; for
both he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one,
wherefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren. Now a man is not sanctified
before Faith, therefore not a brother before Faith, therefore not a child.

1. The scope of the place is this, the Apostle is comforting the believing
Hebrews against the scandal of the Cross, to which the Apostle answers in
v. 9. 1. That he was subjected unto death for our sakes, not for his own,
therefore his Cross should not offend us.

2. That he did but taste of death, he was but a little while under it.

3. It is was by the special grace of God, that his death for a short time
should stand for our eternal death deserved; Therefore we should rather
gloriously esteem of his suffering, then be offended.

2. He gives a second reason in the 10th Verse, it made for Gods glory as well
as for our salvation; for it behoved him, for whom are all things, and by whom,
in bringing many sons to glory, to make the Captain of our salvation perfect
through suffering In v. 11. he gives an account how Christ could die, and how
this could be accepted in our stead. He answers, Because that he is one of
our kin and nature. Now least it should therefore be thought that all are
redeemed, because all partake in the community of nature with Christ as man: He
shows who indeed are his kindred, brethren, for whom he died, they are
sanctified ones; They that are sanctified, and he that sanctifies, are all of
one, as if he should say, Christ died for them that are one with him: Now none
are one with him, but such, they are not only all of one common lump, but of
the same body, and have the same God for their Father: Hence if none be united
but sanctified ones, and if Christ will claim kindred with none but sanctified
ones, then none but Believers are his brethren, and children. Now as to your
Argument that they could not be the children of wrath, and of Christ at the
same time, I retort it upon you, and say, therefore it is evident they were not
Christ's children immediately from the time of his death, for then they could
not be children of wrath, which yet the Apostle expressly affirms of the
Elect Ephesians, before regeneration. Thus the Captain of the Lifeguard of his
opinion, lies bleeding at the feet of the truth that he does oppose.

Secondly, If it were the will of God that the death of Christ should be the
payment of our debt, and a full satisfaction for all our iniquities, then was
it his will that our discharge procured thereby should be immediate: But it was
the will of God that the death of Christ should be the payment of our debt, and
a full satisfaction for our iniquities: Ergo.

I deny the consequence of the Major Proposition, which he endeavors to
prove, because says he, it is unjust that a debt when it is paid, should be
charged upon the Surety, or Principal.

I answer, if it had been the intention of God and of Christ, that the payment
should have procured an immediate discharge; it were unjust: But that rests to
be proved, and will while the world stands. We deny not the value of the price
or satisfaction, but that God or Christ intended it for a present discharge.

1. Because Christ's death, though it be the meritorious cause, yet it is not
the only cause of Justification.

2. Christ's was Gods servant in the work of Redemption, and if it were the will
of God to limit this benefit till faith, it behoved Christ as Mediator to obey.

3. The merit of Christ's death is not to be valued only by the intrinsecal
value of it, but by the constitution and acceptance of God; it is said, that
by grace he tasted death for every man; It was an act of grace to Christ, that
he should be Mediator, that the sufferings of his humane nature, united to the
divine person of the Son of God, should be accepted as a ransom for us from
eternal death. Hence Christ's death was not an act of pure justice, but of
justice mixed with grace; and is so far accepted, as the divine will of the
Father pleases, as we see in denying the fruit of it to Reprobates, and
limiting it to the Elect, which might have ransomed all. And why is it any more
injustice to have it limited for a time by the will of God for application to
the Elect, when it shall certainly be done, then to have it by the will of God
absolutely limited to them alone? Hence Christ's death is so far meritorious, as
the will of God is to accept it; hence Gods will must not be regulated by the
death of Christ, for the time and manner of application, or else it must be
injustice in God, (which is a harsh expression in you,) but Christ's death must
be regulated by Gods will in accepting it; and I have else where given
sufficient reason, why God did limit the benefit of it until faith. And from
what goes before, it follows Christ's death was not solutio ejusdem, but
tantidem, for then it would have produced an immediate discharge. This is the
great Argument upon which his cause depends; and you see how invincibly it is
overmatcht, by opposing the Doctrine of Justification by Faith.

3ly. If nothing hindered the reconciliation of the Elect with God, but the
breach of the Law, then the Law being satisfied, it was the will of God that
they should be immediately reconciled; But nothing hindered their reconciliation
with God, but the breach of the Law. I shall here distinguish in answer to this
Argument upon the hinder^ng of reconciliation. 1. Reconciliation may be
hindered by that which is the cause of separation, which at first made the
breach; or reconciliation may be hindered for want of a fit means to apply the
benefit of reconciliation. And thus I apply it to the Minor. And deny it,
though nothing do hinder by way of guilt as a cause of separation for want of
satisfaction, yet something did hinder by way of application, for the want of
Faith as a means to unite the soul to Christ, hindered it; for as none are
partakers of Adams sin, but such as were in him; so none are partakers of the
reconciliation wrought by Christ, but such as are in him. Now it is by Faith
that we are implanted into Christ, and therefore until Faith we are not
partakers of the benefit of actual reconciliation. Mr. Air does err toto
coelo, when he thinks we conceive a new will and affection to be in God upon
believing, which was not before, for we acknowledge no new immanent act in God,
this were to make him mutable; but we acknowledge a transient act of God to
pass upon the believer, and that there is a change of Gods dispensation toward
the believer, though not a change of affection; and God loved them before with
the love of benevolence, not with the love of complacency, and delight, which
he could not do while they remained unjustified; The first love is terminated
upon their persons, (yet the nature of Justification consists not in it,
because it is a love of good will and purpose to do them good; The second is a
love terminated upon their graces, and so a delighting in his own work, and so
a loving them for what he has wrought in them, and now he pardons by virtue
of the Covenant of grace, and the promise, Whosoever believe, shall not perish,
but have everlasting life.

Fourthly, If it were the will of God that the sin of Adam should immediately
overspread his posterity, then it was the will of God that the satisfaction and
righteousness of Christ should immediately redound to the benefit of Gods
elect.

This consequence is denied, the reason that he brings, is, that there is the
same reason for the immediate transmission of both to their respective subjects;
for as the Apostle shows, Romans 5.14, both of them were Heads and Roots of
mankind. To which I answer, and deny that there is the same reason for the
immediate transmission of both, for though they be both Roots of mankind, yet
we are in the first Adam in a natural way, and so sinned in him before we had
a being, and were formally and actually sinners as soon as we had an actual
being; but we are in the second Adam by a supernatural work of the Spirit
working Faith, and this is not wrought always at our birth, but a long time
after. Besides, the scope of the Apostle is not to compare Adam and Christ, as
causes in eodem genere, of the same kind that did in the same manner, in every
respect communicate the issues of their actions, to their respective members;
but to show that Christ's death is no less efficacious, nay, more powerfully
efficacious to save all that are in him; then Adams sin were to condemn all
that are in him; and the efficaciousnesse of Christ's death consists not in the
immediate conferring of the things purchased, (for though in regerd of
causality, the effects are immediate, yet not in respect of application;) but in
the certainty of collating the things purchased, and the excellency of the
things obtained; for it is far mo^e efficacious to save one man, then to damn
all the world: The first is an act of Impotency, this an act of Omnipotency;
and they for whom Christ died, shall as certainly be justified and saved as if
the work were already done.

Fifthly, If the sacrifices of the Law were immediately available for the
typical cleansing of sins under that administration, then the sacrifice which
Christ has offered was immediately available, to make a real atonement for all
those sins for which he suffered. The reason of which consequence is this,
because the real sacrifice is no less efficacious then the typical, Heb. 9.14
But those legal sacrifices did immediately make atonement without any condition
perfermed on the sinners part, Lev. 16.30.

I answer, that the consequence of the major may justly be questioned; for if
they were immediate, it follows not that therefore Christ's sacrifice must be
so, or else it is of less efficacy,

First, because that such as brought those sacrifices were actually the people
of God, and professed faith in Christ, and if the Profession were outward only,
they had an outward cleansing; if real, they had by faith in Christ a spiritual
cleansing, signified by the outward cleansing, but all that shall be cleansed
by the sacrifice of Christ's death were not in being, much less had an actual
faith to apply it, nor is the death of Christ less efficacious, because they
did but typically cleanse, they could not purge the conscience, Heb. 9.25, 26.
hence they were often repeated, but Christ by one sacrifice once offered has
cleansed us, they had their power and efficacy only in reference to Christ's
blood, which was typified thereby.

Secondly, we say that Christ's death does immediately cleanse in respect of
causality though not in respect of actual application, the defect is not in
Christ's blood, but in the want of faith, that it might be applied. But

Thirdly, I deny the minor, those legal sacrifices did not immediately make
atonement without any condition on the sinners part; for that is apparently
false; For,

First, the man that would have an atonement made for him by sacrifice, must
have it be done by the slaying of a beast, offered up and burnt with fire, to
signify that without blood there (...) no remission, Levit. 1.
and to set forth the grievous sufferings of Christ.

Secondly, Levit. 1.
he must bring his sacrifice to the door of the Tabernacle, without which it
should not be accepted, yea, blood should be imputed to him, and he should be
cut off: Lev. 17.4.
this Tabernacle signified Christ, Heb. 9.11. Heb. 9.11.
by whom all services as a door must have passage to, and acceptance with God,
and he must voluntarily bring it, to show his voluntary Profession of faith,
though it were a duty commanded, and a sin not to do it, yet he must
voluntarily bring it to show his voluntary service, and profession of faith in
Christ.

Thirdly, he must put his hand upon the head of the beast, Levit. 1.4. Exodus
29.10. Lev. 1.4.
whereby he confessed his sins, and worthiness to die, though through Gods
mercy this death was inflicted on the beast, by which was signified, that he
must confess his sins and worthiness to die, and that God has laid his
iniquities upon Christ, and by this laying on of the hand is signified his
apprehending Christ; Exodus 24.8.
and likewise the blood was sprinkled upon the people, Heb. 9.19. Heb. 9.19.
The Priest took the blood of calves, and of goats, and he sprinkled the book,
and all the people, under which is typified the application of Christ's blood to
the conscience upon believing: Hence Calvin says, upon Heb. 9.19. Calvin apud
marl. Heb. 9.19.
Quod autem ex hyssopo aspergillum fiebat, and lana cotcina, non dubium est
quin mysticam asperginem quae fit per Spiritum representaverit, scimus hyssopum
singulari purgandi and excoquendi efficacia pollere: Ita Christus Spiritu suo
vice aspergilli utitur ad nos sanguine suo abluendos, dum serio poenitentiae
nos sensu afficit, dum excoquit pravas carnis nostrae cupiditates, dum pretioso
justitiae suae color nos tingit; and without these ceremonies thus performed,
the atonement was not available.

Sixthly, if it be the Will of God, that the death of Christ should be
available, for the immediate reconciliation of some of the Elect, without any
condition performed by them, then it was his will that it should be for all of
them: But it is the Will of God that it should be available for the immediate
reconciliation of some of the Elect, viz. infants, or else they cannot be
reconciled.

I answer, Mr. Air is hardly put to it, that he must run to the Philistines to
sharpen his goad; this argument is taken from Suarez, who argues against faith
in general upon this ground, because Infants are justified without it. Now this
argument proves, if it proves any thing at all, that we are justified without
it, and not before it, and so believers are not the sole subjects of
justification, as Mr. Air elsewhere affirms; but the case of Infants is not
to be urged in most questions, especially when we are speaking of what God
requires in those that are adulti, of age unto salvation; but I deny his minor,
and affirm that Infants are not united to Christ without says, they are saved
by faith as well as we. Thus Zanch. 5. Tom. in Com. in Hoseam. p. 28.
Zanchy, Vt uniamur huic capiti Christo, Spiritus propriae fidei per sese
omnibus ipsis etiam parvulis pernecessarius est, justus enim ex sola fide sua
vivet, non aliena: assensus autem propriae voluntatis omnibus adultis est
necessarius, etc. ac proinde etiam parvuli quodammodo sibi ponunt hoc caput,
cum Spiritu fidei interno in hoc caput donantur: That we may be united to
Christ, the spirit of a man's own faith by it self is necessary to all, yea to
Infants also, for the just shall live by his own faith, not by another man's: but
the assent of our own proper will is necessary to all that are of age. And a
little after he says, and therefore also Infants do in a manner appoint
themselves this head, when they are given unto this head by the internal Spirit
of faith. So also learned Rivet ad verse. Babyl Jesui. Tom. 297. p. 254.
Rivet, Agnoscimus Deum in Infantibus supplere quod deest propter aetatis
imbecillitatem interna Spiritus sui operatione, qui fidei semen in ipsis
ingenerat, and vi sua eis applicat meritum Christi, cujus suo tempore in eis
sensum est excitaturus: We acknowledge, that God supplyeth in Infants, what is
wanting through the weakness of their age by the internal work of his Spirit,
who engendereth a seed of faith, and by his power applies the merits of Christ
to them, whereof he will raise up a sense in his time; therefore I acknowledge
there is at l^ast wrought in them semen fidei, a seed of faith, by which they
become members of Christ, and that relation which is in their faith to Christ^
merits, is the instrument by which they obtain remission of sins, and without
which they could not be saved, nor may this seem strange, seeing we grant, that
in men grown up they are merely passive in the first work of grace, their
understandings and wills no ways concurring antecedently to this work, and
seeing it is a work wrought in us without us, why may not children be capable
of this? Besides, if Adam had stood, even Infants before the use of reason had
been sanctified, and Christ was so from the womb, and John Baptist, and
Infants received the seal of the righteousness of faith, and are they capable
of the seal of the righteousness of faith, and not of faith? And therefore
though they have not the use of knowledge, this hinders not a seed and work of
faith, they have not actual reason, yet they have reasonable souls; and when
its said that faith comes by hearing, it is to be applied to persons that are
of age, to whom the ordinary means to beget faith, is hearing of the Word
preached.

Seventhly, if it were the Will of God, that Christ should have the whole glory
of our reconciliation, it was his Will that it should not in the least depend
upon our works and conditions, because that conditions will share with him in
the glory of this effect, and our salvation would be partly of works, and
partly of grace, partly from Christ, and partly from our selves, nay, it would
be more from our selves then Christ.

Ans. I shall here distinguish upon conditions; A condition is either strictly
and properly taken for an absolute condition, required on our parts, performed
by our selves without the help of grace, no way given and merited by Christ,
upon which the effect of Christ's death should depend, as a cause of the effect,
if not deserving, yet at leastwise obliging God to give the effect; such a
condition would indeed share with Christ, and the honor of our salvation would
be ascribed, partly to our selves, and partly to Christ; nay, we should be more
beholding to our selves then to Christ, because notwithstanding all that he has
done, we might have been miserable, unless we had by the liberty of our Will,
and improvement of our natural abilities performed this condition; but we deny
and abhor such a condition as derogatory to Christ.

Secondly, a condition may be taken in a less proper sense, for an Evangelical
condition appointed by God to suspend the benefit of Christ's death, till the
condition be performed, which condition is not the fruit of free will, but the
absolute purchase of Christ, and the free gift of God, and shall be infallibly
given in the Lords due time to all, for whom Christ died, effectually to apply
the benefit of his death unto justification; this condition we acknowledge, nor
is it any wrong to Christ; for it is not the matter for which we are justified,
and it is the fruit of his death, and freely wrought by his own Spirit, and the
death of Christ is not rendered the less certain or effectual, but as
absolutely effectual, as if the effects were already enjoyed.

Eighthly, If it were the Will of God that his people should have strong
consolation, and that their joy should be full, then it was his Will that their
reconciliation should not depend upon conditions performed by themselves.

I answer, that the consolation and joy of Gods people is no whit lessened, or
abated by this condition before explained; for their salvation is as firm and
sure, as if that condition were not required, for they are not left to perform
the condition by natural strength; as for the condition which Calvin opposes,
it is a condition of works in the Papists sense, not in ours. And when the
Apostle says, Romans 4.16.
Our salvation is of grace, that it might be sure to all the seed; the same
Apostle says in the same verse, It is of faith, that it might be of grace, and
yet you are willing to leave out those words, because they make against you:
nor is it less sure by faith, Acts 16.48.
then if it were without it; for faith is merited, and shall be given, As many
as were ordained to eternal life believed; Phil. 1.29.
and To you it is given not only to believe, etc.

Ninthly, If it were the Will of God that the death of Christ should be
available while they live in this world, then it was the Will of God it should
procure for them immediate and actual reconciliation.

Ans. This consequence is denied, the argument makes against a condition in an
Arminian sense, not in ours; for upon the first moment that a man believes he
is justified, and all his sins past are actually pardoned, his sins to come
virtually, so that no following sin shall unjustifie him; though it may take
away his aptitude for heaven, yet not his right: and though his sin may deserve
damnation, and without actual repentance and faith he cannot be saved, yet
grace shall be given to enable him to repent and believe, so that though there
must be nova remissio, yet there is not nova justificatio; though a new
remission is needful, yet not a new justification; pardon of sin is a continued
act, but our justification quoad statum is done simul and semel, once and for
all; this you know to be the Orthodox opinion, yet you fraudulently conceal it,
and oppose us, as if we held a condition in an Arminian sense, and that so
often as we fall into sin, we fall from justification, and so no man could be
sure of salvation until death.

Tenthly, If it were the Will of God, that the death of Christ should certainly
procure reconciliation, then it was his Will it should not depend upon terms
and conditions performed by us.

Answ. Still your consequence does halt downright, for the salvation of the
Elect is not uncertain as to the event, but as certain as the unchangeable
decree of God can make it; but this is, Crambe bis vel ter recocta, and
fastidium parit.

Eleventhly, If he willed this blessing to his Elect by the death of Christ but
conditionally, then he willed the reconciliation and justification of the
Elect, no more then their non-reconciliation.

Answ. If Mr. Air be not, he may; and I am ashamed of this gross and wilful
ignorance; I believe he knows it as well as he knows there is a God, that the
Orthodox abhor these positions of the Remonstrants, and that we acknowledge that
God willed the salvation of Peter with another manner of intention, then of
Judas, and that we acknowledge no condition antecedently to their Election, but
that he has absolutely predestined the Elect unto the end, and as absolutely
to the means, and that God did not stand indifferent to the event, whether
they shall be justified, saved or no, but absolutely decreed them unto life as
the end, unto justification as the means, unto faith as a means to bring them
unto justification; so that though they be not justified nor reconciled
actually, yet he absolutely willed that they should be reconciled, and
therefore gave Christ to die for them, and will give faith to apply the
benefits of his death. As for the proof of his consequence, if he willed their
salvation only in case they believe, then he willed their condemnation if they
believe not. I distinguish upon Gods Will, it is either secret, or revealed,
voluntas signi, or beneplacity; praecepti, or propositi; if you look to the
will of Gods purpose, and his good will and pleasure, he absolutely willed
their reconciliation, so that nothing shall hinder it; but he did not will an
absolute reconciliation without Faith; there was no condition of his will,
though of the thing willed; but if you look to the revealed will of God, the
will of precept, so he declares it is his will, that he that believes shall
be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned, and thus he wills their
damnation if they believe not.

Twelfthly, If God willed unto men the benefits of Christ's death, upon any
condition to be performed by them, it will follow that God foresaw in them an
ability to perform some good which Christ has not merited, conditional
reconciliation necessarily presupposes freewill.

Answ. Still his arguments are guilty of this common fate to be lame in the
consequence, and to fall very short of the mark intended; It does not follow
that God foresaw any such ability in man, nor does such a condition as we
establish, enthrone free will; we yield him that God willed this blessing upon
a possible condition; not possible to nature, but possible by grace; not
because man can perform it, (for it requires the same Almighty power that was
required to raise Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1.18,) but because God by his
Spirit will work and give it. And those he calls his adversaries, do mean it
in this sense, it is a fruit of a promise made to Christ, and an effect of his
death that Faith shall be given, but not a fruit of the Covenant made with us,
but rather the condition by which we are really received into Covenant.

Thirteenthly, If God did will that our sins should be accounted to Christ
without any condition on our part, then was it his will that they should be
discounted without any condition on our part: But the Antecedent is true: Ergo.

I answer, it is pity that a man, whom we hope means well, that his Arguments
should go out like a snuff of a candle in the socket, as these do; And I
confess it is a ridiculous argument, and inference, yet I will give a solution
to it. I therefore deny his consequence: It is readily granted, that the
imputation of our sins to Christ did not depend upon any condition of ours,
for we had not then a being when this imputation was made, nor was it needful
either for Christ, or us, that any condition on our parts should be the ground
of this imputation; it was a free act of God in mercy, taking off the guilt
from us, and transferring it on Christ, and his sole will and pleasure was the
cause of it; but that therefore it was the will of God that it should without
any ondition on our part be discounted to us, is a miserable consequence, more
fit to be laughed at, then refuted. But to omit nothing that may have the face,
though not the force of an argument unanswered; I deny the consequence, and the
reason of it, and affirm that the charging our sins upon Christ, was not our
discharge formally considered, the imputing out sins to Christ was not a
formal non-imputing them to us, virtually it was, it was a foundation laid for
the non-imputing them to us, it was a paying the ransom for us, a legal
translation of the eternal punishment upon Christ, a laying help upon one that
was mighty; but this was not, nor is ever called in Scripture Justification:
here is no formal imputation of any righteousness to us, who are not yet
borne, much less cited before a Tribunal, and absolved from the guilt of
sin. Besides, it is not the charging of a surety with the debt, bue the
discharging of him rather that carries the force of an Argument, to prove our
discharge: but although Christ in his Resurrection was legally discharged as a
publik person, and all that he did represent, fundamentally, meritoriously, and
causally; yet not personally, and formally, which is necessary to Justification.

Thus have I answered his Arguments, which he has brought to prove the
antecedency of Justification to Faith, there remains yet one Argument, and
Objection behind, with which I shall put an end to this discourse, leaving
that which relates to the Covenant to Mr. Woodbridge, to whom it peculiarly
belongs, from whom I doubt not but the world will receive a satisfactory
answer. The Argument yet unanswered, is this;

If a man have the Spirit of God given him before he believe, then he must
needs be justified before he does believe, because then he is in Covenant
before he believes, and he that is in Covenant is justified.

To this I answer; First, by Concession, willingly acknowledging faith to be
the Spirits work, and that no man can believe without the help of the Spirit
working Faith.

Secondly, I deny the Consequence, that although the Spirit works Faith
before we can believe, yet does it not follow that a man is justified before
believing. And the reason of the Consequence I deny also, it follows not that
he is in Covenant before believing, for there is no distance of time between
the giving of the Spirit, our believing, and being justified, and in Covenant,
or being passed from the state of death into a state of salvation, because
there is a synchronisme in these, in respect of time, they being altogether, as
soon as ever there is fire there is heat; so as soon as the Spirit is given,
Faith is wrought, and the person justified, and in Covenant, and sanctified, at
the same time; for God is able to act in instanti, in a moment; the Spirit is
then said to be given to us, when he does manifest his Divine presence by
working something in us peculiar to the elect, for though those that shall
perish may be enlightened, and taste of the powers of the world to come, and
may be said to be partakers of the holy Ghost, yet properly none receive the
Spirit but the Elect, and what others have is not a true saving work; now
because no work before Faith is truly saving, and have a necessary connection
with salvation, therefore the Spirit is not received before Faith, and so they
are simultanea, all together, the Spirit, Faith, and Justification, and being
in Covenant; and therefore though there may be a precedence of nature in this
gift of the Spirit before Faith, yet follows it not that we are justified,
and in Covenant before Faith, but at this very instant is the believer taken
into Covenant, and justified; and thus I willingly acknowledge the first grace
is absolutely given, to wit effectual vocation, or Faith, by which the soul is
brought into an estate of Justification, and Faith is made the condition
(though wrought by God) of our Justification. So that our being in Covenant and
justified, follow Faith in order of nature, which is contrary to that which
Master Air has all along contended for, that a man is justified from
eternity, or from the time of Christ's death, antecedently to our birth, and
faith; and that the unregenerate, so remaining, if elected, are justified in
that estate: which opinion, if it be received, how it should not destroy the
vitals of Religion, is past my understanding to imagine. Having therefore had
the glory of God, the vindication of this blessed truth, the salvation of the
souls of Gods Elect, the preserving them from Error that are yet free from the
infection of it, the reducing those that are gone astray before mine eyes; and
having with earnest prayers unto God sought for guidance herein, I undertook
this task, and through his grace have finished it; and I trust I have not (I am
sure I have not willingly) departed from the truth: and if in any thing I have
written, I have erred from the truth, as humanum est errare, upon the first
discovery of it I shall through the grace of Christ become a thankful
Proselyte; in the mean time I commend the Christian Reader to the grace of God
in Christ. And the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
glory, tread down Satan under our feet, establish and settle us in the truth,
and give us to receive it in the love of it, and grant to us the Spirit of
wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of him, that the eyes of our
understandings may be enlightened, that we may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what is the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints,
and by the exceeding greatness of his power, work Faith in the hearts of his
Elect, where it is yet wanting; according to the working of his mighty power,
and fulfill that which is lacking in our faith with power, and so keep us by his
mighty power through faith unto this salvation, which is ready to be revealed
at the second coming of Christ, Amen.

A Postscript of the Author by way of advertisement to the Reader.
WHereas it is said, page 238, that it is not denied that we are concurrent
causes with the merits of Christ in the work of Justification, least Mr. Eyte
in particular, or any other should through wilfulness or weakness mistake the
mind of the Author, he is desired not to dismember the sentence, but to take
it as it is there explained; And I further declare, that I understand by it no
more, but that faith is a concomitant, social cause with Christ in the work of
Justification, but not a coordinate or meritorious cause of the same kind;
but a subordinate instrument appointed by God for the receiving and applying of
Christ's righteousness unto Justification; and that this faith is Gods Almighty
work, and free gife, without which no man shall ever have benefit by Christ's
righteousness: and because it is our act, though it be Gods gift, (for it is
we that believe, and not God; in this sense alone it is said, that we are
concurrent causes with Christ; not that we are justified by faith as our act,
but as it is an organical instrument to apply Christ's righteousness for this
end: and this I conceive is the unanimous opinion of all the Orthodox.

FINIS.

