Youths Behavior, OR DECENCY IN CONVERSATION AMONGST MEN. Composed in French
by grave persons for the Use and benefit of their YOUTH. Now newly turned into
English BY FRANCIS HAWKINS.

The fourth Edition, with the Addition of Twenty six new Precepts, (which are
marked thus)

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for W. Lee: and are to be sold at the Turks-head
near the Miter Tavern in Fleetstreet. 1646.

To the READER.
GENTLE YOUTH,
Think it not amiss to peruse this Piece, yet connive at the Style: for it
has need thereof, since wrought by an uncouth and rough File of one in green
years; as being aged under eight. Hence, worthy Reader, show not thy self
too-too rigid a Censurer.

This his version is little disguised, and therefore likely will it appear to
thee much imperfect. It ought to be his own, or why under the Title is his
name written? Peradventure thou will say, what is it to me? yet hear: Such is
it really, as that I presume the Author may therein be clearly seen to be
rendered faithfully: with this courteously be thou satisfied.

This small Treatise in its use, will evidently appear to redound to the
singular benefit of many a young spirit, to whom solely, and purposely it is
addressed. Pass it therefore without mistake, and heartily.

In laudem Authoris.
THough here be wonder when it is known,
A Child should make this work his own,
(Since he that can translate and please,
Must needs command two Languages:)
Yet this is nothing to the rest
Of treasure, which this little Chest
Contains, and will in time break forth
To call just Volumens of his worth.
If thus, a Branch! what will he be
When he is grown to be a Tree?
So glorious in the bud, let men
Look for the Hesperides again,
And gather fruit, nor think it unfit,
A Child should teach the world more wit.
J. S. The Contents.
CHAP. I. General and mixed precepts as touching civility amongst men. Page 1
CHAP. II. Of the first duties and Ceremonies in conversation. page 10. CAAP.
III. Of the fashion of quailfying, or titl'ing of persons to whom one speaks;
to advise them, to break a jest. page 19 CHAP. IV. Of Clothes, and arraying
the body. p. 23 CHAP. V. Of walking, be it alone, or in company. page 25 CHAP.
VI. Of discourse. p. 29 CHAP. II. Of Carriage at the Table. page 42.
Youths Behavior, OR DECENCY IN CONVERSATION AMONGST MEN.
CHAPTER I. General and mixed Precepts as touching Civility among Men.
1. Every Action done in the view of the world, ought to be accompanied with
some sign of reverence, which one bears to all who are present.

2 It is ill beseeming to put one in mind of any unclean, or ill-savored thing.

3 Take heed as much as thou can in the presence of others, to put thy hand
to any part of thy body, which is not ordinarily discovered; as are, the hands
and face: and to accustom thy self thereunto, it is well done to abstain
from so doing, yea, being alone.

4 Do not thou show any thing to thy companion, which may affright him.

5 Sing not within thy mouth, humming to thy self, unless thou be alone, in
such sort as thou can not be heard by others. Strike not up a Drum with thy
fingers, or thy feet.

6 Rub not thy teeth, nor crash them, nor make any thing crack, in such manner,
that thou disquiet any body.

7 It is an uncivil thing to stretch out thine arms at length, and writhe
them hither and thither.

8 In coughing, or sneezing, make not great noise, if it be possible, and send
not forth any sigh, in such wise that others observe thee, without great
occasion.

9 In yawning, howl not, and thou should abstain as much as thou can to
yawne, especially when thou speak, for that shows one to be weary, and
that one little accounted of the company: but if thou be'st constrained to
yawne, by all means for that time being, speak not, nor gape wide mouthed but
shut thy mouth with thy hand, or with thy handkerchiefe, if it be needful,
readily turning thy face to another side.

10 When thou blowest thy nose, make not thy nose sound like a trumpet, and
after, look not within thine handkercher. Take heed thou blow not thy nose as
children do with their fingers, or with their sleeves: but serve thy self of
thy handkercher.

11 To sleep when others speak, to sit when others stand, to walk on when
others stay, to speak when one should hold his peace or hear others; are all
things of ill manners: but it is permitted to a superior to walk in certain
places, as, to a Master in his School.

12 It is a thing unseemly to leave ones bed out of order, and one ought not to
put off ones clothes in the presence of others, nor go out of ones Chamber
half unready, or with a nightcap. Let not thy Chamber, nor thy Table where thou
studiest, be unhandsome, especially in the sight of another, and if so be that
thou have one to make thy bed, leave it not uncovered when thou go out
thence.

13 During the time thou should study, if thou be'st in the company of
others, it is not fit to make a noise, or read so loud that thou be'st
understood by others who study: Likewise it is mis-beseeming to study, or read
other books unseasonably, while the Master explicateth a lesson, as also to
hinder thy fellows attentions.

14 Hearing thy Master, or likewise the Preacher; wriggle not thy self, as
seeming unable to contain thy self within thy skin, making show to be the
knowing, and sufficient, to be misprice of others.

15 At play, and at fire; good manners will, that one give place to them who
are newly come.

16 Take heed, that in playing thou do not over-heat thy self; Contest not,
nor speak louder than thou may with moderation. Drink not when thou art hot,
be it that it comes by play, or by walking a pace, or other labor: for it is
a thing very prejudicial to health, to drink at such a time.

17. It is not decent to spet upon the fire; much less to lay hands upon the
embers, or put them into the flame to warm ones self, nor is it beseeming to
stoop so low as even to crouching, and as if it were one sat on the ground. If
there be any meat on the fire, thou ought not to set thy foot thereon, to
heat it. In the presence of a well bred company, it is uncomely to turn ones
back to the fire, or to approach nigher than others: for the one, and other
savoureth of pre-eminence. It is not permitted but to the chief in quality, or
to him who has charge of the fire, to stir up the fire with the fire-forke,
or to kindle it, take it a way, or put fuel on it.

18 When thou set, put not undecently one leg upon the other, but keep
them firm and settled, and join thy feet even, cross not them one upon the
other.

19 Gnaw not thy nails in the presence of others, nor bite them with thy teeth.

20 Spet not on thy fingers, and draw them not as if it were to make them
longer: also sniffle not in the sight of others.

21 Neither shake thy head, feet, or legs, Roll not thine eyes. Lift not one
of thine eyebrows higher than thine other. Wry not thy mouth, Take heed that
with thy spettle thou bedew not his face with whom thou speak, and to that
end, approach not too nigh him

22 Kill not a flea, or other unclean virmine in the presence of others. And
if thou see any filth on the ground, as some thick spettle, or the like, put
thy foot thereon dexterously, if thou can: if that were upon the clothes of
thy companion; show it not to others: but if thou can, put it off neatly, yet
without his taking notice thereof, if it may so be: and if another do for
thee, the like office, show thy self unto him with tender of thanks.

23 Spet not far off thee, nor behind thee, but a-side, a little distant, and
not right before thy companion: but if it be some gross phlegm, one ought if
it may be, tread upon it. Be-spet not the windows in the streets, nor spet on
the fire, nor on a Basin, nor on any other place where the spettle cannot be
taken away, by putting thy foot thereon.

24 Turn not thy back to others, especially in speaking. Jogge not the Table,
or Deske, on which another does read, or write; Lean not upon any one; pull
him not by his cloak to speak to him; push him not with thine elbow.

25 Set not in order, at every handwhile, thy beard or thy stockings. Keep not
thy nails foul, or too long, and keep thy hands, and thy teeth clean, yet
without overmuch attendance thereon, or curiosity.

26 Puff not up thy cheeks: Lall not out thy tongue; Rub not thy beard, nor
thy hands. Thrust not out thy lips, or bite them, and keep them neither too
open nor too shut.

27 Take heed thou be'st not a flatterer: for such an one shows to have
little opinion of the judgment of him whom he flattereth, holding him for a
simple fellow. Play not with him who takes no pleasure therein.

28 It be comes not to read Letters, Books, or other Writings, whilst one is
in company, unless there be some necessity, and as it were in passing by; and
then also thou should crave leave of the company, be it not that thou art
the chief of them all. No more may thou touch the writings, Books, or such
like things of others, nor go near them nor fix thine eyes upon them, unless
thou be'st invited thereunto, by him who is the owner of them: and thou
should not blame them, or praise them, until one asks thy advice therein.
Also thou ought not to approach, or look nigh, when another reads a
Letter, or such like thing.

29 Let not thy countenance be like that of a fantastical, or haire-brained,
stern, amazed, melancholique, pensive, inconstant man, in such sort that one
thereby may discern some passion, or unruly affection: rather show a good
countenance, and pleasant cheer, avoiding too much mirth in serious affairs,
and too much gravitie in things familiar and ordinary.

30 Let the gestures of thy body, be agreeable to the matter of thy discourse,
For it has been ever held a solaesime in oratory, to point to the Earth, when
thou talkest of Heaven.

31 Scorn not any, for the infirmityes of nature, which by no Art can be
amended, nor do thou, delight to put them in mind of them, since it very often
procures envye, and promotes malice even to Revenge.

32 When thou shall hear the misfortunes of an other, show not thy self
gladed for it, though it happ to thy enemy, for that will argue a mind
mischevous, and will convict thee of a desire, to have executed it thy self,
had either power or opertunity seconded thy will.

33 When thou see justice executed on any, thou may inwardly take delight
in his vigillancy, to punish offenders, because it tends to public quiet, yet
show pity to the offender, and ever Constitute the defect of his morality, thy
precaution.

34 Laugh not too much, or too Loud, in any public spectacle, least for thy
so doing, thou present thy self, the only thing worthy to be laughed at.

CHAP. II. Of the first duties, and Ceremonies in Conversation.
ALthough superfluous complements, and all affectation in ceremonies are to be
eschewed, yet thou ought not to leave them which are due, otherwise thou
displeasest the person with whom thou do converse.

2 Put off thy cap, or hatt, to persons of desert, as are Churchmen, Justices,
and the like, turning thy cap, or hat, to thy selfe-wards, make them a
reverence, bowing thy self more or less, according to the quality ofthe
persons, and the custom of the better-bred. So in like sort, it is an undecent
thing, not to do reverence to who^ it appertains, and among thy equals, to
expect that thy companion prevent thee in that duty. Also to put off ones hat
when there is no necessity, appears to have of affectation; in like manner
it is reproveable, to observe whether one does re-salute thee: For the rest, in
manner of saluting, or resaluting by word; keep the most common custom of the
best-trained up.

3 It is ill said, Sir be covered, or put on your hat, to one of more eminency
than thy self, as also not to say so much, to whom it is due. Likewise he who
makes too much have to put on his hat, and he who at the first puts not on,
or after some few entreaties; do not well: and therefore one ought to be
covered after the first, or for the most part after the second time; if so that
in some Countries, the contrary custom be not received, and among equals, or
superiors, who are of the self same house, the inferior may cover himself
at the first request. True it is, that equals, at the instant, or immediately
after, are wont to enterchange a sign of covering themselves jointly. Now what
herein is spoken of qualification in behavior, ought likewise to be conceived,
in what concerns taking of place, and sitting down: for ceremonies without
bounds are too troublesome.

4 He who being inferior, or held for such an one, would put on his hat, his
companion being uncovered, ought to demand leave of the other: then in good
time let him do so; upon condition, that he may presume, that nothing will
offend the other.

5 If any one come to speak with thee whilst thou sit; stand up:
especially if the person do merit it, be it that he be greater than thy self,
or for that he is not thy familiar, or though for the rest he were thy equal,
or thy inferior: and if there be any thing for one to sit on, be it a chair,
be it a stool, give to each one his due.

6 When thou shall meet any one of greater rank than thy self, thou ought to
stay thy self, yea, and even retire a little; especially if the meeting be at
a door, or other straight passage, giving way that he may pass.

7 Walking in Company of the like, thou shall give them the more worthy hand
(according to the custom of the country) in which speaking in general, it
seems to be the most common use, that the more noble place is on the right
hand, the right, I say, in such sort, that he, who does honor to any other,
placing himself on his left hand, gives him the right. But if three walk
together, the chiefest place in rank is for the most part, that of the midst;
then that which is on the right hand: and the last that of the left. Yet, in
France, for so much as the place near the wall is ordinarily more high, more
sure for easy walking, and cleaner, commonly one gives it to the more worthy,
namely, where there are but two.

8 Being with thy equals, be not the first to take the best place: but if one
present it unto thee, be not wilful in refusing it: thou may well express
some act of civil courtesy, showing that thou exceptest it rather to obey
them, or for that thou would not enter into importunate striving, than for
any merit of thine; at least let it appear, that thou rendrest thanks.

9 If any one far surpassing others, either in age or in desert, would give
place to a meaner than himself in his own lodging, or elsewhere; even as he
ought not to accept of it, so he on the other part, should not use much
earnestness, nor offer it unto him more than once, or twice; to the end he be
not suspected of incivilitie.

10 But to him who is ones peer, or almost the same, one ought to give the
cheivest place in ones own lodging; and he ought gently to refuse it: then at
the second offer to accept it, with thanksgiving, and recognizance.

11 In walking to, and fro an house, thou ought to observe the same, but it
is enough that one put ones self on the left hand at the first, and afterward
continue where one is. Which may likewise be observed, being with ones
superiors; yet use the most common custom of the Country.

12 They who are in dignity, or in office, have precedence in all places: but
whilst they are young, they ought to respect them who are their equals in
birth, or other qualities, although they have not any public charge, if they
be much more aged, principally if they have the degree of Doctership: nay, when
they give to them, the chiefest place, they ought notwithstanding at the first
to refuse it, afterward to take it civilly with thanksgiving.

13 It is good manners to prefer them to whom one speaks, before ones
self, especially if they be far above us, with whom in no sort ought one to
contend.

14 Meeting by the way the Bishop of the City, the sovereign Lord, or other
person of like quality, it is the duty of each one to do them the reverence
which appertains to them, staying ones self until they are passed by.

15 For that which concerns ceremonies, or complements; we ought to have
respect of time, place, age, and condition of persons: and with them who are
much employed we must be brief, nay rather we should make them understand
by sign, that which we would say unto them.

16 Even as Artificers, and other persons of low conditions, ought not to
trouble themselves to use many ceremonies to them who are great, and Lords; but
respect them and humbly honor them: so likewise on the other part, they ought
to treat with them in all sort of affability, and courtesy, keeping
themselves from each action, or sine of arrogance.

17 Speaking to men of quality; lean not, and look not them wistly in the
face. Approach not too near them, and at the least keep thy self a pace from
them, or thereabout.

18 Visiting any sick body, do not play suddenly the Doctor of Physics part,
if thou therein understand nothing.

19 Writing Letters, or speaking to any person of honor, and quality; thou
shall give to each one the title which belongs unto him, answerable to his
degree, and the custom of the Country: and it will not be to ill purpose to
read over again that which thou have written, to the end thou may correct
the faults, if any therein be found.

20 Strive not with thy superiors, in argument or discourse, but always
submit thy opinion to their riper judgment, with modesty; since the possibility
of Erring, does rather accompany green than gray hairs.

20 Do not undertake to teach thy equal, in the Art himself professes, for
that will savor of Arrogance, and serve for little other than to brand thy
judgment with Rashness.

21 Let thy Seremonyes in Courtesy be proper to the dignity and place, of him
with whom thou conversest. For it is absurd to honor a Clown, with words
covrtly and of magnificence.

22 Do not thou express joy before one sick, or in pain: for that contrary
passion, will easily aggravate his misery. But do thou rather Sympathize his
infirmityes, for that will afford a grateful easement, by a seeming
participation.

23 Show thy self humbly, tractable, to thy Superiors, especially to
Magistrates, and men in Authority, let thy demeanor toward thy equals be such
as may argue thee free from arrogance. And be thou assured, that gentle
affability toward thy inferiors, will fix to thy name the Epithet of
courteous.

CHAP. III. Of the fashion of qualifing, or titling of Persons to whom one
speaks; to advise them; to break a jest,
1 TOuching the Titles, and Attributes which comomonly one gives to great
persons; it is needful to observe the use of times, and of the Country, and to
take counsel of them, who are versed and experienced in such things. Also one
ought to take heed in speaking to such an one, that one change not his Title,
giving unto him sometimes one, sometimes another, if one be not mistaken at the
first.

2 To persons of lesser rank; one says, you, without thou-ing any body, be
it not some little child, and that thou were much more aged, and that the
custom it self amongst the more courteous, and better bread, were to speak
in such manner. Yet, Fathers to their Children, untell a certain age, as in
France until they be set at liberty; Masters, to their little, Scholars;
and others of a like command, seem according to the more common use, to have
power to say, Thou, Thee, even plainly: for, what concerns familiar friends,
amongst them the custom does comport in certain places, that they (Thou) one
another more freely; in other places one is more reserved.

3 When a man does the uttermost he can, and ought, although it succeeds not
to thy wishes; take heed to blame him: for in it, he rather deserves praise.

4 Having whereof to advise, or reprehend any one, take good heed whether it
ought to be done in public, or in private; or indeed, whether it be fit to
remit it to another time: consider in what terms thou should do it,
especially when he who should be counseled, seems not to give hope of
remedy to his passed, or future faults: above all, in reproving any one, show
no sign of choler, nor speak to him with too high an accent: but do it with
all sweetness.

5 Being admonished of any whosoever, and in what time, and place soever; show
to take it in good part, thanking him who has done thee such an office; but if
afterward, being not culpable, it seem to thee necessary to justify thy
self; thou may do it in time, and place, and with decency, rather to
content him who advises thee, than to excuse thy self, especially, if he be
thy superior.

6 Reproach not anyes imperfections, although they be natural. Take not
pleasure to make any body blush, either by thy deed, or word.

7 Neither mock, nor scoff in a thing of importance, nor be reproachful; nor
also break a jest, in biting like a dog: but if thou deliverest any conceit
which is ready, and not too much permeditated, and without offense to any body,
thou may do well. Witty conceits, and passages of the tongue, ought not to
be in base and mis-beseeming things such as are those of jesters: and when so
it falls out that thou deliver some happy, lively, an jolly conceit; abstain
thou, and let others laugh.

8 Be sure thy conversation be in that point virtuous, wherein thou art
desirous to retain another, least thy Actions render thy advice unprofitable;
Since the ratification of any advice, is the serious prosecution of that
virtue, For example has ever been more prevalent than precept.

9 * In writing, or speaking to any deprive then not of their acquired Titles,
least thou seem Censorious of their deserts.

10 * Thou ought not too sudenly to be seen a flying Rumor of a friend, or
any other. But let charity guide thy judgment, until more certanty: for by this
means thou securest his Reputation, And free's thy self of rashness.

11 * Use no reproachful language against any man, nor Curse, or Revile, For
improperations and imprecations; will rather betray thy affections to censour
than in any manner, hurt him against whom thou utters them.

CHAP. IV. Of Clothes, and Arraying the Body.
1 BE not too solicitous in setting thy bands, thy hair, or thy beard. Carry
not about thee any sweet smell. Wear not thy hat too high on thy head, nor too
cloase on thine eyes, nor in the fashion of swaggerers, and jesters.

2 Untrusse not thy self, nor make thy self ready for the cloase stool in
the presence of others: afterward if thou be to touch any meat, first, wash
thine hands: but if it may be, not in the sight of any whosoever.

3 It is a point of cleanliness, and of wholesomnes, to wash ones hands and
face as soon as one is up; and to comb ones head in time, and season; yet not
too curiously.

4 Wear not thy clothes foul, unsowed dusty, nor old; look that they be
brushed commonly once a day. Take heed where thou sit, or kneelest, and
whom thou approachest, for fear that there be dust or some uncleannes. Carry
not thy Cloak, under thine arm, like a Braggadoche. If thou layest by thy
Cloak, or thy Gown, wrap it up, taking heed where thou put it.

5 For what concerns clothes; accommodate thy self to the fashion of thy
equals, civil and orderly men, according to the use of times, and places: Yet
thy Clothes ought to be rather more plain, and grave, regard had to others,
than richer and beter.

6 Ever be modest in thy apparel, rather seeking to Accommodate nature, then
curious by Art to procure admiration: Clothes may give thee ornament, but the
juditious will never seek thy perfection on thy outside. And I Am sure if
decency be thy only aim, thou will be sure to shoulder off the censure of a
Fantastic.

7 Admire not thy self in thy apparel, for that will so far monstrate thy
defects, as thou art willing to seek perfection, in the skill of a Taylour.

CHAP. V. Of walking, be it alone or in Company
1 Run not in the streets, also go not too slowly, nor with thy mouth open:
Move not to and fro in walking, go not like a ninnie, nor hang thy hands
downwards: Shake not thine arms: kick not the earth with thy feet: Throw not
thy legs a-crosse here and there, and walking, draile not thy feet after thee:
Trusse not up thy breeches at every hand-while: go not upon the top of thy
toes, nor in a dancing fashion, nor in a stooping, nor in a capering or in a
tripping manner with thy heels.

2 Play not the Peacock, looking every where about thee, whether thou be
well decked, and trim, if thy shoes sit well, if thy stocking be fitly
drawn up, and thy other clothes handsome, and well accommodated. Go not out of
thy chamber with thy pen in thine ear, cap, or hat; carry not thy
handkerchiefe in thy hand, nor in thy mouth, nor hang it at thy girdle, nor
under thine arm, nor upon thy shoulders, or under thy gown: but put it in a
place where others see it not, and from whence thou may take it out when thou
need. Beware, although thou had scarcely made use thereof, to present it
to others.

3 Eat not in the streets, principally in the Town, be thou alone, nor in
company; nor in the house out of season, and in the presence of strangers.

4 Laugh not, nor speak not thou being alone; for it is not the part of a man.
Walking alone, sing not in such manner, that thou be overheard. Make not any
sign of admiration, as if thou thoughtest of some great business: Also throw
not in the streets a stone, a stick, or any other thing. Tread not purposely
one the pebble stones, and remove them not out of their places, for it is the
act of a fool; Go not with thy head too high, nor too low, nor hanging to the
right, or left, and look not giddily here and there.

5 Above all things, if thou esteemest of thy reputation, associate thy self
with men of good quality: but if it cannot be, because thou know none, or
for some other reason; it were better, as one says, to be alone, than ill
accompanied.

6 If thou go with one of thy rank, take not the upper hand, and amuse not
on points of precedence; and having not the place which belongs to thee, let
it not trouble thee, but go on roundly. It indignity he be more eminent than
art thou; give him the right hand, or the most worthy place, and beware thou
go not before him.

7 Walking up and down an house with one only, if he be greater than thy
self; at first give him the right hand, and stop thou not then, when he
stays; be not thou the first to return; and turn not thy back to him, but
thy self toward him. If he be a man of great quality, walk not at all by
him cheek by joule, but somewhat behind him; yet in such manner, that he may
easily speak to thee. If he be thy equal, carry thy self so that thou turn
proportionably with him, and make him not always the first: Likewise stop not
too often at midway, if there be not great necessity: for that savoreth of
superiority, and is accounted troublesome. He, in the midst walking with
equals, or as it were equals, ought to turn himself, now to the right, then
to the left hand: and if so be that they be not equals, let him turn for the
most part toward him who deserves best. Finally, they who are on the side,
ought always to turn themselves toward him who is in de midst, neither
before him nor behind him.

8 In thy walkings alone, express no passion in thy gesture, lest by that
means thou should turn thy breast into Cristall, and let others read thy
mind at a distance.

9 Let thy conversation be without malice or envye, for that is a sign of a
tractable and commendable nature. And in all causes of passion, admit reason
for thy governesse, so shall thy Reputation be either altogether inviolable, or
at the least not stained with common Tinctures.

10 Never express any thing unbeseeming, nor act against the Rules moral,
before thy inferiors, For in these things, thy own guilt will multiply Crimes
by example, and as it were, confirm Ill by authority.

11 Be not imumodest in urging thy friend to discover his secrets; lest an
accidental discovery of them, work a breach in your amitye.

CHAP. VI. Of Discourse.
1 Utter not frivolous things amongst grave and learned men, nor any very
difficult question or subject, amongst the ignorant, nor things which are hard
to be believed. Farce not thy language with Sentences, especially amongst thy
equals, and much less amongst thy betters. Speak not of mischances, and
doleful things inopportunely, and to the company: In time of mirth, or at the
Table, speak not of melancholic things, of wounds, of sculls, of death; and
if others speak in that kind, change the discourse, if thou can,
dexterously. Tell not thy dreams, if it be not to thy intimatest friends,
when they might seem to be of great and notable presage; to which
notwithstanding thou shall not give credit.

2 A man well bred ought not to vaunt himself of his brave achievements, or
rare qualities of wit, of virtue, or of the like; much less speak of his
nobleness, honor, riches, or his kindred, if he be not more than
constrained; also he ought not to depresse himself too much without occasion.

3 It is to no purpose to break a jest there where one takes no pleasure in
mirth. Laugh not aloud, and to the disfiguring of thy countenance, or without
subject, only be custom. Deride not the misfortune of any one, although
there seem to be some cause why.

4 Speak not an injurious word; be it in jest, or in earnest. Nip not any by
word: Likewise one ought not to scoff any body; especially, if they be greater
than thy self, although they give occasion.

5 Be not froward, but friendly, and courteous, and the first to salute others:
hear, and answer, and be not pensive, when it is a time to converse and
discourse.

6 By no means detract from any other, nor speak of things which belong unto
him; also be not too excessive in praising.

7 Go not thither, where thou know not whether thou shall be welcome. Give
not thy advice, except one ask it of thee, be it not that thou art the best
there, principally out of season, and where there is no hope of profiting: and
being entreated to deliver what thou think, be brief, and come quickly to
to the point.

8 If two contend amongst themselves, take not the part of either, if thou
be'st not compelled: and take heed that thou be not obstinate in thine
opinion. In things indifferent, be thou on the part of the most of the
Company, who deliver thereon their opinions.

9 Reprehend not the imperfections of others, for that is the part of Fathers,
Masters, and Superiors: thou may well show, notwithstanding, that they
distaste thee: Likewise may thou now and then sagely give some good counsel
in time, and place.

10 Stay not to gaze on the marks or blemishes appearing on others, although
they be natural, principally, if they be in the face: and ask not from
whence they come; and that which thou well may speak in secret to thy
friend, deliver not in the presence of orhers.

11 Speak not in an unknown language, or in what thou know not well, be it
not in case of necessity to be better understood: but use thine own natural
tongue, as men of quality of the Town speak it; not like the mean sort.
especially, take thou heed to utter words which savor of immodestie, although
in secret, or to move mirth. Use not homely, and clownish words, when things
sublime and serious are treated of

12 Speak not before thou think what thou would deliver, and in the
vulgar language. And make not a show of nimble conceits, and clinches.
Pronounce not imperfectly, nor hastily bring forth thy words: Likewise utter
not thy words so slowly, that thou trouble the hearers.

13 When another speaks, take heed that through thee he be not neglected by
his auditors; and be attentive, turning not thine eyes here and there, nor
busy thy self in ought else. If any drawl forth his words, help him not
therein, nor prompt him, be it not that he entreat thee so to do, or that it
were in private, or that thou had great familiarity with him. Likewise
interrupt him not, nor answer him, until he have brought his speech to a
period.

14 Being in the midst of a discourse, ask not of what one treats, since
that it is a draught of authority; but thou may well entreat gently, that
he proced, if thou perceivest that for thee he hold his peace. On the
contrary, if any one come on a sudden whilst thou talkest, especially if he
be a person of quality, it is seemly to make a little Epilogue, and brief
collection of what thou deliveredst, and then afterward go on with thy
discourse.

15 Thou ought not to make face, or use any other action of undecency with
thy mouth, eyes, or thy hands, to express what thou would deliver; neither
ought thou to hold thy hand behind thy back, either clasped, ar acrosse; for
that savoureth of ones pre-eminence: but place thy hands before thee, one over
the other, somewhat under thy breast, or under thy girdle. When thou talkest, be
circumspect how thou carriest thy body. Shake not thy head, nor move thy hands
much, and hold thy feet still.

16 Whilst thou speak, put not on thy hat, nor ought else before thy mouth.
Chew not paper, nor other thing. Shake not thy head. Deal not blows with thy
elbowes. Stand not tittertatter, on one foot. Put not one leg overthwart the
other.

17 Point not with thy finger at him of whom thou speak. Approach not too
nigh his person; less, his face, to whom thou talkest.

18 If thou be'st in Company, speak not in secret with whomsoever, but refer
it to another time, if so be that thou have no authority over them.

19 To treat with men at an unfit time, is to do nothing, or rather to anger
them with whom thou would speak.

20 Take thou heed that thou make no comparisons; and if any body happen to be
praised, for some brave act, or verture; praise not another for the same virtue
in his presence: for every comparison is odious.

21 Be not apt to relate news, if thou know not, that for the most part
they be true. Discoursing of things which thou have heard, say not; who told
them unto the, if thou think not that he will take it well, What has been
told thee in secret; relate it not to another.

22 Be not tedious in thy speech, reading, discourse: principally when the
thing is of small importance, or when thou perceivest that the company does not
well like of it.

23 Be not curious to know the affairs of others: and approach not to that
side where one speaks in secret.

24 Undertake not that which thou can not perform; but keep thy promise.

25 When thou do a message, deliverest a relation or manifestation of a
business; endeavor to do it without Passion, and with discretion: although
it be thou treatest with persons of mean rank or quality.

26. When those that are thy Tutors talk to any body, or other; be thou aware
to speak, to laugh, or to hearken to them.

27. Take heed to mumble, or make a noise within thy teeth.

28. Assure not that which thou know not, to be true.

29. Being with persons of more quality than art thou, principally if they have
power over thee; speak not until thou art asked: and then stand upright, put
off thy hat, and answer in few words, if so be they give thee not leave to sit,
or to put on thy hat.

30. In disputes which occur, especially in conversation; be not so desirous
to win, that thou leave no liberty to each one to deliver his opinion: and be
it that thou art in the wrong, or right, thou ought to give way to the
judgment of the major part, or at the least to the most choleric and peevish,
and far rather to them under whom thou art, or who are Judges of the dispute.

31. Although thou be'st bitten, or injured by words, answer not; and endeavor
not to defend thy self; but make show to take them in jest, and that thou
carest not for them; although others do move thee to defend thy self; for, as
the Proverb says, Each question does not deserve an answer.

32. Contradict not at every hand-while, that which others say, contending and
saying, It is not so; it is as I say: but apply thy self therein to the opinion
of others; principally, when the things are of small consequence.

33. Being in company also even with them of thy condition, play not the
Mountebanke and pratler, but speak with measure, and in due time, having
wherewithal to talk to the purpose of that which is handled, and with
certainty of truth: For, to speak, or rehearse a thing, not knowing it, and
afterward to excuse ones-self, in saying, I do not remember it well, I know
well that I have read it; that becomes not.

34. If any one had begun to rehearse a History; say not, I know it well: and
if he relate it not a-right, and fully; shake not thy head, twinkle not thine
eyes, and snigger not thereat; much less may thou say, It is not so, you
deceive your self.

35. Speak not very loud, as would the Crier of Proclamations. Nor speak so
low, that one cannot understand thee.

36. Let thy carriage be beseeming a man moderately grave, settled, and
attentive to that which is spoken: to the end thou have not occasion to say at
eve-discourse; What say you? How happened that? I understand you not; and the
like.

37. In discourses, walking, hold not back thy companion, as it were by a
bridle, staying him at every three words. Approach not so nigh unto him, that
thou justle him. Keep not thy self further from him than a span, or thereabout.

38. Be not a year in the beginning of a Discourse, and in certain long
excuses, or ceremonies, saying; Sir, excuse me, if I know not to deliver my
self well, etc. yet to obey you, etc. and other-like troublesome and sottish
drawlings, and nice curiosities: but enter readily into the matter; as much as
may be, with moderate boldness: then proceed without being troubled, even to
the end. Be not tedious; make not many digressions, nor repeat oftentimes the
same manner of speeeh.

39. He who has an unready speech, let him not always take upon him the
Discourse: but let him endeavor to correct the default of his tongue by
silence, and good attention.

40. Speak not evil of one absent, for it is unjust to detract from the worth
of any, or besmeare a good name by condemning, where the party is not present,
to clear himself, or undergo a rational conviction.

41 It is a thing very improper, if not altogether ridiculous, to treat of
matters about ^bove the capassitie of thy Auditors, for by so doing though
thou should purchase admiration from their ignorance; yet, it will procure
derission from the wise, since by that means: thy discourse will become common
air, and they who here thee, will be altogether unsatisfied in thy Conclusions.

CHAP. VII. Of Carriage at the Table.
1 BEing set at the Table, scratch not thy self, and take thou heed as much as
thou can, to spet, cough, and to blow thy nose; but if it be needful, do it
dexterously without much noise, turning thy face sideling.

2 Take not thy repast like a glutton.

3 Break not bread with thy hands; but cut it with a knife, if it be not very
little, and very new, and that all the others did the same, or the major part.

4 Cast not thy self upon the Table with thine arms stretched out, even to
the elbowes. And lean not thy shoulders, or thine arms, on thy chair
undecently.

5 Eat not with thy cheeks full, and with full mouth.

6 Sop not in Wine, if thou be'st not the Master of the house, or have some
indisposition or other.

7 Make not show to take great delight in thy Meat, or in thy wine; but if he
who feasteth thee, ask of thee, how thou likest it, thou may answer him
with modesty, and prudence, much less should thou find fault with the
meat, or procure others or more.

8 Taking salt, beware that thy knife be not greazy, when it ought to be
wiped, or the fork. One may do it neatly with a little piece of bread or as in
certain places with a Napkin; but never with a whole loaf.

9 Entertaining any one, it is decent to serve him at the Table, and present
him with meats, yea, even those which are nigh him: but if one be invited by
another, it is better to attend until that the Master or other do carve him
meat, than that he take it himself, were it not that the Master entreat him to
take freely, or that one were in the house of a familiar friend. Also one ought
scarce offer ones self, as undesired, to serve others out of ones house, where
one might have little power; be it not that the number of the guests were
great, and that the Master of the house could not have an eye on all the
company; then one may carve them who are near ones self.

10 Blow not upon thy meat; but if it be hot, stay until it be cold: Broth
may be cooled, turning it gently with a spoone; but it is not comely to sup
ones broth at Table, it ought to be eaten with a spoone.

11 Smell not to the meat; and if thou hold thy nose to it, set it not
afterward before another.

12 Be-smeare not thy bread round about with thy fingers, but when thou will
cut some bread, wipe them first, if they be greazy. Therefore take heed as
nigh as thou can of fouling thy hands, or of greazing thy fingers. And having
a spoone, or forke, make use of it, as becomes thee, according to the custom
of the best bread.

13 If thou soakest thy bread or meat in the sauce; soake it not again, after
that thou have bitten it, dip therein at each time a reasonable morsall which
may be eaten at one mouthfull.

14 One ought not to cast under the Table, or on the ground, bones, parings,
wine, or such like things; notwithstanding, if one be constrained to spet
something, which was to hard to chew, or which causes irksomeness, then may
one throw it forth dext'rously upon the ground, taking it decently with two
fingers, or with the left hand half shut; so that it be not a liquid thing; in
such case one may more freely spet it on the ground, turning ones self, if it
be possible, somewhat aside, as has been said here above.

15 Likewise it appears not a seemly thing, to spet forth the stones of
Plummes, Cherries, or such like on a dish; but one ought first to gather them
neatly, as it has been said, in the left hand, bearing it to ones mouth, and
then lay them upon the brimme of a trencher.

16 Put not thy meat in thy mouth, holding thy knife in thy hands, as do the
Country clounes.

17 Cast not thine eyes upon the trenchers of others, and fix them not wistly
upon the meat on the table and lift them not up whilst thou drinkest, or whilst
thou put the meat in thy mouth.

18 Cut not much bread at once, and make not too great shives; but of a small,
or middle size. Cut thy bread even, without framing a tub thereof, taking unto
thee only the crumme thereof; also flaw it not, solely taking the crust
thereof. Cut not morsels of bread upon thy trencher.

19 If thou have bad teeth, in such manner that thou can not eat a crust of
bread, or bread burned, or too hard; it seems better to pare the piece thou
cuttest; than the whole loaf.

20 It is mis-beseeming to stoop much to ones dish, or meat; it suffices to
bow a little then when one carries the morsel which is sauced to ones mouth,
to the end that one foul not ones self, and afterward to sit up right again.

21 One ought sometimes to look off the meat; yet without gazing to and fro,
or wistly looking upon the guests, or them who wait, or on the meat which is
before others.

22 In like manner it is undecent to soil the Table cloth; and that which is
worse, to clean ones face, or wipe away ones sweat with the Napkin, or with
the same to clean ones nose, ones trencher, or the dish.

23 Present not to others that whereof thou have first tasted, be it Wine or
other thing.

24 Wipe not thy hands on thy bread if it be a whole loaf: yet if they be
greazy, it seems that thou may clean them first with a piece of bread,
which thou art to eat forwith; then with a Napkin, to the end that thou foul
it not much.

25 When thou eatest or drinkest, make not much noise with thy teeth, neither
in supping, nor in grinding too hard, nor in any other manner.

26 Suck no bones, at least in such wise that one may hear it: Take them not
with two hands, but with one solely, and properly. Gnaw them not, nor tear the
flesh from the bones with thy teeth, as dogs do: but make use of thy knife,
holding them with one hand, or rather with two fingers, as nigh as thou can.
Knock no bones upon thy bread, or trencher, to get out the marrow of them, but
get out the marrow with a knife. To speak better, it is the counsel of the
most wise, that it is not fit to handle bones, and much less to mouth them

27 Make not use of a knife to break bones, plum-stones, or other hard thing;
also break them not with thy teeth, or other thing, but let them alone.

28 Take not from the common dish, that which is before thy companion, but
only that which is on thy side, and also no more than others. And if they be
fruits, or such like, handle them not to take the best: yet, if any one eat of
thy dish, take no heed what he does.

29 Put not a bit in thy mouth, until the former be swallowed: let them be
such that puff not up thy cheeks notably. Serve not thy self with both thy
hands, to carry a morsel to thy mouth, but make use of the customary way, that
is the left.

30 Fill not thy glass in such manner that the wine run over, and fall upon
the Table-cloath.

31 Drink not with meat in thy mouth; Call not for drink then, speak not then;
Fill not thy glass to drink, and drink not, whilst thy next companion
drinks, or he who sits at the upper end of the Table.

32 When thou drinkest, gaze not here and there.

33 Drink not too leisurely, nor too hastily, nor as chawing the wine, nor too
often. Before and after that thou have drunk, wipe thy lips, and breathe not
with too great a noise then, nor ever: for it is an uncivil thing.

34 Cleanse not thy teeth with the Table-cloath, or Napkin, nor with thy
finger, forke, or knife: much worse would it be to do so with thy nails; but
use thy picktooth. It seems likewise uncomely to clean them at the Table,
were it so that the others do not the same, and that it were the custom of
the best bread.

35 Rince not thy mouth with wine, to spet it out before others, but when thou
shall be risen from the Table, usually wash thy hands with the others. For the
mouth, it seems unfit to wash it in men's presence; and therefore, when water
is given at the Table, one ought to wash only ones hands.

36 It is a thing litile praise-worty, and now adays almost out of use, to
call upon the company to eat; principally too often, and with importunity, for
it seems that one bereaveth them of their liberty: much less should thou
drink to others every time thou drinkest; but if one drink to thee, thou
may refuse it civilly, rendering him thanks for his courtesy, and
acknowledging that thou yeeldest, or rather taste a little of the Wine,
especially with men who are accustomed to it, and take a denial in ill part.

37 When others have left eating, dispatch also, and hold not thine arms upon
the Table, but rest thy hands only on the edge thereof.

38 It is peculiar to the chiefest of the company, to be the first to unfold
his Napkin, and fall to the meat; and therefore it is the duty of others, to
attend patiently, without setting hand on any thing before him.

39 On the contrary part, he ought to be solicitous to begin in time to provide
all, and entertain the guests, and finish all with such dexterity, that he
may give time to the slowest to eat at their leisure, entertaining himself,
if it be needful, in slightfull tasting meats, or when it is lawful to
discourse at the Board, intermingling some little Relation, until the company
might make an end.

40. Be not angry at the Table whatsoever happens, or if so be thou be
vexed, make no show thereof, especially there being strangers at the Table: a
cheerful Countenance makes one dish a Feast.

41. Set not thy self at the upper end, but if it be thy due, or that the
Master of the house would have it so, contend not mcuh for thy going thither,
that thou trouble all the Company.

42 If one read, or talk at the Table, be thou attentive; and if it be
expedient that thou speak, talk not with meat in thy mouth.

43. Let thy Speeches be seriously reverent, when thou speak of God or his
Attributes, for to jest or utter thy self lightly in matters divine, is an
unhappy impiety, provoking heaven to justice, and urging all men to suspect thy
belief.

44. In all things which are to be learned, whether it be in the contemplation
of humane actions, let not precept be neglected: for what at the first view,
may seem useless upon thy second thoughts, thou may find worth observing.

45. Since Wisdom is the perfection of understanding, let Prudence to
practice be the end of all thy Science; for the knowledge of Precepts, teaching
thee what is good, is not of sufficiency to entititle thee virtuous, no more
then thy body in thy souls absence can express thee a man: Therefore neglect
not to adorn thy intellect with knowledge directive, nor be thou wanting in
such actions as may truly crown thee happy.

46. Content not thy self with the bare knowledge of these Precepts: but when
thou have imprinted them in thy mind, express them in thy conversation; for
virtue consists in Action, not in Contemplation.

Laus Deo trino-uni.

FINIS.

