HOPES INCOVRAGEMENT pointed at IN A SERMON, PREACHED In St. Margarets
Westminster, before the Honorable House of COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT: At
the Last Solemn Fast, February 28. 1643.

BY THO. YOUNG.

Hebr. 6.19. Which Hope we have as an anchor of the Soul, both sure and
steadfast, and it enters into that which is within the veil.

Published by Order of the House of Commons.

Printed at London for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange. 1644.

Die Mercurii 28. Febr. 1643.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parliament; That Sr. John
Trever, and M. Rous do from this House give thanks unto Mr. Young, for the
great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day (at the entreaty of
the said Commons) at St. Margarets Westminster, it being the day of public
Humiliation, and to desire him to print his Sermon. And he is to have the like
privilege in Printing of his Sermon, as others in the like kind usually have
had.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Ralph Smith to print my Sermon. Tho. Young.

NOBILISSIMIS EQVITIBVS AVRATIS, aliisque Viris prudentissimis, EX Singulis
totius REGNI Comitatibus selectis, PARL. DOM. COM. Senatoribus honorandis: IN
Quorum Solenni conventu inelaborata haec Concio in divae Margaretae Templo apud
WESTMONASTERIUM

Solenni jejunioru^, die Februarii penultimo fuit habita: eam in Perpetuum
demissae observantiae testimonium L. M. D. D. D.

Tho. Young S. Evangelii in Comitatu Suffolciensi Minister.

HOPES-ENCOVRAGEMENT, pointed at IN A SERMON, PREACHED before the Honorable
House of COMMONS.
GOD having given to his afflicted Church in this distracted Nation so long
cause of sad mourning and heavy lamentation; in which (according to the warrant
of the word, and laudable custom of the Church in all ages) he has been
sought unto by prayer and fasting: Deum quasi manu facta pre^anonibus ambiamus
orantes. Tert.
with which the Church has ever plied the Lord in the day of their distress,
as it were beleaguering heaven with the Army of their prayers: This course
having been so long by authority continued in this place, I conceive it is too
late for me after the revolution of so many solemn fasts, now to go about to
open to you what is required of Gods People in the day of their solemn
humiliation and fasting. I am confident that you (who have spent so many days
in that Christian duty) have been fully instructed therein from sundry learned
discourses heretofore presented to you. Neither will I stand to plead before
you for the necessary conjunction of prayer to your fasting: trusting you have
not so learned Christ, as to divide the duties which he in his word has
coupled together. That which remains for me (the meanest of Gods Laborers) to
aim at, for the present, I take to be this; (that whereas you have fasted and
prayed, and in both continued so long) to endeavor now to raise up your hearts
and quicken your spirits in the continuance of this duty of seeking God by
earnest prayer: and the rather because assuredly the Lord (on whom we wait in
these holy duties) in the end will be exalted, that be may have compassion on
them that patiently wait and pray for his mercy: would you be assured of it?
take his word that if you wait and be strong in your dependence upon our God,
be will at length arise for your comfort. So much desire I to clear unto you
this day: and for that cause I humbly pray you with all reverence to hearken to
what you shall find written for that purpose,

PSALM. 31.24. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye
that hope in the LORD. THE man, whom God in this life, has singled out by
faith to depend upon him, is sure to meet with troubles of all sorts, and in
all places, which will not fail to attend upon that dependence: Yet he, whose
heart is engaged in all these storms to cleave unto the Lord, must still sue
to him for deliverance: which having once obtained, he must then with all
thankfulness acknowledge it: For a grateful acknowledgement of received
favors, is the great tribute due to the Lord for all the favors which he
bestows upon his people: Yea, certainly he who is blessed with the favor of
deliverance, and truly, or thoroughly affected with the free mercy therein,
will not only himself be thankful; but study to draw on others to praise
the Lord in way of thankfulness for the favors whereof he tastes,

See all this in this Psalm, David dangerously pursued by his enemies, sues to
God for deliverance: his Petition, together with the several arguments
wherewith he backs it, are set down from the beginning of the Psalm to the
20. ver. from whence to ver. 24. he thankfully acknowledges the received mercy
vouchsafed to him, and all such as trust in God: which favor he amplifies
sundry ways. Then he desires all Gods people to love the Lord. Lastly, upon
all these several branches he infers, what is the duty of Gods people in all
their troubles; even this, to encourage themselves in strengthening their
hearts, and waiting upon the Lord: this he lays down in the words of my Text:
which may be termed a comfortable direction to strengthen the believing soul,
against all heartbreaking, or soule-rending fears, or distractions
whatsoever: In which words our Prophet prescribes the best and most sovereign
cordial that can be given in such a condition* when Gods people are
overwhelmed with fears: and I beseech you when can it be judged more
seasonable to be discoursed of, then in these days? wherein for no short
space of time (though now and then of late, God has come unto us with sweet
refreshing beams of mercy) it has fallen out with most men, as of old with
Ahaz, and his people, Esa 7.2.
Whose hearts were moved (with fear) as the trees of the Forest are moved with
the wind: and has not this been generally our condition a long time? in which,
whose heart is not ready to be surprised with fears? unless it be some
son of Belial, who being besotted with his lusts, passes his time without
fear of God, or his judgments. But to you, to whom the day seems gloomy,
and the light of your comfort has been long eclipsed; 1 King. 18 44.
to whom trouble has risen up as the cloud did to Elijah his servant, which
though at the first it was but little like a man's hand; yet speedily caused it
the face of heaven to look black: so has the cloudy storm of our unnatural
troubles spread it self to the darkning of all our comforts.

Now to such as notwithstanding all this, yet wait for comfort from the Lord,
my Text is a sure guide to lead them unto comfort: hearken therefore to what the
Lord speaks in the same, that you may not be to seek for comfort, when heavy
storms of troubles shall swallow up others that fear nothing till it seize
upon them. To you then (whose hope in all troubles rests on the Lord) the Lord
speaks in my Text, saying, All you that wait on the Lord, be strong, and he
shall establish your heart.

Wherein see, first, to whom the Prophet does address his speech, to such as
patiently wait upon the Lord: Secondly, what it is that he requires of them,
to strengthen themselves, to wax strong or be valiant: Thirdly, in the last
place consider what he promises to them, that their hearts shall be raised
up in strength. You see the parts, the sum of all is a lesson full of comfort
to all such as patiently hope in the Lord, and from these parts, I shall draw
forth three propositions to insist upon by Gods assistance and your patience at
this time:

The first is, that Gods people are taught by the Lord in all their troubles to
wait patiently upon him.

The second is, that such as wait patiently upon the Lord must rouse up
themselves with strength and courage to wait further upon him.

The third follows, that when Gods people with courage and patience wait
upon him, he will increase their courage. To these three Propositions shall I
limit my speech, only my desire is, as they find, so they may leave you
attentive.

The first of them arises from the first considerable branch of the words, the
persons to whom they are directed: he directs his speech to such as patiently
wait upon the Lord. The word in the original here rendered in our language to
wait signifies, (...)
to be carried out after any thing with a wonderful desire to enjoy it.
Secondly, to be sorry we are so long without the fruition of that we thus
desire. Thirdly, patiently to wait for it: all these are elegantly hinted in
the use of the word by Job: Job. 29 21.23.
whilst he sets forth what was the opinion which once men had of his wisdom
and counsel when he spoke in the public before others, he says they eagerly
desired to hear him, that appeared in their silence when he spoke; they rested
in it as the best and choifest counsel that could be prescribed to them: as
the rain is welcome to the dry and parched ground, it sucks it in: so was his
counsel to such as heard it, and waited for it. Thus the godly here are
described from their waiting upon God, which implies, First, their desire after
God; Secondly, their grief, that yet they enjoy not the Lord according to
their desire; Thirdly, their patient attending upon God for that which they
desire: and from hence arises our first proposition; that

Gods people are taught by God in all their afflictions, and under all their
troubles patiently to wait upon the Lord.

This is their practice, and therefore in my text they are described by that
property, They wait upon the Lord; they are a generation of waiters, being
carried on with earnestness of desires to see what God will do for them in
their troubles; they long for the Lord, and yet patiently wait upon him.

To clear this truth unto you, first, I will prove the (...), make it good
that it should be so; secondly, point forth unto you the true grounds from
whence this waiting in Gods children does arise, which being laid open I doubt
not but the truth of the Doctrine with case will be manifested to all that
hear it.

As for the first, that Gods people must wait upon him; 1. God requires it.
know first that this is the thing which God requires of all his children, that
in all their afflictions they should wait upon him for his help, Psalm. 55.22.
cast your burden upon the Lord, says the Prophet, and he shall nourish thee:
The words in the original are significant, and run thus; Cast your careful
burden on the Lord and he will sustain thee, q. d. look whatsoever it is
thou art careful may be afforded to thee in all thy wants and necessities,
cast thy care for that thing upon the Lord, and wait on him to receive it from
his bountiful hands; for he is sure to sustain and nourish thee with the
same. To the same purpose speaks our blessed Savior, Luke 21.19. By your
patience says he, possess your souls: that speech follows upon a sad
relation of heavy troubles that were to ensue; he tells them, Nation shall
rise against nation, there shall be great Wars, Earthquakes and
persecutions, the Parents shall betray their Children, and one friend another;
and to imbitter all, he adds, they shall be hated of all men for his sake;
Now what might his poor unarmed children think should become of them in all
these troubles? might they not conclude, in the eye of reason there was no
safety for them in such a condition? what shall they do? our blessed Savior
answers, possess your souls in Patience, as if he had said unto them,
although you be compassed about with troubles on every hand, yet do you
continue waiting quietly upon the Lord, there shall not a hair of your heads
perish, therefore wait you upon the Lord. Thus God requires it of his people.

Secondly, the Lord goes farther and pronounces them all blessed that do so,
Esa. 30.18. Blessed are all they that wait for him: 2. God accounts them
blessed.
their waiting in that place is opposed to the preposterous course followed by
them, and mentioned in the beginning of the Chapter: when God threatened to
bring an enemy upon them; they following their own counsels are not long in
resolving what to do; they will down to Egypt, and strengthen themselves in
their confederacy with them to boe aided by their assistance, and they make
haste to do this: but therein they consulted not with God; therefore he tells
them, the strength of Pharaoh should be their shame, and their trust in Egypt
their confusion, i. e. not able to profit them: After this he comes to
prescribe a better and more sure way of deliverance unto them then that could
bring forth, and what is that? He sets it down in the 15. Verse, In rest and
quietness shall you be saved, in quietness and confidence shall be your
strength: (here was a sweet and wholesome counsel, could they have followed
it, but that they would not do) the meaning of it was this, that they should
depend upon the Lord and on his strength, but they would not; yet some amongst
them did so, and he says, such are blessed; by which place it appears that
God would have his people wait upon him in their extremities, which if they
do they are sure to be blessed of him.

Now then if God require his people in all their troubles to wait upon him, if
he pronounce them blessed that do so, then we may surely conclude, that it
is their duty in all their troubles patiently to wait upon the Lord.

Hope flows from Faith.
To clear this truth yet further unto you, in as much as Gods people are here
styled waiters upon the Lord, consider in the next place from whence it comes
that when they are enclosed with troubles, yet they can resolve with patience
to attend upon the Lord? first their patient waiting upon the Lord is the work
of their hope, and that springs from their faith in God: he that dare trust to
the goodness of the Lord for the present, assuredly will wait upon him or
expect these good things from him for the time to come: no man can possibly
hope in the Lord, that does not by faith trust in the Lord, and settles not the
affiance of his soul upon him: it is hope therefore that raises up the heart
with expectation of that which faith lays hold on; for faith being informed in
the truth and faithfulness of God; resting also satisfied that there is no
power wanting in God to make good his Word, and withal meditating on his free
mercy doclared in the promise; when the heart upon these and the like grounds
is brought to trust in the Lord, then will it with patience wait, being raised
up with hope one day to enjoy what it waits for; therefore it is faith that
makes the heart in hope to wait upon the Lord. Hence is it that as God works
faith to believe in him, so he alone raises up the heart with hope to wait
for the accomplishment of that Word which by faith it has received; 1 Pet. 1.^.
Blessed be the Lord, says Peter, which according to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead: It is the Lord alone that is the author of the hope that waits upon
him, yea and that by the promise received and rested on by faith; Col. 1.^3
for which cause it is called the hope of the Gospel, that is, the things
which are laid forth in the Gospel, the expectation whereof raises up the
heart; which gave occasion to that holy man to say, Spes fine fide quomodo esse
possit, non invenio. Nemo enim se sperat posse assequi, quod esse non credit;
all which confirms that faith brings forth hope, Aug. Sent.
and hope makes the soul patiently to wait upon the Lord: If any man would
know what are the things they wait for; I answer they are such as God in his
sacred Word has promised to give; for hope which raises up the heart to
wait, is always grounded upon the Word of promise; therefore David coupleth
these two together; My soul has waited and I have trusted in his Word, Psalm.
130.^.
Gods Word is the thing that hope flowing from faith does wait for. Yet
further, the good things promised and waited for are such as are neither past,
nor present; but good things that are absent and yet to come are the things
which such as wraite on God do look for; Aug. Enchir. ca. 8.
Spes non nisi bonarum rerum est, nec nisi futurarum; the things hoped for are
yet in expectation: I will not scan the particulars which hope waits for, it
is enough in the general to know that whatsoever good things God has
promised, and has not yet fully performed his promise therein, hope waits upon
him for all these things, as whether it be deliverance from trouble, improving
the work of grace, affording daily bread, treading down Satan under our feet,
etc. whatsoever are the good things with which God has promised to bless his
people either in this life or that which is to come, hope waits for the
fruition of them all.

Hope it grounded upon the promise.
Secondly, whatsoever the troubles of Gods children fall out to be, yet they are
raised up to wait upon him, because they have Gods Word to rest themselves
upon, they well know though heaven and earth should pass away, that God is
true and will be faithful in all that he has spoken; such a heart will be
brought to wait upon God, which knows that he has said, Psalm. 89.34.
I will not alter the thing that is gone out of my lips, that is spoken, I
confess, of a special promise unto David, concerning his successor in the
Crown, but it holds as true in every promise made by God to his people, he
will not alter it nor falsify his faith, for the sure mercies of David spoken
of in the Psalms, are the privileges of the Covenant of grace made good to
believers; the due and serious consideration hereof is the thing which upholds
the heart to wait upon the Lord though it has all the world against it,
whilst it sees Gods promise and then looks out for his efficiencie to make
good the same, ever knowing that he that speaks the word will in his due time
give a being to it.

There are two things which may hinder a man from making good his word or
fulfilling of his promises, impotency or carelessness: when either he is not
able, or not careful to perform what he has promised: but the believing
heart raised up to wait on God, knows well that neither of these can be found
in him: His almighty power admits not of impotency or weakness, no thing can
let or hinder him (to whom all things are possible) from doing what he
pleases: neither is He careless of his promise, for his faithfulness will
not admit of that. I might also put you in mind of the infiniteness of his
mercy, whereby he is drawn to commiserate and pity his children in all their
troubles; a mother is tender of her children, but the Lord more: for though she
should prove unnatural and forget the fruit of her womb, Esa. 49 15.
yet the Lord will not forget his people, what made the King of Ammon his
servants wait for mercy at Ahabs hands? 1 King. 20.31
They had heard the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings, thereupon were they
encouraged to wait upon him for favor, though they had no promise of it; it
is an undoubted truth, where a petitioner knows there is pronenesse or a ready
inclination in a party (to whom he sues) to show mercy, that will make him
wait for help from him above all others: Thus Gods people find in God reason
enough to wait upon him for the fulfilling of his Word; they know that he is
a God faithful in his word, every way able to perform it, and infinitely
merciful toward all that wait upon him for the same.

Thirdly, with patience they wait upon him, because they know that the same
God who has made the promise to them, has also appointed or set out the
period of time, in which his promise shall undoubtedly be fulfilled to them:
for though the faithfulness of Gods promise is known to them, yet the
particular period or set time, wherein this promise shall take effect, is
unknown to them; ( for whom it is not to know the times and seasons which the
Father bath put in his own power; Act. 1.7.
) this makes them wait with patience till the happy revolution of the time
come about, which God has set out to the performance of his promise. God
promised faithful Abraham that in Isaac his seed should be called: Genesis 21.12.
yet holy Isaac did not presently see that promise performed, for he was
married (as may be collected from the History) twenty years and had no child:
yet he waited for it; the evidence of his waiting was, He prayed and God
heard him, Genesis 25.21. Luke 2.25.
and his wife conceived. It is said of old Simeon, He waited for the
consolation of Israel, i. e. for the revealing of Christ in the flesh; God
having promised to him, He should not see death, Verse. 26.
till he had seen the Lords Christ: he knew not when that would be, yet he
believed and waited for it: upon this very ground it is, that God requires
waiting in his people, Habak. 2.3. The viston is for an appointed time, but at
last it shall speak and not lie: though it tarry, wait; for it shall surely
come and not stay: The vision he speaks of contained both the destruction of
the enemy, and comfort of his Church: there was a time determined by the Lord,
wherein both these should take place, yet though the issue were certain, the
hasty affections of men thought the time long: now because they knew not when
it should be, God requires of them to wait: therefore the not knowing of the
time when Gods promise shall take place, draws such as believe the promise to
wait upon the Lord.

Thus have I cleared the first proposition, That Gods people wait upon him; I
shall forbear the use till I have proved the other two, and then give you a
joint application of them all the other.

In the next place see and consider what is the thing which he calls for from
these waiters: Be strong ye that wait upon the Lord; or be confirmed: that
word here rendered, be ye strong, or of good courage, (...)
does properly import to wax strong and prevail: so is it used, 2 Chronicles.
28.20. when Tilgathpilneser, came to the assistance of Ahaz, it is said, he
troubled him and did not strengthen him, or he grew not stronger by his help
as he expected: the word therefore imports a corroboration of that strength
which a man has: so the Lord here requires that all such as wait upon him
should wax strong, and take heart by their relying upon him; from whence
arises our second proposition, that such as patiently wait upon God must rouse
up themselves with strength and courage, to wait further upon him. The heart
that has chosen the Lord for his God, and patiently does wait upon him, must
grow to a holy kind of greatness, and magnanimity, because it is set upon the
great God. To evidence this truth, I will endeavor, first, to open the way, how
this may be done, whereby you may see wherein this heroical valor stands, by
which he that waits on God is confirmed in his strength: Secondly, that such
as wait upon God must gather strength and courage to themselves in their
dependence upon him: which being done, then in the third place we will show
the reasons of it; the opening of all which will sufficiently clear the
Doctrine: the first will lay forth the way how to attain it: The second will
manifest the necessity of it: and the third shall clear the reasons of it.

For the first, let us inquire wherein this courage stands, that so you may the
better see how a Soul that waits upon the Lord may wax strong: A point
needful to be discussed, and searched into by every one, who desires with
strength to wait upon the Lord: and the rather, because many seem to be raised
up with stoutnesse, when indeed their stoutnesse is not true courage, but mere
rashness, or inconfideratenesse: Neither is the valor or courage mentioned in
my Text, that confident courage or holy boldness, whereby the believing soul
does rest on God for salvation by faith in Jesus Christ: nor is it the
assurance of hope it self, by which the soul waits on God for the
accomplishment of his promise, (indeed the considence or courage here spoken of
is required in all such, as believe and wait for the promise; Faith and Hope
bring forth this courage, and it is an effect of hope rather than hope it
self.) But in a word, this courage is that confidence: which is wrought in man
by the power of faith and strength of hope in God; which makes him go on
cheerfully in the particular work to which God has called him; it is
especially discovered in these things:

This courage is seen. Act. 4.
therefore, that which here is phrased waxing strong, elsewhere is called
boldness: as Peter being examined before the Rulers, Elders, Scribes, and
Highpriests, by whose authority he had done that miracle, he does freely and
clearly confess it to be done in the name, and by the power of Jesus Christ:
this free confession of the truth, there is called boldness, and why? Verse. 13.
because he waxed strong and would not shrink a whit from that, to which he
was called: this was the very thing which they craved of God by prayer, saying,
Grant unto thy servants to speak thy word with boldness. Act. 4.29.
You see then what is meant by waxing strong: even this, to raise up the spirit
to a holy boldness to do that, which God calls a man to do: It is not courage,
but presumption, for a man to adventure upon that work to which he is not
called of God; and though he be resolute in pursuance of it, yet his resolute
adventure is not the boldness that comes from faith or hope: a man his holy
boldness must be seen in doing that, to which he is called. Peter says, Let
them that suffer according to the will of God, 2 Pet. 4.19.
commit their souls to him in well-doing, as to a faithful Creator: Where he
would have Gods children to arm themselves with courage against all troubles
and tentations that may befall them: but how shall they do this? they must so
order things, that if they do suffer, they may suffer according to Gods will,
which they shall do, if they suffer in doing that which God commands them to
do: God commands Jeremiah that he go forth with courage to speak to the
people, O but how shall he attain to this courage? he must do what God
commands him, and speak what the Lord will have him to speak, Jer. 1.7, 8.
then he needs not be afraid of their faces.

his strength to enable him to go through the work. David was exceeding stout
when he durst engage himself to grapple with that Giant Goliath: 1 Samuel 17.45.
yet he did it not in confidence of his own strength, but of the Lord, which he
dare proclaim to the terror of the Giant at their first meeting: that learned
Apostle Saint Paul would have his Ephesians strong in the Lord, and the power
of his might: he would have them to strengthen themselves in fulfilling Gods
will, but he would have them also to rest assured that that must be attained to
by the power of God, without which no man can in a holy way fulfill the will of
God.

Paul his practice witness it: he resolves to stay at Ephesus until
Pentecost, 1 Cor. 16.8.9.
and why? a great door and effectual was opened to him; and there were many
adversaries: he had a fair opportunity to preach the Gospel: (upon which
crrand he was sent of God) O but he had many adversaries to resist him, there
were many difficulties for him to overcome: yet you see by his words, he gives
no place to fears on that occasion, stay he will, and there with courage wait
on God in sulfilling of his ministry to which he was called of God. It is
said, Eccles. 11.4. He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that
regards the clouds shall not reap: Solomon is there persuading men to be
largehearted, and open-handed to the poor: O but when an unbelieving heart is
locked up in a covetous breast, nature is wonderfully apt to devise many
excuses to keep him off from showing his benevolence to the poor: he will
tell you, he knows not but his lot may fall to be in want himself; he may grow
old, when nature is enseebled with age and cannot attend his calling: and bath
be not then need to lay up something against that evil time? he may be
overtaken with sickness, which may not only keep him from labor, but make
him spend all he got before, etc. these and a thousand such frivolous excuses
can corrupt nature frame, to hinder a man from cheer ulnesse in relieving them
that want: in Solomon his answer to all these doubts, he reasons from the
absurdity that follows upon such base and vain excuses: this is all one,
says the Wiseman, as if an husbandman should hold off from sowing his ground,
fearing lest the wind should blow hard and trouble him in scattering of his
seed, (when yet there is no great gale of wind stirring) yet he puts off his
work from day to day only upon that surmised fear: or as if another should
sear to thrust in his sickle to reap down his corn, because he sees the
Firmament to be cloudy, which makes him fear rain; if any man upon these or
the like fears should forbear to do that which his calling requires and
warrants him to do, he would certainly be cried down for a fool by all
wisemen: So here when God calls a man to any work, he must not forbear or
keep off from doing that which God calls him to, upon fear of what troubles
may ensue; but rouse up his spirit and strive to fulfill his work: therein
will appear his courage, in breaking through all difficulties whatsoever to
honor God in obedience to his command.

comes he with quietness to carry, on the work and leaves the success to
the Lord. The three children did rest assured that it was Gods will they should
not defile themselves with that idolatrous worship, they knew that God at his
pleasure could deliver them; therefore do they wait upon him without any
distiust at all, saying, Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand. there was their hope;
now follows their courage, but if he will not, BE IT KNOWN to thee O King we
will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden image that thou have set up;
they were not troubled about the success, but left that wholly to the Lord,
and did what God required of them; so did holy David when he was to encounter
with Goliath, the story is known to you; So when Paul was commanded to pass
into Arabia, and there preach the Gospel, where he had small hope of success
in his ministry; he consulted not with flesh and blood, but immediately went
on to preach the Gospel, and left the success to the Lord that called him. Gal
^.
Thus have you heard wherein this holy strength of courage is mainely to be
seen: now if you shall go further, you may with ease in the second place see
the necessity of these several steps of this spiritual courage in any
undertaking for the Lord; and that shall be made manifest unto you in four
things.

The first whereof is this, as God requires of his people to wait upon him, 1.
God requires courage in his people.
so likewise he requires that they should gather strength to corroborate or
confirm themselves in their waiting upon him; besides our Text, wherein he
calls upon such as wait upon God to strengthen themselves; consider what he
speaks to this purpose elsewhere: Zeph. 3.16.17.
he says, Fear thou not O Zion, let not thine heart be saint; the Lord thy
God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee
with joy, he will quiet himself in his love, he will rejoice over thee with
joy; there the Lord it setting down a notable comfort to the residue of his
afflicted people, and consider what he says unto them: fear not thou O Zion,
let not thine heart be faint; he requires of them that they be stout-hearted
and courageous: then he subjoynes the reason of it, the Lord thy God in the
midst of thee is mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy,
he will quiet himself in his love, etc. the reason why they should grow in a
holy valor, and not be faint-hearted is, because God is amongst them, and
will know them; yea he delights to show his love and great affection toward
them: therefore seeing God dwells among his people, and delights to do them
good, he charges them that they be not faint-hearted, but courageous. To this
very purpose speaks Peter saying, Fear not their fears, neither be
troubled, 1 Pet. 3.14.
but sanctify the Lord in your hearts: he is there setting down the right
way how to go through all afflictions we meet with in this world, and
teaches the Church how to bear them so as we may be blessed in the end: If
we would do so; first, we must lay aside false fears, such as men ordinarily
are troubled withal, Let not, says the blessed Apostle, your hearts be
troubled with their fears: for they become not you that wait upon God.
Secondly, the heart with confidence must be raised up to wait on God; by this
confidence God is sanctified, and that fear removed; by which place it may
appear, that fear is to be shaken off, and confidence in God is the way to
do it, therefore the Lord requires that his people should be raised up in
courage and not fearful whilst they wait upon him.

Secondly, as God requires it, so when men grow strong in waiting upon him, 2.
God co^mends courage in his people.
the Lord does highly commend it: how are those worthies renowned for their
confident waiting upon the Lord? Heb. 11.33, 34, 35, etc. they waxed valiant,
of weak were made strong, etc. therefore are their names honored to this day
by the Lord: did not their waiting on God so raise their spirits that they
became valiant? was not Sampson so valiant by his waiting on God, that with the
jaw bone of an Ass be slew a thousand Philistims? did not David by his waiting
on God slay Goliath with a stone out of his sling? and how are both of them
ennobled by their valor unto this day?

3. God is angry where courage is wanting.
Thirdly, where God finds that such as wait on him wax not stout-hearted, or
are not filled with courage, he checks that want of valor in them; whilst
they are not filled with courage for the work about which he sends: see it in
Gods dealing with Moses Number. 20.8. he is commanded to speak to the rock, and
the Lord tells him, it shall give him water; nevertheless he smote the rock
and spoke unto the people, but he is not said to speak to the rock as he
was commanded; it seems he believed not that his speaking to the rock could
bring forth water out of it: therefore the Lord tells him, he should not bring
that Congregation into Canaan: Number. 20.12.
in a word God was angry with him, that he waxed not strong in waiting upon
the Lord.

4. Gods people have been full of courage.
Fourthly, the holy practice of Gods people recorded in the Scriptures holds
forth the same truth unto us, in which he that runs may read, that by their
waiting upon God they grew exceeding strong; How valiant waxed the three
children before Nebuchadnezzar? and whence came it? was it not from their
waiting upon God? they dare tell him, we are not careful to answer thee in
this matter: Dan 6.16, 17.
and why? our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the fiery Furnace;
you hear of their courage which could not be allayed by all the threatenings
breathed out by that potent King; their patient waiting on the Lord was a
strong preservative against them all. Jebosaphat his stoutnesse, and the
strength of his courage was testified in his speech to his subjects, 2 Chronicles
20.20.
saying, Hear me O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, put your trust in
the Lord your God, and ye shall be assured; believe ye his Prophets; and ye
shall prosper: God had given them by a Prophet a special promise of victory,
and you see how valiant that pious Prince waxed upon the receipt of it, and how
he labored to draw others to depend upon the same. To the same purpose
speaks Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.6, 7, 8. He speaks comfortably to them, says
the Text, and it well appears by the many phrases he there uses to raise up
their drooping hearts, he forbids them to fear, he doubles it again, and
would not have them afraid, and all upon this ground, because they waited upon
the Lord who was stronger then all that could come forth against them; the
enemies, what had they to assist them? an arm of flesh; that is, such power as
man could afford, but with them was the Lord their God to help them. I might
also tell you of the worth of Nehemiah his valor, Nehem. 6.7, 8.
who gave no place to the policies and subtle craft of the enemies seeking to
weaken his hands from the work; but with undaunted courage pleaded the
falsehood of their accusations: and would you know from whence it came? even
from his waiting upon God, which imboldned him with great courage: Nehem, 6.9.
he can go to God and say, encourage thou me, or strengthen thou my hand.
Here likewise I might add the example of David, and others, all which I now
forbear, having cleared to you that such as wait upon God should be filled
with courage, seeing God requires it; where he finds it, he commends it; he
blames the want of it in his people: Lastly, this is that whereunto by his
Spirit he guides all such as wait upon him.

Thirdly, let me entreat you to go one step further with me, and dive into
the reasons of the point thus cleared to you; The reason of it.
assuredly there is great reason for it, should not such as wait on God be
strengthened in their hearts, even for this cause, have the Lord to settle their
trust upon? Such as patiently wait on God, have God for their God, and are in
Covenant with him: that makes them grow to be magnanimous, or to a holy kind
of greatness well beseeming such as wait upon the Lord; the Psalmist says,
Commit thy way to God, trust in him, he shall bring it to pass: you see to
whom he speaks, Psalm. 37.5.
even to them that trust in God; and you see likewise what he desires them to
do, to commit or put over all their care to the Lord, which they cannot do if
they be not raised up with courage, and the ground of that courage is, they
trust in God; let them know He can bring their ways to pass though they see
not how; this was the only ground of the courage in those three children,
mentioned before, Dan. 3 Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us: it was
not the power of that enraged Prince, nor the dreadful heat of his fiery
Furnace, that could quench or allay their courage, whose confidence was settled
on God! Chrysistome expounding those words of the Psalm, Great is the Lord and
worthy to be praised; his greatness is incomprehensible: speaks thus:
because thou have the great (...), etc.
God to rely upon, be thou also of a high courage: whereby he would persuade
men to a holy kind of greatness in their courage, because they are grounded
upon the great God: he would not have such to be of a proud or haughty
disposition, as a frerward he expounds himself, but as David charge
Solomon, to be strong without dread, 1 Chronicles. 22.23.
and not dismayed: such an heroical disposition should be in all that profess
their hearts are raised up in waiting upon the great God.

Secondly, such grow courageous, 2 Gods Spirit fills them with courage Act.
6.10.
because Gods Spirit strengthens all such as wait upon the Lord: that blessed
Martyr Steven waxed stout in resisting his adversaries, but whence came it? was
it not from the wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke? that strengthened him
that they were not able to resist him: Act. 4.
So Peter spoke freely to the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes, and reproved them:
but he was then full of the holy Ghost, v. 8. which freedom, v. 13. is called
boldness in him: it is the same spirit which cleares up the truth to their
understandings, that makes their hearts bold in defense of the truth: it is
therefore the powerful working of Gods Spirit that corroborates their hearts
with holy boldness, and makes them set their faces like a flint, Esa. 50.7.
and make their foreheads as the Adamant, Ezekiel. 3.9. then are they Lion-like
hearted, 2 Samuel 17.10.

3. God by the promise works courage in them.
Thirdly, this courage in Gods people arises from the strength which they suck
from Gods promises; for faith and hope which teaches them to wait on God
considers not only that God gives his promises to them that lay hold on them
by faith, but such a one goes further, and verily believes, that God will
convey that strength of grace into his heart, which is set down in the
promise: this, this is that which makes them full of courage in waiting upon
the Lord: for it is not with the promises of the Gospel as it is with the
Gommandements of the Law, which are distinct from the promises; the things
commanded to be done by the Law are not promised in the Law; there God
requires obedience, but power to yield it is not promised in the commandment
which requires it; but in the Gospel it is otherwise, where that which is
commanded is also promised: therefore as faith with one hand lays hold on the
Evangelicall commands (which binds the soul in all extremity to wait on
God:) so with the other hand it lays hold on the promise to receive the
virtue, strength and power, whereby it may by the promise be brought to wait
upon the Lord: this makes it full of courage to wait upon him, having taken
hold upon the promises by which God conveighs grace into the heart to stand in
such extremities: that makes it valiant in waiting upon God, upon whose
strength it waits in the promise.

He, says my Text, shall fortify or strengthen your hearts: there is some
variety in reading of the words, some read them thus, (...)
Let your hearts be comforted, or strengthened: other, He will strengthen your
hearts: So does our last translation, and as I conceive, this sense will best
agree to the words, for if we read them in the first sense, Let your hearts
be strengthened, then were they only a bare repetition of the former words in
another phrase, as if he said, Be valorous, let your heart he strengthened
you that wait upon the Lord: but I rather read them with our translation, be
valorous and he will fortify or strengthen your hearts: who is it that should
strengthen them, but the Lord upon whom they wait? (...) signifies to
fortify or raise up any thing in its strength, which implies, that God will
raise up the troubled heart in its strength; whence we gather, God increases
courage in them that have it.
that when Gods people with courage and patience wait upon him in their
troubles, he will increase their courage: the Lord by his Prophet promises to
add courage to their courage, and follow such with farther degrees of valor,
be ye stout and he will strengthen your hearts, says my Text: I will but
name this truth, know therefore that is true in a Christians courage, which is
seen in all other graces; the ready way to have them to increase and multiply,
is faithfully to employ them: for grace when it is well employed and wisely
husbanded, ever thrives and prospers; God ever adding new measures or degrees
to such as faithfully lay out what they have received. This is evidently set
forth to us in the parable of the Talents: Matthew. 25.21.
he that improved his five talents to the gaining of five more receives this
answer, Well done good servant and faithful, thou have been faithful in
little, I will make thee ruler over much; so to him that gained two, the same
answer is made; you see thereby that their faithful husbanding and improving
what they had, made way for them to receive more from God: such a joyful
Audite had these faithful Stewards when they came to give up their accounts;
so here, the more valorous they were for God, the Lord promises to strengthen
them by a new addition of courage to what they had, Esa. 40.31.
Esaias tells them, they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they
shall lift up their wings as the Eagle, they shall run and not be weary, they
shall walk and not faint: a sweet and comfortable promise wherein the Lord
binds himself by his Word, that changes not, to afford new measures of
strength to such as use their strength in walking in his ways, that they may
go on and advance more cheerfully in the same: such as gather strength to
wait upon him shall be enabled at length to fly as the Eagle flies, which
of all fowls soareth highest in her flight; thus will God strengthen them more
and more; even when to their own apprehension they wax weary and faint.

Grace employed prospers.
If any man desires to know the reason of it, why strength is added to the
strong, and courage well employed is seconded with a fresh supply? Let him know
as (as I said) this is Gods dealing with men in all their graces which he
bestows upon them: a continual supply of grace is afforded to them that
faithfully lay out for the Lord what they have received. It is said of our
blessed Savior be was filled with wisdom, Luck. 2.40.51.
yet follows afterward, he increased in wisdom; the spirit was strong in
Christ, and still he put forth wisdom bey and the condition of his years;
the more he put it forth, the more he increased in it; Act. 9.20.22.
so when Paul was called to the ministry of the Gospel, it is said of him,
he straightwayes preached Christ in their Synagogues: then follows, he
increased more in strength: his strength and courage in his work was seconded
with fresh supplies from God, who abundantly adds to such as improve grace.
This I take to be one maine ground why my Text tells us, he will fortify
such as are strong in waiting on the Lord: but I cease further to enlarge the
proof of a written truth, and hearken with your patience, to wind up all that
I have said in a short application; which I will endeavor to do by way of
teproofe, exhortation, and comfort; and all this, first in general to all the
Church; secondly, more particularly to this honorable Auditory here present.

In the first place, upon the Lord: these and many others likewise may justly
be reproved by the truth before observed, and all of them cast out from having
any place among them that patiently wait upon the Lord. Time gives me no more
freedom but to name these; the first are so far from testifying their
dependence in a patient waiting upon the Lord in their troubles, that they are
ready with that impious King, who in the extremity of famine with a heart
enraged against the Lord uttered that woeful desperate speech, Behold, this
evil comes of the Lord, 2 King 6.33.
should I attend on the Lord any longer? Thus many, when they find not present
remedy against their troubles fall into discontented rage, and will wait no
longer upon God: the Israelites often in the extremity of their dangers and
wants fell soul upon the Lord, and Gods hand found out to their confusion such
enraged dispositions: to all such I may fafely say, they never learned by faith
to eye the Lord, nor with patience to wait for deliverance from the Lord. As
for such as by unlawful means seek deliverance, 2 King. 1.
who with Amaziah can betake themselves to the God of Ekron; as if there were
no God in Israel to be waitedon; who in their extremities stick not by
unlawful means and unwarrantable practices to seek deliverance from their
present troubles, some with Saul can seek to the Witch of Endor, others
betraying a good cause can desert the truth and submit to error, thereby to
spare their lives and estates; to them I only say what Jesus Christ has said,
Luke 9.24. Whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose
his life for my sake shall save it: he that turns his back upon Gods cause
to avoid present danger to his life or estate, shall be a loser, and no gainer
in the end: for what can be saved by that man, who to prevent a temporal
loss will hazard an eternal? assuredly such savers prove miserable losers. To
the third sort, I mean such as seem to wait upon God, and yet they stay more
upon the means then upon the Lord; such must know they are disorderly in their
waiting, they will not wholly forsake the Lord, but add other things with the
Lord, much like to those; Some trust in Chariots, some in Horses; Psalm. 20.7.
but the true waiter upon God will resolve with David, to remember the name of
the Lord. Only I confess there is a lawful use of means which a Christian
may use, but he must not settle the ground of his hopes on the means: it is
not the use of them which is condemned by God in Scriptures, but the relying on
them, or waiting principally for help by them, that God condemns: all these
are justly reproved by our first proposition; as having no right to be ranked
under that character of Gods people, that they wait upon the Lord.

Secondly, if all that wait upon God must raise up their spirits, and
strengthen themselves with undaunted courage to wait further upon the Lord;
this truth likewise reproves all such as seemed to wait upon the Lord, yet
grow not in their courage, but giving way to inordinate fears, quench the
same: of which sort are, first, such as wanting courage dare not adventure upon
the work, to which God calls them; Secondly, such as peradventure have set upon
the work, yet afterward they are beaten off from prosecuting of it by the
discouragements they meet with, in following of the same: Thirdly, such as
wholly despair of the success of their undertakings, though they have
adventured to engage themselves in the work, by a warrantable call from God:
All these sin against the duty mentioned in our second proposition, and fall
short of that heroical disposition, whereunto all that wait on God ought to
aspire. To the first of them I say; why should not such remember, that Gods
calling of them to his work, should be enough to put courage in them to raise
up their spirits to the effecting of it? Absolon speaks thus to his servants,
When Amnons heart is merry with Wine, 2 Samuel 13.28.
and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon, kill him, fear not, have not I
commanded you? be bold therefore and play the men: the service wherein he
imployes them was desperate: for was it not a high attempt to adventure to
murder the King's first borne Son: this was the service he puts them on; and
the argument by which he would raise up their spirits to the performance of
it, is drawn from his authority, have not I commanded you? says he, be bold
and play the men: Could the command of a mortal man infuse that courage and
valor into the hearts of his servants as to make them adventure upon that
desperate design? and shall not the command of the Almighty God raise up the
hearts of his people, employed by him in any work to which be calls them,
raise up their hearts in following of his command? and the rather, because
never did any man finally miscarry in executing what God commands: what if they
meet with unexpected troubles in pursuing of that which God commands, what
then? is not the Lord (upon whom they wait) with them? they have his presence
to go along with them, and his gracious promise of protection of them; yea if
they should suffer any thing in following of his commands, let them know that
it is for their honor: did not the holy Apostles rejoice when they were
beaten, that they were accounted worthy to suffer any thing for Christ's sake?

To the second sort, such as are discouraged from the work by some cross
opposition they meet with in managing of it: let such remember, though Gods
command frees not a man from troubles, whilst he does that which God commands
to be done; yet his command may assure him, he shall be delivered, if he
prosecute the command according to his will: it is true, the Disciples shipped
not themselves into the boat until Christ commanded them to prepare a boat for
their passage: and it is also true, that in their passage they met with foul
weather at sea, whereby they were in danger of suffering shipwreck; but what of
all this? did not the Lord arise for their comfort, still the stormy tempest,
and gave them safe deliverance? Gods children in all the tempestuous storms
they meet with in fulfilling Gods commands, had recourse for comfort to the
Lord, even upon this ground, because God sent them on the errand wherein they
meet with trouble: Amos was crossed in his Ministry, and complained of by that
wicked Priest unto the King; he was in a great strait, yet he bears up his
courage upon the Lords command, See it Amos 7.14, 15 God is with all them that
execute what he commands: Such may well say as Elijah to his servant, Fear
not; there are more with us than be with them that are against us.

To the last sort, I mean such as despair of the success of business
undertaken by the warrant of Gods Word: thoughts of that nature must not abate
their courage, nor hinder their valor from prosecuting that whereunto they are
called; but must remember it is their duty to fulfill what they are called to,
and leave the success to the Lord; so did the three Children as we heard. It
is a maine sleight of Satan to draw a man to vex and torment himself about the
success of his just undertakings; and therein he does disable a man from
going on with courage: all these justly from hence to be reproved.

The third proposition reproves them that labor not to improve the graces they
have received, not considering how with the unfaithful servant lapping up his
Talent in a Napkin, they not only prevent themselves of receiving more, but
make way to be stripped of all they have: I can but only name these things unto
you.

exhorted to be valourous for the Lord, that you may be blessed of the Lord
with a further degree of spiritual and undaunted courage in managing of Gods
work. And to the end you may grow valourous for the Lord, I desire every man to
consider: First, his own weakness and insufficiency to any work that is
pleasing to the Lord; assuredly he that goes on in the confidence of his own
strength, when he comes to be opposed, he shall by woeful experience find
his valor to fail him, and his courage to be gone; who was more strengthened
in his courage to prosecute the cause of God then that holy Apostle Paul was?
or who could adventure more to advance it then he did? and would you know from
whence did his courage arise; take it in his own words, not, says he, 2 Cor.
3.5.
that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God: there was the first step from whence he ascended to
that valor: the due and serious consideration of his own insufficiency made
him stick close to the Lord for help. Secondly, let a man weigh with himself
that God has called him to the work, thereby shall his heart be fortified
also: thus did David encourage Solomon, saying, The Lord has chosen thee to
build the house of the Sanctuary, 1 Chronicles. 28.10.
be strong therefore and do it. Thirdly, let such consider that God will ever
be with such as he calls to any work: you know how the Priests were to
animate the people when they were to go forth to war against their enemies:
they were thus to speak unto them; You are come this day unto battle against
your enemies, let not your hearts faint, neither fear, nor be amazed, Deuteronomy.
20.1, 3, 4.
nor adread of them. O but the people might have replied, their Horses and
Chariots are in our eyes, our adversaries go beyond us in number: yet for all
this they must not be dejected with fear, and why? For the Lord your God
goes with you: the consideration of Gods presence going along with them, whom
he has called to any hard undertaking, must raise up their hearts to carry on
that work. Fourthly, suppose that such meet with dysasters in following of Gods
work: yet if they would be fortifyed against them, behold God has promised
that all things shall work together for the best unto them that love him;
Therefore, if thou be crossed in prosecuting of Gods work for the present,
yet that hinderance shall be as a vantage-ground to take thy rise to advance it
further hereafter. Lastly, consider there is an ample reward laid up for all
them, who are steadfast, unmovable, 1 Cor. 15.58.
and abundant always in the work of the Lord: their labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord. Now by all these motives be exhorted to stir up the grace
that is given unto you: that will make you faithful to God in laying out what
you have received, approving your selves to him in your stewardship: that will
make you useful to the Church of God where you live: and that will open a way
of comfort unto you, when you shall come to give up the accounts of your
stewardship in the great day of the Lord.

as wait upon the Lord; whose hearts I desire may be raised up with strength
to wait further on him, but I dare not presume upon your patience too far,
therefore I say no more in it, then what the Lord has said in my Text, All you
that trust in the Lord, be strong: and know for certain, that God will
strengthen your hearts.

You have heard the particulars considerable in the Text, Applic. to the
Parliament.
and in general how they meet with many by way of just reproof; as also how
they may serve for the quickening of some, and raising up of others with
comfort. Now give me leave with Your patience to bring home all by a more
particular application, to all you that stand here this day before the Lord: In
the first place (Honorable and dearly beloved in the Lord) my desire is (with
all due respect to your great and weighty employments, and your personal
worth) to point forth unto You in a word or two, the way to the true valor
mentioned in my Text, well beseeming such as are engaged in the cause of the
Lord; that God may strengthen your hearts, and comfortably crown your great
employments with a happy and desired issue in the end: for this cause consider,
I beseech you: First, what God has called you unto: Secondly, what he now
requires to be done by you, whilst you are struggling to advance that work:
both which being closely followed, you may expect of the Lord both present
comfort, and a happy closure of your just undertakings.

First, cast your eyes upon your present employment, (which I crave may be
weighed by you in the balance of the sanctuary.) The work you are now called
to, is a work of great concernment, it is the purging of the Lords floor: as
it has reference both to the Church and Commonwealth; a work sure enough to
be encountered with great oppositions: yet I must say, it is a work, with the
managing whereof God has not so honored others, which have gone before you in
your places: but has reserved it to make you the instruments of his glory in
advancing it; and that does much add unto your honor: Was it an honor to the
Tyrians, that they were counted amongst the builders of the Temple, Ezekiel. 28.
when Hiram sent to Solomon things necessary for that work? how then has God
honored you, reserving to you the care of re-edifying of his Church (the house
of the living God) and the repairing of the shattered Commonwealth, (so far
borne down before he raised you up to support it) that succeeding ages may
with honor to your names, say, THIS WAS THE REFORMING PARLIAMENT? A work,
which God by his blessing upon Your unwearied pains has much furthered
already: whilst he by you has removed the rubbish that might hinder the
raising up of that goodly structure appointed and prescribed by the Lord in his
word. Lastly, a work which God never in any age perfected but through many
difficulties to his people.

This is the work You are called to; then let me say to You in the words of my
Text, be strong and of good courage, the Lord will strengthen your hearts: and
would You have Your hearts fortified with this sovereign cordial? then see
you follow what the Lord requires of men employed by him in such a work, that
you striving to that, may attain unto the other. For this cause let me in the
name of Jesus Christ, (in whose name, by Your command, I stand now before You)
crave of you to see to your carriage: First, as you are Christians: Secondly,
as You are public persons entrusted with the managing of the Lords work.

First, as You are Christians, so have You need of courage: and if you would
have your hearts strengthened with it, then in your thoughts look back again
to that which was spoken in our second proposition; to wit, keep to the work
to which you are called: let not your hearts be carried on in the confidence of
your own parts, but rest upon the Lord for his strength: see how God has
carried you through many straights already, and learn to depend on him for the
future, committing the success of all to his wisdom and goodness: to all
which I humbly pray, remember that as you appear for the truth, so you must
stick to it: First, in the profession: Secondly, in the practice of it. Truth
should be dear to all that profess it; the truth which is brought from heaven
by the Lord Jesus Christ, the word of his Father, which he has sealed with his
blood: the truth, the profession whereof has been watered with the blood of
your Noble Ancestors that have gone before you: for this truth, let me spoke to
you in the words of holy Jude, and exhort you to contend earnestly for the
same: Jude 3.
love to the truth, and well ordered zeal for the same, well beseem's all that
profess the truth, especially such as are in authority and high places of
dignity; though the world judge it a thing beneath great places: therefore if
any question about it should be raised up before you, albeit the world would
persuade you to be of Galli^ his mind, who cared for none of these things; Act.
18.17.
yet I pray take notice, that the God of truth has led men in authority to
higher thoughts of it; which has made them stick closer to it, then with a
lukewarm disposition to stand by and see it trodden down: was it not commanded
by the Imperial Edict of the Emperor Justinus, (...)
that no man should be suffered so far as to change one syllable of the
Orthodox Doctrine of the Church, in the mystery of the sacred Trinity? and why?
because the Verity of the Christian Faith was comprehended in the words and
syllables. We know also what stirs Satan raised up in the Church about one
Letter, in opposing of the Truth; whilst (...) was cried down by the Arians,
and (...) pleaded against by the famous Lights of the Church. When the
Emperors Deputy dealt with Basil the great, to enter into communion with
Budoxius, he answered with resolution, (...).
That none trained up in holy Scriptures would suffer one syllable of divine
truths, to be betrayed: but were ready (if it were required) to suffer any
death in the defense thereof: here are precedents worthy of your imitation, to
raise up your hearts to shine before others in the close profession of the
truth: and the rather, because such is the waxy disposition of the people, that
the example of superiors ever makes a deep impression upon them, either in
cleaving to the Truth, or departing from it: for if such as are heads to
others, be not well-affected to the Truth, what can be expected of their
followers? the Books of Kings, and Chronicles, in Judah and Israel do tell us,
the people are ever carried on by the example of their Governors: when either
they cleaved to the Truth, or turned their backs upon the same; so went the
disposition of the people, either for, or against it; and so fell it out in the
Christian Church; how was the Eastern Empire polluted with execrable
Arianisme, whilst yet the Western continued in the Truth? the Historians give
the reason of it. Constantine an Arian ruled in the East; when at the same time
Constans and Constantius Sons to Constantine the Great, treading in the steps
of their pious father adhered to the truth professed by him, and so did as
far ennoble the western Empire with the truth, as the other did defile the
eastern with his countenancing of error and heresy: I spare to bring forth
before you other instances, especially speaking to such as are not ignorant of
any thing I can produce; only let me renew my humble motion unto you: Set
your hearts to stand for the profession of the truth, if you would have the God
of truth to fill you with courage firmly by your endeavors to settle his truth
amongst us.

In the next place the man that would be valorous for the truth, must look as
well to his practice as to the profession of the truth; the truth must be held
out before the world in profession, and a holy practice must warrantably
evidence the life and power of that profession: for seeing God has coupled
these together, profession and practice of the truth; no man must seek to part
them in himself; be you then holy men in your practice, you profess to all
the world this day; the Nation rests assured of you, that you seek to advance
the cause of a holy God: your solemn Covenant into which you have lately
entered tells the world, that it is your deliberate resolution not only to
preserve and reform Religion, etc. but you have also professed before God and
the world your desires to be humbled for your own sins, and for the sins of
the Kingdom, and you have testified, that it is your unfeigned desire and
purpose to amend your lives, and to strive each one to go before another in
the example of a real reformation, etc. are not these solemn promises strong
engagements to oblige you to a holy and close walking with your God, whom you
profess to know, and promise to serve? he that stands for piety and is not
pious, (God knows) does not a little weaken the cause of piety whilst he
seeks to advance it. It is storied of Justinus the second, that he defended
the orthodox faith, not only amongst his own Subjects against heretical
pravity, but also he aided foreign Christians against the injuries they
sustained of others; (for he had war with the Persians in their defense) O
but what of all this? his sinful life defiled with pleasures, with
covetousness, with cruelty against his own blood, etc. with the dirt of
these sinful courses was his defense of the truth eclipsed, stained, and
obscured; yea, and he smarted for it. Honorable Worthies, this I speak to
encourage you in the way of a holy practice: you know what was said of old,

Qui monet ut facias, quod jam facis, ipse monendo
Laudat, and hortatu comprobat acta suo.
This I speak to stir up your holy minds to aspire more and more by your
religious lives to beautify and adorn the holy cause of Religion for which
you appear this day: did the Lord require holiness of his people, Ess. 52.11
who carried the vessels of the Lord? (which was spoken of the time in which
they were to carry back from Babylon the vessels of the Lords house taken away
by Nebuchadnezzar before) O then what holiness will the Lord require of you
that stand up to carry on the holy work of the holy God? when your exemplary
holiness lays open the way to others in the practice thereof in your selves,
if they be not won by your example to follow it, then have you quitted your
own souls, and they are left without excuse, when you have labored to have
truth held forth to them as a guide, and followed it in your own practice: O
that it might be said of all you in your houses as of that pious Emperor
Theodosius the younger: cujus regia non dissimilis crat monasterio: (...).
in the morning his custom was to sing Psalms unto the Lord; he was so well
instructed in the Scriptures that he could discourse of them with the Bishops
as if he had been one himself; he was not given to unadvised anger nor base
revenge (impotent passions too usually attending upon greatness.) In the pious
ordering of his personal carriage, and family, he had a warrantable precedent
before his time, even Constant. M. whose Court was as a Church for piety; (so
says the Historian that pens his life) it was his custom to call his family
together, read the sacred Scriptures to them, and pray with them; by which
means was his royal Palace, together with his Comtiers and Soldiers, inured
to holiness, and breathed after Christ; yea such as were not sound in the
truth were yet convinced by his practice. Here are precedents worthy to be
followed by you; great men, men of eminent place, even Emperors had so learned
Christ, as not to be ashamed to be eminent for the practice of piety, as
well as for worldly government. It was not deemed in those days a
schismatic and unwarrantable practice unbeseeming greatness, for great men,
and potentates to study to be pious themselves, and to promote godliness in
their charges; so do you, and God will sill you with courage to fulfill what
he requires of you in your places; an unholy heart may boast of God, but can
never be truly bold for God and goodness: the guilty conscience will
occasion fears, which will daunt courage when it is most required, most
necessary, and useful: therefore as you are Christians follow holiness in
your profession and practice, which will raise up your hearts with that courage
which cannot easily be quelled.

But I must speak further to you in another capacity, as you are public
persons sharing in that legisllative power, which has influence upon the whole
kingdom: to the faithful discharge of which condition courage is more
requisite then to the former (as you are Christian men:) for if any be sure to
be opposed, it is men called out to rule and govern others; and if courage
be conducing to the well ordering of any calling, it is to the Magistrates in
the first place; hence is it, that amongst the meet qualifications of an able
Ruler, in Jethro his judgment courage is ranked in the first place, Ex. 18. Now
that you may attain to it in this capacity in which you stand at present, I
shall commend unto you sour things whch are proper to you in your legisllative
station. 1. Make no Laws against Religion and piety; 2. Recall such as have
been made in the times of ignorance against the same; 3. Study to uphold and
maintain such profitable and wholesome Laws as have been formerly enacted for
God and his people; 4. Improve what was well begun by others before you, and
not perfected by them.

First, the Governor, who desires to manage his authority with courage and
comfort, must beware he give no consent, or have no hand in the enacting of a
Law that makes against God or his cause; for such never prospered. Dan. 6.
The Rulers and Governors solicited King Darius to make a law and decree,
which was derogatory to the glory of God, as it was invented for a snare to
Daniel, and have you not read how they sped? Did not this among other things
add to Constant. M. his renoune? though in all things his care was to advance
divine worship, tamen in legibus condendis vel maxim. Eminent governors have
stained the glory of their government by enacting Laws which stand in
opposition to Gods Law: Valentinian the great beginning to alienate his
affection from his royal consort (the cause I spare to relate) casting his
affection upon Justina, thereupon makes it free by Law for any, that would, to
have two wives, and after the promulgation of that Law presently he married
her: how inconsistent his Law was with the Law of God, I need not speak.

Secondly, go farther, if the times of former ignorance have led your Noble
Ancestors to decree and publish any Law repugnant to godliness, make have to
repeal such, as well as others, which in your grave judgments you find
dangerous to the present state of the commonwealth. There were two grand evils
countenanced by Law in Rome before Theodosius came thither, and both suppressed
by his religious care; the one was the putting down of filthy houses, nests of
uncleanness; the other was about preventing of murder and other misdemeanors
frequently acted in their common baking houses: though both these evils had
the countenence of Law before, he suppressed them by enacting Laws to the
contrary; here were evil Laws piously by his care repealed: so do you, and
God shall fill you with holy courage to enable you for your work.

Thirdly, labor to maintain that, which by the piety and holy zeal of your
Ancestors before you has been warrantably enacted for Religion and the
Commonwealth. Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri: herein failed
the Princes and Governors in Jeboash time, who continued not what was well
settled by Jehojada whilst he lived, 2 Chro. 24.
but left the house of the Lord God of their fathers and served groves and
Idols, and wrath came upon Judah, because of their trespass; you see where
they failed, and how they were rewarded; What a bane was it to this Nation,
when the States of the Kingdom in Parliament agreed to revoke the wholesome
Laws enacted in the reign of that pious Prince Edward the sixth against the
Idolatry and superstition of Rome? was it not the cause of the effusion of the
precious blood of so many Martyrs afterward; whereof I fear the nation is not
cleansed to this day? and whence came the flood of the late innovations which
defaced the Church (famous among other Churches before) but only from hence;
for not maintaining the vigor of former Laws then a foot, but carelessly past
over, or perversely wrested by such, as should have kept them up in their
strength? If the Lord in former ages has directed them that went before you in
this place to strengthen Religion and support the Commonwealth; do you in
your times keep up those Laws: then will the Lord afford you courage to
defend them, and your selves and us by them. When Theodosius the Great set
forth a Law among the Egyptians against the sacrificing to the River Nilus, it
so fell out that the River that year did not rise to the usual height in
overflowing of the land; this the heathen ascribed to their not sacrificing to
it, and so begun to blame the imperial edict: the governor fearing some
insurrection or tumult would ensue, gave timely information to the Emperor
hereof; withal implying that he could have been content to have had the
Emperor connived at them for that time: but the holy Emperor answered
resolutely, (...), etc.
that it was better to remain faithful to the Lord, then to prefer the
overflowing of Nilus and the expectation of fruitfulness thereby to piety,
yea he would rather it should never overflow again, etc. Here was a Law
seasonably declared, and an heroical resolution, that would not upon any
pretense whatsoever give way to repeal that Law that was conformable to Gods
Word: with the like courage ought faithful Magistrates to maintain
warrantable Laws for Gods honor in defense of that which is good in Gods
sight, and by no means be induced to sin against God either under hope of
gain, or fear of approaching danger, to let those Laws sink, whereby
religion and the Commonwealth have been upheld.

Fourthly, to improve what has been well begun by your Ancestors for the Lord
and his cause; and the rather, because no reformation can rise to its
perfection at the first: How long was the Temple in building after the people
returned from their captivity? yet was the work perfected in the end: it was
Nehemiahs honor to carry it on to that degree; he that shall duly weigh with
himself either the first planting of a Church where it was not, or the
reforming of it, when once it was planted and afterward defiled; he that
shall seriously weigh either of these works, will easily grant it is not the
work of one time to bring a Church to perfection, and must conclude that many
oppositions must attend upon both these, before a great building can be reared
up, or a goodly decaying structure reedified: is there not much ado, are there
not great stones to be dug out of the earth which must be smoothed ere
they can be coupled together in the building? so what ado had the blessed
Apostles (the master builders of the Church) to lay the foundations of
particular Churches, whilst the devil and the world and all their united
forces labored to withstand it? and when particular Churches were planted, how
soon came they to be corrupted and pestered with tares in one kind or another?
I need not give you instances to make out this truth, every one to whom the
story of the Scripture is known, will subscribe unto it; is there not then
courage required of them that are engaged in the great work of reformation of
a Church? and have they not need to observe how far such as have gone before
have carried on the work, and study to improve it?

Thus have I adventured to bring forth before you some generals proper to your
legislative station: I dare not descend to the particular Laws necessary to
be enacted, repealed, upheld, or improved, that being above my reach, and
without my sphere: only I crave freedom to quicken you in improving what has
been enacted by your Noble Ancestors for the due observation of two of Gods
sacred ordinances; for which some laws have been declared, but provision for
the faithful keeping of them has not been made: I mean against the horrible
abuse of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the irreligious
profanation of the Lords day: (both which in the Scriptures have the honor of
the Lords name put unto them, (...) Revel. 1.10. (...), 1 Cor. 11.20.
which no other ordinance in all the new Testament has) some Laws I confess
have been enacted in this State against both these disorders: but (God knows)
they have not been followed with that powerful vigor with which they should
have been quickened. It was once by Law provided if any repairing to the holy
Communion were an open and notorious evil liver, so that the congregation by
him is offended; the Curate having knowledge thereof shall call him, and
advertise him in any wise not to presume to the Lords Table, until he has
openly declared himself to have truly repented, and amended his former
naughty life: that the Congregation might thereby be satisfied, which before
were offended, etc. Here was provision against the pollution of the sacred
Eucharist; but (alas!) the poor Minister of the Gospel was not strengthened to
do it: whereupon it came to pass that (such as took upon them the sole
administration of all ecclesiastical discipline, and yet lived on the sins
of the people) our Courts stripping the Ministers, and Guardians of the Church
of that power, engrost it to themselves: whereby a door was ever kept open to
profane men to approach to that holy Table even inspite of any conscientious
minister of the Gospel; which gave occasion to many to keep off from
approaching to it, whilst they saw such to be admitted to the participation of
it: and this these courts durst do notwithstanding the former Law, though it
was otherwise provided of old, when by the discipline of the Church, In
ecclesia solent a Sacramentis altaris visibilibus homine^ distiplina
ecclesiastica removeri.
such were denied the participatio^ of that holy Sacrament and not admitted to
it.

The other evil (declared by Law to be forbidden) is the profanation of the
Lords day: against which the profaneness of our age may justly challenge at
your hands a quickening of these Laws to suppress that crying sin. I have
observed from the systeme of your Laws, that in former ages some things have
been enacted in this State against that evil also: for by public authority
Fairs have been put off from that day, no Court to be kept on it: Tailors and
Shoomakers have been forbidden to carry home their ware to their customers on
that day; some sports likewise have been forbidden on it, etc. here were good
beginnings of a Reformation, which should be improved to the better solemnising
of that day: O but if you (Honored Senators) would be pleased to these
restraints to add more, whereby such in whom conscience of their duty is less
powerful, might be kept off from profaning of that time which should be
consecrattd as a delight and holy unto the Lord: how should you endeare your
selves unto the Lord, and be honored with renown in his Church? and I beseech
you, does not our present condition require this at your hands? When
Guntberamnus perceived the glory of his Kingdom to be abated, and the unhappy
success of his wars with the Goths: whilst he enquired after the causes
hereof and sought for a remedy; amongst other things, he reproves the
profaneness of his Clergy, and their carelessness in not feeding the people
committed to their charge: then he lays this as a foundation for the remedying
of those evils, Diem Dominicum religiose cust odiendum esse.
appointing that the Lords day should be religiously kept. So do you, and we
may be assured with more confidence that God will hasten the closure of our
unnatural wars. Let it not be judged boldness in me to remember you
hereof. Was it not once appointed, Vt humiliter a sacerdotibus Christianorum
exeellentia flagitetur: ut ob honorem, et reverentiam tanti diei cunct is metum
injiciant, ne in tam sancto* die mercatus, placita et opera sua homines facere
praesumant.
that Christian Magistrates should be humbly sued unto by the Ministers; that
for the honor and reverence of so great a day Magistrates should make all
afraid, that they presume not to follow their Merchandise, pleasures, or other
works on that holy day? speaking of the Lords day. These are the two evils,
the remedy whereof Law has begun: O that God would stir up your hearts to
improve both! So should the Lord delight in us, honor you, and hasten the
desired end to our heavy and wasting troubles.

Know then in a word all you whom God has ranked in that honorable station to
give laws unto others: it is your part to see that nothing be enacted against
God, to repeal whatsoever of that kind the ignorance of former times has
agreed unto, to maintain what has been worthily concluded before your times,
and to improve that which they happily begun, but by the iniquity of the
times could not perfect: this is the duty which God requires of you, and thus
walking and waiting on God, be strong and the Lord will strengthen your hearts.

Now a few words more to you (men, fathers and brethren) who likewise appear
before the Lord this day to hear what he will speak unto you from his word:
you have need also to be encouraged in your places to wait upon the Lord,
that he may strengthen your hearts in defense of his cause: Deborah her heart
was not only upon the heads and governors of Israel; Judge. 5.
but also on all among the people, who went forth with cheerfulness against
the common enemy of their Religion and Peace: Would you be encouraged by God?
then make known your courage in coming forth to appear for your Honorable
heads and governors, who stand for God, his truth, and your liberties. Shall
the upholding of Religion to you and your posterity be dearer to our
ever-honoured Worthies, then their own lives and estates? and will not you
show courage in cleaving to them in your just defense? shall the rulers with
Joab arm themselves with brave resolutions to be valiant for God, for their
people and the Cities of their God? 2 Samuel 10.12.
and shall the men of the City not be valorous for their City and themselves?
God forbid: And I beseech you discover your holy valor, first in wrestling
with the Lord by fervent prayer on their behalf, that they may carry on the
work of Reformation now in hand: should not your spirits be roused up to
follow God with the sweet incense of your continual requells to God for his
blessing upon this work? what though it be derided by the jibing Ishmaelites,
and withstood by the Gyantlike Anakims of our age? yet faithful prayer (that
can open the windows of heaven, and draw down rain from thence) can remove
these mountains, and level the way before them to advance the work: holy
Ezra was ashamed to solicit an Army of the King to guard him and such as
returned with him; but resolves to commit all to God: Ezra ^.21.2^.
therefore he (did as we do this day) sought God by prayer attended with
fasting; and happy was the issue. Earnestly prayer is known to have done that
which strength and policy could not do. When that unworthy heretic Arius was
incensed against Alexander because he would not receive him into communion with
him, Eusebius (the upholder of Arius) threatened Aelxander that by such a day be
should be cast from his place, banished, and his successor would admit Arius
into Church Fellowship with him: the day before that should fall out, holy
Alexander goes into the Church, falls down upon the ground and continued with
all ardency of affection pouring forth his earnest prayer to the Lord to
frustrate the attempts of his enemies: and would you know what was the fruit of
his powerful prayer? in the evening of that day Arius was taken away by an
execrable judgment in his sudden death: prayer faithfully performed is never
without effect, it is of a prevailing power with God: be persuaded therefore to
follow God with prayer for his blessing upon the public work now in hand: ever
knowing that the more you are taken up with effectual prayer, the more courage
will the Lord infuse into your hearts: a praying heart will be bold as a Lion.

Secondly, let your courage for the Lord appear in furthering his work with
that estate with which the Lord has blessed you: assuredly for my part, I must
say of many of you and of your forwardness herein, as the Apostle once spoke
of the Macedonians; 2 Cor. 8.3, 11.
who were willing to their power to further Gods cause in the relief of his
members: I may say further with him, 2 Cor. 9.
that your zeal has provoked many: so many have had their hearts enflamed to
further Gods work by your readiness to support the same: all that I say herein
is only this, consider that the work is great, and many withdraw their help;
yet go you on with cheerfulness, though the charge be great, it will quit
all the cost when God shall give you or yours to see Zion raised up in beauty.

Thirdly, if God call any of you to be an instrument in your places to further
the work, let your hearts be filled with courage, and your hands active with
all faithfulness to fulfill what in required of you in your Sphere: many other
things I might add as ingredients into this cordial for raising up your
hearts with courage to wait upon the Lord; but I shall conclude all as I begun;

Be of good courage, the Lord shall strengthen your hearts all you that wait
upon the Lord.

FINIS.

