A JUST VINDICATION OF THE ARMY WHEREIN All that doubt may have large
satisfaction, in relation to their late proceedings.

As touching the Cause, beginning, continuance, and their end therein.

OR, A Book entitled, The Examination of the late passages of the Army
(especially of the grounds laid down for their Justification in their
Declaration, June 14. 1647) Examined, Refuted,

By A. WARREN.

Micah 2.1, 2. Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their
beds, when the morning is light they practice is, because it is in his hand,
etc.

Mal. 3.5. And I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift
Witness against -- those that oppress the Hireling in his wages, the Widow,
and the Fatherless, etc.

Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt ut Jure regantur,
In Republica max. ma conservanda sunt Jura Belli.
LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1647.

A full Vindication of the Army.
I Have a long time waited, and with waiting longed, to hear, or see somewhat
proceed from some of the Army, in order to their own justification, (more able
for such employment) and in Answer to the forementioned Book styled, The
lawfulness of the late Passages of the Army, etc. Examined. But hitherto my
hopes have been frustrate, which has forced me (unapt for such a work) to
crowd amongst others, (not out of vain ostentation) upon the common Theater' to
each man's public view; my sincear endeavors aspiring no higher, then to give
satisfaction to my doubting friends, (if I can) next to that main mark,
(whereunto relation ought chiefly, to be had, in all things) even the glory of
God. I was at first encouraged hereunto by the opprobious and despitefull
language I frequently heard in the mouths of diverse ill-affected persons,
against the Army, and many times my self being scornfully hit in the teeth, by
the showing of this, and such like Pamphlets unto me. And knowing well enough
it can be no affront to Justice, to speak the truth, in behalf of the condemned
Innocent, (it no whit opposing the just Law of this Kingdom, nor right reason,
which is (or ought to be) the ground of all Law, for Lex est summa Ratio) I
have undertaken the ensuing discourse. And as it is the greatest glory, that
any Nation, or People are invested with, to be under the Command, and
Jurisdiction, of a sound, impartial, and well principled Government, and upon
good grounds, not to fear slavery, vassalage, thraldom, a yoke too ponderous
for any to puton, (especially those, who are born free, and have the very name
of freedom written, in so fair a Character in their foreheads, (Ab Origin)
that it is conspicious, to the whole universe, and the remotest Nations can
read it as well as themselves:) So, on the contrary, for such to lie tamely
under the corrupt Constitution of an inslaving power, (being clothed from their
creations, with admirable Immunities, Nature her self crowning them with so
rich a favor, and abhorring thraldom in any) is the greatest obloquie, and
brand of shame, sorrow, and infamy, that can befall a free State, or Kingdom.
Oppression, injustice, and vassalage, is not, ought not, to be endured in any,
by whomsoever, or howsoever imposed, it being abominated and detested by the
sacred Laws, of Religion, Reason, Roma Tybur amo vent su, Tybure Romam. Verg.
Nature, and Nations. It is a very sad disaster, and a great sign of
instability, when men, and their principles differ upon every occasion, nay
sometime without the least visible occasion thereunto. I know no one place or
text of Scripture, the truth whereof has been better backed, and attended, in
all foregoing ages, and our present times, Obad. 7. ver.
with more credible testimonies of verity then David's so often repeated Maxim,
That those of a man's own house, commonly prove his greatest enemies. I shall
not make any Application of this to the present opposer, only give me so much
favor, as to tell you with all meekness, that though you had not that
relation to the Army, as serve the State with them in particular engagements in
the Field, yet that you should pretend friendship when their hearts, and hands,
were active, and successful in fighting for freedom, and now desert and deny
them, for desiring the fruition of the same things they contended for, is no
less then a wonder to me; insomuch, that (I fear) you, as well as others, in
cases of the like nature, and concernment do hoise sail, more for some private
unhappy respect, then for public good and interest; but beware lest your
unsound vessel meet with rocks, and there God find you out to your shame. Will
you give the Army leave to sight, and spill their blood, for the recovery of
the just wholesome Laws of the Nation, and shall they not be permitted now to
speak for the execution of them? Will you be a friend when they fight, and a
foe when they have obtained, because they desire the reasonable performance of
undeniable engagements? Have not the whole Kingdom cause to look about them,
and suspect, (yea and in time prevent) a design, when men dissent from the
Army, because their tongues concur with their hearts, hands, and the end of
their Commission. But not to tarry any longer here; we will come to the preface
or Introduction to your Examination, which in the first place you lay down thus;

^f the late Declaration from the Army, of June 14. 1647. had given
satisfaction to all their friends (as it seemed to promise in the first line) I
should then have been silent, etc. It was not the intent of that first line,
that the Declaration could without a blessing give satisfaction unto any, much
less to all their friends, for its not in the power of any (but God himself)
either to persuade, or prevail with the judgments of men, and the Declaration
is but a means thereunto tending: And that the Declaration (concluded on by
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and his Council of War, afterward read in
the head of every Regiment in the Army, and at last consented unto by the
Officers and Soldiers thereof) did not give satisfaction (though intended for
that use) to all their pretended friends, or real enemies, is not through any
insufficiency in the thing it self, which is to all rational men satisfactory
enough, considered as an instrument; but either their own incapability,
stubbornenesse, or selfe-ends, by which means they will not incline their
ears to the truth thereof. Then you say, who have ever (until some of their
late proceedings) not only had the Army in great esteem and honor, but
studied and endeavored (according to my abilities and place) to be
serviceable to them: Truly Sir, for your pretended esteem and honor of the
Army formerly, (whilst it lasted) they were beholden to you; but it sills me
with admiration, that you were no more real nor stable, and that your
principles should be so slippery, as degenerate from what they were, and your
judgment so darkened, as to mistake the well-grounded purposes and principles
of the Army: and what those late proceedings of theirs should be, whereat you
take occasion to withdraw your first love, I am altogether ignorant of,
unless because the Army are (by divine power) contriving, how righteousness
and peace might kiss each other, justice and judgment run down our streets
like a mighty stream: and for your studying to serve the Army, according to
your place and ability, and not persisting therein, whilst they in the whole
progress of this late business, have not in the least desired ought, but what
the Parliament in their many Declarations have faithfully promised, (I wish
they had been as really performed, and then our troubles had ceased) might be
sufficient cause of sorrow and sadness unto you.

And to speak in justification of their very adversaries, in this one respect
I dare boldly affirm it, the Army have received more civil usage, courteous
respect, and affectionate expressions of love from them, then from many of the
near pretended friends of the Parliaments Cause; and this not out of any hopes
they have, that the Army should effect that at last, which at first they
opposed, and the other party stood for; or that they look for any courtesy or
favor from them, more then what in conscience and equity, they are bound to
allow them; but merely from the observation of their good ends, (whereof many
are convinced) civil deportments, and honorable performances of Articles and
Covenants, which merits no less then cordial affection from very Enemies. But
now you say, all your glorying in them is turned into shame, and your prayers
and praises to God for them, into mourning and astonishment: I had rather hear
this were for the forecited reason, to wit, your strange revolting from the
Kingdoms cause, then that you seem to mention, viz. to see that under the
general notions, and colors of Gods glory, and good intentions to the
Liberties and peace of the people of this Nation, the late actions and
practices of the Army, in disobeying and opposing the Parliament (if persisted
in) will appear to be contrary to the Laws of God and the Kingdom, and to
their duty, trust, and engagement to the Parliament of England, etc. I am sorry
the eye of your judgment is so much obscured, and you so much mistaken in the
affairs and proceedings of the Army: Does it derogate more from Gods glory,
when the Army present their humble desires to the Parliament by way of
Petition, then it did when they freely powered forth their blood against the
stubborn Adversaries of our Tranquillity and Freedom? Are the good intents of
the General to the Liberties and peace of this Nation, less good, because he
has gained them (vi and Armis) from the irreconcilable enemies thereof, and
now desire the enjoyment of them for the Nation, from those who arbitrarily and
unjustly detain them? Is it more disobedience or opposition in the Army, to
demand the price of their blood, even their hardly gotten Liberties of the
Parliament, then it was in the Parliament at first to raise war against the
King? The Army might say to the Parliament in relation to their late
proceedings, as they said to the King at the beginning of this unhappie
fraction;

It is a levying of war against the King, when it is against his Laws and
Authorities, Book Dccl. part 1. page 276 where by the Statute of 25. ^^d. 3.
though it be not immediately against his Person and the levying of force
against his personal commands, though accompanied with his presence; if it be
not against his Laws and Authority, but in maintenance thereof, is not levying
war against the King, but for him, etc. So (and no otherwise) it is
disobedience and opposition against the Parliament, when it is against their
Laws and Authorities, though it be not immediately against their persons; and
disobedience and opposition to their personal commands, though accompanied
with their presence, if it be not against their Laws and Authorities, but in
maintenance thereof, is not disobedience and opposition to the Parliament, but
the defense of the Parliament and their due Privileges: In the judgment of
any ingenuous man, that which you call disobedience and opposition in the Army,
is no more then what the King called Rebellion in the Parliament, and their
actions then will appear as contrary to the Laws of God and the Kingdom, and
to their duty, trust, and engagement to the King and Kingdom of England, as
the present progressions of the Army will to the Parliament of England; for it
is evident to all the world, that the Army are guided by the very selfsame
principles now, that the Parliament were grounded on at the beginning of this
unhappy distraction; November. 2. 1646. Declar. 1 part 696 and page 150.
observe but their own expression, That obedience binds not men to cut their
own throats, etc. had the Army obeyed the groundless personal Commands of
the Parliament, how unhappie had both themselves and the whole Kingdom been?
The Parliament at first alarumed the whole Kingdom, crying, Arm, arm, arm,
with beating of Drums, and soundings of Trumpets, (the sad precursors of
ensuing War, and woe) assuring the people, the King, and his Counsel then,
intended to destroy their Religion, subvert their Laws, enslave themselves,
etc. Whereupon the people suddenly set themselves in a defensive Martial
posture for the Parliament against the King; and both parties resolved, and to
that purpose declared, to stand by each other, in safe-guarding their Freedoms,
and immunities, (the justest cause of any War,) whereupon, an Army was
immeadiatly sent forth, who took upon them to restore (or lose their lives) the
peoples Freedoms; this being done, and liberty purchased with the effusion of
blood, were it not perjury, and perfidiousnesse in the Army, to suffer some
Members of Parliament (after all this) to inthrall the people, and undo
themselves? Which was evident enough they would have done, (had they power
answerable to their malice) as appears by Sir Philip Stapleton, who was heard
to report, when the Army but intended to Petition for their dues, That it was
come to that pass, that either the Army must down, or They, meaning himself
and his corrupt Rivals, must down.

And if the Armies refusing to forfeit for ever their own and the Kingdoms
freedoms, and surrender it, though earned with the invaluable price of their
dearest blood, to an inconsiderable party, of Arbitrary, merciless men, in
both, or either House of Parliament, be disobedience, and opposition, as you
term it, to the whole, then how will you define obedience? Do you imagine the
Parliament cannot oppress? And if they do, must not ease be petitioned for,
but for so doing the Petitioners must be accounted disobedient, and opposers?
Parliaments were called for the benefit, and not dis-ease of the people.

There are several things, Four causes of a Parliaments being
which are chiefly the considerable Causes of a Parliaments Being; 1 The
outcries of a free people inslaved, to their King, for his Summons. 2 The
Kings Summons, for the calling of a Parliament. 3 The peoples Election of their
Members. 4 The Members appearance (upon the foresaid Summons and the peoples
Election) to any place appointed by the King, for to order, and dispose of the
great Affairs of the Kingdom.


Now when this Assembly thus lawfully gathered, shall forget the ends of their
Constitution, and not rectify, or cause to be rectified, the known wrongs, and
greivances of the People, and restore liberty to the enslaved, the people may,
(and are bound thereunto by the Laws of Religion, Reason, Nature, and
Nations,) sue, and Petition for their just rights. Neither have the Parliament
power to Act, Ier. 38.5.
or order any thing but that which tends to the mutual good and known weal of
the people. If King Zedekiah, by his own confession, could not imprison a man,
without, or against the advice of his Princes, then by what Law, can the King,
or Parliament of England, or both together, assume such a power to themselves,
as bereave the people of their liberties, and birthrights? The people of this
Nation, and so the Army as a substantial part thereof, being equally born
free, may refuse obedience to any Acts, or impositions of King, or Parliament,
whose apparent tendency is to their own ruin, and overthrow: and if it be so,
that the Kingdom, and Army, must neither refuse obedience to unjust commands,
nor Petition for redress of manifest wrongs, (without being branded with
disobedient, opposers, infringers of the peace of the Kingdom, and enemies to
the State, and that which will be the sad consequence of all these, even the
whole Kingdom and Army exposed to the limitlesse pleasures of merciless men,
whose tender mercies (as the wise man says) are cruel, then farewell indeered
Freedoms for ever.

Object. But to this you will happily object, Who shall judge when the Acts of
the Parliament be destructive to the people?

Answ. In this case I know, at present, no better judge then their own common
and frequent experience, that undergo oppression and wrong; who can better
inform a man that he has lost the use of one of his joints or members, then
he that wants it?

But not to stay longer here, I shall proceed to your next clause, to wit, by
Parliament.
whose Commission they are an Army, and are but a tumultuous number of men;
when they act or do any thing that is not in order to or within the limits of
that Commission, which I take to be, the utmost bounds of their calling as an
Army: and when any man or number of men, step out of their calling, or if in
their calling run out into by and unwarrantable ways, they can upon no good
grounds look either for protection, or expect a blessing, etc.

It is true, it was by the Parliaments Commission and none others they were an
Army; yet that was not the only cause of their being an Army, but something in
relation to the Kingdom in general, and something also in relation to
themselves in particular: and therefore observe these things considerable in
the raising and levying of a lawful Army. Three things to be considered in the
raising of a lawful Army.


1. The lawfulness of the Cause. 2. The lawfulness of the Call or Commission.
3. The collection or gathering together of the people in a formidable posture.
For the cause of raising this Army, it was the preservation of His Majesty's
Royal Person, and Kingdom, restoration of our almost lost Laws and
Liberties, defense of the just Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, etc.
their Commission was from the Parliament, and their collection from themselves
freely and willingly without constraint, or force, and this last they were
induced and provoked unto by virtue of the two former, to wit, the Cause and
Commission; all which have a necessary dependence each on the other, and are
inseparable in the levying of a lawful Army; insomuch that a Commission
without the peoples free consent, cannot raise an Army, nor both of them (as
some have untruly said) make a lawful Army, without a lawful Cause.

And now I appeal to you and the whole Kingdom, if the Army have not to their
power, inviolably observed, and with the price of their blood, effected the
substantial end of their Commission, which was for the defense of the
Kingdom, etc. as their own Ordinances import, Ordin. Feb. 15 1644. and Apr.
1. 1645.
and if some disaffected Members in both or either House of Parliament, did
betray the confidence and trust reposed in them, and by their too effectual
insluence on others, (who perchance have no great desires to close with, or can
discern their base ends therein) so carry on their deep and dark designs,
that the Kingdom suffers too much prejudice by them: must this constrain the
Army to do so likewise? Shall none be ready to stand in the gap in behalf of
this almost ruined Kingdom, and stop that inevitable inundation of misery
ready to overwhelme us through the inhumane malice of those who make their lust
their Law? Is there no means left of freedom from Egyptian Taskmasters? Was
it lawful for the Army to oppose vassallage and thraledome to the death in the
Kings party, and shall they so easily subject themselves, and by their means
the whole Kingdom to a far worse tyranny in some Members of Parliament? Or
shall they outstrip their Commission, which is just and equitable, which is
still in force till the ends thereof be performed by the Parliament as well as
by them, and now run themselves into extravagant courses of Injustice and
Tyranny, because others do so? Must they bid adieu to their Commission and the
fruits of their labors, because they have labored, and those who gave them
their Commission command them? But I shall retort this assertion into your own
bosom again thus:

The Parliament are a Parliament by the Kings Warrant and the Peoples Election,
for hearing complaints and redressing wrongs in the Kingdom: But when they act
or doany thing that is not in order to or within the limits of that Warrant or
Commission, unless they pretend a Commission limitlesse, as the sequel of
your discourse imports, and tending also to the peoples benefit, by whom they
were chosen, which I take to be the utmost bounds of their calling, as a
Parliament, they are but a tumultuous number of men, and though any particular
man, or number of men in the Parliament, step out of their calling, or if in
their calling run out into by and unwarrantable ways, they can upon no good
grounds, that I know of, either look for protection, or expect a blessing.

And then, as you import in the next place, however such proceedings being
backed with policy and power, may have success at present, yet they are sure
to be bitterness in the end.

For the rest of your Exordium or Introduction into your discourse or pretended
Examination, I shall leave as impertinent, my ordinary employments not
favoring me with time enough to examine every thing.

Now to the first part of your Examination of the Armies Declaration, where you
affirm,

That although as particular Englishmen, they may petition or plead for what
they think makes for the right, freedom, peace, and safety of themselves and
the Kingdom; yet they cannot do it as an Army, for that relates only to
those uses (for which it was made) limited within Commission: of your
Assertion, I make a triple dividend, the affirmative and negative parts, and
the reason of the latter.

1. In your affirmative part you grant all I desire, and therefore needs no
further trouble, to wit, that as particular Englishmen the Army may petition or
plead for what they think makes for the right, freedom, peace, and safety of
themselves and the Kingdom.

2. In your second or negative part you affirm, they cannot do it as an Army.
To which I answer:

If not as an Army, then not at all; but their being an Army lays several
engagements on them to petition.

1. The violence, oppression, and injustice done to the people, in not hearing,
and granting their just desires and Petitions, unwarrantable commitments,
illegal levyings of moneys, and neither paying them for the uses pretended,
nor at all accounting for them, with diverse other galling pressures, which
constrain the Army, as an Army, to plead and petition for the Kingdom and
themselves.

2. The cries and doleful clamours of many thousands, distressed people in
several Counties of this Kingdom, abused, reviled and rejected by their
ill-affected Trustees in Parliament, inforceth them to plead as an Army; which
said people, after the presentation of diverse humble Petitions, yet refused,
though by due course of Law, reason, and honesty, they ought and are bound in
conscience not only to receive them, but make report thereof, and give
effectual answers thereunto, know no other means left them under the Sun, for
the obtaining their just but lost Liberties, except this Army, as an Army, in
which case they make a law of necessity, Necessitas non habet Legem.
which is without law, and exemption from vassallage, their reasonable suit.

3. Their very Commission in a double respect, does enforce them as an Army
hereunto, which might sufficiently satisfy any rational conscientious man, in
relation to their late proceedings; though no more were said of it. Reasons why
their Commission warrants them.


1. Because they received it from the Parliament. 2. They received it from the
Parliament by, and according to Law.
First, they received it from the Parliament, who are a lawful Parliament, and
so to be obeyed whilst they act and order, according to the Laws that made
them so, and in order to the special ends of their being and constitution.

They received it from the Parliament by and according to Law, and so are
enjoined by Law, to observe the commands and injunctions of the Law therein,
and to compass the ends of the said Commission, according, and not against or
without Law, though the Parliament themselves should severely require it: And
if this were not so, the Army must and ought to infringe and violate the Law,
and consequently for get the meaning and ends of their Commission, because they
do so from whom they received it. It stands not with reason that you or I
should act the parts of madmen or fools, because some, and those eminent wise
men and nearely related to us, have done so before us.

The principal part of their Commission I have before rehearsed, which is, ^or
defense of the Kingdom, according to the fore-quoted Ordinances: whereby it is
evident, that if the Army by virtue of that Commission, are bound to defend the
Kingdom, which is the utltimate end thereof, then are they obliged also, to
the defense of every particular member in the Kingdom, without limitation of
time, or respect of persons; and if the Army may defend the Kingdom against
the encroachments and inroads made by the King upon our Liberties and
Franchises, (he being the Superior Magistrate in the Kingdom, whilst guided
and biassed by Law) then doubtless they may as responsibly defend it against
the usurpations of the Parliament, when their actions run in the corrupt
channel of the peoples vassallage, ruin. And in case the Parliament refuse to
give the oppressed protection and deliverance, then the Army must and are bound
to do it for them, or else they must be forced to set themselves in a warlike
posture, and require it of them; which to do, how sad it would be to the
Parliament and Kingdom, let all judge.

When any case of public concernment is in debate by the Parliament, tending
directly to the weal of the people or not, and then referred to a Vote, that
Vote carries it right or wrong: Now if the Parliament consist of so many
ill-affected Members, which was the condition of the House since their last new
moulding, as to carry the Vote to the disturbance and prejudice of the people,
when it is apparently and evidently so, and the people smart and groan under
it, and when they petition no redress can be had, then I beseech you, what
other course or means is there left for this distressed people to take, but to
use the power of an Army? or must they and their posterities, notwithstanding
they were created free, lie for ever under such insupportable languishments? It
is true, the Army received their Commission from the Parliament, and so did the
Parliament theirs from the people; so that the Army are as equally entrusted by
the people, as they are by the Parliament, or the Parliament by the people: For
the Parliament were no Parliament without the peoples leave, nor could they
give Commission, till first they received one themselves: whereby it appears,
the Army have their Commissions as certainly and undoubtedly from the people
of England, as any inferior Officers in Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army have theirs
from the Parliament; and the people are as really obliged, to stand firm and
entire to them, whilst they act according to their Commission, as the
Parliament are to countenance and protect any Officer or number of Officers,
who refuse obedience to their General, when he commands him or them to betray
their trust. Therefore I say, if the Parliament forget their first principles,
and stop their cares from the peoples sighings, the Army are required (if they
violate not the trust reposed in them) to use their best endeavors to relieve
them. And this cleares the third part of their assertion, which is the reason
you give why the Army cannot plead or petition for what they know makes for the
right, freedom, peace and safety of themselves and the Kingdom, as they are
an Army, to wit,

Because that relates only to those uses, for which it was made, limited
within it Commission.

Which Commission (as I said before) does as really authorize them, as an Army,
to desire right from the Parliament for the people of this Nation, as it did
put them in a capacity of fighting, and pouring out their blood for their
rights; or the Parliaments Commission did invest them with power to regulate
the affairs of the Kingdom, and consequently, in case of visible necessity,
to raise and maintain an Army in otder thereunto.

If the Parliament declare against the Army for the just prosecution and
performance of their own Orders, and Ordinances, they do as immediately and
directly declare against themselves; yea, by striveing to condemn and
overthrow the Army, they do but dig a pit or lay a snare (as David says) for
themselves to fall into: For if the Parliaments Declarations and Ordinances, by
themselves framed and composed, in order to the raising and maintaining of a
force, and granting them a Commission, were not according to Law, which most
men confess they were, then the Army were culpapble and responsible to another
Parliament, if any should be after the dissolution of this, for obeying the
Votes and directions of this, yea and this Parliament themselves could not be
free from severe examination in this particular. But if the Parliaments
Declarations and Ordinances in relation to the levying of an Army, were firmly
grounded on Law, and Reason, as undoubtedly they were, and so kept and
precisely observed by the Army; if the Authors of them, viz. the Parliament
should begin and persist in the unjust violation of them, who is fault-worthy?
the Army that keeps them, or the Parliament who infringe them? If the
Parliament command injustice, shall not they be responsible for it, when the
Army who did but execute their commands, escape Scot-free? Shall the instrument
be broken, and the hand that made and used it, be discharged from the fact?
Does the Army crave any thing but what the Parliament have often promised, the
Law warrants, your self, with the rest of your friends, I hope the Armies
friends too, would willingly and gratefully partake of? If they do, then what
is it? If they do not, then why are they so much blamed? When the war was hot
in the Kingdom, which, and for which blessed for ever be our God, is now
assuaged and mitigated by the fidelity, valor and unanimity of this Army,
under the wise conduct of puissant Fairfax, the only instruments in Gods hands
to period our dismal distractions, they never troubled the Parliament or
themselves with things of this concernment, but quietly and patiently, as led
thereunto by the very hand of providence, obeyed all commands tending to
public safety, and freely underwent the saddest exigences of a fiery War:
and when none else were honored with the like victories, they endured without
grudging or repineing the test and brunt thereof, and never molested the
Parliament with one scrip or line, as other Armies did, and at that time well
enough resented too, which might impede them in their public and ponderous
negotiations: yea, they freely subjected and exposed themselves to the
merciless extremities of wind and weather, hunger, nakedness, the dis-favour
and hate of diverse of their best friends, and what not? But alas! we are now
again in peace, and these mercies are utterly forgotten. Besides, other Armies
before this, did several times plead and petition, as Armies, not so much
necessitated thereunto, as this Army is, and it was well accepted, and requited
with plausible answers of satisfaction in their just demands; yet this Army, if
they but offer to petition as an Army, is so ill resented, that they shall
immediately, without being heard for themselves, be declared enemies, etc. Had
they but (unworthily) committed those outrageous incivilities, and offered such
affronts and indignities to the two Houses of Parliament, as the London Faction
(the best friends to the impeached Members) did, I dare affirm, the City and
whole Kingdom had been flameing about their ears ere this day: but this is
not so considerable a crime in them, nay, no crime at all, as some peremptorily
report, because they were no Army, had they but a Commission, then this were a
fault in them, but as the case stands now, it is none. Had not our Brethren the
Scots (not to deprive them of their dues, which they deserved) all that they
desired or demanded as an Army? Pax quaeritur Bellc. L.G. Crumwells Motto.
But now tempora mutantur and nos mutamur in illis, this Army must not desire
those things as an Army, which other Armies with much facility have obtained:
and all the reason I know for it is, because peace is extracted from war, by
the prodigal effusion of the precious blood of diverse in this Army.

In the next place, you say, for their affirming they are not a mercenarie
Army, you will not spend time to dispute it, and in my judgment you have taken
the wisest course, unless you be so good a Sophister, as to make truth appear
falsehood, and falsehood truth; which is something difficult in the apprehension
of any honest man. Yet, say you, every one sees they insist much on their
wages: and good reason they should, when so many of them have spent the prime
and flower of their years in the service of the Kingdom, diverse of them being
men of trades and callings, and have charges of families, who depend wholly
upon their honest endeavors, and were able sufficiently to maintain them
before this war, and now have no subsistence or livelihood, whereby to
relieve themselves or families, but that small pittance of pay they seldom,
yet sometimes receive from the State, who called them from their functions to
public employments.

Others there be, who though they have sufficient estates, yet some of them
have been wholly sequestered in those parts of the Kingdom where the King had
any Garrisons, or parties to command them. And the rest by reason of the
unsupportable taxes of the Kingdom, had little or no benefit by them: yea I
have known some that have served the Parliament faithfully and valiantly, who
have been worse dealt with in their estates then Papists, and others who were
in actual service against them. And now tell me, if the Parliament are not
bound to give the labourer his deserved hire, and this Army have not sufficient
cause to insist on their wages: I am very confident, that if the Parliament had
but allowed them what was promised, and for the use levied in the Kingdom, you
nor they should have heard one word more of them, in relation to that
particular.

And for that Scripture you allege in the 3. of Luke 14. that Soldiers should
be content with their wages, the Army have been in the whole progress of this
war so far from grudging, repineing, or being discontent with their wages,
that they have been very well content without it, even to the admiration of all
the Countries they have marched through, and (for ought they or I can perceive)
are like so to continue yet a while. The Kingdom are sensible enough of
nineteen millions of money (some say 73000000.) that has been with more then
ordinary have, and in little time extracted from them, and if any part of it be
transported beyond Seas, it is past their skill to bring it back again: yea
they know also, the Army have not received above 1400000. l. of all that vast
sum: and how the residue is disposed of, cannot (I think) be well and honestly
accounted. I presume, that if all the Parliament Men in England, Committee Men,
Sequestrators, Excize-men and all the Assembly-men, with all their Clarks,
Attendants, and fellows, and all other such Officers made since the War in
pay, were but drawn together into one field, you should find them in number to
super-equallize half Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army, and these men have been
constantly paid, de die in diem, from day to day; but the Army who have
secured these by the frequent distillings of their blood, must be content with
a twelve months pay in two years time, and Ordinances must be made for the
discharge of their quarters too, of purpose to set the Country and them
together by the ears, by making them believe the soldiers must do what is
impossible for them to do, viz. discharge their quarters, when they have scarce
money to buy them clothes to keep them from the cold wind, and air.

Truly Sir, you might rather admire the patience of the Soldiers, that they
have forborne so long, and been no more earnest for their wages, then that they
have insisted so much thereon at this time. There be diverse Sequestrators and
others, who enrich themselves with the ruins of honester men, and fill their
coffers with the decayed Countries wealth; yet such men may escape
unquestioned, for their oppression and injustice, when the Army shall be
reviled, despised, declared against for insisting on their wages, and
petitioning for it, though in a legal way: but the old Proverb is verified by
this, That some had better steal a horse, then others stand and look on.

There is the high and mighty Sequestrator of Suffolk, his name is Base, (so
is his nature) and if his head had been sequestered from his body long since, it
had been better for those parts: his own estate at the beginning of this war
was worth 70. or 80. l. per annum, and as much in debt as his estate was worth;
yet in these few years of Englands misery, has he been making his harvest;
for he has not only discharged his debt, but proffered to a Gentleman, an
acquaintance of mine in that Country, above 3000. l. for his house and Land
that he lived on; and (as I am credibly informed) has purchased some store of
Land in the same Country, and also sent some quantity of Cash into Holland
against a rainy day, there to keep Christmas with his Grandsire Waller, and the
rest of that rabble, birds of a feather, flock together: and therefore you may
imagine ex pede Herculem, by the dimension of the foot, the proportion of the
whole body. So much for that part of your Examination: then you continue thus:

For what you speak of the Arbitrary Power of a State, and of violence,
oppression, particular Parties and Interests, if you apply it to the present
case, to justify your not obeying the Parliament, and otherwise it signifies
nothing, then I must say, it is exceeding unjust when you do not instance in
any one action wherein they are willingly guilty of any such charge. To this I
shall reply as concise an answer, as I can, and that in these ensuing
particulars:

1. That you have mistaken the candid meaning of the Declaration, for it
speaks not positively of the Parliament, or any others, that they have done
violence, oppression, injustice, etc.

2. Whereas the Declaration says, they will vindicate the just power and
rights of this Kingdom in Parliament, against all arbitrary power, violence,
etc. it speaks not in relation to the Parliament, as I said before, unless
your and their consciences inform you, that they, or rather some of their
Members, are guilty of the premises, and so come under the lash of that
Declaration; but those, whatever he or they be, who have, do or shall for
the future practice arbitrarinesse, violence, oppression, etc. against the free
People of England, as the impeached Members have done.

3. It is not wisdom in any man, or society of men, to instance particulars,
before a general is proposed, though but in the charge of a single man.

4. If all were true that you say, and that it were so, that if the Army apply
not what they speak of arbitrary powers, violence, oppression, etc. to the
present case, it signifies nothing, and that i^ is unjust in the Army, that
they do not instance one action of injustice the Parliament have done, yet it
can be reputed (time, place, and other inconveniences considered) no less then
a point of greatest modesty, meekness, and wisdom in them to forbear a while.

5. Though your misapprehension were granted for a truth, which I dare not do,
that it was the intent of the Declaration peremptorily and positively, to tax
the Parliament of arbitrarinesse, violence oppression, etc. yet for your
satissaction, and the Vindication of the Army from that aspersion of Injustice
you east on it, I shall instance in some particulars, wherein arbitrarinesse,
violence, oppression, etc. has been conmitted in a more then ordinary measure,
and with unaccustomed speed, though I confess, it is such a point, that I had
rather deny my self in silence, and weep over the failings of men, then to rip
them open to the view of the world.

One is the late ordering of the Militia of London, and remomoving it out of
the hands of those who had (during the late Wars) served the Parliament and
Kingdom faithfully and valiantly, not fearing to hang their lives on the
points of their swords (as at Gloucester and both Newbery fights) in defense of
the just Freedoms and Rights of this Nation, and disposing thereof into the
hands of some, who are no less then Delinquents, if they had their due, and
others whose cowardly hearts dare not adventure further then they see the smoke
of London Chimneyes, and yet are (forsooth) tied to a Sword in a Militia
posture; some again there be who have all these times kept at a distance and
stood as Newterall and disaffected to both parties, and these are the men to
whom is committed not only the guard of that renowned, famous, wealthy, and
populous City of London, and by consequence of the whole Kingdom, the Army
once disbanded, it being the Headquarters and Magazine thereof; but they are
also entrusted with the safety of the Parliament, the grand Court of the
Kingdom, and those honest conscientious Worthies of London were dismissed, to
their extreme dishonor, in the vulgars view, as if they had done something
worthy cashiering, and that, upon no grounds in the earth, nor as much as one
word was objected against them. If they may do thus to the City, that is as an
entire, compact Army within it self, what will they not do to the whole
Kingdom? Would they not have entrusted Malignants and ill-affected persons
with the Militia thereof as at London, and so set the Kingdom all on sire
again? Was not this the ready way unto it? But it is evident to all men, that
what was done in this particular, was in order to a plot of inslaving the
freeborn people of England, and that chiefly by the traitorous impeached
Members, who well knew that the forementioned honest party were not perfidious
enough to serve their designs, and rather then they would want help to set
them forward, would entrust any, though never so bad, therefore moved the House
therewith, and by their subtle instigations and malevolent influences on
diverse Members, got this cursed conspiracy passed and ordered, to the great
discouragement of all the honest sincere party of the City, and indangering the
ruin of this enough miserable Kingdom.

Again, the unjust imprisonment of Lievtenant-Colonell John Lilburne without
expressing the cause of his commitment in the Warrant, though by due course of
Law they ought and are bound thereunto: and keeping him under miserable
restraint, not permitting him to have the use of ink and paper, nor suffering
his wife or any of his friends to come near him for a long time.

Then the breaking open M. Overtons door of his house, that stout stickler for
Englands Liberties, by a company of Pro. 29.12.
uncivil Ruffians, and surprising him and his wife in bed, and forcing him
thence to appear before the House of Lords, without Order or Warrant that he
could at that time hear of, though much desired, but after they pretended a
Warrant from the Lords, from thence they dragged him head long through the
streets, through dirt and mire, and on the stones, all the way most vilely
abused and beaten to Newgate, and there laid in double Irons, where he has
continued from the third of November, 1646. till this present time, and no kind
of relief or hearing can be had for this miserable and distressed man: Bur
further, as not content with this, and not supposing it woe enough for the
poor man, they send again to his house, where finding his sad-hearted wife
and three small children about her, (poor soul disconsolate enough God
knows) took her and his brother away, and forced them to appear at the Lords
Bar, plundered and ransacked his house, exposing the helpless children to
the mercy of the wide streets, and all this before any presentment or due
process of Law proceeding: and from the House of Lords, both of them were sent
to the new Prison in Maiden-Lane, where he still continues, but she under
pretense of another Order was dragged in the same manner that her husband was,
to infamous Bridewell through dirt and mire, with an Infant of half a year
old in her arms, not regarding her Sex, Age or present condition, Vir and ux^r
sune quasi unica persona, qula care una, and sanguis (...), etc.
but abusing her with the nicknames of Whore, Strumpet, etc. where she has
been ever since kept in miserable restraint, not permitting her to have the
liberty of being imprisoned with her husband, notwithstanding Gods Command
against such separation, or as much as once to visit him in all this time, or
enjoy the comfort of her children about her, or suffering her to go a little
abroad with her Keeper, to take the fresh air, though her life has been
apparently endangered by the want thereof.

Then there was Major Balsum, who had served the Parliament conscientiously and
stoutly, under the command of Sir William Waller, he was a long time (after the
dissolution of that Army) a humble Petitioner to the Parliament for some part
of his Arrears, having naught else to depend on for the maintenance of
himself, his wife and three or four children, but he waited so long, and to
so little purpose, (as most do who wait there) till at last he died most
miserably for want of ordinary sustenance: and when he was dead, his*
Father-in-Law and wife, M. Michell.
knew not how to bury him in four or five days, for want of money, till at
last some money was ordered his wife, wherewith she buried him.

There were thirteen or fourteen more soldiers that served in the same Army,
who were starved in the same manner, Pro. 21.7.22.16.
which will be proved upon oath; the robbery of the wicked shall destroy them,
because they refuse to do judgment. He that oppresses the poor to increase
his riches, and he that gives unto the rich, shall surely want. Mal. 2.3, 5.
And I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness
against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against false swearers,
and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow and the
fatherless, and that turn away the stranger from his right, and fear not me,
says the Lord of Hosts.

Again, the Widows and Orphans of those slain in the service of the
Parliament, who were well maintained by their husbands, and fathers, before
this war, are now feign to beg their bread from door to door in London and
elsewhere, for want of promised relief from the Parliament.

Besides, their refusing to hear and answer the cries, groans and Petitions
of the distressed, and those who entrusted them to sit, though bound thereunto
by the strictest engagements of the Laws of England, of Conscience, and Reason,
which way of Petitioning, is one of the greatest privileges the people of this
Kingdom are invested with, yet often refused, as that of the virtuous
Gentlewoman Mrs. Lilburne, presented to every Member of the House, as they went
in but never any satisfactory answer returned, The forementioned passages
relate only to particular men, but they have special influence on the whole
body of the Kingdom and Army.
as if they were resolved to make that honest conscientious Gentleman, and
gallant Soldier for his Countries rights, her husband, a perpetual slave.

Then the Petition of the entire Counties of Hereford and Buckingham, though
just, legal and seasonable, was cast aside, rejected, and at last
disgracefully burnt by the hands of the Common-Hangman. If they will disappoint
two whole Counties in their reasonable demands, sure a si^gle man shall scarce
have audience, or right from them.

Also the Petition of the Army, which contained nothing but what was equitable,
and honest, yet before it was presented, whilst the Army were but desiring
their General to solicit for them in behalf thereof, they were declared
enemies to the State, and obstructers of the relief of Ireland, if they
persisted: as if their being an Army and fighting for freedom, had deprived
them of their freedoms and birthrights.

Another maine and more general oppression, is the billeting of Soldiers on
the enough wasted Country upon Free Quarter, the heaviest pressure they
undergo for the time, and neither giving them their due pay, that so they might
be able to discharge their quarters, nor abateing it in the Taxes and
Contributions of the Country, which are daily continued.

I shall forbear to proceed any further in the sad relation of these passages,
they are already so common in each man's mouth: I shall only request you to
peruse the Petition of the inslaved Commons of England, July 6. 1647.
called Englands doleful lamentation, presented to his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and there you may behold acts enough of arbitrarinesse, violence, and
oppression, and if these things be not done by the knowledge or consent of some
Members of Parliament, why then is not ease, deliverance and redress given,
and the just Laws of the Kingdom seasonably and duly executed after so many
Petitions presented? Is it possible that all these and many more acts (which I
shall forbear to repeat) of arbitrarinesse, violence and oppression, can be
done by any but by them, or if they be done by others, (their instruments) it
must needs be by their consent, and countenancing of them therein, they durst
as well run their heads in the fire, and there let them consume to ashes, as
once offer to practice any of the premises contained in the said Petition,
without special favor of some of the great Council of the Land. Therefore do
you weigh and consider impartially these things, and tell me if there be not a
fault, and that a horrible one in that high Court of Judicature. And truly, I
can see no way how it may be prevented, whilst they suffer so many Isa. 3.4.
Eccl. 10.16.
Boys, (who know better how to Court Ladies then create Laws) Commission of
Array-men, men whose estates were but lately (and are still for ought I know)
under Sequestration for Delinquency, to reside, sit, vote, and act amongst them.

I shall insist no longer on this, but proceed to the next thing observable in
this part of your Examination, where you affirm for truth, that which (in my
judgment) is a gross mistake.

That those who have a Legislative power, have not altogether a limited power;
but that is no more in this (say you) then in all Parliaments.

This I utterly deny, and do contrarily affirm, that those who have power to
make Laws in England, have several bounds and limits, which by no means they
are to exceed; one is this.

1. The Freedom and Birthrights of the people is one main limit; for it is
not with us as with other Nations, we are not under that vassallage and
thraledome the Turks or French are, if that were our condition, then indeed
Stat pro ratione voluntas, they were as limitles, as those States be, and may
impose what they please upon us, and make their cursed wills the peoples cruel
Law: but (praised be God) that is not the condition of this Kingdom yet,
though twice designed to be subjected to slavery within these half dozen
years; we are yet Freemen and not left to the limitlesse disposing of an
arbitrary State: this therefore is one cord which binds a Legislative power in
this Kingdom, from imposing and laying what loads they please on the free
people thereof.

2. The peoples knowledge of their own Liberties, is a second great hinderance
to this limitlesse power, it is not unlikely, (if the Parliament continue their
extraordinary taxes, and pressures on the Country, after the disbanding of
this Army, and use such violence against the Commons of England as they have
done by their Committees, and other unjust Officers, and not hear and answer
the Petitions of the afflicted) but that they will be all ready with their
clubs, and other weapons on their shoulders, to stand upon their own guards.
But I hope, they shall have no cause for it, and that the Parliament of England
will not take such a boundless power unto themselves, as you would make them
and us believe is their due.

3. Right reason, which in cases conducing to this end, has no better Judge
then the sensible computation of the vulgar, and this is a great stop and
obstruction to that limitlesse Legislative power, for nothing that exceeds the
confines of right reason, according to common acceptance in cases of this
nature, may or ought be pressed on a free Nation; if they do, the imposers are
both liable to answer them, and like to bear them themselves. Non solum quod
licet, sed quid est conveniens est considerandum, nihil quod est inconveniens
est licitum.

4. Scripture, with which right reason accords, and which is as sufficient,
full and ample, for regulation and government of the outward man, Am. 2.4, 6,
7. and 1.11.
as the inward, and therefore binds and limits all Legislative powers in this
Kingdom, to compose, constitute and enact Laws expressly according thereunto.
Therefore these things seriously weighed in the just scales of indifferent
judgments, do (to me) clearly prove, that there is undoubtedly a restriction of
Legislative powers: yet I shall freely lay down my own, and submit to sounder
judgments, when the contrary to this that is spoken, is made apparent. The next
thing considerable in this part of your Examination, is this: And that so long
as the calamities of the times did necessitate Armies, there must needs be
burdens laid, even to more then ordinary pressures; but was that the
Parliaments fault, or those that did oppose them?

Here is another mistake, that you go about to vindicate the Parliament from
that which the Army never intended to charge them with: it is acknowledged by
all men, that in cases of more then ordinary need, the people must be
necessitated to undergo extraordinary pressures; neither is the blame laid
altogether on the Parliament, but mostly on those, who (contrary to Law)
constrained them thereunto.

In the next place you propound this Quaere: And that these pressures and
burdens must be still kept upon the people, is it the fault of the Parliament,
or the Army that will not disband?

It is already made manifest by what precedes, that it is neither the fault of
the Army, that they are not disbanded, or the Country oppressed. For, it is
not in the power of the Army to oppress or burden the Country, though they
would do it, unless the Parliament instate them into it, or enforce them to
such exigences, that they are necessitated thereunto; for if they should, the
whole Kingdom (to whom they are but an inconsiderable party) would quickly
oppose and destroy them: but they well know the fault is not in the Army, which
makes them so apt on all occasions to side with them in those things that are
just. And let all men judge, whose fault is it, the Army will not disband, or
the Country are oppressed? the Parliaments or the Armies? when they neither
bring (after seven years sitting) Liberty or Freedom to this freeborn Nation,
(nothing in the world, but their own wills obstructing them) or give the Army
any lawful, honest, or reasonable encouragements to disband, but contrarily
have used all means tending to the mutinous and dishonorable disbanding
thereof, as by fair proffers to divide the Officers from their Soldiers, and
the Soldiers from their Officers, and when that could not take expected
effect, then to divide the whole Army from the Country, and the Country from
them, This was done when the Headquarters were at Saffron Walden.
witness that Petition framed by some Members of Parliament and fent into Essex
to get hands to it, and then present it to the Parliament again. Again, they
declared against that Petition, but intended to be presented them from the
Army, without hearing them plead for themselves, wherein they desired nothing
but the auditing of their Accounts, their Debenters to be cast up,
Communicated to the Army at the Rendevous nigh. Royston.
some satisfaction for Arrears in hand, security for the rest, and an Act of
Indemnity, not as their Votes import, where they say, that an Act of
Indemnity shall be made for the wrongs, oppressions, misdemeanors, etc. of
the Army, for if the Armies defense of the Parliaments Cause have relation to
any such Acts the Kingdom may thank the Parliament and require satisfaction
from them, for putting swords in their hands, but or things done in the just
prosecution of theirs and the kingdoms service: also provision to be made for
the relief of the widows and children of those sluine in the States service,
and for marmed soldiers; yea they were so exceeding imperious and high in this
particular, as if they had been absolute Monarchs, and intended no less then
the utter ruin and overthrow of this so gallant and powerful an Army, for
providing for their own securities, defending the peoples Liberties and
Privileges against their predominant encroachments

Moreover, because you would have the Kingdom take notice, that the reason of
their burdens and oppressions is because the Army will not disband, if they had
disbanded at that time and upon those terms, (whilst persisting in their
just Petition) how deplorable the Kings, Kingdoms and their State had been, the
shallowest capacity can easily determine. Had they not been given over to the
arbitrary, merciless power of their malicious adversaries, (the impeached
Members) whose designs on the Army and Kingdom were immediately effected
after the dissipation of this Army? Was not this the opening of a fair gap
thereunto? Would not the Authors of that illegal Declaration have seized on
the persons of every one in the Army, after disbanding, where ever they found
them, and have hanged them up one by one, the just desert of the States
enemies, as that unjust Declaration would make them? Does not their Covenant
bind them to this, the Army being (as before) declared enemies? and if they
should attempt to plead for themselves, there is no way left, they are declared
obstructers of the relief of Ireland, notwithstanding his Excellency was then
ordering a party for that service upon the Parliaments own terms, and
enemies to the peace of the Kingdom, though from the beginning the Army freely
adventured their lives for to obtain a safe peace for it, yea and that
Declaration remain and still would have been uncancelled on Record, had not
they (with the blessing of God) prevented it; and who once durst speak a word
in their behalf, or expostulate the case for them?

Object. But happily you will object, that the Parliament did proffer the Army
an Act of Indemnity, by which they were secured from that Declaration, that it
could lay no hold on them.

Answ. 1. To this I answer: first, That Act of indemnity was only for the
wrongs, oppressions, and misdemeanors, etc. committed by the Army, in tempore
and loco Belli, in time and place of War, whereof, as I said before, they
were not guilty, unless the sincere prosecution of their service be wrong,
oppression, misdemeanour, etc. and therefore that Act cannot secure them from
this Declaration.

2. Again, the Army Petition, and their persisting in the presentation
thereof, was not in the time of war, but after the dissolution and
dissipation of the Kings party, and reducing his Garrisons; therefore that Act
of Indemnity, which was only intended for things done in tempore, and loco
belli, in time and place of War, cannot secure them from that Declaration,
for persisting in their Petition, which was done neque in tempore ne^ loco
belli, neither in time, or place of War, but in times of Peace.

Therefore (I say) these things well considered, in a judicious breast, there is
but little sound reason (that I know of) why the Kingdom should either imagine,
the Armies not disbanding, is the cause of their burdens, and pressure, or the
Army should disband on such slight and unsafe terms, especially the
Parliaments own principle (viz.) that obedience binds not men to cut their own
throats, giving them sufficient encouragement, to make better terms for
themselves, the King, and Kingdom. And now I shall proceed to the next thing
laid down by you; which is briefly this.

That the Parliament have judged the forces raised by the King, were to invade
the peoples rights and liberties, and the just power, and rights of this
Kingdom in Parliament, and did publish the same in their Declarations, and
thereupon did raise both this and several other Armies, to oppose and resist
those forces: but (say you) how these Declarations give them a right to judge,
what these liberties, just power or rights are, either of the Parliament, or
people, is (I think) past all humane understanding to conceive, neither the
laws of God, nor the laws of the Kingdom having made them Judges, nor having
put any of the weights or measures of Justice, in the behalf of others into
their hands.

It is not denied but the Parliament did judge (as by right to them it
belonged) that the forces raised by the King were to invade the liberties of
the people, and that they published the same in their Declarations, and raised
both this and several other Armies for the prevention thereof, and
preservation of the people.

But here again is the Army misapprehended by you, and taken up, before they
are down, they go not about to draw any conclusion of that nature (nor can you
have any grounds for such slight surmises from their expressions, or actions)
as to the matter of being Judges of liberty and freedom, from the Parliaments
Declarations, although that in it self, be a case dubious, and (therefore)
disputable enough, for if they must not know, and consequently judge of liberty
and freedom, how must or dare they fight (which you well approve of) for them,
unless they fight, for they know not what, or make use of an implicit faith,
and believe all the Parliament say to be true, as men infallible, which to the
understanding of any reasonable capacity, is but a rotten, trayle, and unsound
foundation for them to build on) but the Parliament themselves have judged of
their own privileges, and the liberties of the whole Kingdom, and have
several times declared what they are, and that when the people are grieved, or
oppressed, they should immediately repair to them, by way of Petition and
redress, should be forthwith granted; this is one of the greatest privileges
of the free people of this Kingdom, have according to Magna Charta, Pet. of
Right, and their own many and frequent Declarations, but alas! how has this
been perfideously perverted? (as if there were not the least knowledge, or
fear of God amongst men) and the people (under a fair colored pretense of
peace, and freedom) altogether subjugated to war, vassalage and thraldom,
(had not the wisdom and power of God prevented it) this appeared by the late
commotions occasioned by some Members of Parliament, and their unjust refusal
of several legal Petitions precented unto them, which (notwithstanding the
Laws of the Kingdom, and their own Declarations to the contrary) were
rejected; yea, and with the greatest infamy, and shame that could be, consumed
with fire in several parts of London, by the hands of the common Hangman, so
insolently and proudly have some of them behaved themselves toward the free
people of England.

Therefore (I say) if the Parliament shall declare to the whole Kingdom, what
their immunites, rights and freedoms are, and also, what of due belongs to
thmeselves, whilst sitting in Parliament, and then shall go about (under the
painted show of breach of privilege) to anticipate, and subvert the ancient
privileges of the people of England; must not the Army, (who were raised by
the Kingdom for their defense) as in the strictest bonds, of duty and
conscience, they are obliged, once open their lips, to crave and beg, for the
people their proper rights, but they must (in an infamous manner) be termed
Judges? And now Sir I appeal to your self, if the Army ever went about to
determine any causes in the Kingdom, except what they did by the Parliaments
permission, with their Swords, against the public enemy, only they have
represented their own, and the peoples often rejected grievances to them, by
way of humble Petition; and if this be a contracting power or right, from the
Parliaments Declarations, of being Judges of their own, and the peoples
liberties, powers, and rights, let the world judge betwixt them and you.

For that you say, the Army can only do (what your erring fancy has suggested
to you) by the length of their Swords, which can be no good Standard, for it
will be liable to alteration, when a longer Sword comes: I say their Swords are
so long, and so good a Standard, that it never yet, (I know not what it may do)
met with a longer, to remove, or alter it, from prosecution, (with zeal to
Gods glory, and the Kingdom benefit) the righteous cause, they have in the
sincerity of their hearts undertaken, in behalf of the King, Parliament, and
Kingdom. Then you proceed thus.

And when the people of this Kingdom, have understood, and considered this, it
is not likely, they will leave the settled course of Law, and Justice, in the
known Courts of the Kingdom, to be judged by any one who can raise the
greatest tumult.

Indeed now you have paid the Army to some purpose, if the people were
surprised with such a spirit of delusion, as to believe the deviating dictates
of your thoughts; and now I desire you or any of your Competitioners to
demonstrate, in any one particular (or confess you injure them) wherein this
Army have taken upon them, the place or authority of Judges, or hindered the
people, from following the settled course of Law and Justice in the known Courts
of the Kingdom, Or that his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, at whom you chiefly
aim, ever intended or offered to judge any thing, but what the Parliament have
determined already, unless those things which conduce to the weal of his
Army, the very terror of Englands enemies, and all other Soldiers in England,
and Wales, which in duty, and conscience he is bound to do.

And whereas you speak of a tumult, by which you mean this Army, or otherwise
you overthrow the rest of your discourse, you do the Parliament themselves more
wrong and injustice, under the specious pretense of a friend, in one word, then
ever the Army did, or durst, though they could do them, in their whole life
time, nay, as much as the Kings party have ever done, in expression, since the
war began; For if the Army be a Tumult, they were raised by the Parliament,
whereby it appears, you make them, whom you se strive to defend the Authors
of this Tumult.

Which must needs follow say you, if they, meaning the Kingdom, allow this
Army, suppose it 14000. men to be Judges now, then any 150000. in the Kingdom
may judge the Army, and a greater number then ad infinitum; by which it does
appear, that the Army making themselves Judges in these cases, does overthrow
and take away the Ordinance of God, and Magistracy; then which amongst men, I
cannot imagine what is a greater impiety.

Truly Sir, I know no greater impiety amongst men, tending to public harm and
prejudice, then to misapprehend the serene and candid thoughts of others, if
what preceeds this consequence of yours had been true, as appears it is not,
then this would have held good; for it is a certain maxim, that if 14000.
men, in a tumultuous way, be Judges now, then any 150000. men, in the Kingdom,
may judge the Army, and a greater number them ad infinitum. But your
misapplication of this conclusion, is the spoil of it; had you but turned this
from the Innocent, and laid it on the guilty, I mean the impeached Members,
then rem acu tetigoras, you had laid the saddle on the right horse, and if that
course of theirs, were not directly to overthrow the Ordinance of God, and
Magistracy, when they went about to judge, without the least pre^en^^ or show
in the earth for it, or reason given, not only the Army, but the whole
Kingdom, with a company of rude deboist Reformadoes, who better know, how to
raise mutinies, swear, damn, and domineere, and make black pots salute each
others crowns, then to do their Country any true and faithful service in the
field, then will I forfeit my judgment utterly; for they were such good friends
to Magistracy, that by their unparalleld barbarous behavior, they forced the
Speakers of both Houses, and the rest of the honest Members to fly for
liberty, if not for life and make this Army their chief refuge, and all
because they judged it meet: They armed, and disarmed whom they pleased in
London, killed one or two, whose lives were worth many thousands of theirs,
manned their works, planted their Ordinance against the Parliament themselves,
then constrained to reside with the Army, and this also was because they judged
it fit. Had this Army done these, or the like incomparable actions against the
Parliament and Kingdom, then might you have safely said, that they overthrew
both the Ordinance of God and Magistracy, then which amongst men, I know not a
greater impiety. And therefore now see, if this Army, whom you would make the
Kingdom believe, would be their Judges, to make them more odious in the eyes
of the soon deceived vulgar, had not instead of being Judges, stuck firm and
entire to the Parliament, and again interposed their lives and fortunes
betwixt them and the face of danger, and that in the very pinch and nick of
hazard, and put those grand Judges of England, into their own proper places
again, with honor and safety, what Judges should we have had, but a company
of impeached Traitors, with their rivalls, who better deserve a three legged
stool to hang on, then seats in the Parliament house to sit on. and any
longer to disturb the Kingdom, by their hellish plots, and practices; and if
this be such an impiety as you would have us imagine it to be, then let any
impartial man in England judge.

But not to stay any longer here, let us proceed to the next part of your
examination; which you say down thus.

Besides their refusing to obey the Parliament, under whose Command they are,
or ought to be, is against many particular precepts, Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. 2
Pet. 2.10, Jud^^. 8.11.
and directions in the word of God, as you may find them laid down in the
Margent.

1. To this I answer first, that they never refused obedience to the Parliament
in any thing, except when they commanded them to destroy themselves, through
the prevalency of a wicked and sinister party in the House, and then they did
no more then what the Parliaments own Principles led them unto, as is already
plainly manifested.

2. For the Scriptures you allege, I shall i^sist on the first only, as the
full scope, and substance of all the other; the words are these. Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers for there is no power, but of
God; the powers that be are ordained of God. This Text of Scripture to them who
rightly understand it, makes nothing at all for you, as shall appear
hereafter, this power the Apostle speaks of in this place, (with which the Law
of this Kingdom and the Parliaments own forecited Declarations, do admirably,
and truly concur) is not meant the Persons, or personal commands of any, but
the just established laws of a Kingdom to which obedience, active, or passive
must be given; for this power, as ^o me the Apostle seems to dispute it
himself the better to s^t it ou^ of controversy, is that which is placed
originally, Dec. ^un. 14.1647. Romans 13.
and fundamentally, according to that wise observation of the Armies, in the
Office, and but Ministerially in the persons; observe both the first, and
second verses, and you shall find the Apostle says nothing of persons as if
he did not mean them at all in that place, only enioynes all to yield
obedience, ver. 3.
and subjection to the higher powers which is the Law of a Kingdom; and in the
next verse he speaks of the Administration of that higher power in these
words, for Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil; ver. 4.
and in the following verse he says, for he is the Minister of God to thee for
good, but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, etc.

3. But thirdly, the Apostles expression has an universal extent, and there
is never a rational living soul under the Sun, exempted therefrom, from the
Prince, to the poorest man that sits on the threshold, but every soul must, if
they disobey not this injunction, be subject to the higher powers: which
powers, as is manifest, are not the pleasures, or wills of great men (because
they themselves are not acquitted from subjection to the higher powers) but of
the established well grounded Law of a Kingdom, by general consent, and for
this cause is that infallible Gramaticall Rule, nemo sibi imperare po^est,
which is the reason Schoolmen cannot frame a prima persona imperativi modi,
for indeed, who is it that can command himself? and if no man, how can a
Prince be subject to the higher powers, he being the highest power himself,
when he cannot command himself? unless you will allow with me, that the Law
is the highest power, and he is under the Command thereof as well as the
meanest: so that it appears, if the Prince be not subject to the Law of the
Kingdom, as well as others, the Apostles words (which are expressly that every
Soul, that is, man, woman, and Child, to their abilities, must be subject to
the higher powers, that is the Law whereunto all men are confined, are spoke in
vain, which were impiety once to imagine.

4. Then fourthly) if your assersion be true, which is in effect thus, that all
the Commands, (whether just, or unjust, or else you had as good said nothing)
if the Parliament must be obeyed, and so make them an unbounded Parliament, and
without all Law, which is more t^^n ever they desired themselves, then will you
make a clear antipathy, and disproportion, betwixt this of Paul's, and those of
Hosea, and Micah, with diverse other Texts, which Scriptures decipher very truly
the Apostles meaning, and freeth him from your gross imputation. The Prophet
Hosea says, Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in Judgment, Hosea 5.11. 1 Kings
16.26.
and the reason is, because he willingly walked after the Commandment: Now
what those Commands were, examine but the 1. Kings, where it is said, that Omri
(King of Israel) wrought evil in the eyes of the Lord, and did worse then all
that were before him; for he walked in all the way of Jeroboam, the Son of
Nobat, and in his sin, wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the Lord God
of Israel to anger with his vanities: From both which places you may observe,
that it was not only accounted to Israel for a sin, to obey the unjust
Council and Commands of King Omri, though their lawful King, but that they
should also be attended with the desert of sin, to wit, to be oppressed, and
broken in judgment, etc. And that which confirmed both these places, Micah 6.
from 13. to 16.
is that of Micah, where he threatens the Children of Israel, that they shall
eat and not be satisfied, sow but not reap, etc. and in the last verse he
gives the reason thereof, in these words; for the Statutes of Omri are kept,
and all the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their Councels, that I
should make thee a desolation and the Inhabitants thereof an hissing, therefore
ye shall bear the reproach of my people.

Now how shall these Prophets and the Apostle be reconciled, unless Paul's
meaning in that place is, that obedience must be given to the just Law of a
Kingdom, and only to that; and that Magistrates must not be obeyed, in their
unjust and illegal Commands, though lawful Magistrates, for Paul says, they
must be subject to the higher powers; the Prophet thunders out threatenings
against them for being subject to unjust powers, though (as I said before) a
lawful Magistrate. So that it is clear, that the Apostles meaning is not, that
subjection must be given to men's persons or personal Commands, Pro. 28.4.
Zeph. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
but to those higher Powers, (to wit) the Law of the Kingdom wherewith men are
entrusted, some with one part, some with another, and ought not to exceed the
limits thereof.

King James, upon this very ground, when he was arrested for debt, told the
Officer, that he who made Laws, must himself obey Laws, and thereupon paid
the debt, and never blamed him that arrested him, for so doing. From all that
is spoken in this particular, the ensuing Syllogismes, are inevitably extracted.

1.
Paul says that every Soul must be subject to the higher Powers. But King,
Parliament, and all other Magistrates are within the limits of that number.
Ergo, King and Parliament must be subject to the higher Powers.
All powers that are not given, are not of God. But Powers usurped are not
given. Ergo, Powers usurped are not of God.
3
Every soul ought to be subject to the Higher Powers given, and to none else.
But these Higher Powers that are usurped, are not given. Ergo, No soul ought
to be subject to Higher Powers not given.
4
Those Powers that be not given from God, are no powers. But usurped Powers are
not given from God. Ergo, Usurped Powers are no Powers.
5
Those Powers that are no Powers, ought not to be obeyed. But usurped Powers
are no Powers. Ergo, Usurped Powers ought not to be obeyed.
The probation of these Arguments, is evident from the very Words of the
Apostle and Prophets, in the places before quated: therefore I will not spend
time (my ordinary employments not suffering me) any longer therein; only give
me leave to digress a little, and observe (as I desire also the Courteous
Reader would) some passages of Scripture, which (in my ordinary reading) I have
met withal, very considerable for all men's observation, especially those in
Authority; wherein all my behold, what the dismal ends of those Magistrates
are, who take delight in oppression and unrighteousness; I shall name diverse
places, and refer them to the deliberate debate of the Reader, they are quoted
in the Margent; I shall only insist a little on the last, Job. 27.13, 14, 15,
Prove. 14 31 and 22.16.22, 23. Mat 3 5. Amo. 4.1, 2, 3.
Am. 4.1. his words are these, Hear this word ye Kins of Bashan, that are in
the Mountain of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which
say to their Masters, Bring, and let us drink: This Prophet, though somewhat
mysterious, and metaphorical here, yet, compared with other places, will be
made more clear, and intelligible: By these Kine, Hosea means, the
forementioned Omri, which the other wicked Kings of Israel, and their
pernicious Councels: for it was that Omri that bought this Hill Samaria, of one
Shemer, for ten talents of silver, and built there on the City Samaria, where
he lived, dyed, and was buried. Those were they who oppressed the poor, and
crushed the needy, which said to their In some translations to their Lords. 1
King. 16.24.28. Mark that expression.
Masters (to wit) (the oppressed poor, and crushed needy) Bring, and let us
drink. But what was the issue of all this? The Lord God has sworn by his
Holiness (a greater oath could he not sweat) that lo the days shall come
upon you that he will take you away with bookt, v. 2.
and your A sore judgment. v. 3. Strange posting from the judgment of God, as
in Rev. 6.15, 16.
Posterity with fish-bookt. And ye shall go out at the breeches, every Cow at
that which is before her, and ye shall cast them into the Palace (some
translations have it, cast away the things of the Palace) says the Lord. ^Thus
much by way of digression, let us now proceed to what follows, which you lay
down thus;

For the great complaints made to them, although it were false that is reported
[as I have cause to believe] That men are sent from the Army to get hands to
Petitions to themselves, thereby to draw the eyes of the people after them; yet
I do conceive such Petitions ought not to be received by any, who either by
Protestation, or Covenant, have sworn to mean the just power and privileges of
the Parliament, to whom of right it does belong to hear, and determine, all
the grievances of the people, not remediable in other Ordinary Courts of
Justice.

I perceive now, that although you want true matter to tax^ the Army with, yet
you want not ill will enough, to insist upon reports, that are merely
groundless, (which I fear did first, arise from your own brain; nor is there
any but will marvel at you, for undertaking to examine the lawfulness of the
Armies proceedings, and then to bottom your Examination upon bare and unjust
reports.

This is capable of no other Answer (it being so untrue) but to assure you, and
the Kingdom, that you have wronged the Army herein, and I fear that this is
but a mere complement, framed to hold up your groundless discourse; and am apt
to think, that if you had any such thing against the Army, they should have
heard of it with open mouth ere this day; but (blessed be God) that the mouths
of gainsayers are stopped.

You proceed and say, There (meaning the House) the people may be heard,
without the forcible recommendation of an Army; I wish you would tell the
Kingdom, when the Army did by force, recommend any Petition, or thrust on
those things that upon serious debate, have been rejected, as prejudicial to
the Public, as you affirm: or else you will bring such a calumny upon your
self for these reports (and in print too) without the least probation of them,
in any circumstance of time, or otherwise, that (were your Name to your Book)
you could never wipe off again.

Now to the last clause in this part of your Examination, I only say this, That
the Army never gave encouragements to such Petitions, nor Went about to set
themselves as a new Tribunal, which is, and ought to be believed, till the
contrary be proved by you who accuse them, which will never be, whilst the Sun
and Moon endure. Now we will go forward to the next place.

For the examples of Scotland, Netherlands, Portugal, and some proceedings in
this Parliament, which you urge for your Warrant, I must answer ingenerall,
that presidents are poor proofs, to justify actions; and if admitted, there
is nothing so bad, that might not obtain such a Justification; It is a warrant
from some law, that must make every action lawful. And although my business
be not to search into the grounds, or proceedings, upon which other Nations
have taken up arms; yet, being called unto it, I must clear the
misapplication to Scotland, etc.

To this I answer, that your examination is full of misapprehensions, and you
make your mistakes, the Armies meaning; who intended not that examples should
be proofs, but presidents, neither do they diminish ought from the lawfulness
of their Cause (for Exempla illustrant, non restringunt Legeem) and that they
ground not the lawfulness of their actions on them, but upon their Commission,
and the Parliaments own Exposition of the Law, in their Declarations
frequently communicated to them, which Commission, and Declarations, are their
sufficient Warrants, as formerly manifested.

And now you have done all you can to divide the Parliament and Army, you would
divide the Army from the Scots, by falsely charging the Army with a
misapplication to Scotland; you say, (but I know not who will believe you) that
you are called (by whom I cannot imagine) to clear the misapplication to
Scotland. To this I answer distinctly.

1 That you have taken in hand is of public concernment, and therefore it
requires a public call, and who should give this public call besides the
Parliament of England or Scotland, I am ignorant of. But if they did give you a
call, [me thinkes] they should patronize it, and not suffer it to go abroad
into the wide world to deceive, without either authority or name. But [let the
Kingdom consider, and they will scarce credit your loose reports] how great a
prejudice it would be to the honor, both of the Parliament of England, and
that of Scotland, that a private man should be entrusted, with so public a
business, when they have both so many wise and judicious men in both
Assemblies, who know what their own intents and proceedings at the beginning
were, and can better free themselves from misapplications [if any were] then
any one in England, that is, in a manner, a stranger to them.

2. Again, I will here lay down verbatim all that the Army have spoken of the
Scots, in their Declaration, which will more manifestly discover your envy,
and vindicate the Army from your aspersion, these are their words, That the
Soldiery may lawfully hold the hands of that General who will turn his Canon
against his Army, on purpose to destroy them; The Seamen the hands of that
Pilot, who wilfully runs his ship upon a Rock (as our Brethren of Scotland
argued) this is one thing the Army have spoken of them, and if there be not
more for the justification of the Scots here, then misapplication of their
proceedings at first, the weakest wit can soon determine.

Another passage wherein the name of Scotland is used, is this, and these two
are all they say of them. And truly such Kingdoms, as have according both to
the Law of Nature, and Nations, appeared to the vindication, and defense of
their just rights, and liberties, have proceeded much higher, as our Brethren
of Scotland, who in the first beginning of these late differences, associated
in Covenant, from the very same grounds and principles, (having no visible
form, either of Parliament or King to countenance them) and as they were
therein justified and protected by their own, and this Kingdom also, to we
justly expect to be.

Of the proceedings of Scotland in the particular, the Army neither have, nor
can make any application at all; because the Scots had no visible form, either
of King or Parliament, to countenance them at the beginning; but this Army had
the favor of the Parliament of England only their sights were veiled by the
subtle interposition of misapprehensions; by the impeached Members of their
confederates, until they were removed: so that the Army can make no
application at all, (and therefore no misapplication in this particular) for
the cause aforesaid.

3. But grant the Scots had the Countenance of the Estates of Scotland: so had
this Army the favor of the Parliament of England, (as shall be afterward
declared) only their proceedings were obstructed (as aforesaid) by those grand
stumbling blocks, the accused Members, therefore if the Army had opposed their
case to Scotland, then (I pray) what misapplication were there here.

4. Then again, if both these were granted for truth, first, that the
multitude in Scotland, had the countenance of the Magistrates thereof.
Secondly, that the Army in England, had not the favor of the Magistrates of
that Kingdom; yet this shift also, would fail you; for the Parliaments of
England and Scotland, have declared, that obedience binds not men to cut their
own threats, and also, that opposition to the personal Commands of
Magistrates, though accompanied with their presence, if it be not against their
Laws, and authority, but in maintenance thereof, is not opposition against
them, but defense of them, and upon this very ground, and for this cause, the
Scots (though as strictly bound to the contrary, as this Doctrine is to oppose
the Parliament) took up Arms against their King at the beginning; whereby,
and by what is before spoken (relation being thereunto had) it appears there
is no such misapplication to the Scots, (as your discourse imports) in the
maine, which is the defense of the Kingdom, and the just rights, powers, and
privileges of the people; but only in circumstance, which is the want of
favor to the Magistrates of the Kingdom, which is not so considerable, when
it is put in the balance, with the 1 King. 12.16 Lev. 24.20. Exodus 21.24, 25.
Deuteronomy. 19.21 Mat. 5.38.
weal, and preservation of the Republike. Nature will endeavor to preserve it
self, and therefore gives all Creatures means, and ways, and puts them in a
capacity to use them, for their own defense against violence, vassalage, 1
King. 12.16 Lev. 24.20. Exodus 21.24, 25. Deuteronomy. 19.21 Mat. 5.38.
breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc.

5. This examination is confuted as unlawful by the principles of reason,
which says that nihil quod est contra rationem est disputandum; and if this be
not clearly contra rationem, I know not what is; for you go about to undo
that, which never was done, or empty a vessel that never was full, to
vindicate the Scots, and Parliament of England, from a misapplication, when
there was none at all made.

6. But this I believe is your great aim, (if any were so rash as credit you)
to divide the people of this Kingdom from the Army, by suggesting to them that
the Army have not that favor, and countenance of the Magistracy, of this
Kingdom, as the Scots had of that, and that the Army would tax the Scots with
want of countenance from the Magistrates of that Kingdom, the better to
justify their own present actions; whereby you would render the Army odious,
and force the people to believe them to be lawless, and proceed in
unwarrantable courses, against, and without the knowledge, or consent of the
Parliament of England that so upon these grounds you may with more facility
persuade the Country and Kingdom, to band themselves, and destroy them. But
that the people may be undeceived, you reproved, and the Army justified, it is
apparent, that one of these two things you aim at.

1. Either to make the 11 impeached Members the supreme Council of England.

2. Or, that this Parliament which now sit are no Parliament, and so have
nothing to do with the Government of the Land. If you can prove the first of
these that Massy, with his accomplices, were the supreme Council of the
Land, then indeed, you cast, and overthrow the Army, for they never had the
least favor, or countenance from them, not was it ever desired in all, or any
part of their Actions.

But if you will acknowledge the Gentlemen who now sit in the House, to be the
supreme Court, then I tell you, (and the whole Kingdom) that the Army have
their favor, and furtherance, (both acting according to the tenor of the Law)
in their actions hitherto; or else why did they declare them their Army,
conferr such dignities, and Honors on Sir Thomas Fairfax of late, and when
they met with uncivil opposition in their Parliamentary proceedings, make them
their ulrimum refugium: And when the people come to hear this, that the Army
have acted according to the rules of Law, for their freedoms, and also that
they have the Parliaments countenance therein, they will give you but small
thanks for blinding their eyes, and will be apt to retain, as they ought a
better, and higher conceit, and esteem of the Army.

Having showed the grounds whereon the Parliament proceeded, to the raising of
an Army, you say, that upon this occasion, and just quarrel, they raised
several Armies, wherein were men of very great Honor, power, and interest in
the Kingdom, It appears to be so by this Army, but (blessed be God) never any
of their Armies (except what has been done by this Army) did refuse (that ever
I heard of) to obey, when the Parliament (for the good and ease of the
Kingdom, nay, although it were to lay them aside, and raise others in their
room) commanded them to disband.

1. Here I answer first, that never any thing was proposed to other Armies, as
to the point of disbanding, before this Army was raised, and had by their
fidelity and courage with the blessing of God upon their endeavors, made them
useless; and therefore how could you hear that refused that was never
proffered.

2. Had there any thing of that nature been put to others before this Army was
raised, I question whether they, as well as this Army would not have refused it.

3. It could not be accounted wisdom in the Parliament to make any such
proposal, to any of their Armies, before this was set forth, or at this time;
their enemies being so strong, and they so weak, as that sometimes they could
not keep the field, and when they were at the strongest, they could spare none
to disband.

4. But fourthly, if the point of disbanding had been proposed, and they
willingly submit thereto, they had not so much cause to the contrary, as this
Army has: and therefore may better submit to the Parliaments personal
Commands, then this Army car; so that this appears as groundles, as all the
rest. Then you say for those instances of the Soldiers holding the hands of
their General when he would turn his Cannon against his Army, and the Seamen,
the hands of their Pilot, who willingly runs his Ship upon a Rock; I must say,
that in those and such like cases of surprisall, or extremity, where there is
none to judge, nor no time or place for judgment, the danger being eminent,
and the evil intention evident, the Law of nature does teach, and justify
opposition, to the unjust, and tyrannous power of superiors, in this is
granted, all that can be expected, and therefore I will not spend time about
it, and it was upon this very ground the Army proceeded, and prosecuted their
late actions, the just rules of nature binding them thereunto. But something
here wants clearing, left by overslipping thereof, you take advantage of
further objection; you say, that in these and such like cases of surprisall or
extremity, where there is none to judge, nor no time or place for judgment,
the danger being eminent, and the evil intention evident, the law of nature
does teach, and justify opposition, etc. That the Army was surprised, and
forced to an extremity, is apparent by many particulars, I shall only
instance that, which the Army has largely mentioned in their charge against
the impeached Members, if the reader please to look into the Charge, it may
give further satisfaction; I shall repeat some part of the 8. Article, where
the Army charge Col. Harley, with a false letter which he brought into the
House, against his Lieut. Colonel Pride.
Lieutenant Col. without any name to it, and in the last part of that S.
Article, it is said; and although the substance of the said letter was most
untrue, and no Author thereof appeared, or could be produced, although a
Committee was appointed for examination thereof, and it was much pressed the
Author should be discovered; yet the said Col. Harley, Sir John Clotworthy,
and Sir William Waller, did so avow the reality of the said letter, and that
the contents thereof would be made good, as that thereby, and by other false
suggestions of theirs against the Army, they procured the House upon long
debate which held till about 8. of the clock at night, to order that a
Committee of 5. Members (whereof the said Mr. Hollis is one) should prepare a
Declaration to be brought into the House the next morning, signifying the
Houses dislike of the proceedings of the Army upon that Petition; as by the
said Order may appear, upon which settling of the said business for that
night, most of the Members departed, as conceiveing nothing would be done
thereupon, till the next day, and that then they might have a free debate
concerning the same; but the House still continuing to sit (upon dispatch of
some letters formerly ordered) the said Mr. Hollis by the same combination, and
in further prosecution of the said evil designs, having of himself, without
the Committee, prepared a Declaration against the Petition it self, contrary
to the intention and direction of the said order, and contrary to the rules of
Justice, and usual course of Parliament, did the same night, about 10. of the
clock, on purpose to surprise the House, present the same Declaration to the
House, whereby the said Petitioners were without being heard, declared enemies
to the State, and obstructers of the relief of Ireland; if they persisted
therein, as by the same Declaration, relation being thereunto had appears, and
did procure it to be then passed accordingly, to the great dishonor of the
Parliament, and their proceedings, to the insufferable injury, the just
provocation, discouragement, and discontent of the Army, to the trouble and
danger of the whole Kingdom, to the hindering of the relief of Ireland, and
other the evil consequences, in the said general Charge expressed; now if
this be not a surprising the Army, and forcing them to the extremest
exigencies, (when they are in this illegal inhumane manner declared enemies to
the State, and obstructers of the relief of Inelana, for no cause, but
petitioning for these things, that relate to them as Soldiers) then let the
Kingdom judge, but to proceed,

You say where there is no Judge, nor no time or place for judgment, etc. to
this I answer, there were Judges, and time and place for Judgment, but those
Judges were overpowred, by the dangerous distilling influences, of the
maliguant impeached Members, as appears by the former passages, and the
Parliaments Order, which Members since they were removed, how peaceably have
the Parliament ( England's Judges) and their Army concurred, notwithstanding,
there are yet some (though not so powerful as the former) left amongst them,
(I hope they will not be suffered to continue long) who would hinder the
concord betwixt both parties, and retard the Parliament from executing justice,
and judgment, and answering the Army in their fair and profitable demands, for
the Kingdom and themselves.

But now to the next clause which is this; The danger being eminent, and their
ill intention evident the Law of Nature does teach, and justify opposition, to
the unjust and tyrannous power of Superiors; It is apparent, that the former
proceedings of the Parliament (by the persuasion of the accused Members) were
eminently and evidently dangerous, and evil, to the Army (to the hazard of
their estates who had any, loss of their due arreares, and forfeiture of their
liberties, if not their very lives) therefore I will not stand to aggravate the
business now, it not agreeing with my nature and work to use tautologies, or
enlarge my self by the needless multiplication of words, which is condemned
for vanity;

The next thing you lay down thus; But it is no ground for a rule where a
judgment may be had, or expected, as now in the case betwixt the Parliament and
Army.

This will stand you in as little stead as the rest; For since those pernicious
spirits [who compass Sea and Land to make a proselyte] have been separated
from the Parliament, there has been no need of a judgment; for both Parliament
and Army, do admirably agree, without any apparent dangerous clashing, or
opposition at all. Prove. 29.2.
When the righteous are in Authority the people rejoice: but when the wicked
bear the rule, the people mourn.

In the next place you say; These instances might have been more colourably to
the point, if the Parliament had drawn out Forces against the Army, to have
cut them off: then notwithstanding the obedience they owe to the Parliament,
they might possible have defended themselves against such Force. There be many
things in this assertion, that would have particular and distinct answers, but
I shall reply to your assumption in general thus; That a piece of Ordinance is
made for defense, as well as a Target, and it is as lawful for the people of
England, to invade the Countries of those, who would surprise theirs, as to
fight with them when they are landed; and it is as good policy to prepare for
an enemy, though but darkly discovered, as to fight with them, upon never so
great advantage, when they are nigher hand: And though the Parliament did not
draw out Forces against the Army, yet some false Members of Parliament [not to
wrong the innocent] endeavored, not only to raise Forces [contrary to the Law
of this Kingdom] but also to draw those that were designed for the relief of
helpless; Ireland [an employment more warrantable then the other] to a
Randevoux at Reading; which place [most men know] is not the way from Bristol,
Chester, and other parts nigh the Sea Coasts into Ireland, And what other
design they could have in it, but to engage them in a new war against the
Parliament and Army, is utterly beyond my capacity, to apprehend, or conceive.

For what follows in this part of your Examination, I shall forbear to
trouble the Reader, or my self with it, as being invalid, and impertinent to
the work in hand.

In the next place you say, For the last thing alleged; That the Armies
proceedings may be justified, when against injustice, unrighteousness, and
miscarriage in Government: If that were granted, and the Parliament were guilty
in all [which I am most confident can never be made good by clear instances,
that they are guilty of any course of injustice, or unrighteousness, though
all the World, and the accuser of the Brethren to help should set about it]
yet that would not come up to justification of the Army, because God has not
made them Judges for the people of the Kingdom, either of justice, or
injustice, right or wrong; Some part of this which is bounded with a
parenthesis, is spoken in a furious passion, as if it were impossible for the
Parliament to err: I am therefore regardlesse of giving any answer unto it,
the Prove. 26.4.
wiseman exhorting me thereunto.

But then for the next thing, it is not my purpose, neither was it in the
whole, or any part of this discourse, to tax the whole Assembly of Parliament,
for that I well enough know, there are many Members in that Body very sound,
and faithful, who have to their powers withstood all proceedings of injustice,
unrighteousness, and miscarriage in Government: yet let me tell you, it is
apparent enough to the whole Kingdom, that there have bin such proceedings to
the almost overthrow of State and Kingdom: and where injustice,
unrighteousness, and miscarriage in Government should be acted but in that
Court, I know not; For all other Courts in the Kingdom are strictly limited,
and bounded, and over seen by the Parliament, and People, therefore cannot
exceed those Rules, that particularly relate to them, which are set down by the
consent of Parliament every other Court, acting, proceeding in, and prosecuting
several things, and at several times and places.

But the High Court of Parliament, are Supreme, and have the hearing,
deciding, and doing of all things in the Kingdom whether determinable, or not
determinable in other inferior Courts.

Then you say, That though this were granted (which undoubtedly must according
to what I said before) yet that would not come up to Justification of the Army,
because God has not made them Judges for the people of the Kingdom, neither
of justice, nor injustice, right or wrong. I have before made it appear, that
the Army by their Commission (which clearly justifies them for so doing) are
bound to oppose injustice, and wrong in the Parliament, as well as in the King,
or any other where they find it, the Parliaments own Declarations, and the
Laws of Nature leading them thereunto. And as to the point of Gods making them
Judges, we are to consider

1 That Judges are made by God, either immediately, and without the use of any
means, or instruments; and then he calls them by speaking (if I may use the
Scripture phrase) to themselves particularly, and accommodating them with his
spirit, for such employments, as he did Ioshuah, Othiniel, Ehud, and others; or
by giving his Ministers, and other particular men notice thereof, is he did to
Samuel of Saul, and appointing him to anoint Saul, and for that purpose giving
Saul a spirit of prophecy: but these are not Gods usual ways now; nor can we
instance in one that has been so appointed, or ordained.

2 Or, secondly, God uses means, and instruments, in the creation and
constitution of Judges, and other Officers of a Republique; which means, are

1 Ordinary, and that must be either

1 A Succession by Birth and Generation, and so the Lord Mayor of London's Son
must be Lord Mayor, when his Father is dead.

2 Or, it must by the general consent, advise, and knowledge of the people,
and thus the major part of the Parliament are lawfully chosen.

2 Or secondly, God uses extraor linary means, and instruments (as when War
is in a Kingdom, the certain token of succeeding sorrow) Armies are raised to
decide the controversy with their Swords, betwixt both; each party being
assured of his own just cause; and both waiting with a doubting confidence, on
which side the hovering Victory will resolve to pitch her Trophies.

And thus this Army was raised, (not so much to judge but under the
considerations formerly mentioned, though you vainly imagine by that means to
brand them) as to execute the just Judgments, and Commandes of the Parliament (
Englands chief Pretors.) And this the Army in cases of necessity may do, being
called thereunto by the very same power the Parliament were, as is formerly
instanced, injustice, unrighteousness, miscarriages in Government leading
them, and the providence of God guiding them (by putting seasons, and
oportunities into their hands) thereunto.

Also, the manner of their being Judges [if they must needs be so] considered,
does somewhat constrain them to their present actions; which is no otherwise
then thus; they believe and say, that those things which are just, and
equitable, and tending to the Kingdoms weal; and so judged, and deemed (upon
serious, deliberate debate) by the Parliament, are really, and truly so.

And thereupon they resolved to execute those things so ordered, acted, and
judged by the Parliament, or to be executed themselves, which resolution (I
hope, for the Kingdoms, and their own safety) they will still continue, which
(without any imposibilities) they may do, whilst proceeding upon those sound
principles. And herein they do no more then the rules of nature and reason, (to
which I am sure, the Laws of England are, or ought to be reduced and do allow,
for, Lex spectat naturae ordinem, and non cogit ad imposibilia, sed intendit
semper, quod convenit rationi; the Law has regard to the order of nature, and
does not command impossibilities, but intends, and purposes, what does agree
with reason; I shall say no more here but this, that if the Parliament judge,
and declare, what the liberties, proprieties, and privileges of the subject
is, (the contrary whereof is oppression, injustice, and miscarriage in
goverement) then the Army may justifiably stand to it with their lives, against
any, without respect to persons.

You say in the next place, when the people conceive any thing to be amiss, it
is their duty to represent it to those whom God has appointed, to the Office,
and place of Judgment.

To this I sadly, and concisely answer, that there were many cries, but few
ears to hear, or hearts to pity them, and when the people did petition, they
and their Petitions (as before is instanced) were rejected, some burned. I wish
it had been otherwise, that so righteousness and just Judgment, might run
down our streets like a mighty stream, that every man might sit under his own
Vine, and under his own figtree; so had peace been within our Borders ere this
day.

In the last place you say; but if the meaning of this last part of it be, that
God has made the former successes, and present power of the Army, a testimony
to its opposing the pretended injustice, unrighteousness, and miscarriage in
government, then the Turk may have the same argument, to justify his Title, to
all he has gotten in Christendom. But the wise man teaches otherwise, that
no man knows love or hatred by all that is before him, Eccles. 1.

In this, several things are considerable; but (for want of time) I shall
answer in general, and briefly; No, that this, as you have laid it down, is
not the meaning of that part of the Declaration, and though all in this were
granted, that you would have; yet the evil consequence you have drawn thence,
would prove unsound, and feeble (the cause considered) for the Turks opposing
the Christians is for the enlargement of his Territories, and advancement of
his Monarchy, and greatness; but the disproportion betwixt the Army and
Parliament, was for the restoring, establishing, and confirming the immunities,
and freedoms of the freeborne people of England, (the Parliament declaring at
first what they were, which was all they could do then of themselves) and the
Army (neither regarding the painted favor, of pretended friends, nor civil
force of their public enemies) stoutly contending with their lives in their
hands, for them; yet now invaded by some putrified rotten Members, contrary to
the intent, and meaning of the House in their first Declarations) are again
defended by the Army; and therefore this is no Argument at all for the
justification of the Turks Title to all he has gotten in Christendom.

But then again, as it appears, that neither of the two former parts, of your
examination, nor both of them together can make up the Armies meaning, in that
part of their Declaration; so, I shall give you my understanding of it; they
say, that supreme end (the glory of God) which all men should especially aim
at; is not wanting in these cases, but they study, how, by all means to
advance it, the better to set a price upon all such proceedings of
righteousness, and justice; It (to wit) the glory of God; being one witness
of God in the world; that is, one maine argument to discover the candid, and
sincere purposes of them, who make that their mark, to carry on a Testimony
against the injustice, and unrighteousness of men, whatever they be; and
against the miscarriage of Governments, wheresoever it is found; when
corrupted, or declining from their primitive, and original glory; that is,
when they are transported from their primarie brightness, and luster, into the
muddie streams of disorder, oppression, and miscarriage: The scope of all is
this. That the glory of God it (being their ultimate end) is a testimony of
their proceedings, against all injustice, it being the clearest demonstration,
of the real and upright parposes, and resolutions of any.

And to conclude, the Army might say, as Iuliamus Emperor of Rome, slain in
the Pers. Wars.
one did on his Deathbed; Right joyful, and wi^tingly much more, have I stood
firmly grounded, and resolute, whenever the Commonwealth, as an imperious
mother has exposed me, to apparent and evident danger, as one used to contemn
the whirling storms of all casualties.

I have now ended this part of your examination, and do earnestly desire, it
may give you and other doubting friends that satisfaction desired, it being
published for that purpose.

Finis.
Certain Quaeries wherein Resolution is desired, proposed without any
particular by-interests, or private respects at all, but for satisfaction.
I. WHether the Army under the present conduct of Sir Thomas Fairfax, are not
as well bound to resist (yea to the death) Tyranny and Oppression in the
Parliament, as in the King; and whether every point and part of their
Commission, extend not as well to the one, as the other.

II. How the Army can disband, till they see those things effected, for which
the people entrusted them in Military Employments?

III. Whether the end of their Banding was to free nd acquit the people of this
Kingdom from feared slavery or not? if it were, how will Conscience, and the
Kingdom be satisfied, if they disband before they have done their work? if
not, then why were they raised?

IV. Whether the effect, or end of any thing is not more honorable, and
consequently to be preferred before, the efficient cause whereby it was
procured?

V. Whether the blood of all the slain during the late War, may not be
required justly at the hands of this Army, (since it was spilt in vain) if
they endeavor not to bring to pass the just ends for which it was shed?

VI. Whether a lawful Cause, a lawful Commission, and the peoples
willingness, in cases of necessity, be not sufficient to raise a lawful Army?

VII. Whether the Parliaments lawful Ordinances are not sufficient warrants
for the Army, in the prosecution of the Kingdoms Cause, in the case aforesaid.

VIII. Whether the Army are bound to observe the will and Command of the
Parliament, when they are acted by a principle of egoity, and selfishnes and
for private Causes, and interests, or the will and Commands of the Law?

IX. Whether the Parliament are better able to judge of the peoples grievances,
and oppressions then they be of their own?

X. Whether the Parliament are not bound to hear and give satisfactory answers
to their Petitions? and whether it be a breach of privilege (as they have
sometimes declared) so to do, or not?

XI. Whether the privileges of Parliament, be inconsistent with the weal of
the people?

XII. Whether upon non-satisfaction to the just Demands of the people, no
reason given but breach of privilege, the Army are not engaged, both by
Covenant and Command, to use all lawful means for the procurement of the
peoples reasonable Desires, they having employed, and maintained them for that
purpose?

XIII. Whether the Parliaments expression in the Declaration formerly mentioned
(to wit) that obedience binds not men to cut their own throats, and those so
frequently used in Scripture, save thy self, thy wife, thy children, an eye
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: be not just grounds for the present actions of
the Army, and why?

XIV. Whether an Act of Indemnity (though with the Royal assent for things
done in tempore and loco belli, be sufficient to acquit the Army from those
things they have done, neque in tempore, nec loco belli, especially the
Parliament having (upon no grounds in the earth) declared them Traitors and
enemies, in tempore pacis?

XV. Whether the King and Parliament are not both subordinate to the Law? And
whether is Supreme, the King or Parliament, the Head or his Members? if the
King, then why might not the injustice of the Parliament be as warrantably
opposed, as the Kings?

FINIS.

