The Cure of PREIVDICE, Or, The Doves Innocence and the Serpents subtilty,
wherein The Original, Continuance, Properties, Causes, Ends, Issue and Effects
of the worlds Envy and hatred to the Godly

Is pithily laid open and applied.

By R. Junius.

GENESIS 3.15. I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy seed
and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. PRO.
29.27. A wicked man is Abomination to the Just, and he that is upright in his
way, is Abomination to the wicked. LONDON, Printed by I. B. and are to be sold
by James Crump, at his house in Well-Yard in little S. Bartholmews, 1641.

Courteous Reader,
HAving perused this first part of the Cure of Prejudice, we find it to
contain a lively description of that enmity and hatred which the wicked bear
to Gods people, together with a perspicuous discovery of the grounds and
reasons of it, laid down pithily, orderly and elegantly, with much both sinew
ous strength of argument, and variety of graceful and delightful Illustration:
The which, through Gods blessing accompanying it, is likely to prove of much
use to all sorts that shall read the same, whether in comforting the godly in
their sufferings, or in reclaiming, or (at least) convincing such as any way
oppose the way of truth: So that whatsoever time, labor and diligence thou
shall spend in often reading it, we doubt not but the profit will recompense
thy pains abundantly.

GEORGE WALKER. EDM. CALAMY. JOSEPH CARYLL.


THE CVRE OF PREJUDICE: OR The DOVES Innocence, and the SERPENTS Subtilty;
wherein The Original, Continuance, Properties, Causes, Ends, Issue and Effect,
of the Worlds Envy and Hatred to the Godly, is pithily laid open and applied,
by way of Question and Answer, between a weak and an experienced Christian.
Question.

HOw is it, that the practice of Christianity is every where spoken against,
under the name of Schism, as the chief Jews told Paul in his time? Acts
28.22. And that so soon as men become religious and conscionable, they are
made a byword of the people, Job 17.6. A song of the drunkards, Psalm. 69.12.
And generally hated of all, Matthew. 10.22.

Answer. Know ye not (says Saint James) that the Amity of the World, is the
Enmity of God? And that whosoever will be a friend of the World makes himself
the enemy of God? James 4.4. A wicked man (says Solomon) is abomination to the
Just, and he that is upright in his way, is abomination to the wicked, Pro.
29.27.

There is a natural Enmity, and a spiritual Antipathy between the men of the
World and the Children of God; whence it is, that the holy Ghost (who can give
most congruous Names to Natures) uses in the Scripture, Gods Dictionary, not
only to call wicked men, Adders, Aspes, Gockatrices, Serpents, Dragons, Lions,
Tigers, etc. Psalm. 10.9. and 74.13 and 80.13. and 140.3. Esaias 14.29. Dan. 7.
Zeph. 3. Matthew. 23.33. which are the mortallest enemies to mankind that live;
but most frequently Wolves, and the godly Sheep; Behold (says our Savior to
his Apostles) I send you forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, Mat. 10.16.
between whom there is a strange contrariety and antipathy living, and dead, as
both Naturalists and Lutinists observe.

It is an everlasting rule of the Apostles, He that is born after the Flesh
will persecute him that is born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. not because he is
evil, but because he is so much better then himself. 1 John. 3.12. because his
life is not like other men's; his ways are of another fashion, Wis. 2.15. for
therefore speak they evil of you, because ye will no longer run with them to
the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4 4.

Quest. But are not many discouraged, and others beaten off from being
Religious, through the daily scoffs and reproaches, which in every place the
godly meet withal, for refusing to do as others do with whom they are
conversant?

Answ. Yea millions, there being no such rub in the way to Heaven as that
general contempt which the Devil and the World have cast upon Religion and
the practisers of Piety; which makes our Savior pronounce that man blessed
that is not offended in him, Matthew. 11.6. For hereby it is grown to that, that
men fear nothing more then to have a name that they fear God, and are more
ashamed to be holy then profane, because holiness is worse entreated then
profaneness: with Peter we are apt to deny our Religion, when we come in
company with Christ's enemies: and with David, to dissemble our Faith, when we
are amongst Philistims. Like those white-liverd Rulers, John 12 42. who loved
the praise of Men, more than the praise of God, we choose to conceal our
knowledge of, and love to Christ, lest we should be mocked, have so many
frowns, and frumps, and censures, and scoffs, be branded with that odious and
stigmaticall name of an Hypocrite, etc.

True, with Nicodemus, we owe God some good will, but we dare not show it,
because of this, we would please him, yet so as we might not displease others,
nor our selves. Like the young man in the Gospel, we will follow Christ, so
Christ propound no other conditions, then what we like of: but what will be
the issue, our Savior says expressly. That he will be ashamed of such at the
latter day, who are now ashamed for his sake, to bear a few scoffs and
reproaches from the World, Mark 8.38.

But secondly, it so forestalleth (such as are without) with Prejudice against
goodness and circumspect walking, that they resolve never to be Religious so
long as they live: As how many not only stumble at Christ, the living and
chief corner stone, elect of God, and preclous, but quite fall as at a Rock of
offense; yea, utterly disallow of the things that are excellent, only through
the contempt which is cast upon Religion? 1 Pet. 2.7, 8.

What such men's thoughts are we may hear from the damned in Hell, We fools
thought their lives madness, etc. Wisd. 5.3, 4. And experience shows, that
they will hate a man to the death, though he have nothing to condemn him, but
his being holy.

Yea, where Satan has once set this his porter of Prej^dice, though Christ
himself were on earth, that sou^e would stumble and be offended at his very
best actions; as we see in the Scribes and Pharisees, who made an evil
construction of whatsoever he did or spoke: For when he wrought Miracles, he
was a Sorcerer: When he cast out Devils, it was by the power of Devils: When
he reproved sinners, he was a seducer: When he received sinners, he was their
favourer: When he healed the sick, he was a breaker of the Sabbath, etc. John 8.

Nor can the highest eloquence of the best Preacher ever reclaim such. For
first, words are vagabonds where the Admonished has an evil opinion of the
Admonisher. Secondly, they are resolved against yielding* Thirdly, let them be
convinced by strength of argument, the thought of those things presently passes
away like the sound of a Bell that is rung. O this is a difficult Devil to be
cast out, even like that which we read of, Math. 17.16. For as all the
Disciples could not cast out that Devil, no more can all the Preachers this:
for the Cure of Prejudice alone in one man, is more then to cure the seven
deadly sins (as the Papists term them) in another. Nay (if I may speak it
with reverence) what means can God use that shall be able to convert such an
one? The nine plagues shall not prevail with Pharaoh; the graves opening, the
dead arising, the veil of the Temple renting, the light of the Sun failing,
the Centurion confessing, etc. will do no good upon the Scribes and
Pharisees; Yea, though Ahab be told from the Lord, that if he go to War he
shall perish; yet he goes and speeds accordingly.

Quest. But how should weak Christians know the mystery of this iniquity,
shake off this slavish yoke of bondage and fear, in which Satan for the
present holds them?

Answ. Search the Scriptures, and they will so clear your judgment, and cure
your Prejudice, that in some measure you shall be enabled to quench those fiery
darts, Ephesians. 6.16. I mean, the reproaches of those evil tongues, which are
set on fire from Hell, James 3.6. for Virgil most excellently and profoundly
couples the knowledge of cause, and the conquest of all fears together.

First, for the informing of your judgment, our Savior Christ and his
Apostles has abundantly foretold the same. Of a multitude of predictions I Will
only instance three or four. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Not some, but all; and what all, but even all
that will live godly? Now, me thinks, if there were no other texts in the
Bible but this one, it were omnisufficient to take away Prejudice and wonder
touching the Worlds hatred and calumny: but the Scriptures are full of the
like, Ye shall be hated of all men and Nations (says our Savior) for my
Names sake, Matthew. 10.22. and 24.9. Not of a few, but of all Men and Nations,
that is, all natural men, or the greatest part of men in all Countries and
Nations; yea, and for no other cause, but for professing of Christ's Name.
Neither is Christ a Sign to be spoken against of many in Babylon, or Assyria,
but of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. where Religion is professed publicly.

Yea, when sincerity is wanting, the nearer the line with any opposition, the
greater Eclips. The Gadereans but besought Christ to depart; his own
countrymen drove him out, and cast him down headlong, Luke 4.29. Yea, who was
his greatest enemy but his greatest friend, even one of his houshold-Chaplains?
And who but Jeremies familiars watched for his haulting?

Again (faith our Savior) The Servant is not above his Master, John 15.20.
But Christ having suffered so much, if we should rest, the Servant were above
his Master, which were senseless to think: For could not his wisdom,
innocence, and holiness, sense him from these scorns, and can thine fence
thee? Besides, that ancient prediction must be fulfilled, I will put enmity
between the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman, Genesis 3.15. But, if
there be no war between the men of the World, and the children of God; if
they should not hate and persecure us, this Prediction were not fulfilled: Yea,
all the former predictions of Christ, and many, that I omit, should be false;
which were blasphemy once to think.

Wherefore marvel not, my brethren, though the World hate you, as Saint John
speaks, 1 John 3.13. Neither count it strange, as Saint Peter has it,
concerning the fiery trial which is among you, to prove you, as though some
strange thing were come unto you, 1 Pet. 4.12. for Christ and his Cross are
unseparable, Luke 14.27.

Again, search the whole Bible over, and you shall not find one holy man
mentioned, without mention of something h^e suffered from ungodly men; as it
were easy to instance, how Abel, Lot, Noah, Righteous men, Abraham the Father
of the Faithful, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Patriarchs and Fathers of the Church,
meek Moses, upright Samuel, holy David, wise Solomon, all the Lords Priests,
Prophets, Apostles; yea, the harmless Babes, and our Savior Christ himself,
did severally suffer from wicked and ungodly men: Yea, never man came to
Heaven, but first he past through this Purgatory: God had one Son without
sin, but never any one without suffering; which makes our Savior say, Woe be
to you, when all men speak well of you, that is, when evil men speak well of
you, for so did the Jews of the false Prophets, Luke 6.26. Whereas he
pronounces them blessed, which hear ill for well doing, Matthew. 5.11. Which
leads me to the second point.

Secondly, For Scriptures to confirm, comfort, and strengthen weak Christians
against the Worlds hatred and calumny, these would be applied which follow.

Blessed are they (says our Savior) which suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.10. And
again, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice and be exceeding
glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets
which were before you, ver. 11.12. And Saint Peter, Rejoice, inasmuch as ye
are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye
may be glad also with exceeding joy, for if ye be reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you;
Which on their part is evil spoken off, but on your part is glorified, 1 Pet.
4.12, 13, 14. Lo, here is reward enough for all that men or devils can do
against us: And what will not men undergo, so their reward may be answerable?

But yet further, What says Saint Paul? In nothing fear your adversaries,
whose malice is to them a token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that
of God, Phil. 1.28. Yea, in the same Chapter, verse. 29. he prefers the gift
of suffering before the gift of believing: And in his Epistle to the Church of
Thessalonica peremptorily concludes, That they are elect of God, from this
ground, That they received the Word in much affliction with joy in the holy
Ghost. Examine these Scriptures again and again, for every word of them is
ponderous, and consider of whom, and by whom they were spoken: then certainly
thou will confess, that if there be any Nectar in this life, it is in sorrows
we endure for Righteousness. And methinkes, when I hear goodness
calumniated, I bear it the easier, because the servants of vice do it.

Quest. What is the Original ground of the Worlds hatred?

Answ. That proclamation which God himself made in Paradise, Genesis 3.15. where
he says unto the Serpent, I will put enmity between thee, and the woman, and
between thy seed, and her seed: be, or, it shall bruise thine head, and thou
shall bruise his heel.

Quest. What is meant here by Enmity?

Answ. A bitter, immoderate, inveterate, irreconciliable and endless hatred
and division, opposite to that amity and familiarity which formerly had been
between the Woman and the Serpent.

Quest. Between whom was this Enmity proclaimed?

Answ. Between the Serpent and his seed, on the one side; and the Woman and
her seed, on the other.

Quest. What is meant by the Serpent and his Seed?

Answ. First, by the Serpent we are to understand Satan, who opened the
Serpents mouth, and caused it to speak with man's voice; as the Lord by an
Angel opened the mouth of Balaams Ass, Numbers 22.

Secondly, By the Serpents seed is meant the whole generation of wicked men, as
all Interpreters conclude, and other Scriptures make clear, calling them
Serpents, Generation of Vipers, and Children of the Devil, Matthew. 23.33. John
8.44. 1 John 3.10.

Quest. What is meant by the Woman and her Seed?

Answ. By the woman is meant Eve; by her seed we are to understand first and
chiefly Christ, the singular Seed, who was so the Seed of the Woman, as that he
was not of the Man, Gal. 4.4. being borne of a Virgin, Isaiah 7.14.

Secondly, It imployeth all his members, the Elect, when once regenerate, who
are not only Eves seed as she was the Mother of all living by nature, but by
faith also; as else where they are called the seed, or children of Abraham,
Gal. 3.29.

Quest. What occasioned the Lord to proclaim this enmity?

Answ. Adams sin, in eating the forbidden fruit, and Satan's malice, in moving
and seducing him thereunto was the meritorious cause: the original of this
discord is from Original sin.

Quest. What Instruction affords this?

Answ. First, That to be without reproaches and persecutions we may rather
wish then hope. For what peace can we look for between the Seed of the Woman,
and the Seed of the Serpent, seeing God himself, from the beginning, has set
them at enmity? Yea, once to expect it were an effect of frenzy, not of hope.

Secondly, If the Lord has put this enmity between us and the wicked, here is
comfort in suffering, warrant in opposing.

Thirdly, If the Seed of the Woman fight on Christ's side, and they have Gods
Word for their warrant, they are sure to have him assist them, and prevent
their enemies. And is not that God we fight for, able enough to vindicate all
our wrongs?

Quest. Does that hatred and enmity continue to this day?

Answ. Yes, the words are set down indefinitely without limitation, and so
signify that it shall be perpetual, from the beginning of time to the end of
all time. When time (says one) began, this malice first began, nor will it end
but with the latest man: it is an everlasting Act of Parliament, like a Statute
in Magna Charta.

Quest. To proceed from Explication to Confirmation, and so to Application. How
prove you, That there has been in all ages past, is now, and ever shall be
between the wicked and the godly a perpetual War, enmity and strife,
according to the Lords Prediction, or Proclamation?

Answ. For proof I could produce testimonies and examples innumerable, there
being scarce a page in the Bible, which does not express, or imply somewhat
touching this enmity. Yea, as if the Scriptures contained nothing else, the
Holy Ghost significantly calls them the Book of the Battles of the Lord, Numb.
21.14. as Rupertus well observes. But I will confine my self, and only
mention three examples in every age.

1. To begin with the first age, Viz. the old World before the Flood. We read
of this war, enmity and strife between Caine and Abel, 1 John 3.12. Between
L^mech and the holy Seed, Genesis 4.23, 24. and between those wicked Giants, which
Moses speaks of, and the sons of God, Genesis 6.2. to 12. Yea, those Giants
bade battle to Heaven, as our Mythologists add, to ver. 4.

2. After the Flood, before the Law, between all the men of Sodom and
righteous Let, Genesis 19.4* 9.11. 2 Pet. 2.8. Between Hagar and Ishmael, the
Bondwoman and her son, and Sarah and Isaac the Freewoman, and her son, Genesis
21.9, 10. Gal. 4 29. And between Esau and Jacob: first in the womb, the more
plainly to shadow out this enmity, Genesis 25.22, 23. and after they were borne,
Genesis 27.41.

3. After the Law, before Christ, between Doeg and the eighty five Priests,
which he slew with the edge of the sword, 1 Samuel 22.18, 19. Between Jezabell
and all the Prophets of the Lord, which she destroyed, 1 Kings 18.13, 14. And
between the Heads in Israel in Micahs time, and all that were good, Micah 3.2.

4. Since the Gospel, in the time of Christ and his Apostles this enmity so
manifested it self, not only in the Gentiles, but in the Jews, Gods own
people, who first moved those persecutions against Christ and his Members, that
having beheaded John Baptist his Harbinger, and crucified himself the Lord of
life, we read, that of all the Twelve, none dyed a natural death save only
Saint John, and he also was banished by Domitian to Pathmos; and at another
time thrust into a Tun of seething oil at Rome, as Tertullian and Saint Hierom
do report: See Acts 7.51. to 60. and 12.1. to 5. Romans 8.36. John. 21.18, 19.

Now all these, besides many other of his Disciples, suffered martyrdom
merely for professing the faith of Christ; whereof some were stoned, some
crucified, some beheaded, some thrust through with Spears, some burnt with
fire, with a multitude of other Believers, for Ecclesiastical History makes
mention of two thousand which suffered the same day with Nicanor, Acts and
Monuments, page 32. which makes Saint P^ul cry out, I think that God has set
forth us the last Apostles, as men appointed to death, 1 Corin^h. 4.9.

5. After the Apostles, if we consider the residue of the ten Persecutions,
raised by the Romans against the Christians, which was for three hundred
years, till the coming of godly Constantine, we find that there was such an
innumerable company of innocent Christians put to death and tormented, that
Saint Hierome (in his Epistle to Chromatius and He^^odorus) says, There is no
one day in the whole year unto which the number of five thousand Martyrs might
not be ascribed, except only the first day of January, who were put to the
most exquisite deaths and torments that ever the wit or malice of men, or
Devils could invent to inflict: we read of no less then twenty nine several
deaths that they were put unto, if no other be omitted.

6. From the Primitive times and infancy of the Church hitherto the Turk and
the Pope have acted their parts, in shedding the blood of the Saints, as well
as the Jews and Roman Emperors: touching which, for brevities sake, I refer
you to the Book of Acts and Monuments. Yet because a taste may please some, I
will insert what the Holy Ghost has foretold in the Revelation, touching the
Pope, who calls himself Christ's Vicar and supreme Head of the Church: the
Angel, speaking of the Whore of Babylon, says, She was drunk with the blood
of the Saints and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Revel. 17.6. Which in
part was fulfilled in England, under the reign of Queen Mary, when in one
year, a hundred seventy six persons of good quality were burnt for Religion,
with many of the common sort: and in France, for before these late bloody
Massacres, there were more then two hundred thousand which suffered Martyrdom
about Transubstantiation: For the chief persecutors of Christ and his
followers, are not Atheists, or Turks, or Jews, but such as hold great place
in the Church, Antichristians and Pseudochristians; which makes our Savior say
they shall excommunicate you, that is, they shall blot out your names from
among Gods people, or cast you out from the visible outward communion of the
Saints.

And indeed, virtue has ever suffered most from those, which should, and seem
to uphold her: and intruders upon other men's right can endure any man, how bad
soever, rather to live by them, then the servants of him whom they intrude
upon, as you may see, Mat. 21.33. to 39. where those Farmers of the Vineyard
killed the servants, who came to receive their M^sters rent: they did not kill
the Thieves, and Robbers, and Spoylers of the Vineyard, but the servants; yea,
and the son too, and the end of all was, that they might take the Inheritance.

Yea, the godly have ever suffered most from such as profess the same Faith
and Religion with them. It has been the complaint almost of all the Fathers
and Saints of God, which have written, that the faithful, in their several
times, were hated, traduced, calumniated, slandered, reproached, accused,
persecuted and condemned of such as profess the same Religion with them,
though under other pretenses, yet only for their austere and holy lives, that
they stuck close to the truth, made conscience of their ways, and would not
rush so boldly into sin as others, Ecclesiastical History. lib. 6. Chap.
4.5.16.

7. To come unto these present times wherein we live. Is the World mended with
age? Yea, I would to God we did not find, that as it is in the little world,
the older it grows the more diseased; so in the great World, the older the more
vicious; that the consummation of times and sins were not met together upon
us. But as commonly in a diseased body all the humors fall down into the Legs
or feet, and make an Issue there: so the corruption of all ages has sliden
down into this of ours, as into the feet. Many (says the Apostle) walk,
that are enemies to the Cross of Christ, Philip. 3.18. If many in Saint Paul's
time, more now; for Satan, who was then bound, is now loosed again out of his
prison, and has great wrath, because he knows he has but a short time,
Revel. 12.12. To speak only of the entertainment which piety finds among
such as would be counted (not only Christians, but) Protestants, which
principally I intend. Is it possible for a man to live a conscionable and
unreproveable life, abstain from drunkenness, swearing, profaning the Lords
day, separate himself from evil; yea, wicked company, be zealous for the
glory of God, etc. without being traduced, calumniated, hated, slandered and
persecuted for the same? No, it is not possible: for if our righteousness do
but exceed the righteousness of a swearer, or a drunkard, we are sure to be
persecuted for our righteousness, as Abel was persecuted of Caine, because his
Sacrifice was better then his. If a man walk with God, he is too precise: if
he will be more then almost a Christian, he is curious, fantastical,
factious, and shall be mocked with the Spirit, as if the Spirit of God were a
Spirit of dishonor and shame. How common a thing is it to wound all holiness
under the name of Puritan, a name so full of the serpents enmity, as the egg of
a Cockatrice is full of poison? What should I say? The World is grown so much
knave, that it is now a vice to be honest. O the deplorable condition of these
times! Even the Devil himself durst not have been so impudent, as to have
scoft at holiness in those ancient and purer times: but now I could even sink
down with shame, to see Christianity every where so discountenanced: our very
names come into few mouths, out of which they return but with reproaches.
Amongst the rest of our sins, O God, be merciful to the contempt of thy
Servants.

True, blessed be God, and our gracious Sovereign the very breath of our
nostrils, we suffer little but the lash of evil tongues; but were wicked men's
powers answerable to their wills and malice, they would deliver us up to be
afflicted, put us out of the Synagogues, excommunicate and kill us, as our
Savior shows, John 16.2.33. and Mat. 24.9.

Yea, their enmity and hatred would be so virulent and bitter, that the brother
would betray the brother to death, the father the son, and the Children would
rise up against their Parents, and cause them to dye, the kinsman against the
kinsman, and the friend against the friend, only for professing Christ's Name,
and being religious, as himself affirms, Matthew. 10.34, 35, 36. Luke 21.16,
17. Neither is it strange, for this was one of the ends of Christ's coming into
the World, as appears, Mat. 10.34, 35. where himself says, Think not that I
am come to send peace, but the sword; meaning between the Seed of the Serpent
and the Seed of the Woman; for I am come to set a man at variance against his
Father, the daughter-in-Law against the mother-in-Law, and a man's enemies shall
be they of his own household, Luke. 12.51, 52, 53.

Neither want we precedents of this, For, by whom was upright Abel persecuted
and slain, but by his own brother Caine? Who scoffed at righteous Noah, but his
own son Cham? By whom was that virtuous and religious Lady Barbara put to
death, for embracing the Christian Faith, but by her own Father Dioscorus? And
lastly, by whom was our Savior Christ betrayed, but by his own Disciple Judas?

8. For the time to come, As this strife and enmity in the wicked against the
godly, was early in its entrance, taking its first being in the beginning of
time, and has constantly continued hitherto: so it will be long in
continuance, and endure to the end of time, as the Scripture shows: Yea, the
last remnants of time are likely to have the most of it, because as in them
love shall wax cold, Math. 24.12. so as love grows cold, contention grows
hot.

More expressly the Holy Ghost foretells, That in the last days shall come such
perilous times, that all who will live godly shall suffer persecution, and that
toward the end of the World there shall be scoffers, false accusers, cursed
speakers, fierce despisers of them that be good, such as shall turn the grace
of God into wantonness, and deny God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus
Christ; And being fleshly, not having the Spirit, they shall speak evil of
the things which they know not; And whatsoever things they know naturally as
brute beasts, which are without reason, in those things they shall corrupt
themselves; And that many shall follow their damnable ways, whereby the way of
truth shall be evil spoken off: And that as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses; so these also shall resist the truth, being men of corrupt mandes,
reprobate concerning the Faith, being before of old, ordained to condemnation,
2 Timothy 3.1. to 13. 2 Pet. 2.2. and 3.3. Jude 4.10, 16, 18, 19. And so much of
the continuance.

Now to wind up with a word of Application: If it be so, that all the godly
that have gone before us ha^^ been envyed, hated, traduced, nicknamed, and
persecuted by wicked men, and all that come aft^r us shall be; let no
particular member of the Church look to fare better then the whole body: we
see the Patriarchs went this way, the Prophets this way, the Apostles this way,
the Martyrs this way, this way went all the Saints and servants of God, and do
we look for an easier way? Yea, if the dearest of Gods Children in former ages
have suffered so much for Christ, been put to such cruel deaths and torments
for keeping of a good conscience; let us praise the Lord, who has dealt with
us far otherwise; and pray for his Majesty, to whom, next under God, we owe
the thanks: Yea, if our Forefathers so willingly underwent those fiery trials,
let none for shame shrink under the burden of an aerie trial only.

2. If the brother persecute the brother, the son the F^ther, the Parent his
Child, the Disciple his Lord, think it not strange to be persecuted of any;
for lightly they which are not persecuted, are persecutors themselves.

Qu. Having proved the Continuance of this Enmity in all ages, now tell us what
be the Signs and Properties of it.

Ans. They are either Mental, Verbal, or Actual.
The first whereof are inward and secret, the two later outward and manifest.

Qu. What are the mental properties, which you call inward and secret.

Ans. They are four in number.

First, it is the manner of wicked men, out of Enmity, to envy the virtuous and
good estate of the godly: For envy shall lead the troop, as Judas lead the
soldiers; and it may challenge the first place in the right hand file (as
pride does in the Popes Catalogue of the seven deadly sins) because it was
the eldest and first borne sin that ever was in the Devil, after he was cast
out of Heaven, and the first that ever he begat upon our nature, after we were
cast out of Paradise; which makes Saint Austin therefore call it (as by a kind
of excellency) the Devils sin. Thus Caine envied his brother Abel, Genesis 4.5.
Saul David; 1 Samuel 18.28, 29. and those unbeleeving Jews Paul, Acts 17.13. The
wicked take as much delight to see the virtuous life of an holy man, as fore
eyes do to look upon the Sun. How contrary are good Angels and evil men?
The Angels rejoice at that, whereat these power and stomach; they are ready to
cry and burst for anger, at that which makes music in Heaven. But why is it?
These Antipodes to virtue, having lost all good themselves, are vexed to see it
in another: a true note to know the Serpents seed by, for it is the Devils
cognizance, 1 John 3.14, 15. as Love is Christ's, John 13.35.

And as it is the very Lees of vice; so it has a punishment answerable: for by
a just judgment of God, their own malice turns back into their own bowels,
as it is Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. and slays them, as the swords of Gideons
enemies killed themselves, Judges 7.22. For that none might have cause to envy
the envious man again, but all to pity him; envy it self is a fire, which
consumes that fuel; a Worm which gnaweth that gourd; a Viper, which eats
through those bowels; a Moath, which fretteth tha^ garment wherein it is bred,
nourished and maintained; it is the consuming of the flesh, and rotting of the
bones: Prove. 14.30.

And for hereafter, if wicked men thus envy the virtuous and good estate of the
godly in this World, which is but their Hell, or at least their Purgatory; How
will it gall them, when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Prophets and Saints of God in the Kingdom of Heaven, and themselves thrust
out of doors, and cast into the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone?
This shall make them gnash their teeth for envy, as our Savior shows, Luke
13.28. Matthew. 8.11.12. but how just is it with God, that this fire of envy
should be punished with the fire of Hell!

2. Secondly, it is their manner and property to contemn the supposed mean
estate of the godly, as Samballat, Tobiah and Gershom, with the rest of that
crew, contemned Nehemiah and the Jews, Nehem. 4.1, 2, 3. Thus Rabshakeh
contemned Hezekiah and his people, 2 Kings 18 19. to 36. and the Epiourean
Philosophers Paul, Acts 17.18

Whereas misery, with good natures, is made a loadstone of mercy: with base
minds, it is contrarily made a footstool for pride to trample on; and nothing
so midnights the soul of him that is fallen, as scorn and contempt.

But you may observe, That arrogance is a weed that ever grows on a dunghill,
and from the rankness of that soil, she has her height and spreadings; for
they are but puffed minds, and frothy wits, that get so to the top, and bubble
thus above inferiors. As what makes them contemn us, but, together with
pride, their ignorance? For, alas, they take notice of our misery, not of our
happiness. Noah's virtues are not Chams admiration; but his drunkenness is his
sport. Wicked men are like those ill taught Children, 2 King. 2.24. that could
upbraid Elisha with his bald head, but had not the wit to consider how God had
crowned that head with virtue and honor. O that they could but see all, that
they would but say all: as Ephialtes, when one cast him in the teeth with his
poverty, answered, Why do thou not make rehearsal of other things also, as
that I love law, and regard right? But indeed, this were to clean our faces,
and foul their own.

But let them insult for a while, they cannot sit upon so high a cogge, but may
with turning prove the lowest in the Wheel: as it fell out with Hammon, who
being now made Lackey to a despised Jew, begins to envy, where half an hour
since he had scorned; and misery, like a Vulture, must have some body to prey
upon. There is a continual vicissitude of things: The Righteous is delivered
out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead, Prove. 11.8. The wicked
shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressor for the upright,
Prove. 21.18.

3 Thirdly, it is their manner, to rejoice at the supposed evil estate of the
godly, as the Princes of the Philistims did at Sampsons blindness and bondage,
whom they insulted over, and made their laughing stock, Judge. 16.25. Peninna at
Hannahs barrenness, especially when she went up to the house of the Lord, 1
S^m. 1.6.7 And the Jews at the Disciples, and the rest of the Church, when
Herod vexed some, and slew others, Acts 12.1, 2, 3. Wicked men feed themselves
with others adversity, as Beetles are fed with their fellows dung: and like
Flesh-flies, make the wounds of Gods children their chief nourishment: Yea,
Crocodile-like, they would, if they might, fatten themselves with the warmest
blood of godly men's lives.

And not so only; for we have a generation, whose only rejoicing is,
Cham-like, to see another fall into some gross sin, or infirmity: Yea, as
Luther speaks, they hunger and thirst after the scandals of the godly; and if
at any time through humane frailty they do fall into some evil, like hungry
Hogs, they muzzle in their excrements, and feast upon them, as upon dainties;
there being nothing that so glads their hearts, that so opens their mouths with
so much insolency and triumph; as what care will they take to spread the same
abroad by a common fame: Yea, it were well, if they would not play the Curres,
and open when they are able to spring no Game.

But they must needs be filthy creatures, that feed upon nothing but
corruption. To delight in men's sins, is the sport of Devils: recovery from
those sins, is the joy of good men and Angels. Cham derides his Fathers
nakedness; it should have been his sorrow: he makes it his sport. But it is
ill for a man to make himself merry, with that which angers God.

4. It is their manner, to hate the religious, as all carnal men hate the
members of Christ, Matthew. 10.22. Thus Ahab hated Eliah, as himself confessed,
1 Kings 22.8. Yea, so inveterately, that there was not one Kingdom or Nation,
where he had not sent to take away his life, 1 Kings 18.10. and Haman Mordecai,
which was so deadly, that he thought it too little to lay hands on Mordecai
only, wherefore he sought to destroy all the Jews, the people of Mordecai,
that were throughout the whole Kingdom of Ahasuerus, Hester 3.5, 6. For the
effecting of which, he obtained that bloody Edict, ver. 6.9. And lest it should
want success, he offered ten thousand Talents of silver into the Kings
Treasury, to have it effected, Hester 3.9, 13. And such another was cruel
Arundel, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury; who vowed and swore, he would not
leave a slip of Professors in this Land. For you must know, That their hatred
extends not to this, or that person alone, but to the whole generation of
Gods Children and people. As what says the wicked in David's time? Come, let us
out them off from being a Nation, and let the name of Israel be no more in
remembrance, Let us take for our possessions the habitations of God, Psalm 83
4, 12.

And the World is no changeling; for this age wants not many such Hamans and
Arundels, who so hate the Children of God, that they wish, as Caligula once did
of the Romans, That they had all but one (...) that so they might cut it off at
a blow, were it in (...) power, Micah. 3.2. Psalm. 83.4.

But our comfort is, they have not so much a^^^^rity as malice; resembling the
Serpent Porp^^^^^ which abounds with poison, but can hurt non^^^ (...) want of
teeth: Though their punishment sha^^ (...) never the less. For as the will to
do God acce^^^ble service, is accepted, as if it were service inde^^^ so the
in^ent and offer of wrong, shall be judge^ (...) wrong, in that Court of
Justice. Good and (...) thoughts and desires, in Gods account are good and
evil works: And so much touching the Mental properties of this enmity.

Qu. What are their Verbal properties?

An. They are Eleven in number. First, ungodly men verbally manifest their
enmity by murmuring against the Children of God: as Labans sons murmured
against Jacob, Genesis 31.1. The Israelites against Moses and Aaron; Yea,
against God himself; for which, the utmost part of the Host was consumed with
fire from Heaven, Numb. 11.1. and 14.2, 3. And lastly, the laborers in the
Vineyard against the Master of the house, and their fellows, Mat. 20.11, 12.

And have not we the like murmurers? O that so many Loaves and Fishes, as did
feed five thousand in the Wilderness, would but stop their mouths, who
amongst us do both vex at others plenty of grace, and their own want: that
do murmr against the g^dly, even for no other cause, but that they alone
should be the men in whom no crime, or fault scandalous can justly be found:
that make it their Grace, both before and after Dinner, to disgrace some
Innocent.

But so it is, That the baggage World desires nothing more, then to scarre the
face that is fairer then her self: whence she takes occasion, in every
company, to erect the faylings of holy men very high, like Saint Paul's, for ^he
gaze of all; whereas they hide their good parts under ground, like Saint
Faiths, that none may (...).

Where^^ (...) another dis^dvantage, that cannot (...) ^^lped. The multitude
will so^ner believe them, then our solves. Affi^mations being apter to win
belief, then Negatives are to uncredit them: whereby it falls out, that Piety
is every where pusht at, and the religious murmured at, and clamoured against
in all places.

If such men would know their wages: let them look, 2 Pet. 2.12. and there
they shall find, that as their tongues have walked against Heaven, so they
shall be confined to Hell: And in the mean time, Cursed is he (says the Holy
Ghost) that smites his neighbor secretly; and let all the people say, Amen.
Deuteronomy. 27.24.

2. By Censuring their actions, and misconstruing their intentions, as Eliab:
did David's zeal for Gods glory to be pride and malice, 1 Samuel 17.28. And those
wicked ones, his fasting and mourning to be Hypocrifie, Psalm. 35.13. to 17.
Thus Jobs friends condemned him for an Hypocrite, Job 4.6. to 11. And the
Jews, Christianity to be Heresy, and Paul the Preacher of it, a pestilent
fellow, a mover of sedition, and maintainer of schism; yea, all the Disciples
to be deceivers, 2 Cor. 6.8.

And thus too many in our days will definitively censure men for Hypocrites,
whom they scarce know superficially: Yea, (which is worse) only because their
works are good.

Prejudice casts a false color upon the best actions: and Baseness, what it
cannot attain to it will vellicate and deprave. But what says Sincerity?
While my conscience is innocent, the Worlds suppositions cannot make me
culpable: Let me rather, with Eliah and Micah,, do well, and hear ill; then,
with Ahab and Jezahell, do ill and be flattered.

The Accuser of the Brethren makes choice of wicked men to traduce those whom
he cannot seduce as he desires; as we may plainly see in our Saviors
example, who notwithstanding he fulfilled all righteousness, and did all
things well, for in his mouth was found no guile, nor fault in his manners, nor
error in his doctrine, Which of you (said he) can rebuke me of sin? Yet the
World traduced him for a Samaritan, a Blasphemer, a Sorcerer, a wine bibber, an
enemy to Caesar, and what not?

Thus they deal with the godly, as sometimes a lustful person will do by a
chaste woman, when he cannot take away her honesty, he will take away her
credit; brag of effecting his will with her, when yet he could never have
admittance into her company.

Bad natures, whom they cannot reach by imitation, they will by detraction:
like the Fox, what they cannot attain to, they will depresse and seem to
despise: their cunning is to condemn others, that themseves may be justified.
As Caligula took off the heads from the Images of the gods, to set up his own.
Or as Merchants, who to raise the price of their own commodities, beat down
the prices of others.

And have they not reason thus to do? Yes, for how is a vicious person
discredited and made contemptible, by the virtuous life of an holy man? We know
straight lines help to show the crooked. And it is easy to guess, that
Pharaohs fat Kine made the lean ones more ilfavoured. A swarthy and hard
featured visage, loves not the company of clear beauties.

Again, another reason is, They judge others by themselves: now they do all
their good in hypocrisy, and so thereafter judge of others. Saint Chrysostom
has given the rule, As it is an hard thing (says he) for one to suspect
another to be evil, who is good himself: so it is as hard for him to suppose
another to be good, who is himself ill. And we see it fulfilled in Nero, who
verily believed, that all men were most foul libidinists, because himself was
such an one.

3. Wicked men manifest their enmity against the religious, by carrying tales
of them unto others: as Cham carried tales to his brethren of Noah's nakedness:
his tongue was the trumpet, to sound forth his Fathers shame, Genesis 9.22. thus
Doeg carried tales to Saul of David, and Abimelech, 1 Samuel 22.9, 10. and the
Ziphins two several times brought tidings to Saul, where David had hid
himself, to the end Saul might slay him, 1 Samuel 23.19, 20. and 26.1. And those
Libertines, with other suborned men against Steven, to the Council of Priests,
Acts 6.8. to 15.

And of this burden many amongst us are in continual travel. For how
frequently do debauched drunkards, and incorrigible sinners (resembling their
father the Devil, who both by name, Revel. 12.10. and by nature, Job 1.7, 8,
9. is a continual Accuser of the brethren) carry tales to their fellows, of
such as will not consorte with them? Yea, of their faithful Ministers,
especially if he thunders in his doctrine, and lightens in his conversation,
as Gregory Nazianzen speaks of Basil? Yea, and think they do as good service
in it, as Secretaries, and espialls of Princes, do to the State, when they
bring in bills of Intelligence?

But do they, as they ought, with an upright mind tell both our virtues and
vices impartially, as Suetonius writes of the twelve Caesar's, and so leave the
upshot to collection? No, but rather, as the Jews did by Paul, Acts 24. charge
us with many things, as that we are pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, and
maintaienrs of schism, but proving nothing, verse 13. And indeed, how should
they, when every word they speak is a slander? Or if otherwise, they look on
our infirmities, they look not on our graces, on our repentance? No these
Flies skip over all a man's sound parts, I mean his excellencies; to fasten on
a scab, or ulcer; resembling our Prognosticators, that are more diligent to
make mention of foul weather, then of fair; storms and thunder they much
harp upon, but calm and serene days pass them unobserved: whereas an
ingenuous nature would pass over the evil, where he finds more good;
considering, we are full of faults by nature; good, not without our care and
industry; for a mind well qualified, is often beholding to the industry of the
owner: and Ulysses, as Homer relates, was so applauded for the acuteness of an
ingenious mind, that men spared to object unto him the deformity of his body.

But these contrarily, for want of matter to except against, will coin it of
their own heads. And that they may deliver themselves with the greater
Emphasis will affirm as that Gymnosophist in Plutarch did, of those Orators to
Alexander, That every one of them does exceed his fellows, and swear that the
matter is so clear and manifest, that all the Town ings of him (meaning the
good fellows of the town) and to speak truth, the parties faults are so
clear and evident, that you may see them as well in the dark, as with a
candle, as appears by the sequel. For, are there not some godly and faithful,
both Christians and Preachers, that have been often (I say not ninety five
times) accused by them, as Aristophanes was by the Athenians, and every time
found innocent? Though no thanks to their accusers, for they endeavor all
they can to corrupt such as hear them, and forestall their judgments against
the good and goodness.

O that men were so wise, as to hear the talebearer with indignation, examine
before they trust, believe his reports, if infallibly true, with
unwillingnesse, acknowledge it with grief, hide our neighbors faults with
honest excuses, and bury them in silence: for commonly it fares with the first
relator, as it does with a stone thrown into the water, which of it self
makes but one circle, but that one begets an hundred, and so both offends and
infects many others, but always proves himself to be uncharitable. It were
good for other men, if tale-bearers would consider this, but better for
themselves.

True, the wise and honest are able, as so many Angels of God, to discern
truth from slander; though to the grief of many good hearts, no music can be
so sweet to the ears of others, as to hear well of themselves, ill of the
religious.

And these, as they often set the former on work, so they are resolutely
opinionated in believing o^ lies (as Saint Austin speaks of the
Priscillianists) whereby they supererogate of Satan.

But what is the end of these tale-bearers, and informers against good men?
Follow them to their ends, and you shall see, that if ever the Lord open their
eyes to see this their fact, they are even in this life rewarded with the
strappadoes of an humane soul, rackt in conscience, and tortured with the very
flashes of Hell fire, and not seldom forced to lay violent hands upon
themselves, being never well, nor in their own place, till they be in Hell,
Acts 1.25.

4. It is their manner to persuade and give devilish counsel to others, like
themselves, to persecute the godly, as Balaam gave wicked counsel to Balack
against the Children of Israel, when he could not be suffered to curse them,
Revel. 2.14. Thus the Princes and Rulers did to Zedekiah the King against
Jeremiah, saying, We beseech you, let this man be put to death, for thus he
we^kneth the hands of the men of War, etc. Jer. 38.4. and the Jews of
Thessalonica to the people of Berea against Paul, Acts 17.13.

That the enemies of the Cross of Christ, are still accustomed to deal after
this manner with the religious, I need not demonstrate; plain things, which
our selves are daily witnesses of, need no proof, Only note their matchless
malice herein, who that they may be sure to prevail, first dazell their
friends eyes with false accusations against us, as true and certain, as that
Naboth did blaspheme God and the King; and their associates are as sure of it,
as Darius was, that the Idol Bell did eat and drink every day forty Sheep,
twelve Kakes, and six great pots of Wine, because threescore and ten of the
Priests gave it out so; And that their mortal enmity may be taken for a zeal
of the Churches good, as Judas would have his covetousness taken for Charity,
John 12.6. And the Pharisees their Cruelty thought Piety, Matthew. 23.14. All the
reproaches that the Devil and these his scavengers can rake out of the
Channels of Hell shall be flung in our faces, the worst language that has ever
been dipped in the forge, or tipped at the fire of Hell, shall be bestowed upon us;
wherein they resemble those ancient enemies of the Gospel, who clad the
Martyrs in the skins of wild Beasts, to animate the dogs to tear them.

Though perhaps this is more then needs, for not seldom the counseled are
more ready to yield their aid, then they are to ask it; being of Maximinus
his humor, who seeing none offer themselves, set on work certain vile persons
to accuse the Christians of heinous crimes, that so he might persecute them
with more show of reason; for that one may supply the others defects, the first
finds an head, the second a tongue, the third hands: As Ulysses may contrive,
but Diomedes, must through with it: so altogether deal with the poor Minister,
or Christian, as the soldiers did with Christ, first blind him, then strike
him, and last ask him, Who is it that smote thee? And he may answer the best
man of them, It was thou, O mine enemy, thou wast an Achitophell, in the one; a
Doeg in the other; a Beliall in both. And let such men know, that this their
instigation will end at last either in anguish, or confusion, tears or torment
will become their recompense.

5. It is the manner and custom of wicked men to scoff at the righteous, as
Ishmael scoft at Isaac, Genesis 21.9. Rabshakeh at Hezekiah, and his people, 2
Kings 18.27. And the Philosophers at Paul, Acts 17.18. to 21.

And to this day the World is too full of scoffing Atheists, and mockers of
Piety. Michal was barren, yet she has too many Children, that scorn holy
excercises: every household almost has some in it, if not many, of the brood of
Cham and Ishmael: so that if any one refrain from impiety, refuse to do as
the rest in all excess of riot, he is made both their prey and laughingstock:
Yea, if he be so bold as to Preach righteousness to them, by voice or by
example, there is instantly some Tobiah, or Sanballat steps up to flout him.
They so hate righteousness, that they will hate a man for it, and say of good
living, as Festus did of great learning, it makes a man mad. But they cannot
know who are sober, that are mad themselves: Achish and his Courtiers thought
David mad, yet he was the wisest man amongst them. Yea, as old men answer young
men, You think us fools, but we know you are not wise: so answer we these,
You think us mad that are so hot against sins, but we know you mad,
that are so cold for your souls.

Dogs will bark at the Moon: and what all men commend, you have some
Thersites take delight to blast. Lot vexed himself, because he saw men bad;
these, because ^en are good: not because Gods Law is broken, but because others
keep it better then themselves. But these are brinish and ill made candles,
which so sparkle and spit at others: it is a cursed zeal in these men, to
malign the good zeal of all men.

But let them alone, they need no help to be miserable; for as they scoff at
us, so God laughes at them, He that fitteth in the Heavens shall laugh, the
Lord shall have them in derision, Psalm. 2.4. yea, Judgments are prepared for
these scorners, and stripes for the backs of these fools, Prove. 19.29.

If they smart not here, as Cham did, whose scoffing only brought his Fathers
Curse, and Gods upon tha^: And the two and forty little children, who were
devoured of wild Bears, for scoffing at Elishas bald head, 2 King. 2.24. And
Foelix, who for one malicious scoff, did nothing day and night but vomit
blood, till his unhappy soul was fetched from his wretched carcass: And
Pherecydes, who was consumed by worms alive, for giving Religion but a
nickname; a small matter, if thou may be made Judge: And Lucian, who for
barking against Religion, like a Dog, was by a just judgment of God devoured
of dogs.

For this let me tell them, what ever the Devil blinding them they think,
there cannot be a greater argument of a foul soul, then the deriding of
religious services: Y^^ to be a scoffer is the depth of sin: such an one is
upon the very threshold of Hell, as being set down in a resolute contempt of
all goodness.

6. It is their manner and property to nickname the godly as Ahab nicknamed
Eliah, the troubler of Israel, 1 Kings 18.17. The wicked, Job and David
Hypocrites, Psalm. 35.13, 14. Job 4.6. to 11. The Courtiers, Jeremiah an enemy
to the Commonwealth of Israel. The Jews, Paul a factious and seditious
fellow, Acts 24.14. Yea, they termed all the Disciples, Sectaries,
Schismatics, subverters of the State, etc. 1 Cor. 4.9.10.

And the same Devil, who spoke in Ahab and those wicked ones of old, now
speaks in our loose Libertines, who nickname the conscionable, Puritans, and
seditious persons, for do but examine who they be which cast these aspersions
upon the godly, and you shall find, that the hand of Ioab, I mean the Devil,
is in this business. Alas, poor souls, they are but set on by that subtle
Serpent, as Zebede was by her sounes, Mat. 20.20. Mark 10.35. it is but his
heart in their lips.

And Satan has ever found it infinitely successful, to give every vice a
title, and every virtue a disgrace; for still he has found, that the rude and
unstable multitude only look upon the vizard and outside of things, which he
pleases to put upon them, and so judge according to appearance, not righteous
judgment.

Neither does the Devil only gain by fastening reproachful nicknames upon
the religious, but his servants gain too: much like the thief, who meeting
with a full purse, not onel^ takes it away, but returns a stab: for in making
^^rtue contemptible, and in depraving the godly, they are at least upon even
pround with them, if they have not the better: for were all the World ugly,
deformity would be no monster. Among the Myconians baldness is no unseemly
thing, because all there are borne bald: and hereupon infamous persons love to
mitigate their own shame, with others discredit. As Aesops Fox, when she had
lost her tail, would have redeemed her shame, by persuading all her fellow
foxes to cut off theirs; yea, by depressing the good, they may possibly get the
start of them. Even Heliogabulus, that beastly monster, thought to make
himself the sole god, and be only worshipped, by banishing all other
religions out of the World.

But let these depravers take heed, lest imitating the fact of Censor Fulvius,
who untiled Juno's Temple to cover his own house, they partake of the like
judgment, run mad, and dye despayring.

7. It is their manner to revile and rail on them, as Goliath reviled and
rayled on the Host of Israel, and their God, 1 Samuel 17.45. Shimei, upon David,
calling him murderer, and wicked man, 2 Samuel 16.7. And likewise the mighty
men, Psalm. 31.13. And the Jews upon Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13.45.

Calumny is every good man's Lackey, which follows him wheresoever he goes; for
the Devil has his servants in every corner; and rotten Lungs can never send
forth sweet breath. If the Law bind their hands, yet they will be smiting with
their tongues: and if the Law keep them in awe for smiting on the mouth yet
they will do what they dare, they will smite with the mouth.

It is with these men, as it was with Zoilus that common slanderer, who being
demanded why he spoke evil of such and such, answered, because I cannot do
them evil: or elfe, like another Parisian Vigils, we should feel their
swords, before we heard their alarums. When the Devils hands are bound, he
vomits a flood of reproaches with his tongue, Revel. 12.15. What say they?
Since we cannot attain to their virtues, let us revenge our selves with
railing against them.

It is not for nothing, that wicked men are so often in Scripture called Dogs,
as Psalm. 59.6. Deliver my soul, or my darling, from the power of the Dog: and
They make a noise like a Dog, and go round about the City. Beware of Dogs,
says Saint Paul, Phil. 3.2. which either grin with malice, or bark with
reproaches, or bite with mischief.

But blessed be God, although some of these Dogs have teeth like swords, and
jaws like knives, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 30.14. And smite cruelly, as
Jeremy complains, Chap. 18.18. which deserve, like Shepherds Curres, to have
their teeth beaten out, to prevent their biting; yea, and their chaps muzled,
for fear of opening; yet most of them are tooth-lesse Curres, which though
they bark, yet they cannot bite; and cowardly Curres, for if you note such an
one, he seldom unbuttons his tumoured breast, but when he finds none to oppose
the bigness of his looks and tongue.

And for such our only way is, either to slight them, as King Philip did
Nicanor, in the like case, who being told by Smitichus of his evil reports and
raylings, answered, Nicanor is not esteemed by the worst in Macedonia.

Or else stop their mouths with some good turn, as Aeneas, in the fiction,
cast Cerberus the hell-hound a sweet morsel, that he might not bark against
him. The door, when it has been oyled, leaves creaking: and this is good
policy: for barking Curres ofttimes great mastiffs wake.

But as if the term of Dog, were of too narrow extent, the Scripture
elsewhere calls them Devils. Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 3.3. (as Bishop Andrews
observes from the Original) foretells, that in the latter days there shall be
men Devils, foul mouthed men, evil speakers, and 1 Timothy 3.11. he speaks of
women-devils, whose speeches are calumnious. And wherefore is the Devil called
by that name, but by reason of his foul mouth in defaming? Yea, A Calumny,
says one of the Fathers, is the Devils mind in the mouth of a man, his arrow
shot by man's bow; he lends him his lies and malice, and borrows his tongue
to utter them, because the Devil wants a tongue.

I close up this point with those words of the Prophet, either convert the
persons or confound the lying lips, O God, that speak against the righteous.

8. It is their manner to raise slanders of the godly, as those wicked men
slandered Naboth, saying, he has blasphemed God and the King, confirming the
same with an oath, 1 Kings 21. Thus the wicked slandered David, Psam. 57.4. And
the multitude John Baptist, saying he had a Devil, Matthew. 11.18.

It is Satan's policy (because report both makes jealousies, where there are
none, and increases those that are) to abuse our ears in hearing, our tongues
in speaking, and our hearts in believing lies, to disable us from discerning
the truth.

Yea, this stratagem of raising slanders upon good men, like a huge and mighty
Polypheme, has done such service to the uncircumcised, that examples thereof
in Scripture are like moates in the Sun: and it were easy to parallel
former ages with this of ours, for well may we take up those words of the
Psalmist, The wicked bend their bow, and make ready their arrows upon the
string, that they may secretly shoot at them which are upright in heart,
Psalms 11.2.

Innocence is no shelter against evil tongues. Malice never regards how true
any accusation is, but how spiteful.

And great wits are not more ready, with the high Priests and Elders, Matthew.
28.12, 13. to raise these slanders, then the common sort are apt to believe the
same; as we see by our Saviors example, ver. 15. And how many particular
persons know, to their smart, that a slander once raised will scarce ever dye:
for coming once into the mouth of the vulgar, true or falfe, like wildfire it
can never be quenched; for even death it self, which delivers a man from all
other enemies, is not able to deliver him from this of the tongue. Whereas
Truth has much ado to be believed, a lie runs far before it can be stayed.

However, a man once wounded in his good name, is not cured without scarres of
suspicion. Yea, commonly, as a little ball rolled in the snow gathers it self
to a great lump: so the report that is but a little spark at first, proves a
great flame, by that it has past through many mouths.

But did not men's own wickedness blind them, were they not absolutely turned
fools, they would thus argue: Not he that is accused, but he that is convicted
is guilty, as Lactantius has it. In the Chancery are many accusations they
never mean to prove: Neither does any Law condemn a man, till he comes to his
answer. Upright Cato was fifty times undeservedly indicted and accused by his
fellow Citizens, yet was every time acquitted and found innocent.

The Orator Tertullus, when he would plead against Paul, says, We have found
this man a pestilent fellow, Acts 24.5. But, if you mark it, this foolish
Tertullus mistook the antidote for the poison, the remedy for the disease:
Indeed, he had some wit in his anger, and so have his followers in slandering
such as excel in virtue: for whereas formerly the splendour of the others
virtues has obscured the meannesse of their credit, as the lesser light of a
candle is obscured by the greater light of the Sun: so now by clouding and
depraving him and all his fellows, himself shall be judged virtuous very
cheap, accounted a man of honesty and honor, though a Paricide or a
sacrilegious person.

And is it not good policy, for a swinish drunkard, or a beastly liver to fling
dirt in a holy man's face, when, first, any color seems the fairer, when as
black is by? Secondly, when (being conscious of their own defects) by this
means they draw away men's thoughts, and consideration of the beholders, from
climing up into their faults, while they are fixed and busied upon a new
object. One color we know, being laid upon another, does away the former, and
remains it self. A Cutpurse in a throng, when he has committed the fact,
will cry out, my Masters, take heed of your purses; and he that is pursued will
cry, stop thief, that by this means he may escape unattached.

9. It is usual with them to Curse the godly, as Goliath cursed David, 1 Samuel
17.43. And also Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.7. to 15. Thus the Heathen cursed Israel,
Zach. 8.13. And thus the wicked in all ages shall be so drunk with malice,
that they shall spew out cursing and slander against the godly, as our Savior
has foretold, Mat. 5.44.

And experience proves, that not a few amongst us do steep their words in hate
and curses against the good, carrying this deadly poison, these arrows,
swords, knives, razors in their mouths, wherewith to interlace their
discourse, whether in reviling the present, or backbiting the absent.

There is a generation (pity they should be called Christians) all whose
Prayers are Curses, and all their relations lies: Or if sometimes they lend the
truth their voice, they are but false witnesses in speaking of it; for their
hearts are of another judgment. As let them say with their mouths, I believe
in God, or Our Father which art in Heaven, or God spoke these words, etc. even
in this they lie, for in their hearts they think there is no God at all: or if
with their hearts they believe, and with their tongues confess that there is a
God, at least by their works they deny him, and the power of his word. So that
all the difference between them, and very Infidels, is only this, the one are
infidels in their hearts, the other are infidels in their lives, as Augustine
pithily.

And what is the reason they curse us, but this? They are the Devils best
scholars, and of his highest Form; the language of Hell is so familiar unto
them, that they speak not a word of our country language: And indeed, how
should they speak the language of Canaan, to whom blasphemy is become the
mother tongue?

Secondly, they curse us because they cannot be suffered to kill us; for in
heart and Gods account they are no better then murderers; nor will it be any
rare thing at the day of Judgment, for Cursers to be indicted of murder: they
would kill us, if they durst: they do kill, so far as they can. I would be
loath to trust his hands, that bannes me with his tongue. It is easy to guess
how they would deal with us, if we were at their mercy. He that siniled on
David in his throne, curses him in his flight: Now his unsound and treacherous
heart discovers it self in a tongue full of venom, a hand full of stones; and
had not David been yet too strong for his impotent Subject, he had then
breathed his last.

Prosperous success hides many a false heart, as a drift of Snow covers a
heap of dung: but when that white mantle melts, the filthy rottenness will
soon appear.

Neither is it any sin we commit, or offense we give them, that they Curse
us. Who could have less deserved those curses, those aspersions, those stones,
then David? Had Shimei been other then a dog, he had never so rudely barked at
so harmeles a passenger. That head deserved to be tonguelesse, that body to be
headless, that thus blasphemed an Innocent, though he had been less then the
Lords Anointed.

Again, Why would they kill our bodies, but because they could not slay our
souls? For it is soule-blood which the Serpent and his Seed thirst after, as I
shall show afterward.

But alas, if all their Curses and threats, all their aspersions and
Antichristian slanders, could flout us out of the integrity of our devotion,
when our forefathers feared not the flames, we were fearful cowards.

As for their banning of us, we have learnt from Solomon, That the causeless
curse shall not come, Prove. 26.2. or at least, it shall not come where the
curser meant it. Yea, the Psalmist tells us plainly, That though they curse,
yet God will bless, Psalm, 109.28. And his blessing shall do us good, while
their curses hurt none but themselves: for what says the Holy Ghost in the
same Psalm, speaking of the desperately wicked, whose brand is, that they love
cursing. The words are these, As he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him;
and as he loved not blessing, so shall it be far from him. As he clothed
himself with cursing, as with a raiment: so shall it come into his bowels like
water, and like oil into his bones. Let it be unto him, as a garment to cover
him, and for a girdle, wherewith he shall be always girded, ver. 17, 18, 19.

Hear this all ye whose tongues run so fast on the Devils errand, Ye loved
cursing, you shall have it, both upon you, about you, and in you, and that
everlastingly, if you persevere and go on. For if Christians be charged to
bless their enemies; What will be their case, that curse their friends? Yea,
if he which but curses Satan, curses his own soul, as it is, Eccles. 21.27.
What does he, that curses the Saints and dear children of God? Surely, their
curses shall bound back into their own breasts, as the stones which Shimei
threw at David did rebound upon Shimei, and split his heart; yea, and at last
knocked out his brains.

Cursing mouths are like ill made Pieces, which while men discharge at others,
recoile in splinters upon their own faces. Their words and wishes be but
whirle-windes, which being breathen forth, return again to the same place;
Cursed be he that curses thee, Genesis 27.29. Yea, he shall be cursed with a
witness, for even Christ, which came to save the World, shall say unto them at
the last day, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. Where they shall do nothing but curse for
evermore, Revel. 16.11.21. And indeed, Who should go to Hell, if cursers
should be left out? Wherefore let all those learn to bless, that look to be
heirs of the Blessing.

10. It is their use to threaten the religious, as all the men of Sodom
threatened just Lot, that they would deal worse with him then with the Angels,
Genesis 19.9. Jehoram, Elisha, saying, God do so to me, and more also if the head
of Elisha shall stand on him this day, 2 Kings 6.31. And thus Paul, before his
conversion, breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples, Acts
9.1, 2.

It were no living for godly men, if their hands were allowed to be as bloody
as their hearts. But men and Devils are under the restraint of the Almighty.

Neither are their words more swelling, or their designs more lavish, then
their achievements be vain, and their execution short. Benhadad sends great
words unto the King of Israel, as if it were nothing to conquer him: but stay
the proof, Benhadad flies, and Israel persues. Commonly they that least can
do, best cavil, can and make the greatest flourish.

However, it is well for the innocent, that wicked men cannot keep their own
counsels as God fetches their thoughts out of their own mouths, many times,
even against their wills, for the good of his Children; as we may see in Esau,
when he purposed the death of Jacob; and in Saul, touching David; and in
Jezabell, touching Elisha; whose threats did preserve them, whom they meant to
kill. The wisdom and power of God could have found evasions for his Prophets,
with their enemies greatest secrecy: but now they need no other means of
rescue, then their own lips. And it is a mercy (deserving thanks) from God,
that the lightning of anger in a cruel man's eyes, gives us warning of the
thunderbolt in his hand.

But this concerns us only, when we are threatened by the potent: in other
cases, our best way will be to stand it out: for many a foe has spoken
bravely, who in the push has made more use of his heels, then of his hands:
their threats being but like a boys squib, that only flashes, and cracks, and
stinks, but is nothing.

11. It is their manner by subtlety to undermine the godly in talk, that they
may betray them, as Saul caused his servants to undermine David by flattery,
thereby to work his confusion, 1 Samuel 18.17. And again, verse. 21.25. thus
those false Prophets, and other enemies of the truth undermined Jeremiah,
seeking every way to destroy him, Jer. 18.18. to the end of the Chap. And thus
certain of the Synagogue sought to undermine Steven, that so they might have
matter whereby to inform the Council against him, Acts 6.9, 10.

Their chief Principle is that of Lysanders, Where the Lions skin will not
suffice, we must add a scantling of the Foxes. Whereupon, as intelligencers for
Statesmen, mingle themselves with all companies, but use their best art to
keep themselves concealed: so do these, you may travel with such an one as
far as the Indies; and yet find the way into his heart a farther journey.
For as High-way-men, lighting into true meaning company by the way, can talk
of sincere dealing, and uprightness, against robbery and oppression, to take
off suspicion, till they spy their opportunity: so will they have semblances of
religion, pretend great love; yea, perhaps do you a real courtesy; but with
the same intent that Saul gave Michall to David, which was only to ensnare him.

Like Fowlers and Anglers, when they mean to catch and snare us, they hide
their nets, and cover their hooks with the pleasing baits of flattery,
setting a sunshine countenance upon cloudy thoughts: Yea, when they intend to
murder, then speak they fairest; when deadly malice dives deepest into their
hearts, then the smoothest words floate in their mouths, as no faces look
lovelyer then the painted.

Now this kind of undermining they have borrowed from Satan, that old Serpent,
and arch-politician, who in the beginning uses this complement to our first
Parents, Ye shall be as gods: when his drift was, to have them devils, Genesis
3.5. Yea, he sets them on work, who never cease, either by himself or by
his servants to tempt and undermine the people of God, 1 Pet. 5.8. especially
at such times, as they are, or should be addressing themselves to some notable
works in performing the will of God, as we may see, Jeremiah 1.6. Ezekiel. 3.14,
15. Nehem. 2.19. and 4.8. and 6.5, 6, 7, 10. Acts 6.9, 10. Matthew. 4.1.

But beware we trust them not, for these Hypocrites never wound so deadly, as
when they stroke us with a silken hand; being like the mistaken lantern in
Eighty eight; for under pretense of guiding, they will draw us into hazard and
loss among our enemies; and whosoever puts confidence in their words, shall
find them to resemble sinking floores, which will then fail us, when our
weight is on them. And so much of the Verbal properties of this enmity.

Qu. In the last place what are the Actual Properties?

Answ. Theirdly, wicked men actually manifest their enmity against the
Religious in seven particulars.

First, by gesture, as Goliath against David, when he looked upon him with a
disdainefull countenance, 1 Samuel 17.42. Which is a kind of brow-beating; and
other wicked ones, who made mowes, and nodded the head at him, Psalm. 22.7.
Gaped upon him with their mouths, as ramping and roaring Lions, verse. 13.
Guashed shaked their heads at him, Psalm. 109.25. Thus Job complains, That his
enemies opened their mouths against him, Job. 16.10. And Isaiah, that the
scoffing Idolaters gaped and thrust out their tongues against the godly, in his
time, Isay 57.3, 4. And the Laborers in the Parable are said to have an
evilleye against the Master of the Vineyard, because he was good, Matthew. 20.15.
Many will speak, that dare not strike; and some will make mouths, that fear
to speak.

Now this of gesture is a silent foe; yet upon inquisition made, I find none
more guilty of the Serpents enmity, then he, who speaks with his brow, and
strikes with his eyes; who because his tongue cannot justly condemn a man, he
will leave him suspected of ill by silence, or some disdainefull gesture: For,
as his Majesty said most aptly and elegantly, As the tongue speaks to the
ear; so the gesture speaks to the eye. And though such an one be silent for
want of words, yet he is not so for want of malice, even scoffs and nicknames,
slander and cursing sticks in his teeth, and only dares not freely come forth,
because he is guilty of his own faultiness: and were he not a monstrous
coward, not daring to speak or act for fear of Justice, there would be no
dealing with him: Yet bad as he is, being dumb, I find him incapable of a
verdict, and so dismiss him to lead the Van, which is both a punishment to
himself and those that follow.

2. It is their manner to withstand and contrary the doctrine which they are
commanded by God to deliver. Thus Zidkiah the false Prophet withstood and
contraried Michaiaes doctrine, 1 Kings 22.24. The Priests, Prophets, and all
the people, Jeremiahs, saying, Why have thou prophesied in the name of the
Lord, that this house shall be like Shilo, and this City shall be desolate, and
without an inhabitant? Jer. 26.8, 9. And thus Elimas the Sorcerer withstood and
contraried Paul and Barnabas in their preaching, Acts 13.8.

And this is still the manner of wicked men (being better acquainted with
wrangling then reasoning, and deeper in love with strife then truth) even to
cavil against the good word of God, and oppose the messenger, and what they
cannot maintain by reason, a feminine testiness shall outwrangle.

These night-birds know right well, that where the Sun shines, there is small
place for them to appear: whence the Ministers preaching is as great a
vexation to them, as their conversation is to him: and in case he has a fire
in his tongne kindled with a coal from the Altar, they have a sea of water in
their hearts to quench it.

But if some one be more specially gifted in convincing of sin, he is sure to
have treble opposition, if he molest Satan, and dispossess him of his strong
holds, Satan will molest him with a powder; all the drunkards in that Parish
shall fall about such a Ministers ears; Yea, perhaps some neighbor Ministers
that pretend gravity and good will to God, shall more then set them on: for
virtue fares hardest oftentimes from such as should uphold her.

Thus Satan and his instruments deal like our Pirates, who will set upon rich
laden ships, but pass by those that are empty.

Nor are they to be appeased after they have once begun, for that which
rashness and folly have brought forth, pride afterward and contumacy shall
maintain to the last gasp. Usually an ill cause once undertaken, shall be
maintained, though with blood. Nay, rather then want cause, they will now hate
such a Minister, because they have formerly hurt him: as many husbands hate
their wives, only because themselves have wronged them, or at least love them
the less for their own faults: all which they will defend with their tongues,
though they condemn it with their consciences.

Which men are like those wicked Jews, Acts 13.45. who would neither believe
the doctrine which Paul preached, nor abide that the Gentiles should be brought
to the Faith of Christ: For they not only forbear to hear such a Minister
themselves, but will dehort all their familiars: In imitation of the high
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, who in their own opinion were too good, too
wise, too holy to receive Christ into their company; and, not content to
sequester themselves from Christ, they disdained also that he should be
conversant with Publicans and sinners.

Pride was ever envious and contumelious, thinking she adds so much to her own
reputation, as she detracts from others: and indeed the twinkling stars at
the approach of the Sun lose their light, and after regaine it not, until
darkness be upon the deep: Yea, the whiter the Swan is, the more black is
the Crow that's by her.

3. They will combine themselves together, and say devillsh plots to destroy
the godly, as the new King of Egypt with his people did against the children
of Israel, when they perceived them to multiply so fast, Exodus 1.9.10. Thus the
hundred and twenty Governors combined together to work Daniels overthrow Dan.
6. And thus Demetrius the Silver-smith, and the rest of the craftsmen, which
made gain by the silver Temples of Diana, combined themselves together, to
conspire the death of Paul's campanions, Acts 19. And when Paul was rescued by
Lysias, the next day there were more then forty of the Jews, which bound
themselves by a curse, saying, They would neither eat nor drink, till they
had killed Paul; in which conspiracy, the chief Priests and Elders were
likewise assistants, Act. 23.10.14.

The Apostle says, If God be on our side, who can be against us? But St.
Chrysostom, in opening of those words, says, Nay rather, Who is not against
us, if God be with us? For, they cast their heads together, says David, with
one consent, and are confederate against God and his secret ones, imagining
crafty counsel against them, saying, come, let us rout them out, etc. Psalm.
83.3.4, 5.

How wicked men agree in persecuting the truth, and professors thereof, we may
see, Acts 4.26, 27. and Mark 14. where even old Annas, and that wicked bench of
gray headed Scribes and Elders, are content to break their sleep to do
mischief, and make noon of midnight.

As for the manner of their consultations, they are lively expressed by the
Author of the book of Wisdom, who brings them in, saying thus, one to
another, Come, let us lie in wait for the righteous, because he is not for our
turn, but is clean contrary to our doings: be upbradeth us with our
offending the Law: he was made to reprove our thoughts; it grieveth us also to
look upon him, for his life is not like other men's, his ways are of another
fashion, he vaunteth to have the knowledge of God, and counts us as bastards:
he withdraws himself from our ways as from filthiness; he commends the
latter end of the just, and boasts that God is his Father. Wherefore let us
see if his works be true; let us prove and examine him with rebukes and
torments; let us condemn him to a shameful death. And then gives the reason:
Such things do they imagine, for their own wickedness has blinded them, and
they do not understand the mysteries of God, neither hope for the reward of
righteousness, nor can discern the honor of the souls which are faultlesse,
Wisd. 2.12. to 23.

Qu. I, But what have they whereupon to ground their accusations? For the
religious man's life is commonly like Paul's, Philip. 3.6. unrebukeable, and he
walks in all the commandments and ordinances of the Law, without reproof,
as Zachary and Elizabeth did, Luke 1.6.

Answ. He that studies quarrels will easily find occasion. When the Governors
were resolved that Daniel should die, they soon found pretenses: As suppose it
be a private Christian, they will lie in wait to find faults in him, and turn
good into evil, and are of so prying an observation, that they will look
farther into his actions, then the best man would willingly have them search.

But being disappointed of their hopes, hear what they say, We shall not find
an accusation against him, he is so faithful, except we find it concerning
the law of his God, Dan. 6.5. And his punctual obedience to Gods Laws, and
sticking close to the Word of truth, shall serve for a need.

Or secondly, If he be a Minister, they will assemble together to hear him
pray and preach, that so they may catch something out of his mouth, whereof
they may accuse him, as the Scribes and Pharisees dealth with our Savior, Luke
11.54. And those Governors with Daniel, wherein he shall not be able to speak
so warily, but they will find matter enough to ensnare him, as the words shall
be wrested, though indeed, to have a great audience only shall be made crime
enough: you know when the Jews saw that a great company were at Paul's Sermon,
they were filled with envy, and fell to contradiction and blasphemy: Acts
13.45. And the high Priests and Pharisees, when our Savior was so flockt after
said among themselves: perceive ye not, behold the World goes after him, and
if we let him thus alone, all men will believe in him, John 11.48. and 12.19.
they were like the dog in the manger, that will neither eat Hay himself, nor
suffer the Horse; yet they had a reason for it as these have: Rome thinks that
the Gospels rising, must needs be her falling, as when the day comes, the night
must end. Indeed, opinion makes them coin that for a reason, which others will
not assent unto: Yea, what is truth to these men, is error to others more wise.

And when once he is questioned, every one, like Jael to Sizera, will drive a
nail, to keep him from rising again.

O the wicked minds that many go to Church withal, and the great dangers
that Ministers are liable unto, did not God mightily support them! many of
their hearers being like that Lawyer, which stood up to tempt Christ; for they
come not to be taught by him but to catch him.

But what says David? Though they have conceived mischeife, and do travel
with wickedness, yet they shall bring forth a lie, Psalm. 7.14. For the Lord
breaks their counsels, and brings their devices to naught, Psalm. 33.10.
Yea, while the ungodly are whetting a knife to cut our throats, God is whetting
a sword to cut their throats. Shall the powder think to blow up the house, and
escape it self from burning? No, it is a true rule, that of evil premises does
not follow a good conclusion, but from evil seeds come evil plants.

4. They are very proane to imprison the godly, cause or no cause, As Ahab
commanded Michaiah to be put into the prison house, and fed with the bread of
affliction and with the water of affliction, 1 Kings 22.27. Thus the malicious
Priests procured Jeremiah to be shut up in prison, Jer. 36.5. And thus our
Savior showing what entertainment the faithful should find in the World,
foretells that wicked men shall lay hands on them, and deliver them up to the
assemblies, and into prisons, bring them before Kings and Rulers, for his names
sake, Luke 21.12. As John Baptist, Peter, Paul, and many other of the Apostles,
were put into the common prison by Herod, and the Synod of Priests, when they
preached in Christ's Name, Acts 5.18. and 12.4 and 4.3. and 22.25. and 28.17. And
2 Cor. 11.23: And I Will warrant you, the common people were more glad of the
Churches loss herein, then they would have been of their own gain.

But why into prison? Why not unto death? No thanks to Satan, nor his seed,
they would destroy all. Yea, Why are not our Sanctuaries turned into Shambles,
and our beds made to swim with our bloods, but that the God of Israel has
crossed the confederacy of Balaak, and there wickedness does not prosper,
their studies are the pl^ts of our ruin, and the best they intend, is the
destructions and overthrough of Religion, or the religious, or both.

Again, Why these, and a thousand more in all ages shut up in prison? What was
their delinquency? Even this, They were too good, too holy to be endured. What
was it but Joseph's goodness, that brought him to the stocks and Irons? And so
of Michaiah, Jeremiah, the Apostles, and all the Saints in succeding ages.

And to speak truly, this is a deep point of policy in our adversaries: for
when all their arguments fail, by this means they get the better, and withal
prevent further dispute. In the midst of their anger they this discretion,
Stand not to argue, lest thou be overcome, and let the accused plead what he
can for his own innocence: the Wolf would answer the Lamb, Indeed thy cause
is better then mine, but my teeth are better then thine, I will devour thee:
So the Devil puts off the Fox, and puts on the Lion.

Again, we know the M^one has so much the less light, by how much it is
neer^r the Sun; yea, so long as the Sun shines above the Horizon, the Moon
is scarcely seen. And we use to say of Homer, that the dazzling beams of his
Sun makes all other Poets, like little stars, loose their light.

This made Dionysius, when he could not equal Philoxenus in poetry, nor match
Plato in discourse, condemn the one to the stone-quarries, and sell the other
as a slave into the I Will of Agina. And out of like consideration, have the
wicked always dealt with the godly, even as Julian the Apostate did by our
Savior, who took down his Image in contempt, that he might set up his own
in the same place, and have the people worship it, which he knew they would
never do, so long as the other was reverenced.

5. They often manifest their enmity against the religious by striking them, as
Zidkiah, the false Prophet, struck Michayah on the cheek, 1 King. 22.24. thus
Pasher struck Jeremiah, Ier. 20.2. And the Princes also, Chap. 37.15. And thus
Ananias the high Priest caused Paul to be smitten on the mouth, Acts 23.2. and
the Jews whipped him five times with forty stripes save one, and others beat him
with rods, 2 Cor. 11.23.24.25.

And thus our rough adversaries of Rome stopped our Martyrs mouths, and refuted
them, not with reasons, nor by Law (for the Law has no power to strike the
virtuous) but with fists.

When Politisians Rhetoric fails, Carters Logic must do the fear. Their
arguments are all Steel and Iron, they speak daggers points: As Ioab
discoursed with Amaza in the 5th Rib. So Zedikiah disputed with the Prophet a
word and a blow; yea, a blow without a word; for he smote him first, and spoke
to him afterward.

Every false Prophet is like Julius the second, who threw Saint Peter's keys
into the river Tiber, protesting, that thenceforth he would use and help
himself with Saint Paul's sword.

And in case they cannot have their wills, they resemble Achilles, who is
fained to eat his own heart, because he might not be suffered to fight.

6. It is usual with them to hurt and maime the godly: as the whole
Congregation of the Children of Israel would have served those true hearted
Spies, for seeking to appease the tumult, and speaking well of the land of
Canaan, had not the glory of the Lord appeared in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, Numb. 14.10. Thus the Philistims put out Sampsons eyes, when they
had bound him, Indg. 16.21. and thus the Jews of Antiochia and Iconium hurt
Paul, when they stoned him, and drew him out of the City, supposing he had
been dead, Act. 14.19. Neither have succeeding ages wanted Alexanders, who
have done much hurt to Gods people: for not seldom when reason and railing
failed, have they come to plow-mans Logic, Gunpowder arguments, open violence,
taking up swords to strike, or stones to cast at us, though they incur by it
the danger of the Law. Whereas religion makes wild beasts civil; Atheism, and
Impiety makes of wise men beasts and fools. How many have been known, like
him in Aesop, who willingly lost one eye, that his fellow might loose both?

Yea, whereas the drift of such an ones preaching, in case he be a minister, is
to make them like him, in whose name they preach: contrarily, the very word of
God, by accident, makes them degenerate into stocks and stones: for hearing but
their sins laid open, and the judgment due thereunto, they become so stupid
and insensible of reason, that now, maugre all admonition, the quarrel must
end in blood: Yea, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not meet
that he should live, Acts 22.22.

7. And lastly, It is their manner out of Enmity to slay the godly, as Doeg
slew Ahimeleck and the rest of the Priests, even fourscore and five persons,
and Nob the City of Priests, whom he smote with the edge of the sword, both man
and woman, child and suckling, at Saul's command, 1 Samuel 22.19. Thus Jezabell
slew all the Prophets of the Lord she could find, 1 Kings 18.4. And Herod, all
the male children that were in Bethlehem, and all the coasts thereof, from two
years old and under, that he might make sure work with Christ, Mat. 2.16. And
thus the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Gods own people chosen out of all the
World, used to make such havoc of their own Prophets, that our Savior
bemoaning her case, cries out, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, etc. Matthew 23.37.

And thus it fares with the Saints and servants of God at this day, in such
places where wicked men may have their wills. Whereas those Romish Doctors are
appointed for the saving of many, they are all for destruction: like rash
Empiricks, they can cure no way, but by letting of blood; and hereupon they
turn their Massing into massacring; the School into a Camp; Arguments, into
Arms; teaching all their Proselites dismal conclusions: as it has been no
rare thing, for some of their Priests in Queen Mary's reign, when in
arguments they have found the weakness of their pens to fall to their
penknives: In stead of arguments, they take up arms; and in stead of zeal and
the spiritual word, they use fire and the sword; yea, treasons, are their best
reasons; the Spanish Inquisition, is their Grammar; fire and faggot their
rhetoric; Fleet and fetters, their Logic; the Canons roar, their music;
poisoning, their physic; Yea, their very building of the Church, is by blowing
up of commonwealths; and in stead of fighting for God, they fight against God
and his Leivetenant.

And if at this day they catch but a Protestant in their net, it is a miracle
if ever he scapes death, without making shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience. For if we will not obey them rather then God, they have a Law by
which men ought to dye, a law like Draco's, written with blood, and sealed with
death. Of which their savage proceeding, there are many reasons to be rendered.

First, they must do the works of their Father the Devil: he is a murderer,
and so his children are given to blood, John 8.44.

Secondly, that their deeds of darkness may not come to light. Vriah must be
put to death, least David's adultry be discovered, and himself disgraced. A
living Curre you know, will do more harm then a dead Lion: And it is a sure
rule, that of Eggs fried in the pan come no ill Chickens.

Thirdly, the wicked through malice seek by all means to cut off the godly,
because their sinful and wicked lives are reproved by their godly
conversation: neither can they follow their sins so freely as they would, nor
so quietly, without detection or check. Now if Abels good works reprove Caines
evil deeds, let Caine but take away the cause, kill Abell, and the effect
shall not follow.

Fourthly, whereas the godly are too hard for them in disputing: take Steven
for an instance: they will be even with him, by casting of stones, stop his
mouth with brickbats, fetch arguments from the Shambles; and this they are sure
will do, when all other hopes and helps fail. So they make their party good,
if not with arguments of reason, yet with arguments of steel, and Iron. But
this is a very hard way of consuting.

Fifthly, their glory and credit with the World is eclipsed, by suffering these
which excel in virtue. This made Adrian and Nero to kill all such as eclipsed
their glory by any demerit: and Mercine, you know, was murdered of her
fellows, because she did excel the rest in beauty. Thus Herod, thought he
could not be King, if Christ should reign. Yea, as though he had been of the
race of the Ottomans, he thought he could not reign, except the first thing he
did, he killed all the males in Bethlehem, from two years old and under: And
the Pharisees that they should be despised, if Christ were regarded.

And so much of the Actual properties of this Enmity.

Qu. In how many of these kinds did our Savior himself suffer (whose example
hitherto you have omitted) in his own person of the Jews, his Country men and
kinsfolk; yea, of the chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, who were teachers
and expounders of the Law, and which sat in Moses Chair?

An. In every one of the 22. for as touching the Mental Properties.

1 They Envyed him, Matthew. 26.15. 2 They Contemned him, Matthew. 12.24. and
13.55. 3 They Rejoiced at him in his misery and destresse, Mat. 27.29. 4 They
Hated him, John 7.7.
2. Touching the Verbal.

1 They Murmured against him, Luke 15.2. 2 They Misconstrued his actions and
intentions, Mat. 11.^9. 3 They Carried tales of him, Mat. 12.14. 4 They Gave
divellish counsel against him, Mat. 27.20. 5 They Scoft at him, Matthew. 27.42.
6 They Nicknamed him, Matthew. 13.55. 7 They Rayled on him, Luke 23.39. 8 They
Slandered him, Matthew. 28.13. 9 They Cursed him, Gal. 3.13. 10 They Threatened
him, John 11.53. 11 They Undermined him in talk, that they might accuse him,
Matthew. 22.15.
3. Touching the Actual.

1 They Used disdainful gestures before him, Mat. 27.29.39 2 They Withstood
and contraryed his Doctrine, Luke 5.21. Mat. 9.34. 3 They Combined together and
laid Plots to destroy him, Mat. 12.14. 4 They Took him prisoner, Mat. 26.57. 5
They Smote him, Luke 22.64. 6 They Hurt and wounded him, Mat. 27.29. John 19
34. 7 They Put him to death, even that cursed death of the Cross, Matthew.
27.35. That the Scriptures might be fulfilled which says, And thou shall
bruise his heel; for all that he suffered was but in his Humanity, and so no
more then the bruising of his heel.
And why all this? Not for any evil they found in him; for their own words
are, He has done all things well, Mark 7.37. He has done, such was his power;
all things, such was his wisdom; well, such was his goodness: and yet
crucified, and abused every way he must be. It was indeed for his zeal, purity
and holiness, and because his life and practice was clean contrary to theirs,
his Doctrine too powerful and pure for such carnal hearts to embrace or
endure. So that it is plain, and all men may see, who are not dead in sense,
how it would fare with us, might our enemies, the same Seed of the Serpent
have their wills.

Qu. What uses may this serve for, which has been spoken touching the
properties of this enmity, and our Saviors suffering?

An. First, by this taste of its fruits learn we to detest them all.

Secondly, it may serve to inform every man, whether he be of the Serpents
seed, a child of the Devil, as he came into the world, or regenerate, and so
become of the woman's Seed, a child of God and member of Christ: for as our
Savior says, speaking of false Prophets, By their fruits ye shall know them:
so I of the seed of the Serpent, and children of the Devil, By these 22.
fruits of enmity you shall know them, as well as you shall know the life by
breathing, or the day by its light. Wherefore all ye that read, reflect and
cast your eyes on these examples, which are such lively emblemes and
representations of your selves, if you be the Sepents seed, and yet in your
sins. Yea, let it make you tremble; for know assuredly, that if this spawne of
enmity, formerly spoken of, remain in you; if any of these ways you persecure
Christ in his members, or but hate the good, because they will not be so evil
as you are, you have not cast off this serpentine quallity, which you drew from
the loins of old Adam; but it is an infallible sign, that you are of the
Serpents seed, children of the Devil, enemies to God, and all goodness, the
brethren of Cayne, yea, Cayne himself in another person, and without
repentance, your portion shall be with Cayne, and the rest of that cursed crew.

On the other side, does any conscionable Christian find himself hated and
persecuted by ungodly men for weldoing, for Christ's sake, for Religion and for
righteousness sake? Let him be comforted; for it is a manifest sign, and a
notable strong evidence, that he is of the Woman's Seed, regenerate and borne a
new, the child of God, a member of Christ's mystical body, and an heir of
eternal life.

Thirdly, these examples being written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of
the world are come, may inform the godly what they are to expect from the
world: Shall any hope to be free from suffering, or think it a strange thing,
when he does suffer for well doing, when our Savior- Christ himself suffered
so much as he did, being the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and
truth? No, the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his
Lord: If they have persecuted Christ, they will persecute you also, John 15.20.
If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of
his household? Mat. 10.25. Yea, senseless were it once to think, that the same
enmity which spared not to strike at the Head, will forbear the weakest and
remotest limb.

Wherefore arm thou us, O God, with an expectation of that evil which we
cannot avoid, yea, make thou us as strong as Satan and his instruments are
malicious, and then let them do their worst.

And so much of the kinds and properties of his enmity.

The Causes.
Qu. What are the Causes why wicked and ungodly men thus hate and persecute the
religious?

Answ. They are so many, that the time would be too short, or this Treatise too
long, if I should speak of every one, yea, or relate half of what is
requisite to to be spoken of each; for they require whole Volumes, besides
instructions, if they exceed, are wont, as nails to drive out one another.

Qu. Then select out the principal, I mean, such as in regard of our
edification, are most behoovefull for us to know. And lest the pages should
still grow, as fish, into a multitude, garble your notions, and give us only
the marrow of the matter.

Answ. The Causes best deserving our discovery, and the worlds notice, I take
to be Eleaven:

First, a maine Cause why wicked men hate and persecute the godly, is the
contrariety of their natures.

Qu. How contrary are they?

Answ. As contrary and opposite one to the other, as are God and the Devil:
for the one are Children of God, 2 Cor. 6.18. Gal. 3.26. Joh. 1.12. And partake
of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Being begotten, James 1.18. And borne a new
of God, Joh. 1.13. 1 John 3.9. by the immortal seed of the word, James 1.18.
And the spirits powerful working with it, Ioh. 3.5.8. whereby they are become
like God in holiness, 1 Pet. 1.15. And not children only, but heirs also,
even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, Romans 8.17* being his
brethren, Romans 8.29. Members of his body, 1 Cor. 12.27. Bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. having his Spirit dwelling in them, Romans 8.9.
to witness with their spirits, that they are the children of God, verse. 16.
And being Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19.

And the other are the Seed of the Serpent, and children of the Devil, and so
partake of his nature, 1 Ioh. 3.8.10.12.14. Act. 13.10. Ioh. 6.70. and 8.44.
and 14.30. and 16.11. Matthew. 13.38.39. 2 Cor. 4.4. 2 Timothy 1.26. Genesis 3.15. and
5.3. Ephesians. 2.1. to the end, and 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.22. Romans 5.12.18. Titus 3.3.
to 8. 1 Pet. 2.9.10.25. Joh. 3.3.5.6. which being so, they must needs be very
contrary, and if contrary, no marvel they should so ill agree, although God
had not proclaimed an enmity between them.

For there can be no amity, where there is no sympathy; No reconciling of the
Wolf and the Lamb; the winds and the sea; No neighborhood, no aliance, no
conjunction is able to make the cursed seed of the Serpent, and the blessed
seed of the Women ever agree: For fire and water, light and darkness, heaven
and hell are not more contrary.

One blood, one belly, one house, one education could never make Cayne and Abel
accord, Jacob and Esau, Isack and Ishmael at one. Yea, though they be man and
wife, parent and child, yet if they be not like, they will not like, 2 Cor.
6.14.15. And indeed, what is the corporal sympathy to the spiritual
antipathy? Can there be such a parity between the parent and the child, the
husband and the wife, as there is a disparity between God and Satan? No
certainly.

A wicked man can agree with all that are wicked, be they Papists, or Turks,
or Atheists, profane and loose persons, civil or moral men, for all these
agree with him in blindness and darkness: as who feels the smart of their
tongues, or hands? not the Idolator or vile person, not the professed Atheist,
the Canker fretting Arminian, or state betraying Jesuit: For with all these
they are hail fellow well met. But with sincere Christians and Practicers of
piety, he can never agree: the religious shall be sure of opposition, because
their light is contrary to his darkness; grace in the one is a secret disgrace
to the other.

Yea, let wicked men be at never so much odds one with another, yet they will
concur and join against the godly. As for example, Edom and Ishmael, Moab
and the H^garens, Gebal and Ammon, Ammaleck and the Philistims, the men of Tire
and Assure had each several gods; yet all conspired against the true God, Psalm.
83.5. to 9. Manasses against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasses; but both
against Juda. Herod and Pilate two enemies, will agree, so it be against
Christ: they will fall in one with another, to fall out with God. The Saduces,
Pharisees, and Heredians were Sectaries of diverse and adverse factions, all
differing one from another; and yet all these join together against our
Savior, Matthew. 22. The Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrions, Cilicians and
Asians, differ they never so much, will join in dispute against Steeven, Acts
6.9. Herod neither loved the Jews, nor the Jews Herod; yet both are agreed to
vex the Church.

I cannot think of a fitter emblem of a natural man, then Lime, which
agrees well with all things that are dry and of it is own nature; but meeting
with water, a thing directly opposite, it breaks, burns, swells, smokes,
crackles, skips and scatters: so nature will give a man leave to be any thing,
save a sound Christian, and agree with all others, be their conditions never so
contrary, provided they agree in the maine, are all seed of the same Serpent.
But let the natural man meet with one that is spiritual, they agree like
heat and cold; if one stays, the other flies; or if both stay, they agree
like two poisons in one stomach, the one being ever sick of the other, be
they never so near alyed. As how many a wife is so much the more hated, because
a zealous wife? How many a child less beloved, because a religious child? How
many a servant less respected, because a godly servant? And no marvel; for
though they dwell in the same house, yet they belong to two several kingdoms;
and albeit they both remain on earth, yet they are governed by two several
laws, the ones burguship being in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. And the other, being a
denizon, belonging to Hell: as Irish-men are dwellers in Ireland, but denizons
of England; and governed by the Statutes of this kingdom.

Neither is this of theirs an ordinary hatred, but the most bitter, exorbitant,
unlimited, and unplacable of all others. No such concord, no such discord,
says one of the learned, as that which proceeds from Religion. My name, says
Luther, is more odious unto them, then any thief, or murderer: as Christ was
more detestable to the Jews then Barrabas. Behold, says David, mine enemies,
for they are many, and they hate me with a cruel batred, Psalm. 25.19. yea, so
cruel, that it makes their teeth gnash, and their hearts burst again, Act.
7.54. which made the Truths adversaties give Saint Paul stripes above measure,
2 Cor, 11.2, 3. And the Heathen Emperors to devise such cruel tortures, for
all those which but professed themselves Christians.

Yea, agreement in some points, when there are differences in the maine, does
but advance hatred the more: Witness the Reign of Queen Mary, and the
Butchery over all France of above two hundred thousand Protestants; besides the
many thousands of late years: Yea, ask from East to West, from one Pole to
the other; search all Records under Heaven, if ever there was the like of the
intended Powder Plot.

You cannot anger a wicked man worse, than to do well: Ye, he hates you more
b^tterly for this, and the cred^t you gain thereby, than if you had cheated
him of his Patrimony, with your own discredit. But that there is no hatred so
virulent and bitter, as that which is occasioned by virtuous living, and
professing of CHRIST'S Name, our Savior Himself proves copiously, Matthew 10.
Luke 21.

Quest. Wherein consists their unlikenesse and contrariety?

Answ. Chiefly in four particulars; thou hindeed there be more differences
between the Children of God and the children of the Devil, than there are
between men and beasts.

First, they exceedingly differ in their judgments touching Wifedom, 1 Cor.
1.18.20, 23. and ^, 14. and 4.10. Luke 6.27. to 36. Acts 26.24. Wisd. 5.4. Genesis
41.8. Job 5.13. Proverbs 28.11. Ierem. 4.22. 1 Cor. 3.19. Exodus 1.10. Joshua
9.4. Titus 3.9. Proverbs 10. verse 18. Romans 16. ver. 19.

Happiness, Luke 6.26. and 8.13. James 4.4. Mark 16, 16. John 3.16, 18. and
8.34, 36. Romans 6.16, 18.22. Psalm. 2.3, 4. and 10.3. and 12.4. 2 Timothy 2.26.
Mal. 3.15. Revel. 3.17. 1 These. 5.3.

Fortitude, Prove. 28.1, 2. Rev. 13.6, 7. and 12, 13, 17. Mar. 13.9. Acts 7.52.
Matthew. 10.28. Galathians 4.29. John 16.2.

Sin, Luke 16.15. Prove. 13.19. Mark 7.5, 11, 12.13. Luke 7.33, 34. Matthew.
7.14. 1 Peter 4.18. Psalm. 35.13.16

Holiness, Acts 26.9. Exo. 8 26. 1 Cor. 4.10. and 2.14 Pro. 13.19. Psalm. 14.1.
Ier. 44.16. to 1^. Yea, they are of a reprobate judgment touching actions and
persons, say 5.20. and so speak, thinks and do all by contraries, like
Helioga^^^ who wore shoes of Gold, and Rings of Leather, or the Blackmoores
who judge of beauty by contraries. Wherefore read their words as Scholars do
Hebrew, backward, and you have the meaning: for instance do they call thee
Puritan as nothing more frequent in their mouths, understand by it Saint for a
Christian indeed (as thou art) is a Puritan in the devils language and a
Christian in name only (as such an one is) is an Atheist in Gods language.

Secondly, They no less differ in their Passion^ and affections of Love, Psalm.
119.57, 72. and 17, 14.

Fear, Prove. 28.1, 2. 1 Timothy 4.1. Romans 2.14 15.

Anger, Acts 7.52. to 60. and 5.30. to 34. Prove. 12.10. Rev. 18.19, 20.

Joy, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Ioh 3.15. Matthew. 11.19. And the like, which for brevities
sake I forbear.

Thirdly, they differ no less in Practice, and this breeds many quarrels: as
what more common, than for all sorts and kinds of men to hate, scorn,
persecute, reproach, revile, accuse slander and condemn the Religious, because
their own works are evil and wicked, and the others good, holy, and
righteous. Wherefore slew Caine his brother, says Saint John, but because his
own Works were ev^ll, and his brothe^s good? 1 John 3.12. Why was Joseph
accused of h^s Mistreffe for an Adulterer, and thereupon committed to prison,
but because he would not be an Adulterer like her? Genesis 39. Yea, it was his
parti-colored Coat, composed of all kinds of graces and blessings that
formerly procured his Brethrens hate. And what is it that Jobs Wife
expostulates with him about, but his integrity? As if she took it ill, that he
took it no worse: his patience made her impatient. Wherefore was holy David,
as himself complains, almost in every Psalm, Had in derision, hated,
slandered, reviled, contemned and made a proverb and song of the drunkards,
and other wicked men which sat in the gate, but because he follewed the things
which were good and pleasing unto God, and in him put his trust? Psalm. 11.2.
and 22.6, 7, 8. and 37.14. and 69.10, 11, 12. And lastly (for I might be
endless in the prosecution of this) Why were all the just, in Solomon's time,
had in abominations and mocked of the wicked, but because they were upright in
their way, and holy in their conversation, Prove, 29.27. Or those numberless
Martyrs, whose souls Saint John saw under the Altar ( Revel. 6.9.) killed, but
for the Word of God, and for the testimony which they maintained? And the
Master himself, not for any evil as themselves are forced to confess, Mark
7.37. which examples sufficiently prove; that all wicked men are like the women
of Lemnos, who when they had every one slain their husbands and kinsmen,
exiled Hypsipyle the Kings daughter, for that she alone saved her Father alive.
That great Dragon the Devil, and these his Subjects, make war and are wroth
with none but the Woman, and the remnant of her Seed, which keep the
Commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, Revel. 12.17.

But to apply this to our selves. I would feign know, whether the power of
godliness, the sincere profession of the name of Christ, according to the Vow
which we made in Baptism, all kind of purity and holiness, does not live in
persecution amongst us, as Protestants do in Spain? Is it not a capital
crime to be virtuous? Is not the name of an honest man, who makes conscience of
his ways, grown odious? Is not circumspect walking, the zeal of Gods glory
in promoting the best things, frequent hearing of Sermons, singing of Psalms,
holy conference, brotherly admonition, etc. counted a vice, and that vice
called Puritanisme? And must not he who is called a Puritan, be derided, hated,
persecuted, slandered and laughed to scorn? how many may complain with Jeremy,
that because they live a godly life themselves, and call upon others to do the
same, they are cursed of every one, and counted contentious? Ier. 15.10. Yea,
let but a spark of fervent devotion break cut in a Family, all the rest are
up in clamors; as when Bells ring disorderly, every man is ready with his bucket
to quench the fire; disgraced he must be for a Puritan, but only by
Laodiceans. Indifferency strives to dash zeal out of countenance, The reason
is, wheresoever Christ comes, there will be opposition. When Christ was borne,
all Jerusalem was troubled, and Herod cut the throats of all the children in
Bethlehem: so when Christ is borne in any man, the soul is in an uproare, and
Satan with his iustruments are ready to kill in him every good motion, though it
be never so little a Babe.

That which the Ancients did chiefly admire ( goodness) we do most of all
contemn: for is not the godly man more despised for his godliness, then the
wicked for his wickedness? Are not the members of Christ more hated, and worse
entreated by us, then the limbs of the Devil? What suppressing and disgracing
is there of Hels, and Romes chiefest adversaries, under the aspersion and
pretense of Puritanisme.

Whereas if the same men, would but bare them company in their sins, be
drunk, swear, temporise, contemn holiness, mispend their time, haunt
Playhouses and Tavernes, play the good fellows, and do as the rest do, they
should have the approbation and good word of the greatest number; yea, if they
would not be precise in their actions, nor reprove others for their evil
courses; if they would not speak against pluralities, Non-residents, lazy and
good fellow Pastors, who either starve or quite neglect, or else mislead their
flocks; if they would but be profane and wicked, and make no bones of sin,
their malice would cease, and we should not have a Puritan in all the world.

As let me appeal from th ir tongues to their hearts, and from their mouths
to their consciences, whether this be not the greatest cause of their quarrel,
We refuse to pledge them in their wicked customs. For may not all see (saving
such as the Prince of darkness has blind^d) that those, for the most part,
whom the world speaks so basely of, are before men, in respect of any
scandalous offenses or open crimes, unblameable, and may say with the Lamb,
whom they follow, Which of you can rebuke me of sin, though with Paul, 1 Timothy,
1.15. they think themselves the worst of sinners? And do not their
adversaries know, that the men whom they term Puritanes, are honester men, and
more righteous then themselves, as Pharaoh was forced to confess touching
Moses? Exodus 10.16, 17. And Saul touching David? 1 Samuel 26.21. yea, I know they
are persuaded well of them, even when they speak most to the contrary, though
I expect not they should use them thereafter. We know Pilate judged Christ
guiltless, but yet he put him to death. And Festus acknowledged that Paul was
without crime, yet he left him in prison. I dare say Tertullus knew that he
lied, when he called Paul a pestilent fellow: his conscience could not choose
but answer him, Thou lie in thy throat Tertullus, Paul is an honester man
then thy self. And must not these men's conscinces tell them, that the same
they accuse so, are in their lives the most unreproveable of the land? Yea, I
will appeal to their greatest adversaries, whether the Protestant at large, or
those who are called Puritanes, be of the purest religion, and most reformed to
the Primitive Church? ^or not seldom are wicked men's judgments forced to
yield unto that truth, against which their affections maintain a rebeilion:
And yet, as if they would stamp Gods Image on the Devils dross, and the Devils
image on Gods silver, they justify those actions and persons, which God
condemns, and condemn those which he justifies.

True, these enemies to holiness spare not to cast aspersions on us; else how
should they work their wills? How should Naboth be cleanly put to death, if he
be not first accused of blasphemy? 1 King. 21.13. and the like of Joseph,
Eliah, Jeremiah, Susanna, Paul, Steeven, and our Savior Christ himself. But
if you mark it, they are as guilty of the crimes whereof they be accused, as
Joseph was, in forcing of his Mistress, or as Naboth and the rest were, of those
things which were laid to their charge.

I speak not of those monsters, those white devils, who make Religion a
stalking horse to villainy. I know too many dishonor God, by wearing of his
livery. But what was Satan to the children of God, Job 1.6. though he thrust
himself into their company? Or what wise man will tax all the Apostles,
because one was a Judas. To argue, because some are so and so, therefore the
rest are alike, is a saplesse reason, only becoming a fool.

Yet most men are such fools, or rather brute beasts, led with sensualitty,
and made to be taken and destroyed, as Saint Peter speaks, who because they
love to speak evil of the way of truth, 2 Pet. 2.2.12. If they see but an
hypocrite discover himself, they not only harden themselves in their sins,
and, as it were, break their own necks at this stumbling block, being Satan's
trap, set on purpose to catch their blind souls in, but condemn all the rest
of his profession to be such as he is, save that they dissemble their
hypocrisy more closly and cunningly; which is as equal and just, as it was for
Simeon and Levi to murder all the Sechemites for the offense only of Hamors
Son. But as all are not thievs that dogs bark at; so all are not hypocrites
which they term so.

Indeed, as all our enemies are not alike witty, so they are not alike
malicious; for some transcend this way, as Doeg did the rest of Saul's servants
another way, you shall know such an one by these few marks; his hatred is so
inveterate and universal, that he spends all his wit in frothy scoffs, and
invectives against the whole people of God? and as if the door were not wide
enough except he set open all the windows, and brake down the walls to let in
this infectious air, his tongue scrues something against the religious into
all discourses; and when his own invention fails, it shall be supplied with
what he has heard: for as the Papists never found any error spued out by the
Ancients, but they have licked it up, superstitiously to abuse the same: so he
never hears of any scoff, slander, or divellish invective formerly devised,
but he licks it up, that he may spit it out again in the face of some
professor, or on the other fide poison those with whom he does converse; being
to his company like a mad dog, that so biteth every one he meets, that they
become mad too, and as apt to bite others as himself; or in case he meets with
another like himself in wit and malice, it may be said of them, as Diogenes
spoke of two ill conditioned women, when he saw them talking, See how the
Viper and the Aspe are changing poison. And nothing so ticles the spleen, or
glads the heart of such, as that discourse which may most shame profession,
disgrace Religion, and dishonor God. But, O that ever those tongues, which
dare call God Father, should suffer themselves thus to be moved and possessed
by that unclean spirit! Or that ever the Church should own such for her
children. In the Primitive times, the Church would have denied her blessing to
such a Son, that should have thought himself disparaged by serving Christ
and wearing of his livory, although he had not scoft at others: yet this man
flatters himself that he is a Christian; yea, you cannot beat him from it, but
that he is as good a Christian as the precisest, and shall go to heaven as
soon. But let him that reads, consider whether it be not a fearful thing, to
lend to Satan the heart for devising, the tongue for uttering, and the ear for
hearing of calumnies, and all this to disgrace the grace of God in his
children, and make it frutlesse to themselves and others. O impiety to be
abhorred: Such sport on earth is only sport for the fiends in hell, and let
them look to it, for such joys may chance to cost them eternal mourning;
yea, certainly, if the infernal Tophet be not for them (in case they repent
not) it can challenge no guests; for I may well say unto such an one, Many
sinners have done wickedly, but thou surpassest them all; thine is such a
superlative, such a soule-murthering sin, that no other sin can parallel
it.

But thou have plenty of excuses to pacify thy blinded and benumbed conscience:
Yea, thou want not some carnal reasons to make it good, as an easy
invention may put false matters into true Sylogismes: And amongst the rest,
thou would not have men singular: wherefore that they may have less zeal
and more temper, thou seek^st to alay their heat with frumps and scoffs, and
taunts, and jeeres; as how often do we hear remiss professors strive to
choke all forward holiness and zeal by commending the golden mean? For
carnal men (who cleave as close to custom, and example of the greatest
number, as clay to a Cart wheel) think every one exorbitant, that walks not
after their rule, 1 Pet. 4.4. As the Sodomites thought of Lot, Genesis 19.9. the
hundred and twenty Governors of Daniel, Dan. 6.11. and the Caldeans of
Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, Dan. 3 8. to 30. Daniel of all Darius his
servants was so bold as to pray three times a day, not in contempt of the King
of Babylons decree, but in zeal and obedience to the God of Heavens command:
the Governors stranging at it, accuse him, and say, this Daniel which is of
the captivity, regards not thee O King, nor the decree which thou have
signed; but does so and so: wherefore command we pray thee, that he be cast
into the Lions den, for no decree, nor statute which the King establishes may
be altered, Dan. 6. Again what disorder is this that I hear of you, says
Nebuchadnezzar to Shadrach, Meshech, and Ahednego: will not you serve my gods,
nor worship the golden Image that I have set up, Dan. 3.14. who answer no, be
it known unto thee O King, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter:
they were all as stiff as if they had eaten a stake, and they could not bow to
an Idol: as the godly have been in all ages, not being able to wheel with
the times. Yea, they that truly fear God are usually as immovable as the Sun
in its course, because they think, and speak, and live by rule, and not by
example, and hold themselves as fast tied, as if they had the oath given them,
which the Egyptian Kings solemnly presented to their Judges, not to swerve
from their consciences, what command soever they should receive from rhemselves
to the contrary. Which strictness is a great eyesore to carnal men: who hate
singularity, almost as they do sanctity, which makes them to cry it down.

Now this imputation of singularity, and their extolling the mean, is a
cunning discouragement, but it is the Devils Sophistry; for the mean of
virtue, is between two kinds, not between two degrees: it is a mean grace,
that loves a mean degree of grace.

Yet this is the only staff, with which the World beats all that are better
then themselves. What will you be singular? Or are you wiser then all? Or what
is this but want of discretion? And to speak truth, that which worldly men
call discretion, eats up all true wisdom: There discretion and moderate
stayednesse, devoures all true honesty, and goodness. But shall Lot leave his
righteousness for such an imputation of singularity? Or shall he not depart
Sodom, because the whole City thinks it better to stay there still? Shall Noah
leave building the Arc, and so himself, and his household perish, because all
the World else, thinks him haire-brayned? Or must the name of a Puritan,
dishearten us from the service of God? No, but as Saint Paul said in his
Apollogie, Acts 24.14. after the way which they call Herefie, so worship I the
God of my Fathers: so we in this case, After the way which profane men call
Puritanisme, let my soul desire to serve Jesus Christ.

Ob. I grant (will the more moderate worldling say) in such cases wherein the
word of God is express, singularity is not lawful only, but laudable: But
(which makes my spleen rise) they will not conform to things indifferent.

An. A seduced heart deceives thee in so saying, why else do thou cast the
same aspersions, upon such as are conformable.

But admit they only are thorns in thine Eyes, do thou well to hate all
that are not of thy own judgment, or that have tenderer consciences then thy
self? No, for honest and good men may differ in opinion, not only in things
trivyall, but in matters of great moment; provided, they agree in the
fundamental articles of the Catholic faith, and yet may, and ought to
continue brotherly love and communion, as members of the same mystical body:
as many examples witness, both of eminent Christians, and Fathers of the
Church: as also our Saviors words, who speaking of the fundamental points,
penneth the league thus, He that is not with us, is against us, but of points
not fundamental thus, He that is not against us, is with us. Whereas these
differ from thee (if thou be a true Protestant as thou would be thought
to be) in nothing material, for there is a vast difference, between another
discipline, and another doctrine: and they little differ, that agree in matter.
Only their consciences are not so large as thine: and thou think those
things indifferent, which they cannot assent unto; though they take more pains
to satisfy and inform themselves then thou do. But admit they be things of
an indifferent nature, even actions of indifferency, when once they are felt to
trench upon the conscience, lay deep obligations upon the soul, even whiles
they are most slighted by careless hearts: there being no less difference in
consciences, then stomachs, of which some will digest the hardest meats, and
turn over substances not in their nature edible, whiles others surfeite of the
lightest food, and complain even of dainties.

And indeed, every gracious heart is in some measure scrupelous, and finds more
safety in fear, then in presumption: And certainly in cases of a doubtful
and questionable nature, it is ever good to take the surest side, and which
draws nearest to probability. Many things are of so questionable a nature,
that much may be said on either side: Now if I choose that side on which I am
sure I shall not sin, I deserve to be excused, rather then censured; if I use
them it is possible I may sin, it may be they are not sinful; yet I am not
so sure of it that I shall not sin if I use them, as I am sure I shall not
sin, nor break any of Gods commandments if I do not use them. This I may
be bold to build upon, He that sails amongst Rocks, it is possible he may
escape splitting, but he is not so sure to keep his Vessel safe, and whole, as
he that sails in a clear Sea, where no Rocks are at all.

Qu. But to speak really, and as the truth is, Why do they use all these
discouragements?

An. Their only aim is, to make us square our lives according to their Rule;
as that Giant did proportion the bodies of all his guests, to the bed of his
Harlot; Yea, if they would give their tongues liberty to acquaint us with their
hearts and consciences, they must needs confess, that they use that odious
nickname (devised by Satan himself) for no other end, but to flout men out of
their faith and holy profession, and to bring the very truth of Religion, and
power of godliness into contempt and scorn.

And indeed, whom not heroical in fortitude (the case standing as it does)
would it not discourage and beat back to the world? But thanks be given to
God, his Spirit herein so hardens and steeleth his servants, that their faces
are like flint, and themselves like brazen walls, and defenced Cities, though
otherwise soft in affection, and true professors of meekness.

Yea, undoubtedly he must be more then man (that is, more spirit then flesh)
that can contentedly make himself contemptible to follow Christ, be pointed at
for singularity, endure so many base and vile nicknames, as are every where
cast upon the conscionable (for there is scarce a house, but is haunted with
these kind of spirits, familiars, visible and carnal Devils, soule-murtherers)
have his religion judged Hypocrisy; his Christian prudence, craft and policy;
his godly simplicity, silliness; his zeal, madness; his punctual obedience
to Gods Laws, rebellion to Princes, his contempt of the world, ignorance; his
godly sorrow, dumpishnesse, etc. For these and the like, asunseasonable frosts,
nip all gracious offers and beginnings in the bud, and as much as in them
lies, with Herod labor to kill Christ in young professors. Yea, the censures
and scoffs of these Atheists and Worldlings, like the blasts of Rams-hornes
before the walls of lerico, lay all the strength of a young beginners virtues
leavell at one utterance: yea, it is the only Remora and greatest cause of
arrest, if any look heavenward, that makes them recoyle.

True, a wise man will not be scoft out of his money, nor a just man be flouted
out of his faith; Yea, like John Baptist, he will hold his profession, though
he loose his head for it. If Christ have but once possessed the affections,
there is no dispossessing him again. The league that Heaven has made, Hell
wants power to break. If the sweet doctrine of Christ be once gotten into the
heart, it cannot be got out again by all the torments which wit and cruelty
can devise, as we see in the Martyrs.

Neither would he ever endure a blow, who cannot concoct a foul word. He that
is discouraged and made return with an Ishmaelitish persecution of the tongue:
how would he endure a Spanish Inquisitian, or those Marian times? He that is so
frighted with a squib, how would he endure the mouth of a Cannon? But to
proceed.

For a man to be scoft out of his goodness, by those that are lewd, is all
one, as if a man that sees should blindfold himself, or put out his eyes,
because some blind wretches revile and scoff at him for seeing: or as if one
that is sound of limbs, should limpe, or maime himself, to please the Criple,
and avoid his taunts. For my part, I had rather live hated of all men for
goodness, then be beloved of all for vice; and rather please one good man,
then content a thousand bad ones; his single authority being sufficient to
countervayle the disdain of a whole Parrish of sensualists.

Yet experience shows, That diverse are content to be misled with the
multitude, rather then be an object of their scorn and dirision. Yea,
thousands hold it the best and safest way, in differences of religion, without
further question, to take the stronger part; that so doing as the most do,
they may have the fewest to find fault with them, and all through base
cowardlinesse, which bashful devil never leaves a great many, so long as they
live; whereby with the rich man, Luke 16. they never think of heaven, till
tormented in the flames of hell.

Whereas Satan formerly assaulted the Church by violence, now he does it by
deceit: and certainly the devil gets more by such discouragements, and the
reproaches that are cast upon religion, then he did formerly by fiere and
Faggot; for then the blood of the Martyrs was found to be the seed of the
Church, others (Phenix-like) springing out of their ashes, whereas now
multitudes of souls are scoft out of their Religion by wicked men. But I
grieve to see how they wrong themselves, in thus wronging others: for in that
wicked men do so mock and deride such as are in love with heavenly things, it
is hard to say whether they do most offend in hindering the honor of God
thereby, or their neighbors welfare, or their own salvation.

Alas, some men will better abide a stake, then some others can a mock.
Zedikiah was willing to harken to the Prophets, counsel, but that this lay in
his way, the Chaldeans would mock him, Ier. 38.10. it was death to him to be
mocked. A generous nature is more wounded with the tongue, than with the hand:
yea, above hell there is not a greater punishment, then to become a Sannio, a
subject of scorn, as Sampson, I doubt not, found. Alcibiades did profess,
That neither the proscription of his goods, nor his banishment, nor the wounds
received in his body, were so grievous to him as one scornful word of his
enemy Ctesiphon.

Thou think not tongue-taunts to be persecution, but thou shall once hear
it so pronounced in thy bill of indictment. Ishmael did but flout Isaak, yet
St. Paul says, he persecuted him, Gal. 4.29. God calls the scorning of his
servants by no better a name, then persecution. And what ever thou conceivest
of it, let this fault be as far from my soul, as my soul from hell.

And thus you see, That nothing but goodness is the whetstone of their malice;
which being so, are not we heathenish Christians? What honor of Christ is
there amongst us, where Religion makes one contemptible? Is this
Christian-like? Such men may be Christians in show, or name, but they are
devils indeed (however they flatter themselves) resembling the high Priests,
Scribes, and Pharisees, who called themselves the Church, while they went about
to kill the head of the Church: who the same night that Christ instituted the
Sacrament, and consulted how to save them, did consult how they might destroy
him; yea, let any indifferent stander by, judge whether thou be not
bottomlessely ill, who do malice goodness in others, who art displeased
with us, because we please God, and murmurest like the Scribes and Pharisees at
the same things, whereat the Angels rejoice: For none but a Cayne, or a Devil
in condition, will envy, because his own works are evil, and his brothers
good. They are desperately wicked, that cannot endure so much as the sight of
godliness: as he was fearfully idle, that Seneca speaks of, whose sides
would ach to see another work: Neither could thou do so, if the devil
were not in thine heart. And so much touching the third difference between the
seed of the Serpent, and the Seed of the woman.

4. Fourthly, as they hate and persecute the godly, because they do well: so
likewise, because they fare well, and are accepted before them. As why was
Cayne wroth with his brother Abel, and after slew him, as affirms the holy
Ghost, but because, The Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering: but
unto Cain and his offering, he had no respect? Genesis 4.4, 5. Why did Esau hate
Jacob, and purpose to kill him, but because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him? Genesis 27.41. Isaacs blessing bred Esaus hate. Again,
Wherefore did the Philistines and Abimelek envy Isaac, stop up his wels, and
banish him from them, but because the Lord so abundantly blessed Isaac, as
appears, Genesis 26.12. to 18 Wherefore did Joseph's brethren hate him, not being
able to speak peaceably unto him, and after sell him into Egypt, but because
his father more favored him, and they feared he should reign over them? Genesis
37.4. If Joseph be his fathers darling, he is his brethrens eyesore. Wherefore
did Saul persecute David, and pursue after him from place to place to take away
his life, but because he was so praised and preferred of the people before
himself, and, The Lord was with David, and prospered him in every thing he took
in hand, 1 Samuel 18.12, 13, 28, 29. David's success is Saul's vexation: yea, he
finds not so much pleasure in his king dome, as vexation in the prosperiof
David. And lastly, (for I pass by the elder brothers envy in the Parable
against his younger brother, when his father so royally entertained him at his
return, Lu. 15.28. which is meant of the Jews envying the Gentiles conversion;
and many the like instances) Why was Eliah wroth with his younger brother, 1 Samuel 17.28. but because he should be more exalted? And I doubt me, whether
David's brethren were more glad, that Goliath was slain, or angry that he was
slain by their brother: for envy is sick, if her neighbor be well; and the
good man's honor, is the envious man's torment; as it fared between Haman and
Mordecai: as hereafter the glory of Christ shall add to these reprobates
confusion, when they are driven to confess, This is he, whom we once had in
derision.

But to apply what has been collected out of the Word. See whether these
examples sure not with some, and not a few in our times. As,

First, why do a sort of ministers (none of the best) I mean such as live ill
and viciously, or preach ill and unprofitably, or both live ill, and preach
ill, malign, hate and traduce, yea, promote against such as preach more
faithfully and powerfully, and live more holily and unblameably, but because
God honors their ministry with the conversion of souls, and their words are
with such power, that the people flock after them, as they were wont after
Christ; while in the mean time them selves are neglected and dis-esteemed,
being as they suppose far greater scholars (for if a minister preach
profitably, they will give it out he is no scholar, neither can they do Satan a
greater pleasure) and their Sermons more elaborate for they will be as long in
the conseption and breeding of them, as an Elephant is of her young; which
being borne-onely amazeth the hearers, and makes them at there wits end with
admiration, their own bosoms will tell them, that I speak truth.

Again, why do these men enveigh and preach against preaching? As, what needs
so much preaching, say they (and all stupefied sensualists) it was never a good
world, since so many Lectures were set up: their was more love, and charity,
and plain dealing among our forefathers (they mean in time of Popery) who were
only verst in the Lords Prayer, Creed, and ten Commandments; one Sermon well
remembered, and put in practice, is better then ten; yea, quoth a Minister in
the pulpit, that preached (himself) once in six weeks, that he might silence
his Parishoners, who complained for want of their daily food, you will find
this Sermon more then you will be able to practice this two months; and no
question, spoke out of feeling; for he having lived already above five ages,
could never yet put those five words of his text into practice viz. Repent,
and believe the Gospel. But the reason of this their murmuring is easy:
Carnal worldlings cry up practice, to cry down knowledge, as you may see by
their own practice: even as cunning Papists will extol Saint James, only to
disparage Saint Paul.

This point would be further applied, but let conscience do it; for it is a
sore that will not endure rubbing: only this, if any man be vexed at his
brother, because he fares better, and is better accepted, because he is
favored and respected of God and goodmen, while himself is neglected and
dis-esteemed of both; much more, if he belch out his spleen against the
religious, because they are praised and preferred before himself; let him know,
that this could not be if he were not full of the venom of the serpent, Psalm.
112.10. Pro. 14.30.

Secondly, this may be applied to people of the looser sort. As, why do all
drunkards and vicious livers hate the religious, and so belch out their enmity
and spleen against them, in raising and spreading of slanders as they do; but
although, partly to rescue themselves from contempt, and procure a contrary
esteem, by putting a foul and ugly vizard upon virtue, and decking up vice in
a gorgeous and comely attire; yet chiefly, because they are precious in Gods
sight, his peculiar, and chosen people out of all the world, the children of
God, and members of Christ, temples of the holy Ghost: yea, chiefly, because
they partake of the Divine Nature, and are one with the Father and the Son?
John 17.14, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 6.18.

This is the eyesore of our enemies, and let envy look her self blind.

And so much of the first Cause.

Quest. What is the second Cause, why ungodly men hate and persecute the
religious?

Answ. Their ignorance of God, of Christ, and the Scriptures.

Quest. How is that proved?

Answ. By Testimonies, Examples, Reason, and our own Experience.

1. First, by Testimonies: They shall hate and persecute you, yea, they shall
excommunicate and kill you for my Names sake, says our Savior to his
Disciples, because they have not known the Father, nor me, John. 16.2.3. and
15.21. And again they are an offense unto us, because they understand not the
things which are of God, but the things which are of men, Matthew. 16.23. And are
deceived, because they know not the scriptures, neither the power of God,
Matthew. 22.29. Luke 19.42.

2. Secondly, by Examples and Reason. This the Apostle confesses to have been
the cause of his persecuting the Church, 1. Tim. 1.13. Who so soon as he was
enlightened with the saving knowledge of the truth, changed his note, with his
name, and preached that faith, which before he persecuted, Its worth the
noting, how he was no sooner informed, but he was reformed. Now if we look upon
him as Saul, we shall see what we are by generation; if we look upon him as
Paul, we shall see what we are, or should be, by regeneration. Neither is it
strange, that the men of the world through ignorance, should hate and persecute
the members of Christ: for upon the same ground, they even crucified Christ
himself, Father forgive them, says he of his murderers, for they know not
what they do. And why have the kings of the earth, in all ages banded
themselves together against the Lord, and against his Christ, Psalm. 2.2. But
because they knew him not. John 15.21. For if the Princes of this world had
known, they would not have crucisied the Lord of glory, as the holy Ghost
speaks, 1. Cor. 2.8.

Yea, if we consider it rightly, we shall find, that ignorance is the cause of
all sin. Sin indeed at the first was the cause of ignorance, but now ignorance
is the cause of sin: Swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
whoring abound, says the Prophet, because there is no knowledge of God in the
land, Hos. 4.1.2. It is a people that do err in their hearts, says God, why?
because they have not known my ways, Psalm. 95.10.

3. Thirdly, Experience proves, that none are so far transported with a mad and
superstitious zeal against the religious, as the rude rabble who can yield no
other reason, or confession of their faith, if they be asked, than this, that
they are no puritanes, or that they hate a Puritan from their souls; when as
the devil himself, who hates the Puritan they mean most of any, can make as
good a confession of his faith as this. For who are the greatest censurers, and
the violentest opposers of goodness, are not the ignorant fry, who have more
rage then reason? and the more sottish still the more insolent.

As, reprove one of them for swearing, or drunkenness, or unjust dealing, or
for profaning the Lords day, for Atheism, and the like, you are sure to be
branded with the odious title of Puritan, yea you are factious and
schismatic, if ye will not be drunk, and every whit as lewd as they are.

It is worth a large smile, to observe what a clamor the blundering rabble
will make against the people of God, if one in their company but mention the
word Puritan, or tell them how scrupulous and precise such an one is. O what a
number of sharp and deadly arrows will each of them shoot, both at the good and
goodness, maugre all admonition! For each being stung with the Gad-flie of
mis-governed zeal, as Paul was before he knew Christ, they presume to affirm
with incredible impudence, accompanied with invincible ignorance, that there
are not worse men in the world then the religious.

Wherein it is hard to say, whether ignorance or malice do more abound: whether
it be more out of the strength of will, or weakness of judgment.

It is the nature of ignorant and carnal men (that walk after the flesh in the
lusts of uncleanness, whom Saint Peter calls brute beasts, led with
sensuallity) to speak evil of the things which they understand not, 2 Pet.
2.12. Especially in judging acts of zeal and piety, their opinion still lights
upon the worst sense, like them in the second of the Acts, who mocked the
Apostles when they were filled with the holy Ghost, and hearing them speak
languages, which they understood not, cried out, These men are drunk with new
wine.

Until we be born again, we are like Nicodemus, who knew not what it was to be
born again, John 3.4. Until we become zealous our selves, we are like Festus,
who thought zeal madness, Acts 26.24. Until we be humble our selves, we are
like Michal, who mocked David for his humility, and thought him a fool, for
dancing before the Arc, 2 Samuel 6.16. Yea, to such as shall perish, or are for
the present in a perishing condition, all religion seems foolishness, 1 Cor.
1.18.

And thus you see in gross, that Ignorance is a main cause of hatred and
persecution. We shall more clearly discern how it comes to be so, if we note
The Root, Ignorance, Stem, Suspicion, or Jealousy, Sap, Hatred, Fruit,
Persecution,
severally, and apart; for ignorance causes Suspicion; and Suspicion, Hatred;
and Hatred, Persecution. But I cannot stand upon these.

Que. If Ignorance be such a general cause of hatred and persecution, as you
have shown, What is the reason, that so many great Scholars and wisemen do
also hate and persecute the godly?

Ans. Great scholars they may be, and wise men also, in the worlds esteem, but
in the maine, and in Gods account they are nothing so: for admit they have
enlightened heads, sufficient to leave them without excuse, yet because they
withhold the truth in unrighteousness, and do not glorify God with there
knowledge, neither are thankful, but become vain in their imaginations, their
foolish hearts are darkened; and so while they profess themselves to be wise,
in changing the truth of God into a lie, they become fools, and express it,
by thus hating God and his children, Romans 1.18.21.22.25.30. So that Ignorance
is the cause even in them also.

And indeed if they were wise, they would foresee the torments of hell, and
prevent them, as Bernard speaks. Or if they knew God, they would keep his
commandments, for herby, says Saint John, is it known that we know god, if we
keep his Commandments, 1. John 2.3. but he that says I know him, and yet
keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and there is no truth in him, Ver. 4.
Yea, these have sworn to keep the commandments, and to deny the world, and yet
are not content with there own disobedience, unless they cast aspersions upon
them that obey.

Again thirdly, if they knew Christ, they could not but love him; and loving
him, they must needs love his members, not persecute them; for it is the very
first part of our conversion, to love them that love God, 1 John 3.14. and
4.7.8 and Ioh 13.35. But so many as are enemies to the Cross of Christ, show
that they never knew God in Christ.

As for their wisdom and learning; you must know that men may be exquisitely
wise, and incomparably learned in the worlds opinion, and yet very fools in
Gods account, 1 Cor. 3.19. As sharp-eyed as Eagles in the things of the earth,
and yet as blind as Beetles in the matters of heaven. And knowledge consists
not so much in the quantity, as in the quality: not in the greatness, but in
the goodness of it. For as a little precious stone is of more worth then many
other stones of greater bulk: so one drop of wisdom guided by the fear of God,
is more worth then all humane learning. One spark of spiritual,
experimentiall and saving knowledge, is worth a whole flame of secular wisdom
and learning. One scruple of holiness, one dram of faith, one grain of grace,
is more worth then many pounds of natural parts.

But learning and grace do not always keep company together. Yea, O Lord, how
many are there, that have a depth of knowledge, yet are not soul-wise! That
have a Library of Divinity in there heads, and not so much as the least
Chatechisme in their consciences? no rare thing for men to abound in
speculation, and be barren in devotion: to have full brains, and empty hearts;
clear judgments, and defiled affections; fluent tongues; and lame hands: Yea,
you shall here a flood in the tongue, when ye cannot see one drop in the life.

For example, I might instance in Balaam, whom the holy Ghost styles a fool, 2
Peter 2.16. And Judas Mat. 27.3.4.5. And Paul, before his conversion, who (even
while he was a persecuter like these men) was eminent among the Pharisees for
wit and learning, but a very Iddiot among the Astostles. And lastly the
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, who were matchless for their wisdom and
learning, as wanting nothing, that either nature or Art could enrich them
withal: yea, and they were chiefly learned in the Scripture, Gods Oracles,
which will make a man wise, or nothing: and yet our Savior (who could not be
deceived) calls them four times in one Chapter blind, and twice fools, Mat.
23.16.17.19.24.26. Because they wanted faith and holiness, which are the
sinews and nerves, yea the sold of saving knowledge, inlivening, feeding and
strengthening the same; for in the dialect of the scipture a fool is a natural
man, and a wise man a man sanctified.

Alas! God regards not lip-learning, and tongue-wisdom, and brain knowledge,
except it ceaze upon the heart also, and lead captive the affections to the
government of the Gospel, whereby we are changed and transformed into new men,
after the image of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.12. Ephe. 4.20 to 25. Col. 3.10. except we
digest our knowledge into practice, and employ our wisdom to his glory that
gave it, our neighbors good, and the furthering of our own salvation: For with
him wickedness is folly and the greatest sinner is the greatest fool: and he
most wise, that is most religious, and that offends least, Prove. 1.7. Ioh.
28.28. Pro. 9.10, 12. and 11.3. Deuteronomy. 4.6. Hosea 14.9. James 3.13.17. 2 Timothy
3.15. And he that is truly wise, thinks that to be wisdom and folly which God
thinks so.

Neither is that worth the name of knowledge which may be heard only, and not
seen. Good discourse is but the froth of wisdom; the pure and solid substance
of it, is in well framed actions. What says the Scripture? Keep the
Commandments of God, and do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding
before God and men, Deuteronomy. 4.6. And again, He that is a wise man and endued with
knowledge, will show it by his conversation in good works, James 3.13. For,

Rightly, a man knows no more then he practices. It is said of Christ, 2 Cor.
5.21. that he knew no sin, because he did no sin: in which sense, he knows no
good, that does no good. And certainly, they who wander in the bypath of sin
and error, declare themselves ignorant of the right way of salvation, Romans
3.17.

Saving knowledge of the truth works a love of the truth known; it is an
uniform consent of knowledge and action, Ioh 28.28. He only is wise, says
Solomon, that is wise for himself, Pro. 9.12. He whose conscience pulls all
he hears and reads to his heart, and his heart to God; who turns his
knowledge to faith, his faith to feeling, and all to walk worthy of his
Redeemer; he that subdues his sensual desires and appetite to the more noble
faculties of the soul, Reason, and Understanding, and makes that understanding
of his serve him, by whom it is, and does understand; he that subdues his lust
to his will; submits his will to reason, his reason to faith; his faith, his
reason, his will, himself, to the will of God, this is practical,
experimental, and saving knowledge, to which the other is but a bare name or
title. For, what is the notionall sweetness of honey, to the experimental
taste of it? It is one thing to know what riches are, and where they be; and
another thing to be master of them. It is not the knowing, but the possessing
of them, that makes rich. What says one? No more then the knowledge of
goodness, makes one to be named a good man; no more does the knowledge of
wisdom only, cause any person properly to be called a wise man. And certainly,
that wisdom and learning is little worth, which nothing profits the owner of
it, either to virtue, or happiness. These things if ye know, happy are ye if
ye do them, John 13.17. So that he is the best Scholar, that learnes of Christ
obedience, humility, etc. He the best Arithmetician, that can add grace to
grace. He the best learned, that knows how to be saved. Yea, all the Arts in
the world are Artlesse Arts to this.

But alas! Natural men are so far from being thus learned, that not one of
them does really, and by his own experience know the chief Points of Christian
Religion; such as are, Faith, Repentance, Regeneration, the Love of God, the
Presence of the Spirit, the Remission of sins, the Efusion of Grace, the
Possession of heavenly Comforts; he knows not what the peace of Conscience, and
joy in the holy Ghost is, nor what the communion of Saints means; he knows not
what it is to have a certain and experimental feeling, with a continual
proof of Gods favor, in the whole passage of a man's life, and practice, etc.
Pro. 24.7. when every of these are easy and familiar to the meanest and
simplest believer.

Object. But the Word of God in diverse places calls worldly men wise men; yea,
ascribes the greatest wisdom and knowledge to the wicked.

Answ Its true, but in what sense? Do ye not perceive, that God either speaks
it in a holy derision? as, Genesis 3.22. is to be understood: Or else he speaks it
in the person of the wicked, calling it wisdom, because worldly men deem it so:
as in another place, he calls preaching, the foolishness of preaching, because
wicked esteem preaching but foolishness: and as Christ calls the Pharisees
just, because they justified themselves, Luke 15.7. Or thirdly, he means the
wisdom of the flesh, or of the world; and that is as much, as if he had said in
other words, foolishness, for the wisdom of the world is foolishnes with God,
and no less then twelve times infatuated by the wisdom of God in one Chapter,
1 Cor. 2.

But to make it more plain, that no natural man is a wise man, we must know
that there is a speculative knowledge in the brain, common to hypocrites with
Gods children, Heb. 6.4. And there is a spiritual and heavenly wisdom, a
practical, experimental and saving knowledge in the heart, which keeps a man
from every evil way, Pro. 2.12. peculiar to the godly alone, Ephesians. 4.8. and
5.8. The natural man, says Paul, perceives not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him: but the spiritual, who have the mind
of Christ, understand all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15,
16. And again, We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery; even the head wisdom,
which none of the princes of this world have known, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. See These.
5.4 5. W^ence it is, that natural men are said to be in darkness, Ephe. 5.8.
Matthew. 4.16. whereas the regenerate are called, Children of the light, and of
the day, 1 Thessalonians. 5.4, 5. Luke 1.79.

Which comparison is very emphaticall. For as the Soul, is the lamp of the
body; and Reason, of the Soul; and Religion, of Reason; and Faith of Religion:
so Christ is the light and life of faith. Whence i^ follows, that as mere sense
is incapable of the r^les of reason: so reason is no less incapable of the
things which are supernatural. And as to speak, is only proper to men: so to
know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, is only proper to believers. Sense
is a mere beasts, reason, a mere man's; Divine knowledge is only the Christians.

Now if it be asked, Why a natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit
of God? Saint Paul, in the place before quoted, answers; He cannot know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. For if they be spiritually
discerned, how should they discern them, that have not the Spirit? For as no
man can see the Sun, but by the light of the Sun: so no man can know the
secrets of God, but by the revelation of God, 1 Cor. 12.8. Matt. 16.17. To know
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, we must have hearts, eyes and cars
sanctified from above, Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. Psalm. 111.10. Luke 24.45. John 15.15.
Romans 8.14, 15.

Neither is spiritual and heavenly wisdom the fruit of time and study, as the
natural is. It is not eloquence, nor Logical demonstrations, that can make us
capable of it. We cannot attain to supernatural and celestial knowledge, by
any natural and terrestrial means. No learning, nor experience will serve to
know that great mystery of godliness, and hid wisdom, spoken of, 1 Cor. 2.6,
7, 8, 10, etc. to know the riches of the glory of Gods inheritance in the
Saints, to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, etc. Ephesians. 1.17,
18. and 3.19. Because this wisdom descends from above, James 3.17.

2. Secondly, As none can attain to this precious grace of saving knowledge,
except it be given them from above: so it is a jewel of such worth, that God
gives it to none but his children the godly, and such as he knows will improve
their knowledge to his glory. The servant (says Christ, meaning the ungodly
man) knows not his masters will, but I have called you friends (speaking to
his Apostles, and in them to all that are converted) for all things that I have
heard of my Father, have I made known unto you, John 15.15. Surely, says
Solomon, to a man that is good in his fight, God gives wisdom and knowledge,
Eccles. 2.26. intimating, that he does not so to the evil man. The wise, that
is, the godly, says Daniel, shall understand, but none of the wicked shall
have understanding, Dan. 12.10. A scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not;
but knowledge is easy to him that will understand, Pro. 14.6. that is, to him
that will be bettered by his understanding. Wicked men understand not
judgment, but they that seek the Lord, understand all things, Prove. 28.5. and
3.32. They which observe the Commandments, have a good understanding, says
David, Psalm. 111.10. the rest have an ill understanding, and a vain; an
understanding, like that of the Scribes and Pharisees, which was enough to
condemn them, but not to save them.

Thus as no man can see God, and live: so no man can see Christ, who is God,
sitting at the right hand of his Father in heaven, so long as he lives a mere
natural man, 1 Cor. 2.14. God will not power new wine, but into new vessels,
Matthew. 9.17. Christ is said to have expounded all things to his Disciples
apart, to show, that if we will have Christ to teach us, we must go apart from
the world. If any will do Gods will, says our Savior, he shall know the
Doctrine, whether it be of God, or no, John 7.17. So that no man can learn this
doctrine, but he that does it: as no man could learn the Virgins song, but they
that sang it, Revel. 14.3. Yea, if the fear of the Lord, as Solomon speaks, is
the beginning of wisdom, how should they have wisdom, that have not the fear of
the Lord? All unrepentant sinners are enemies to God, servants to Satan: now we
men, do not tell our secrets to enemies; neither will an Artificer teach
another man's servants his trade: but the righteous are Christ's friends, and
brethren, and fisters, and father, and mother, between whom there is a kind of
familiarity, so that he makes them of his counsel; His secrets, says Solomon,
are with the righteous, Pro. 3.32. And again, Psalm. 25.14. The secrets of the
Lord are revealed to them that fear him, and his Covenant is to give them
understanding.

See this in Abraham's example, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?
says God, Genesis 18.17. As if this were an offense in God, if he should tell the
righteous no more then he tells the wicked.

Besides, What should he do with a talent, that will not improve it? And let a
wicked man know never so much, he is resolved to be never the better man. And
they that are unwilling to obey, God thinks unworthy to know: which is but
equity.

Indeed, if they will put off concerning their former conversation the old man,
with his corruptions, and deceiveable lusts, and be changed, by the renewing of
there minds, and by putting on the new man, which after God, is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephe. 4.20. to 25. Col. 3.10. 2 Cor. 5.17. 1
John. 4.7. Then they shall see what the good and acceptable, and perfect will
of God is, as Saint Paul, and our Savior Christ shows, Romans 12.2. Matthew. 5.8.
For God in the person of wisdom has made a general promise to all that will
serve him, Pro. 1. If thou will turn, says God, at my correction, I will power
out my heart unto thee, and make thee understand my words, Verse 23. But else,
they shall blindly go on in persecuting Christ and his members, perhaps to the
killing of his prophets, and think also that they do God good service, John
16.2, 3. For as they like not to retain God in their knowledge, says the
Apostle, so God shall give them over to vile affections, and to a reprobate
mind, Romans 1.28. And because they will not teceaue the truth in love, that
they might be saved; therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they
might believe lies: that all they might be damned, which believe not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.10.11.12.

And is it not just with God, to say, they would none of Christ, let them
welcome Satan and Antichrist?

Quest. What instruction from the premises?

Ans. As it ought to stop all wicked men's mouths: so it may both serve for
direction and comfort to the godly, and to inform all.

First, If it be so, that all natural men are incapable of divine and
supernatural knowledge, that they are blind touching spiritual things: let
not any carnal wretch hereafter dare to speak evil of the things, actions and
persons, which are out of the reach of his capasity, but silently suspend his
judgment, until he is better informed. For as it pertains not to the
rusticke to judge of Letters: so it belongs not to natural men to judge of
spiritual things. And in matters of censure, nothing but a certain knowledge
should make us give a certain judgment; and in the mean time, confess, that
Joseph may know his brethren, although they know not him. He which is
spiritual, discerns all things; yet he himself is Judged of no man, 1 Cor.
2.14. that is, of no natural man.

2. Let those that have used to speak evil of the way of truth, learn to
kick no more against the pricks, lest they bring the same curse upon
themselves, that those did, which brought up an evil report of the holy Land,
viz. that, As they never entered into the terrestrial Canaan: So these never
enter into the Celestial. Yea, put case they shall think to do God good
service in it: for there is a way, says Solomon, that seems right to a man,
but the issues thereof are the ways of death, Pro. 14 12.

3. If all who deride and persecute the godly, are ignorant persons, as has
been proved; then let not Gods Children be discouraged, maugre all slander and
opposition; nor think the worse of themselves, if such reproach them never so.
The Corinthians exceedingly slighted Paul, he was this, and he was that; But
what says Paul? With me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of
you, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. Alas! the best of them saw no more than St. Paul
soutside; the grace of his heart, the raptures of his soul, the ravishing
delights of the inward man, and the like spiritual privileges, more glorious
than the states of Kingdoms, were to these sensualists as a covered mess. And
indeed, natural men are as fit to judge of spiritual matters, as blind men
are fit to judge of colors. We know little Children will often laugh at wise
men, when they are about serious and necessary affairs and business; which
notwithstanding is not an argument of the unworthiness of the things they
laugh at, but of the folly of them which laugh. Will the Merchant be
discouraged, because his Wine pleases not a sick man's palate; when those that
are in health commend it, and himself knows it to be good? Much less cause
have we to be discouraged, having more certainety to rely upon. Our enemies
have Sense, Reason, and Experience to confirm their judgments; but we have
them, with an advantage of three infallible witnesses, Gods Word, and Spirit,
and Faith. Wherefore henceforward let us take our Saviors Counsel, and seek
to justify our judgments to the children of Wisdom, of whom she is
justified; and not to fools, by whom she is daily crucified. Neither let any
think the better of such whom they extol, for the blind eat many a fly.

4. This shows that they suspect much, because they know little, as Children
in the dark suppose they see, what they see not. They complain, like the
Owl, of the glory of the Sun, when the fault is in their own eyes. They are
blind, yet the misery is, they see not that they are blind; and therefore
believing that they see, they accuse others of schism, when indeed themselves
are only guilty of prejudice; as a blind man running against one that sees,
calls him blind that did not shun him. They are like Harpast, a blind woman
in Seneca's family, who would not be persuaded that she was blind; but found
fault with the house wherein she was, as being over dark.

5. If none are truly wise, but such as have past the second birth, it gives
us to understand that the regenerate (for the most part) sleep nigh half
their time in ignorance, that the wicked are never awake. And if this Wisdom
comes down from the Father of lights, and that we cannot have it, except
God vouchsafe to give it us; It may teach us to be bumble, Job 42.6. And not
like the Ape, that is proud of his Masters Iacket. Heavenly notions grow not in
us, we spin them not out of our own breasts: And thankful; for if they be
given, let us not forget the giver.

6. If all natural men, are like blind Sampson without his guide, not able
without the Holy Ghosts direction to find out the pillars of the house, the
principles of faith, let us not wonder that they swarve so much from the godly,
in their judgments and practice. Is it any strange thing, to see a blind man
stumble and fall? Yea, let us condole all their disasters, and drop some
tears, in pity and compassion for their great and grievous misery.

7. And lastly, If with God one spark of spiritual experimental and saving
knowledge be of more worth than all secular Wisdom, and Learning; then strive
we for that knowledge which will make the knower blessed. Let us so be learned;
that we may be saved. Let us not in our hearing, and reading, and
communication, do as little children, that look only upon the Babyes in a
book, without regard to the matter therein contained: but like men in years
have more respect to the pith and solidity of the matter, than to the phrase;
and to the profit of our souls, than the pleasing of our senses. And so much
of the second cause.

Quest. What is the third cause, why ungodly men hate and persecute the
Religious?

Answ. Their infidelity and unbelief.

Quest. How does that appear?

Answ. I will demonstrate it beyond denial.

Why do the Heathen rage, says David, and the people murmr, the Kings of
the Earth band themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together, against the
Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, Let us break their bands, etc. Psalm.
2.1. to 4. but this they think all ways, there is no God, God is not in all
their thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. And again, They break in pieces thy people, O
Lord, and afflict thine heritage, etc. the reason follows, they say the Lord
shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it, Psalm. 94.5, 6, 7. And
what says our Savior to the Jews, Ye seek to kill me, because my Word has
no place in you, John 8.37. that is, they believed not what he spoke, nor the
Scriptures which testified of him.

If ye will see it in Examples, look 2 King. 18.35. Dan. 3 15. Exodus 5.2.

Or if in the New Testament, see Acts 17. where the Holy Ghost makes a decision
between such as did, and such as did not believe, Paul, when in the Synagogue
he disputed with them, by the Scriptures, opening and alleging that Christ
must have suffered, risen again, etc. for faith the Text, So many of the Jews
as believed and of the Grecians and chief women as feared God, joined
themselves in company with Paul and Silas. But those that believed not, moved
with envy, took unto them certain Vagabonds, and wicked fellows, with the
multitude, and made a tumult in the City, and assaulted the house of Jason,
drawing out him, and as many of the brethren as they could find, and brought
them before the people, and the heads of the City, crying; These are they which
have subverted the State of the world, and they all do against the decrees of
Caesar, etc. And lastly, look but 1 Timothy 1. you shall hear Saint Paul most
ingenuously confessing, I was a blasphemer, a persecuter, and an opposer of
Christ; and his members; but I did it ignorantly, through unbelief, v. 13.

Now they which think, all whatsoever is written in Scripture of God, of
Christ, and of His Kingdom of Grace here, and glory hereafter, to be but a
fable: as that impious Pope did, who was not ashamed blasphemously to boast
what he had gained by Fabula de Christo: And all Matchivillian Atheists, who
think Religion to be but a Politic device, to keep men in awe, ^oe, whose
number is greater than is supposed. These, I say, must needs think them mad
and foolish, who lose thereby either profit, or pleasure, and use them
accordingly.

True, this might seem an absurd position, if I should presume upon an Appeal
to their own blinded consciences; for they think, they believe in God, and
the Scriptures, as well as the precisest: and so did those Jews, John 5. which
persecuted Jesus, and sought to slay him, think they believed Moses writings:
but it is plain, they did not, by Christ's answer to them, who knew their
hearts better than themselves: his words are, Had ye believed Moses, ye would
have believed me, for he wrote of me: but if ye believe not his wrightings,
how should ye believe my words? verse 46 47. And again, Ye have not my
Fathers word abiding in you, for whom he has sent, him ye believe not, Ver.
38.39. So bring these, that persecute any of Gods Children for well doing, to
the trial, and their own conscienc^s shall testify before God, that they
neither believe the Old Testament nor the New.

For did they believe that the godly are unto God as the Signet upon his right
hand, Jer. 22.24. Zach. 2.24. Yea, as the Apple of his own eye, Zach. 2.8. and
that whatsoever wrongs and contumelies are done to his Children, he accounts as
done to himself, Psalm 44.22. and 69.7, and 74 4, 10, 18, 22, 23. and 83, 2,
5, 6. and 89.50, 51. and 139, 20. Prove. 19.3. Romans 1.30. and 9.20. Matthew.
10.22. and 25.45. Luke 21.17. 1 Samuel 17.45. Esaias 37.4.22, 23, 28. and 45.9. and
54, 17. Acts 5.39. and 9.4, 5 Job 9 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. John 15.18, 20, 21, 23,
24, 25. Numbers 16.11. 1 Samuel 8.7. They durst not hate, revile, slander,
deride, nicke-name and persecute them, as they do.

More particularly, did they really and indeed believe God, when he says in
his Word, that whosoever shall offend one of those little ones, that believe in
him, it were better for him, rather that a Millstone were hung about his neck,
and that he were cast into the Sea, Mark. 9.42. That he will destroy them for
ever, and root them out of the Land of the living, whose tongues imagine
mischief, and are like a sharp Razor, that cutteth deceitfully, loving to
speak evil, more than good, Psalm. 52.2. to 5. That he will confound such as
persecute his Children, and destroy them with a double destruction, Ier. 17.18.
Yea, that he will render unto there enemies seven fold into their bosom,
their reproach, wherewith they have reproached the Lord, Psalm. 79.12. In fine,
that he will rain upon them snares of fire, and brimstone, with storms, and
tempests, Psalm 11.6. and after all, cast them into a furnace of fire, where
shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth, for evermore: when the just, whom they
now despise, shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father: They
durst not do as they do to the godly. Yea, if they did believe but that one
place, 2 King. 2.24. Where God caused two and forty little Children to be
devoured of wild Bears, only for nick-naming Elisha, they durst not nickname
the religious as they do.

But, alas! they are so far from believing what God threatens in His Word,
against these sins; that they bless themselves in their hearts, saying, we
shall have peace, we shall speed as well as the best, although we walk
according to the stubbornness of our own wills; so adding drunkenness to
thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Yea, they prefer their condition before other men's, who
are so abstemious, and make Conscience of their ways; even thinking, that
their God deceives them with needless fears and scruples, as onc^ Rabshakeb
would have persuaded the Jews, touching their trust and confidence, 2 King.
18.22, 25, 30, 32, 33, 35.

Yea, how is it possible, that any wicked man should believe what is written of
God in the Scripture, especially touching his justice, and severity in
punishing sin, with eternal destruction of body and soul? For did they
really and indeed believe God, when he says, that his curse shall never depart
from the house of the swearer, Zac. 5. They durst not swear, yea and forswear
as they do; much less durst they take a pride in oathing of it, resembling
Ballio the baud in Plautus, who was not ashamed, but even proud of Carting.
Yea, which is worse, reprove a swearer, and he will swear the more to spite
you: Which were not possible, if believing God, they did not, what in them
lies, give themselves over to the Devil.

Again, did they believe, that neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor thieves, nor murderers, nor drunkards, nor swearers, nor
raylours, nor liars, nor covetous persons, nor extortioners, nor unbeleevers
nor no unrighteous men shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; but shall have
their part in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Revel. 21 8. they durst not continue in the
practice of these sins, without fear, or remorse, or care of amendment. Did
they believe, that except their righteousness do exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, they shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5.20. And that without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12 14. with many the like, it were impossible they should live as they do.
Yea, if they did in good earnest believe, that there is either God, or Devil,
Heaven, or Hell, or that they have immortal souls, which shall everlastingly
live in bliss, or woe, and receive according to that they have done in their
bodies, whether it be good, or evil, 2 Cor. 5.10 they could not but live
thereafter, and make it their principal care, how to be saved.

But, alas! they believe what they see, and feel, and know; they believe the
Laws o^ the Land, that there are places and kinds of punishment here below,
and that they have bodies to suffer temporal smart, if they transgress; and
this makes them abstain from murder, felony, and the like: but they believe
not things invisible, and to come; for if they did, they would as well, yea,
much more, fear him that has power to cast both body and soul into bell, as
they do the temporal Magistrate, that has only power to kill the body: They
would think it a very hard bargain to win the whole world, and lose there
own souls, Luk 9.25.

But, alas! if visible powers, were not more feared than the invisible GOD,
and the halter more than Hell, (natural men being like beasts, that are more
sensible of the flash of Powder, than of the Bullet) the World would be
over-runne with outrage: Whereas now, even the worst of the Serpents Seed, by
reason of Authority, are kept in a mean between Devils and Christians; so
living like beasts, because they think they shall dye like beasts, without any
answer for ought they have either acted, or left undone.

True, they do not always, nor at any time altogether, think there is no GOD,
or judgment to come. Not always, for though at present they think their
villainy is unseene, because it is unpunished, according to that in the Psalms,
The wicked thinks there is no GOD, and the reason follows, his ways always
prosper, Psalm 10.4, 5. yet none, as Plato speaks, are so confirm^d in
Atheism, but some great danger will make them fly to the aid of a Divine
power. Extremity of distress will send the prophanest to God: as the drowning
man stretches out his hand to that bough, which he contemned whiles he stood
safe on shore: Even Sardanapalus, who for all his bold denying of God, at
every hearing of thunder was wont to hide his head in a hole.

Yea, in their greatest jollity, even the most secure heart in the world has
some flashes of fear, that seize on them like an Arrest of Treason; for
conscience cannot but sometimes look out of it self, and see what it would not.

At least, on their death beds they would give all the world to be sure what
the Scripture speaks of Hell were not true; though all their life they
supposed it but a fable. How often do those ruffians, that deny God at the
Tap-house, preach him, at the Gallows, and confess that in sobriety of
spirit, which they oppugned in wantonness. And not seldom are the most
lethargized consciences so awakened ere they go to hell, that, Spira-like, they
depart desolate and desperate in and into hellish horrors.

Prosperity does so tympanize men's souls, and entranse them from themselves,
that they forget they hada Maker. Who is God? says Pharaoh. There is no God,
says Nabuchadnezar. What God can deliver out of my hand? says Rabshakeh. I am
God, says Alexander. But Nabuchadnezar found there was a God. Pharaoh found
what that God was. Rabshakeh found, to his cost, that there was an Almighty
God, able to deliver in the Valleys, as well as on the hills. Alexander found
he was not as he supposed, and confessed that he knew himself mortal by two
things, viz. Sleep and Lust. And so it shall fare with these in the end. They
that would stultizare in culpa, shall be forced sapere in poena. Vengance shall
make them wise, whom sin has made, and left foolish.

At least, in hell they shall know there is a righteous Judge, that will reward
every man according to his deeds; and confess, that what they once vainly
imagined, was but imagined. There may be Atheists on earth, were are none in
hell.

A Pope of Rome being on his death bed, said, Now comes three things to trial,
which all my life I have made doubt of, Whether there be a God, a Devil, and
whether the soul be immortal: it was not long ere he was fully resolved with
a vengance. And so shall you, o ye fools, when that hour comes, though ye
flatter your selves for the present, like that desperate Pirate, who when
(ransacking and rifling a Bottom) he was told by the Master, that though no Law
could touch him for the present, he should answer it at the day of judgment;
replied, Nay, If I may stay so long ere J come to it, J will take thee, and thy
Vessel too. Nothing more cartaine than death. Amongst Laws, some are
antiquated, as that of divorce: some changed, as that of Circumcision: some
dispensed withal, as that of the Sabbath (in cases of necessity, Matthew 12.1.
to 14.) but this statutum est, that all shall dye, and come to judgment, it is
neither antiquated, nor changed, nor dispensed withal.

And as nothing is more certain than death: so nothing more uncertain than
the hour thereof: thy pulse may leave beating, before thou can fetch thy
breath.

Wherefore think not, as Lot's Sons-in-Law, that we speak in jest, least you
feel the fire and wrath of God in earnest.

2. Secondly, nor at any time do they altogether think there is no God, etc.
For as the best faith is but like the twilight, mixed with some degree of
darkness and infidelity: so the most grounded Atheism, is mixed with some
degree, either of belief or doubting. What says David, The fool has said in
his heart there is no God: in his heart he has said it, but in his heart he
never believed it: No fool ever thought it peremptorily; he would feign have
it so, he cannot believe it so: it is an opinion which he suggests to his
heart, not which his heart suggests to him: and this makes him fearful to
dye, and to dye fearfully.

Tully speaking of Metrodorus, an Atheist in his time, says, Nec quemquam
vidi, qui magis ea timeret, qua timenda esse negaret. They that make a flout of
hell, Affirmant mihi and tibi, non sibi; noctu, non interdiu; their mouths
tell us so, their hearts do not tell their mouths so. No hell, I dare say, if
there were a general collection made throughout the whole world, that there
might be no Judgment day, these men would be none of the backewardest. Yea,
if they had as many Provinces, as Ahasuerus had, they would give an hundred and
six and twenty of them to be sure of it. The consciences even of wicked men can
never be so charmed, or over ruled, either by arguments, or the temptations of
Satan, that they can let go the sense of a Godhead. We are all borne
Idolaters, and choose rather to adore the Sun, the Moon, yea the meanest of
all creatures, rather than not acknowledge a Deity. You may sooner get a
Conscience to believe all the fables in the Popish legend, or Turkish Alcarou,
than that this universal frame is without a mind,

-- Prima est haec ultio, quod, se
Judice nemo nocens absolvitur. --
So that to say truly, they do not, and yet they do believe there is a God,
and a Hell: for when they admit Conscience into their counsel, they do
believe: but because they would rather not believe it, they stifle Conscience,
stop their own ears, and flatter their hearts with the contrary opinion: Like
as it fared with the Philistims of Ashdod, 1 Samuel 6. who when they had stood
out that fore judgment seven months, and brought upon their god DAGON, and
the whole Country, a very great destruction, and perceived, that all which
were guilty of keeping and profaning the Arc, suffered in the judgment, and
only they; at last could bring forth this conclusion, Peradventure it is GOD'S
hand that smote us; yet, it may be, it is but a chance that has happened unto
us, Verse 9.

Wherein it is evident, they did half believe, and no more; Their Consciences
told their hearts there was a powerful GOD, to revenge the profaning of his
Arc; but their hearts were very loath to give assent thereunto: and so fares it
with these, when they wrong and persecute his Children. Or they may be likened
to those untoward Israelites, Exodus 16. Who did in part believe GOD, when he
told them, If they reserved of the Manna until morning, it should stink; and
that if they went to gather it on the Sabbath, they should find none, who
would have thought it foul scorn, if one should have told them, they believed
no such thing: for all they had seen so many Miracles, yet it is apparent, they
did but half believe him: for what else made them try whether he spoke true
or no, after they were flatly forbidden? ver. 20. or,

Lastly, they are like the unbelieving Jews, who considering the Oracles that
CHRIST spoke, and the Miracles which he wrought, were forced to testify both
these of him (for all they hated him) never man spoke as this man does; and We
never saw it on this fashion: yet this have ye seen, and believe not, says
Our SAVIOVR, John 6.36 They saw, they heard, they wondered, they were
convinced, yet they believed not: therefore their own eyes, in seeing; their
own ears, in heareing; their own hearts, in wondering; their own convicted
reasons shall but witness against their unbelief, Ioh. 16 9.

And indeed, if they did not in some part believe a Judgment to come, they
should be worse than the very Devils themselves: there is no Hell, Quis
Daemonum hoc asseret? What Devil will so affirm? They know it, and feel it,
Why (say the Legion to Christ) art thou come to torment us. before the time,
Matthew 8.29.. And shall not men tremble to deny, what the Devils confess?
says Chrysostom.

Wherefore believe it peremptorily, o ye fools and mad men; yea believe it,
and avoid it, and by believing to purpose, ye shall avoid it: otherwise, if ye
will give more credit to your deceitful hearts, than to what the Word speaks,
as Eve believed the word of the Serpent, Adam the word of Eve, both, before the
Word of GOD; God will leave you to be confuted by fire and brimstone; if you
will not believe what is written, you shall feel what is written.

Object. But here it will be objected, That the wickedest man that lives,
presumes upon GODS mercy in Christ, and thinks he shall be saved, as well as
the thief upon the Cross; yea, he will prove by Scripture, that at what time
soever he repents, his sins shall be pardoned, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. Yea, there is
scarce a man on earth, but he thinks to go to Heaven.

Answ. True, the flesh prophesies prosperity to sin; yea life, and salvation,
as the Pope promised the Powder Traitors; and to this the Devil sets his
seal: whereupon while prosperity lasts, they can turn the grace of God into
wantonness, and even apply Christ's Passion, as a warrant for their
licenciousnesse; and take his death, as a license to sin; his Cross, as a
Letters Pattent to do mischief.

Yea, the Devil and sin so infatuates and besots them, that they think to
have part in that merit, which in every part they have so abused; to be purged
by that blood, which now they take all occasions to disgrace; to be saved by
the same wounds, which they swear by, and so often swear away to have Christ an
Advocate for them in the next life, when they are Advocates against Christ in
this; and that Heaven will meet them at their last hour, when all their life
long they have galloped in the beaten road toward hell.

The Devil makes large promises; and persuades his, they shall have what they
desire; yet ever disappoints them of their hopes, as he did our first Parents:
Diabelus menti^ur, ut fallet; vitam pollicetur, ut peri^at, says Saint Cyprian.

But all one, their carnal hearts shall be flint unto God, wax to the Devil,
who blows this presumption into them; whereby they believe the promises, let
go the threatenings: you shall dye, says God, is heard, but you shall not dye,
says the Devil, is believed, as it fared with Eve, when she eat the
forbidden fruit. Yea, they believe the promises, that they shall have them; but
they believe not the precepts, to do them; nor the threatenings, that they
shall suffer them, for their not believing and disobedience; which shows, that
they truly believe neither. Yea, this makes it plain, that either they
believe there is no God at all, or else that God is not just, and true, nor
speaks as he means in his words; which is worse: or if they do believe that
he is a just and true God, they believe also that they shall be punished (as he
threatens) for their provoking of him; and they provoke him, that they may be
punished; which is worst of all. So that take them in the best sense, they are
but like David's fool, which says in his heart there is no God, and lives
thereafter: which is never a whit strange, for it is usual with them to think
there is no God, for whom it would make that there were none: What we would
have to be, we are apt to believe.

I confess, it is hard for men to believe their own unliefe in this case:
they that be most dangerously sick, are least sensible of their own
sickness: much more hard to make them confess it; for he whose heart speaks
Atheism, will confess with his tongue, that he believes there is a God, and
that he is just, and true, and that every tittle of his Word is equally true:
which being granted, this must necessarily follow, that God will as well punish
the disobedient, as reward the obedient; which in another fit they are apt
enough; yea too forward to believe.

For it is Satan's method, first to make men so senseless, as not to feel
their sins at all; and then so desperate, that they feel them too much: in
the first fit men live as if there were no hell: in the last they dye as if
there were no Heaven; for wicked men are altogether in extremes: at first they
make question whether this, or that be a sin; at last they apprehend it such
a sin, that they make question whether it can be forgiven: either God is so
merciful, that they may live how they list; or so just, that he will not
pardon them upon their repentance.

But to prevent after claps, let this point be argued in the Court of thy
Conscience: say, whether thou art guilty, or not guilty. He that believes the
promises of God, to be true, believes also the commands and threatenings, and
thereupon fears God, and makes conscience of sin: otherwise, if thou be
as it were a dead man, continuing under the burden of notorious crimes,
without sorrow, or fear or remorse, or care of amendment, Ephesians 2.1. If
thou art of a reprobate judgment touching actions, and persons, esteeming good
evil, and evil good, if the Devil has so bewit^^^d thee, that thou
preferrest Hell to Heaven, and blamest those that do otherwise: it,
Ishmael-like, thou mockest; or, Cham-like, thou scoffest at the religious, or
usest bitter jests against them, Psalm 1.1. Ephesians. 5.4. If thou raysest
slanders of them, or furtherest them being raised, Psalm 4.2. and 31.18. and
35, 20. As the Red Dragon, Revel. 12. cast a flood of water out of his mouth,
after the Woman, when he could not reach her with his claws, verse 15. Or any
way opposest them; for the opposition of goodness, gives thee the title of
wickedness, which alone is the enemy thereof, and shows that thou art a
Soldier of the great Dragon, who goes out to make War with that blessed
Seed, which keep the Commandments of God, Revelations 12.17. these or any
one of these, show that thou have neither part, nor fellowship in the Christian
belief; that thou art an Infidel, yea, an Atheist, which is a higher degree
of infidelity, and that thou do no way differ from an Heathen, but only in
the saying of a Paternoster, a Creed, and, it may be the ten Commandments:
Neither have thou any more of a conscience, than fear, which fear also arises
more from the power of the Magistrate, than from the omnipotency of a God.

But to make thy self confess this, examine thy belief by thy life; for
infidelity is the bitter root of all wickedness, and a lively says the true
Mother of all goodness: Indeed if pride, swearing, prophaneing of the Lords
Day, drunkenness, adultery, contempt of Religion and all goodness were
fruits of Faith, then the world were full of Believers; but Faith purifieth
the Heart, Acts 15.9. and works by Love, Gall. 5.6. Consumes our natural
unnatural corruptions, and sanctifies the whole man throughout 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
Acts. 26.18. So that our faith to G^^ is seen in our faithfulness to men:
Show me thy faith by thy works, says S. James, that is, thy invisible belief,
by thy visible life: for the hand is the best commentary of the heart. What a
man does, I am sure he thinks, not always what he speaks: men may say they
believe the word, but certainly they would never speak as they speak, think
as they think, do as they do, if they thought that their thoughts, words, and
deeds, should come to Judgment.

If men believed that heaven were so sweet, and hell so intolerable, as the
word makes them, they would be more obedient upon earth; the voluptuous would
not say, with Esau, give me the pottage of pleasure, take who will the
birthright of grace here, and glory hereafter; the Covetous would not say,
Take you heaven, let us have money. I Will clear it by a similitude.

If a Physician should say unto his Patient, here stands a Cordial, which if
you take will cure you; but touch not this other Vial, for that is deadly
poison, and he refuses the Cordial, to take the poison; in this case, who can
chose but conclude, that either he believed not his Physician, or preferred
death before life? But go on.

If men but believed, that God always beholds them, they durst not sin. No
theife was ever so impudent, as to steal in the very face of the Judge. O God,
let me see my self seen by thee, and I shall not dare to offend thee. Again,
if men believed, that there is a place of darkness, they would fear the works
of darkness. If Lots Sonnes-in-law had believed their father, when he told
them the City should suddenly be destroyed with fire and brimstone, and that by
flying they might escape it, they would have obeyed his counsel. If the old
world had believed, that God would indeed, and in good earnest bring such a
flood upon them, as he threatened, they would not have neglected the opportunity
of entering the Arc, before it was shut, and the windows of heaven opened;
much less would they have scoft and flouted at Noah, while he was building it:
so if you did firmly believe what the Scripture speaks of hell, you would
need noe entreaties to avoid it: yea, cast but your eyes upon that fiery gulf
with a full persuasion of it, and sin if you dare. You love your selves well
enough to avoid a known pain, we know that there are stocks and Bridewells,
and Ioales, and dungeons, and Racks, and Gibbets for malefactors, and our very
fear keeps us innocent: were your hearts equally assured of those hellish
torments, ye could not, ye durst not continue in those sins, for which they
are prepared: yea, if you did truly believe a hell, there would be more danger
of your despair, than of your security.

Yea, had you but so much of an historical faith, as to believe the
Scriptures, touching what God has already inflicted upon sinners; as, upon the
Angels, the old world, Sodom and Gomorrah, Pharaoh and the Egyptians, Nadab
and Abihu, Chora, Dathan, and Abyram, with their 250 Captains, and many
thousands of the Children of Israel, together with the whole Nation of the
Jews, Hammon and Balaam, Saul and Doeg, Absolon and Achitophell, Ahab and
Iesabell, Senacherib and Nebuchadnezar, the 2 Captains and their fifties,
Herod and Judas, Annanias and Saphirah, with a world of others.

Much more, if you did believe how severely he has dealt with his own
Children, when they sinned against him. vizt. with Moses, and Aaron, and Ely,
which were in singular favor with him; yea, with David, a man after his own
heart, and that after his sin was remitted; it were impossible but thou
would fear to offend so Jealous a God: for thus thou would argue, If God
be so just and severe to his own children, who were so good and gracious; how
shall I, a wicked and ungracious servant, that never did him a piece of good
service all my days, look to be dispensed withal? If the godly suffer so
many, and grievous afflictions here; what shall his adversaries suffer in hell?
If Sampson be thus punished, shall the Philistims escape? If the righteous
shall scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? as the
Scripture speaks: 1 Pet. 4.18: For thou can not Imagine, that he will deal
after a new and extraordinary way with thee, and so break the Course of his so
Just, and so long continued proceedings.

Wherefore dally no longer with your own souls. Are ye Christians in
earnest? Do ye believe the word? or do you not? If you do not, ye are worse
than the Devil; for the Devils believe and tremble; they have both faith and
fear, where as thou have neither fear nor faith. If you be Christians, there
is an hell in your Creed: if there be an hell, How dare you tare Heaven with
your blasphemies, and bandie the dreadful Name of God in your impure mouths,
by your bloody oaths and execrations? How dare you exercise your saucy wits in
profane scoffs at religion, and disgrace that blood, whereof hereafter you
would give a thousand worlds for one drop? It is no light or slight offense, to
contemn the brethren of the Son of God: but thou fightest against the very
graces of Gods Spirit, wherever they appear: and notwithstanding thou did
vow in thy baptism, to fight under Christ's banner, against the world, the
flesh and the Devil, and to continue his faithful soldier and servant unto
thy lives end, as good reason, since he laid down his life to redeem thee,
and has ever since protected and provided for thee; for a very Dog will fight
for his master that feeds him: thou contrarily take part with the world, the
flesh and the Devil, his mortal enemies, and take up arms to fight against
Christ.

Again, if there be an hell, and but a tithe of them Christians, who call
themselves so; what means our grinding of faces, like edged tools, and our
spilling of blood, like water? What means our racking of rents, our detention
of wages, our incredible cruelty to servants, our enclosing of Commons,
engrossing of commodities, our griping exactions, with streining the advantages
of greatness, our inequall levies of legal payments, our spightfull suites,
griping usury, our bouzing and quaffing, our bribery, perjury, partiallity, our
sacrilege, simoniacall contracts, and soul murder, our scurrill
prophannesse, cosoning in bargains, breaking of promises, perfidious
underminings, pride, luxury, wantonness, contempt of Gods Messengers, neglect
of his Ordinances, violation of his days, etc? when if the Word of God be
true, we need no other ground of our last and heaviest doom, than ye have not
given, ye have not visited, etc. Mat 25, 41. to 46. Certainly, if the tithe of
us be Christians, which call our selves so, there are abundance of Christians
in hell: For what eyes can but run over, to see for the most part, what lives
men lead? There was a woman much spoken of in some parts of this Land, that
lived in a professed doubt of the Deity, yea, even after Illumination and
Repentance, she could hardly be comforted; she often protested, that the
vicious and offencive life of a great learned man, in the Town where she
dwelt, did occasion those damned doubts in her mind. And we read that
Linacre reading upon the New Testament the 5.6. and 7th. Chapters of Saint
Matthews Gospel, and comparing those rules with Christians lives, he threw
down the book, and burst forth into this protestation, Either this is not
God's Gospel, or we are not Christians. Let any man look upon the lives of
most men, and then say, whether the argument be not without all exceptions.

It is the abstract of Religion, to imitate him whom we worship: neither are
we worthy to be called Christians, except we be like him in works: We are
not like Christ, except we do whatsoever God commands, and suffer whatsoever
he inflicts: Now we are naught at doing, but when it comes to suffering, we
are gone: it is the happiness of these cold times, that we are not put to the
hot fire, for trial of our faith and love: if the Wheel should turn, which
the mercy of God forbid, how many would turn from Christ, rather than burn
for him? Alas! the greatest number are like Orbilius the Grammarian, who not
only forgot the Letters of his Book, but even his own name: for they not only
forget what is written in Christ's Gospel, but they forget also that they are
Christians, and can be of any religion, for a need; which shows their hearts
are truly of none. True, Gods seed is sown, but the Devils fruit comes up:
and, like the Jews, we bring Christ Vinegar, when he thirsts for Wine. But
what a shame? What a prodigy is this? We are bound to praise GOD above any
Nation whatsoever, (for what Nation under Heaven injoyes so much light, or so
many blessings as we?) above any Creature, for all the creatures were ordained
for our sakes: and yet Heaven, Earth, and Sea, all the Elements, all the
Creatures obey the Word of God; only men, for whom they were all made,
ingratefully rebel against it.

The which, as it mightily aggravates our unthankfulness; so when time comes,
it will gall our Consciences to death. Yea, when we shall consider, that Christ
has removed so many evils from us, and conferred so many good things upon us,
that they are beyond thought, or imagination; and that our recompense of his
love, has been only to do that which he hates, and hate those whom he loves,
it will make us speechless (like him in the Gospel, who wanted his wedding
Garment) as neither expecting mercy, or daring to ask it: for know this, that
thy own conscience will once sting thee, like an Adder, to think what Christ
has given, and what he would have forgiven thee, if thou would but have
repented: to think how often thou have been invited to Heaven, how easily
thou might have escaped hell, how often Christ by his Ambassadors offered
thee remission of sins, and the Kingdom of Heaven freely, if thou would but
believe and repent, and how easily thou might have obtained mercy in those
days, how near thou wast many times to have repented, and yet did suffer
the Devil and the World to keep thee still impenitent, and how the day of
mercy is then past, and will never dawn again.

For the same Devil that now shuts your eyes, and labors to keep you blind,
during the presumption of your life, will open them in the desperation, that
shall wait on you at death, or in hell: As it fared with the rich man, who when
he was in hell, lift up his eyes to Heaven; but never before, Luke 16.23. Those
scorching flames opened them to propose: Sin shuts up men's eyes, but punishment
opens them.

But I hope I have said enough, and that thou art convinced in thine own
Conscience, that hitherto thou have been a mere Atheist, and that through
Atheism, thou have hated, reviled and persecuted the godly: If not, truth is
as much truth, when it is not acknowledged, as when it is.

Now if thou do confidently, and without peradventure believe what the
Scripture speaks of God, Heaven, hell, etc. If thou beleevest the threatenings
and precepts, as well as the promises, and if thou bear any love to thine
own soul, Break off thy sins by repentance, and oppose the good no longer,
give no credit to the flesh, or the Devil, which prophesy prosperity to sin;
but believe God and the Scripture, which manifestly proves, that every man
shall be judged according to his works, Revel. 12.13. and 22, 12. Make not
Christ a boulster for sin, nor Gods mercy a warrant for thy continuing in an
evil course. Be not therefore evil, because he is good, least like the
foolish builder, thou come short of thy reconning; for Christ came to
destroy the works of the Devil, John 3.3.8, 9, 10. And not to be a Patron of
sin; and there is mercy with God that he might be feared, not that he might
be despised, blasphemed, etc. Psalm. 130.4. Yea, know this and write it in the
Table book of thy memory, and on the table of thine heart, that if God's
bountifulness and long suffering toward thee does not lead thee to
repentance, it will double thy doom, and increase the pile of thy torments:
for every day, which does not abate of thy reckoning, will increase it, Qui
numer at dotes, numer at dren; and thou by thy hardness and impenitencie,
shall but treasure up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and the
declaration of the just judgment of God, Romans 2.4, 5, 6.

And so much of the third cause.

Q^est. What other Causes are there, why they thus hate and persecute us?

Answ. Other maine Causes (as they make them) are these Eight,

1. Speaking of Truth. 1 Kings 12.8, 17, 23, 24, 26, 27. Ier. 11.19. and 26.8,
9, 11. and 36, 23, 26. and 38.4, 5, 6. Amos 5.10. Mark. 6.16. to 29. Acts 16,
19. to 25. and 17.5, 6, 7, 13. and 18, 11, 12, 13, and 19, 26. to 34. and 21:
27, 28, 30, 31. and 22, 22, 23. and 23 1, 2, 12, 13, 14. Gal 4.16. 2.
Misprision, Acts 24.14. and 26, 9, 10, 11, 24. 1 Kings 18.17, 18. Psalm. 14.1.
Jer. 44.17, 18, 19. Wis. 5.4. Mat. 7 14. and 13.55, 56, 57. and 28, 15. Mar.
5.39, 40. and 7.5, 8, 9. John 2.19, 20, 21. and 3, 3, 4. and 7.15, 23, 24. and
8.15, 57, 58, 59. and 9.16. and 16, 2. Acts 2.13. 2 These. 2.10.11, 12. Romans
8.5, 6, 7, 8 1 Cor. 1.18. to 29. and 2.7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and
3.18, 19, 20. 2 Timothy 2.26. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Rev. 3.17, 3. Example of the
multitude, Genesis 19 4. to 12. Number. 14.2.3, 10. and 16.1. to 4. Mat. 27.20, 25,
27, 39, 49. Acts 19.24, to 30. 4. Separation, Genesis 39.12. to 21. Psalm. 26.4, 5.
and 101.7. and 119, 63, 115. Prove. 5.8. and 23, 20. Ier. 15.19. Wisd. 2.16.
John 15.19. 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Ephesians. 5.7. 2 These. 3.6, 14. 1 Pet. 4.4.
Rev. 18.4. 5. The preaching of some Ministers, Ier. 5.31. and 8.11. and 23,
13.14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 22, 26, 27, 31, 32. Eze. 22.25, 26, 28. Mat 9.34. Mark.
13.22. Ioh. 5.43. Act. 13.8 and 20, 29, 30. Romans 16, 17, 18. 2 Cor. 2.17. and
11.13, 14, 15. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 3.8. 2 Pet. 2. chapter and 3.3. 6. The
scandalous lives of some professors, Genesis 9.21, 22. and 12, 18, 19. and 19.33,
35, 36. and 20.2, 12, 16. and 34, 13, 14, 15, 16, 25, 26. to 31. 1 Samuel 2.12.
to 18. 2 Samuel 12, 14. Mat. 7.15. and 18, 7. and 23, 3, 14, 23, 24.25.27. and
26, 14, 15, 16, 70, 72, 74. and 27.5. 7. Flocking after Sermons, Ioh. 11.48.
and 12, 19, 6, 2. and Acts 13.45. Matthew. 4.24, 25. and 15, 30. Mar. 3.10. and
8.1. and 10, 1, 2. Luke 5.15. and 6, 17, 18, 19. 8. The final cause is, that
they may have more company here in sin, and hereafter in torment, Psalm. 35.4 7,
12 and 40.14. and 5.6, 6. and 59, 2, 3. Matthew. 23.13, 15. Luke 11.52. John
11.48. and 12, 10.11. and 15.19. Act. 26.11. 1 Pet. 4.4. Revel. 12.17. and 13,
15.
But they are all so prolix, and yet so unmeete to be abbreviated, that if I
should handle them, and make of all but one Volume, they would so swell the
heap, that not a few would be deprived of the whole. He will buy a Manual, or
Enchiridion, that will not buy a Commentary: and he will read a Curranto, that
will not read a Chronicle History. Yea, it may happen to meet with Patients so
desperate, that although they acknowledge it is of absolute necessity for them
to be informed touching these things, yet having Quesie stomachs, if they see
their Potion big, as well as bitter, will resolve to suffer, yea to dye rather
than take it. That will be swallowed by morsells, and easily digested, which
being taken all at once, will not only cloy, but surfeit. Wherefore I will
reserve the rest, until I see what return this will make: And the rather, for
that there are three Treatises already published of this very subject,

viz. Sin stigmatized. The Victory of Patience, last Edition. The mischief
and misery of Scandalls.


The end of the first Part.
Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes.


