SOME PRISON MEDITATIONS AND DIRECTIONS On several Subjects: Viz.

On The Fall of Man. On The Sufferings of Christ. On Repentance and Faith. On
Reproof and Counsel. On The Holy Scriptures. On Prayer. On Love to Mankind. On
Sincerity. On The Vanity of the World. On The Benefit of Afflictions. On Heaven
and Hell.
By SAMVEL YOUNG, Minister of the Gospel.

Jer. 33.1, 3. Moreover the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, the second time,
(while he was yet shut up in the Court of the Prison) saying, Call unto me, and
I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things, which thou know
not.

Luther's Song, Col. Men. Credens tribulatur, Tribusatus invocat, Invocans
auditur, Auditus laudat.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Tho. Cockeril at the three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market. 1684.

To all that are serious in the Profession of Religion, whether Conformists or
Nonconformists, Ministers or People.
My Brethren,
THe Eternal God having spread open the everlasting arms of Mercy, and embraced
you, has made you so like himself, as that you have such a hatred to sin, as
sin, and love to holiness, as holiness, that cannot be quenched: Hence it is,
that you being such God-like Creatures, are often in ^angs, because of a
distracted world; whose Lives are a delectable Frenzy, or a continued fit of
madness: To you do I call, that being Converted, you would often speak of the
chief things in Religion (such as are contained in this Book) to a vain world,
that Many may be by you turned unto Righteousness: I foresee that several
Questions will by several men be made, concerning the Author and the Book: As,

Q. What Opinion is the Author of?

A. I Answer. He is of this Opinion, that to love God with all the heart, and
with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength,
and to love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole Burnt-offerings
and Sacrifices, Mar. 12.33. He disowneth all those Names which have occasioned
so many heats and heart-burnings among us, and wishes they were as little
known among the Saints on Earth, as they are among the Saints in Heaven. He is
an impartial enquirer after Truth, without regard to interest or parties; he is
of all your Religions to whom he writes, and yet of none of them; of all, so as
to mind the great things you plead for, as Love to God, Christ and Souls, etc.
above all; of none, so as to be tied to any of your controverted modes of
Discipline; he is a mourner over all your parties, that God and one another are
no more loved, but a furious Contender for none.

Q. Why in the following Meditations and Directions, are Books Quoted, and not
Chapter and Page?

A. Because I have been for above two years from my Study: The Observations are
my own, in the diligent perusing and reading over all the Authors I have named:
And now I call on you that know God, and are known of him, that you love one
another: If your heads must differ, resolve that your hearts shall unite.

Are you such as frequent the Liturgy? Call on them that worship with you, not
to mock God, when they profess to come before him with an humble, lowly,
penitent and obedient heart; when they say to God, Pitifully behold the sorrows
of our hearts: Persuade them, when they bring their Children to Baptism, not to
make it only a matter of custom to give the Child a Name, etc. Choose no
ignorant or scandalous Godfathers or Godmothers that never mind their own
Souls, and therefore in vain promise to mind the Souls of your Children:
Remember what a weighty matter it is to give up your Children to the Lord: What
cries should there be at the throne of Grace, what pains should you take as
they grow up, that they may indeed be his: Those that go with you to the Lords
Table, as you have opportunity, persuade them, that their words be right, when
they say, The thoughts of our sins are grievous, the burden of them is
intolerable; and when they resign themselves to God, to do it unfeignedly.

You that frequent private Assemblies, chiefly or only; Love them that hate
you, Pray for them that are in Authority, let all men by your good
Conversations which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation, 1
Pet. 2.12.

In whatsoever dress your Religion is clothed, whether in a more plain or
curious one, Love one another. Perhaps a Prison may, in time, make many of you
to fall into one another Arms, and weep bitterly for your former Animosities.
Remember Ridley and Hooper! The same Spirit seems to be among you, that once
was between Cox of England, Fuller's Church-Hi^^.
and Knox of Scotland; when at Frankfort, the extreme zeal of one for the
Liturgy, and of the other against it, made them fall into preternatural heats.
I am ashamed to write the whole, but cover all with that of the holy Ghost
concerning the great send between Paul and Barnabas, Act 15 39.
that sharp was the contention between them. I cannot but take notice however,
That the Common-prayer-man was the sharpest.

I would ask them that have not yet learned Paul's directions, when contentions
were in the Church of God, about little things in Religion, as Meats, Drinks,
and Holy Days, Romans 14.22. Have thou Faith, have it to thy self before God: Let
every man be persuaded in his own mind: What if Origin, Augustine, and many of
the Ancient Fathers, and Holy Martyrs were now alive? would they have them
silenced for ever, and cast out of the Church, because they had some Principles
that rendered them incapable to subscribe and swear as some expect? When there
is an Uniformity in the Stature of all men's Bodies, in the feature of all
faces, in the found of all Voices, then, and not 'till then may we expect an
Uniformity in the Opinions, and so practices of the People of God.

Our Divisions are the great stumbling block to a Profane world, who if we
persuade them to live soberly, righteously and godly, tell us, You are not of
one mind; though our answer be ready, Neither are Physicians nor Lawyers, yet
that man would not be himself that should say, if my Body and my Estate be in
never so great danger, I will hearken to none of them. Great have been the
Controversies of late years on foot about Succession, if any man should
therefore say, Government is needless, it is fatal to the world; how soon might
he be answered? If any man should say, because one man accounts a house of one
figure best, and another of another figure, I will therefore dwell in no House;
Because one thinks Clothes of one color and fashion best, and another of
another, I will therefore put on no Apparel; because one man loves such a dish
that another cares not for, therefore I will eat nothing; he were Distracted:
Let such mind the things wherein we agree, and then if they mistake in the
things about which we differ, they will be saved: We all grant Repentance,
Faith, and a Holy Life necessary; Mind these things: Would to God I had spent
some of the hours in enquiring how my Soul might be bowed down before God in
Prayer, that I have spent in enquiring whether I should Pray in my own words,
or the words of others; that I had more enquired how I might come to the Lords
Table, Hungring and Thirsting after Righteousness, and less what gesture I
should there use.

You know my Brethren, your own Judgments often change in the smaller matters
of Religion, which may make you moderate toward them that dissent from you,
seeing you so often dissent from your selves: As the Body changes in a few
years, old matter passes away, and there comes a succession of new; so every
enquiring, thinking man knows, that what he thought lawful at one time, he has
thought unlawful at another, and cannot help it.

Testify my Brethren, testify against the formal men of all your persuasions,
who when they plead for the high things in Religion, do it with so much
coldness, as if their words did freeze in their mouths; but when for their
little notions, are so full of rage and fury, as if wrath and envy had chosen
their faces, to discover their complexion to the world; But remember you are
Christians, and Christians must love one another. Germanicus in his Speech to
the Soldiers, when there was a mutiny among them, Tacitus.
said, Divus Julius seditionem exercitus uno verbo compescuit, Quirites
vocando; that Julius Caesar ended a sedition in an Army, by one word, calling
them Romans, he bad them remember they were Romans; so you are Christians: If
the hand have the Palsy, and shakes much, and can hardly hold any thing, who
is presently for Amputation or cutting it off? Learn you of Paul, Romans 1^1, 2.
Him that is weak in the Faith, receive you, but not to doubtful disputations:
For one believes that he may eat all things, another who is weak, eats
herbs: v. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more: v. 19. Let us
therefore follow after the things that make for Peace, and the things whereby
we may Edify one another. I know not how my counsel may take with some of you;
I know that he that comes between two that are fighting, to part them, is
sometime beaten by both: I know that some on the one hand will be offended, and
charge me that I seem to countenance Superstition; and others on the other hand
will say that I favor Schism, but I matter not.

The Protestant Church, the Vessel in which we are, is ready to sink, Lord save
us, or else we perish; God be merciful to those desperate Souls, who because we
cannot agree, therefore reject all Religion, as if a man at Sea, seeing the
waves urgent, and hearing the winds roaring, should say, if this it is to be in
a Ship, I will never here abide, and so commit himself to the vast Ocean: So
are they that reject all Religion, because of the Contentions that are in the
Church of God, and fall into Atheism and Profaneness: Accept kindly of this
plain Discourse, devoid of all Embellishments of fine words and Phrases, and
take up with the great things of Religion, as you are directed by one that is
of Paul's mind, who says of himself, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22. And unto the Jews I
became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as
under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law; to the weak
became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made (observe) all things to
all men, that by all means I might save some: Had some weak headed Christians
among us seen him thus to do, perhaps they would have said, that Paul often
changed his Religion, or could not tell what Religion to be of; that he was not
fixed, or a man of no Principles: Hear what he says elsewhere, 1 Cor. 10.33.
Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the
profit of many, that they might be saved: As far as I can, I am yours in your
diverse ways of worshipping one Lord Jesus Christ: This I am resolved on, that
having been instrumental for the Conversion of many Souls, and I hope shall of
many more, yet ungathered, that I will Preach Repentance, Faith and Obedience
to the Gospel.

Grow my Brethren, Grow in Grace, that you may have that commendation given to
the Church of Thyatira; I know thy Works, and Charity, and Service, and Faith,
and thy Patience, and thy works, and the last to be more than the first, Rev.
2.19. But Oh! That my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of Tears, that
I might weep day and night; not only for the Profaneness of the Ungodly, but
for the backwardness of the Righteous to all good works; I cry to you as in
that Song, Judge. 5.12. Awake, awake Deborah: Awake, awake: Set about the work,
to be more serious your selves, and to sound an Alarm in the ears of a drowsy,
sleepy world, that they may be saved: That this may be your work, is the hearty
Desire and Prayer of him, who is

Your Brother, And Servant in our Lord, Samuel Young.
Gloucester Goal, Feb. 2. 1683/4
TO ALL SEAMEN, THAT ARE, Or would be Serious.
HAving in this Book, spoken of the chief things in Religion, I could not but
call on you to mind these things your selves, and to put others in mind of
them: I have you daily on my heart, before the Throne of Grace, that you that
are serious may endeavor by Prayer, by Admonitions, by a good Example to make
many so: You that are Baptized, have taken Christ's Press-money, have taken
Christ's Livery, and are under an engagement to Fight under his Banner, against
Sin, the World and the Devil; testify against the Drunkenness, Swearing,
Uncleanness, Sabbath-breaking, Contempt of Prayer and Reading of Scriptures,
and other sins many among you are guilty of. I know your great Objection, is,

Obj. That you shall be derided, if you so do; this I have heard from many of
you.

A. 1. Deride their Derision. Remember what is said of Christ; and when his
friends heard of it, they laid hold on him, for they said, he is beside
himself, Mar. 3.21. If you are accounted mad by them that are really so; you
have Christ for your Companion.

2. It is better be derided by men now, for the faithful discharge of your
duty; than be derided by Christ, Angels, and Saints, another day, for the
neglect of your duty.

3. The Derision of some, may soon turn into imitation. They that at first mock
at good counsel, may in time take it, and give it to others. I have seen an
instance, one laughing to see another minding secret Prayer, and yet seeing
constancy, and resolution for that duty, practiced the same.

Remember, if you mourn not, if you pray not over the ungodly, their sin is
yours; if you reprove not, you are the cause of their damnation. I have read in
the dreadful Tragedy of the destruction of the English, by the Dutch at
Amboyna, that one Dunchin, who had falsely accused them, one day passing by the
Pit where sixteen of them were cast in, that he fell on it raging, and was
distracted, considering there lay so many men he had ruined. How many go into
Eternity, whose Souls you have betrayed into the Infernal Pit, by your sinful
discourse, or by your sinful silence! Stop the mouth of the Swearer, and
Blasphemer as much as you can; James 3.4, 5, 6. Behold also the Ships, which
though they be so great, and are driven with fierce winds, yet are they turned
about with a very small Helm, whithersoever the Governor lists. Even so the
Tongue is a little member, and boasts great things: Behold, how great a
matter a little fire kindles. The tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: --
And it is set on fire of Hell. I wish you Moses's Blessing, Deuteronomy. 33.18, 19.
Rejoice Zebulon, in thy going out, -- Suck of the abundance of the Seas, and
hid treasures in the Sands.

Have you been as those Mariners, Jon. 1.15.16. When Seas have raged, and
ceased, made Vows to the Lord? Keep your Vows; Instruct poor Pagans in the way
to God. Consider the worth of your Souls and theirs. The better your Cargo is,
the more you fear Shipwreck. O man thou art richly laden, that Vessel, thy
Body, carries a Soul of greater value, than all the Treasures upon earth: Let
it never be said of it, what was said of that Ship, and men in it, Acts 27.20.
That all hope of being saved, was taken away.

S. Y.

THE PREFACE.
ALcinous the Platonist tells us, That Plato thought that the work of a
Philosopher consisted in three things, (...). Which I think, taking the liberty
the Poet speaks of, Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus Interpres. Herat. de
Art. Poet.


I may t^u^ English:

In thinking well, in doing well, and in speaking well. What their Philosophy,
which was much of their Natural Religion, taught them; does Christianity, which
is our supernatural Religion, teach us, but in a different way, and in a fuller
manner. The design of the following discourse is to help in this work. There
are many things for Meditation of God, his Word, etc. many practical Directions
for a holy useful life, several helps to speak to God, and for God. I know
dangerous it is, for a man in my circumstances to be a Writer: But I care not
if my counsel be accepted, what becomes of my person. I am persuading the World
to play the Christian, to play the Man: As Solomon brings in Wisdom speaking,
so do I, Unto you O men, do I call, and my voice is unto the Sons of men. Are
you men, learn to act according to the excellency, and dignity of your natures.

Let me beseech those, into whose hands this Book may come, if they have given
up themselves to the Immoralities of the Age, Drunkenness, Adultery, Swearing,
Oppression, etc. that have all vices, that may make their lives a full Systeme
of wickedness; Vices, the nanning of which may seem to corrupt the Air we
breathe in; Vices, that need little more to their confutation, than to be
thought on; I say, let me persuade you to consider: Is Sin an evil thing, Grace
a desirable thing? Is God, and your Souls to be minded above all things, or
not? If not, why do you say they are? If they are, why do you not live as those
that thus believe? I do not despair but that some, who are guilty of the
unpresidented Sins of the times, Sins of the first Edition; if they would
consider, they may yet learn to walk soberly, righteously and godly in this
present World. I know such are ready to say,

Object. Religion is abused to very bad purposes by some.

Answ. I Answer, And used to very good purposes by others. Is Rhetoric to be
despised, because by it some bad men learn to color a bad cause; as well as
some good men to flourish a good cause? Is Logic to be despised, because some
learn to dispute Sophistically; as well as others Topically? Is the light of
the Sun to be despised, because one steals by it; as another works in his
Calling? How many men had lived as Incarnate Devils, that now live as
Terrestrial Angels, had not Religion healed their Natures, and regulated their
Lives! Remember, Sin is a great part of the misery and punishment of these men.
They are out God, his Grace, and Love, and content to be so; they serve the
Devil and Sin, and are glad of the work. The Lord bring in such, as their Elder
Brother in the Gospel, that was healed of his distraction, and was placed in
his right mind at the Feet of Jesus.

SOME Prison Meditations AND DIRECTIONS ON Several Subjects.
CHAP. I. Of the Fall of Man.
MEDITATIONS.
THat the finding out of our Disease, is necessary in order to a Cure; is not
more true of the Natural Distempers of our Bodies, than of the Spiritual
Distempers of our Souls. The Apostle mentions the Fall of man at large to the
Romans, to make way for the discovery of the Necessary and Excellency of a
Savior. Ron, 5. In the Fall of man, I shall consider, that we all were in the
First Man, as in Heb. 7.9.10. Levi is said to pay Tithes to Melchisedeck, as he
was in the loins of his Father Abraham. So we may be said to eat Forbidden
Fruit, as we were in the loins of our Father Adam. We were in him, as a Nation
in their King. Adam was our Repre^^e^^ative: If he had stood, we had had the
benesit of his obedience, though he, not we obeyed: So he disobeying, we are
brought under the Curse, though he and not we offended. It is in vain in war,
if Subjects be taken, to say, our King proclaimed and made the War, not we; we
never consented to it. If the Posterity of a Traitor be disinherited, it is in
vain for them to plead, Our Father, not we, conspired the death of the Prince,
we were not then born. Besides, the nature of man by the Fall was corrupt, and
a clean thing cannot come out of an unclean. Job. 14.4.
It is true indeed what God said by Ezekiel, The Children shall not bear the
Iniquity of the Father: Ezekiel. 19.20.
If the Father sin alone it is so, but this is not our Case; for we find our
Principles, and so Practices corrupted. Adam was but one man personally, but he
was all men potentially, and originally. I shall in order consider, 1. What we
were before the Fall. 2. What Sin we were guilty of in the Fall. 3. What misery
we brought on our selves after the Fall. I may sometimes name Adam only, but
it must be thus understood, that we all were He.


1. What Adam was before he fell. Adam and Eve, Genesis 5.2. are both called Adam,
Male and Female created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam:
In the day when they were Created they were one, though not by a Physical, yet
by a Conjugal Union; they were two distinct persons, yet one by nearness of
relation; and so I may consider them both, though sometimes I name one only, as
I see occasion. Before the Fall, great were the privileges they had for their
Body; and Souls: Of the first sort.

1. Their Bodies were sound and free from all distempers, bodies that could not
be disturbed by any outward colds or heats, or by any inward malignity or
humors, Genesis 2. ult. Ask the sick and unhealthy, that are chained by many
pains in Head, Stomach, what this mercy was.

2. All the Creatures were in subjection to him, Genesis 1.28, 29, 30. God gave
man Dominion over the Birds of the air, and over the Beasts of the earth, and
over the Fish of the sea, and over the living things that creep on the earth:
The Creatures saw such a luster in the countenance of man, that they feared
him; so much majesty yet appears, though sin has lessened it, that the Beasts
fear us not a little: For venomous Creatures, they either had no venom, or
that venom could not hurt.

3. He was seated in a pleasant Habitation, Genesis 2.8. And the Lord God planted
a Garden eastward in Eden, and there he put the man, whom he had formed. The
Excellency of which place we read in the 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. verses. Where he
was placed, or where Eden was, a Learned Author has spent much time to
enquire. Sir Walt. Rawley Hist. of World.
That Paradise was not the whole world, is clear from Genesis 3.24. So he drove
out the man; not sure out of the world, for Adam lived, Genesis 5.5. nine Hundred
and thirty years. For the idle notions that the Rivers signify virtues, etc. I
will not honor them with a confutation.

The good things of the Soul were these.

1. It was enricht with wonderful knowledge, Genesis 2.19, 20. When God brought
the Creatures to Adam, he on the first sight gave names to them; that is, names
significative, or expressive of their natures; as if we should call a Lion
Rage, a Lamb Meek, a Dove Innocent, etc. His Knowledge much exceeded ours; his
was habitual, ours acquired; his was complete, ours imperfect; His knowledge was
as much above the knowledge of the wisest man on earth, as the knowledge of a
wise man above the knowledge of a Child.

2. He had a perfection of Holiness, not only a perfection of degrees, but of
parts: he was perfect, not only if we consider Perfection in opposition to
Hypocrisy, as Abraham, Noah, and many Saints in Scripture are said to be
perfect: But perfect in opposition to any defect, or imperfection. Adam in
Paradise was as an Angel in Heaven, was as free from any Sin or contempt of God.

3. He had frequent, and immediate, and full Communion with God, Genesis 2.16, 17.
God speaks to man, and man to God without any fear, or dread. What an honor is
it for a mean man to have the ear of a Prince, or great man at his pleasure!
Hence it was that Paradise was a lower Heaven; which makes some think, if man
had not sinned, he had there continued for ever.

2. We come to consider what Sins we were guilty of in the Fall. Man had very
bad thoughts of a good God; very good thoughts of a bad Devil; very high
thoughts of low Self, Adam and Eve.

1. They made God a Liar, and justified the Devil as a Speaker of truth; Genesis
2.17. God said, In the day you eat thereof, you shall die, Genesis 3.3. The Devil
said, You shall not surely die, Genesis 3.4. The Woman said, Lest you die. God
affirms, the Devil denies, and the woman doubts. Many Temptations Adam had that
we know not; Now this was by Interpretation to give God the Lie. How tedious is
it among men to be called a Liar, and what effusion of blood has it caused!
Now the Devil the Father of Lies is believed more than God.

2. They looked on God as unworthy to be their Commander, and took the Devil for
their Counselor: God must stand by, the Devil takes place. They chose this
God, or Guide, for themselves and Posterity; hence it is the Devil is called by
the Apostle, The God of this World, 2 Cor. 4.4.

3. They thought it unbecoming them to be restrained by any Law. They should be
as Gods, Genesis 3.5. That there was some hidden virtue in the Tree, that would
make the Eaters of its fruit, more like an absolute God, than God would have
them be; and therefore God forbad the touching that Tree. This was the
Temptation.

3. We shall consider what Miseries we brought on our selves after the Fall.

1. We were deprived of the Image of the Blessed God: According to supernatural
endowments, it was totally gone, there was not one Spark of Grace left; nothing
of holiness remained in man. According to natural endowments, this Image was in
part gone; much wisdom, much power over the Creatures was gone, Genesis 3.7. They
were as naked in their Souls, as in their Bodies. As Aaron in the matter of the
Golden Calf, is said to make the people naked, Exodus 32.25.

2. We were cast out of Paradise among the rest of the Beasts, Genesis 3.24.
Cherubims appeared in Shape like an Ox. Now man by Sin, had made himself like
the Beasts that perish; and therefore God sends him to be their companion. He
is not now in Paradise, but in a Wilderness, not in a place of pleasure, but of
toil and sorrow, Genesis 3.19.

3. We are naturally inclined to all sin, and so exposed to all Judgments. The
Understanding is clouded with error; the judgment fails, both in directing
what is to be done, and judging of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of what is
done: The affections are carnal: In a word, the Soul is blinded, Genesis 3.19.
nay, some so blind as hardly to see the Being of God: That what once God said
to Adam, they are ready to say to God, Where art thou? Genesis 2.17. I know it is
enquired, what Death was threatened in those words, Genesis 2.17.
In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Some think only the
death of the Body. But I thus argue, That Death that followed man's sin was
there threatened, and the death that followed was the natural death of the Body,
the spiritual death of the Soul, and the eternal death both of Body and Soul;
and therefore all was threatened in those words, Thou shall die. Is it
reasonable to think, that the great Lawmakers put more in the Execution, than
there was in the Threat? In Adam, you find no confession of Sin to God, but
adding Sin to Sin, Genesis 3.10. When he fled, God calls to him, how does he
reply? I heard thy voice in the Garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked,
and I hid my self: As if he had said, I am hid, because I heard thy voice; it
is exceeding piercing, it is the voice of a God; and I am but Flesh and Blood,
and I cannot bear it. But did he not hear Gods voice before, Genesis 2.16, 17.
when God gave him a charge, not to eat of the Tree in the midst of the Garden?
I was naked, was another Excuse, Genesis 2.25. Were they not before both naked,
and not ashamed? When God told Adam plainly of his Sin, Genesis 3.11. Have thou
eaten of the Tree, whereof I commanded thee, that thou should not eat? One
would think, now there is no room for an excuse: verse 12. you read, The woman
thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. He lays it
on the woman, but the woman could not compel, though she did tempt: Nay,
rather than take the blame to himself, he lays it on God; Thou gave. If thou
had not given me the woman, she had not tempted, nor I eaten. Few know or
consider the hardening nature of Sin. One might have expected, he should have
cried, Lord pity me, Lord contrive a way to show mercy, if there be any; or if
none, Lord thou art just in all the evil that shall come upon me. So was man
exposed to all Judgments temporal, distempers, troubles, losses, death, and at
last to eternal Judgments, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is never
quenched.

And now to these Meditations, I shall add a few Directions.

DIRECTIONS.
1. Mourn over your selves and Brethren, fallen into sin and misery. Complaints
against Adam are in vain; Complaints against God are worse. It was necessary,
as Calvin says, that the will of man should be flexibilis in utramque partem:
God having made man, it was convenient he should put him on Trial of Obedience.
God gave him but one Law, not many; an easy one, not difficult; a negative
one, not positive; no thanks had been to Adam to obey, if he could not have
disobeyed. Consider it, and it fell out that he sinned. What have we lost in
losing Paradise, and the blessings there! When Ziklag was burnt, what an outcry
was there! 1 Samuel 30.3, 4. So David and his men came to the City, and behold,
it was burnt with fire; and their Wives, and their Sons, and their Daughters
were taken Captives: What follows? Then David and the People that were with
him, lift up their Voice and wept, until they had no Power to weep. What was
Ziklag to Paradise? what was the Captivity of the Body, to that of the Soul?
How sadly do men look back on a burnt House, and Treasures there; and weep
bitterly!

2. Cry against the Tempter, that you may through Grace out-wit him. Was he too
hard for man in innocence, how much more now? If any man wants wisdom, let him
ask it of God: James 5.
Cry to God against Satan, as David against Ahithophel, that God would confound
the Policy of Ahithophel; so Lord, 2 Samuel 15.31.
confound the Devices of the evil one.

3. Strive against all Objections against God in this matter. Though the Act
Physically considered is of God; yet not Morally. And though it is true, that
second Causes cannot act without the first, aliquid Positioum; yet they may
aliquid delinquens. We have learnt of Adam to lay all on God. To them that deny
any thing of Predetermination, I humbly offer this to Consideration. Whether it
be rational to imagine, that it depended upon so pitiful, and weak, and
changeable a thing as Adams Will, without Gods Determination? Whether Christ
should come into the World, and dye, and so be a Savior? Whether the
Providence of God in the World, should be such as they are? Whether the
greatest part of Mankind should be in Hell for ever, and thousands before the
Throne, Praising God for a Redeemer? However, Let every Mouth be stopped before
God. Luther says, I put off questions about Gods Predeterminations, with that
of Christ to Peter, when he asked an unnecessary question about John; Joh.
22.23.
What is that to thee? follow thou me; Officium agamus, said, Melancton, Loci.
Com.
and disputationes de Predestinatione Seponamus: Romans 11.33. How unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! Many would search out
unsearchable Judgments, and find out ways past finding out. I will not cut a
knot that I cannot untie. We that cannot solve the Phoenomena of Nature; how
can we satisfy our selves about the great Mysteries of Religion?

We are by Nature Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
and let us not so curiously enquire, how Original sin got into our Heart, as
carefully enquire how to get it out. For that Objection against Sin in Infancy:

Obj. Omne peccatum est voluntarium. Every sin is Voluntary. Mel. in his Com.
Places, says, that must be understood in civilibus Delictis, in civil Offenses
among men: and yet sin is voluntary in Infancy, quia (says the same Author) eo
delectamur, because we delight in it.

As for such foolish Questions, Whether if Adam had begotten Children before he
fell, Sin had been imputed to those Children; we will not waste time to
consider them. Catarinus affirmed, Soto denied, Hist. of the Council of Trent.
as F. P. says. Run to Christ, who by once Suffering can save you, as Adam by
once sinning has destroyed you. Romans 5.19. For as by one man's Disobedience
many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience of one shall many be made
righteous. Christ was obedient unto Death, Phil. 2.8.
even the Death of the Cross. The Law is in full force against every ungodly
man: God has still his Power of commanding, though we have thrown away our
Power of obeying. God sees more sin in one wrathful thought, than we do in
actual Murder; in one covetous thought, than we do in open Theft. Oh then run
to Jesus that justifies, that sanctifies, that saves. He is our Joseph, that
has all the Storehouses of Provision, in a time of Famine: As the distressed
Egyptians said to him, let us say to Christ, Genesis 47.18, 19. We will not hide
it from my Lord, our money is gone; -- Give us bread, let us be Servants unto
Pharaoh. We will not, nay, we cannot hide it from our Lord: All is gone; let us
have Grace from him, that we may serve our God; and all Believers must say to
Jesus, as they to Joseph, v. 25. Thou have saved our lives, let us find Grace
in the sight of our Lord. When sin had slain us, Christ had Compassion on us,
as David had on his Son, when his own Folly had ruined him. 2 Samuel 18.33. And
the King was much moved, and wept, and as he went, thus he said, O my Son
Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom; would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom my
Son, my Son. Yet Absalom sought his Fathers Crown and Life; and we would be as
Gods. Christ feem'd to say over us, Would to God I might dye for thee; and
indeed, it pleased the Father to bruise; Isa. 53.10.
-- I believe that Adam through this Christ was saved, Genesis 3.16. God
immediately on the fall applied himself to him, and promised a Redeemer. Paul
to the Romans, makes Adam a Figure of him that was to come. Romans 5.14.
If sin and guilt might have made any man pine away, Adam had been the man,
that opened the Floodgates of Sin and Wrath to break in upon the World, and
was the ruin of the greatest part of his Posterity; yet hearing of a Savior,
he lived almost a thousand years. We are not so to mourn for sin, as to forget
to rejoice in Christ our Savior. Of this blessed Savior, I shall speak in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the Sufferings of Christ.
MEDITATIONS.
GOD is more pleased with the Sufferings of Christ, than displeased with the
Sin of Adam: he more loves us as the Children of Christ, than he hated us as
the Children of Adam. We must often consider the Death of Christ, and be
affected with it. It was Prophesyed of old, Zach. 12.10.
They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
as one mourns for the loss of an only Son, and shall be in bitterness for
him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. And O what wringing of
hands, what deep Groans, what doleful Outcries are there made oftentimes for
the loss of an only Child, or Firstborn! Act 2.37.
What made Peter's Converts to be pricked at the Heart, but the Preaching of a
crucified Christ?

I shall here consider, (1.) What Crucifying was. (2.) Who were the Agents in
this Work. (3.) Who, and what he was on whom this Cruelty was acted.

1. For the manner of Crucifying. There was Lignum Geminum, as the learned
Weems speaks at large in his Christian Synagogue: The Cross had four things;
Arrectarium, or Main-tree; Scabellum, the Tree where the feet were Nailed;
Lignum transversum, whereunto their Arms were fastened with Cords, and there
Nailed; Vertex, the Title with the Inscription above the Head. This way of
putting to Death, was so shameful and so lingering, that the Romans inflicted it
on none but Slaves, or the vilest sort of men. Constantine, in Honor of
Christ, took away this Punishment. Christ had carried his own Cross (as all
Crucified Persons did) but they had so weakened him, Mat. 27.32.
that they made Simon of Cyrene to carry it, not out of Kindness to Christ, but
hatred; lest he being so severely handled before, should faint by the way, and
their blood-shot eyes lose the Pleasure of beholding him tormented on the
Cross. The Romans called this Punishment Servile Supplicium, for the reason
before-named.

2. We come to consider the Actors in this woeful Tragedy. They were not the
profane Gentiles, or common Rabble among the Jews, that only did this; but the
High Priest, the Scribes, the Pharisees.

1. They that had so long prayed, and waited for his coming. Before he came
into the world, the Devout Jews thought Blessed were the eyes that should see
the promised Messiah in the Flesh. It was a Petition commonly made by them, in
their Giving of Thanks at their Tables; Let our eyes be made worthy to see the
Messiah in the Flesh. What cries were there, Isa. 64.1.
O that he would rend the Heavens, and come down! Malachi that closed up the
Old Testament, foretold, how though they longed for him, yet they could not
stand before him. Mal. 3.1, 2.
Behold I will send my Messenger, and the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly
come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the covenant in whom ye delight: But
what follows? But who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall stand when
he appears? For he is like Refiners Fire, and as Full^rs Soap. He dealt too
plainly with the world con^erning their Sin and Duty, to be welcomed by them.
They expected a Messiah, to deliver them from the power of the Romans; and God
sent a Messiah to deliver from the power of the Devil.

2. They that were acquainted with the Law and the Prophets; That might by
Types and Prophesies have known that Christ was the promised Savior.

3. They that heard his Doctrine, and saw his Miracles. His Doctrine was
spitual and Heavenly, reaching the Heart and Soul; His Miracles were not done
in a Corner; as feeding many thousands with a few Loaves, his raising Lazarus
from the Dead.

3. We now come to consider who, and what he was who thus suffered.

1. He that did their Bodies so much good: Paul says, for a good man some
would even dare to die: Though scarcely for a Righteous man, Romans 5.7. That is,
consider him as righteous before God, and so few love him so well, as to die
for him; but consider him as good to man, so some would lose their lives for
him. But here they were so far from dying for this good man, that they
contrived his death. He cured all sorts of men, of all sorts of Distempers; he
raised the Dead, etc.

2. He that came to save Souls from endless burnings, and to bring them to
endless Blessedness. 1 These. 1.10.
It is not more true that our Bodies and Souls are now in the world, than that
they had been in endless misery had not Christ dyed.

3. He that was God. God suffered in the Person, Acts 20.28. though not in the
Nature. Hence it is, that his Temporal Sufferings were as much as our Eternal
would have been. Christ had his Sonship but not his Substance from the Father,
who begat him in respect of Personality, not of Essence. The dignity of his
person, made the Sin of crucifying him so great. I will suppose, that all the
Saints in Heaven and Earth were met together, yea that all the Angels were
incarnate and among them, and that a man or number of men should murder them
all; this Sin were no sin in comparison of what I now speak of, the Crucifying
of the Lord of Glory.

Christ suffered from first to last. In his Birth; for the Ancient of Days to
be born in time, for the Eternal God to become a Babe, this is soon said, but
who understands the depth of these things? Luke 2.12. And this shall be a sign
unto you, you shall find the Babe wrapped in swadling-cloaths, lying in a
Manger: yet was all ordered by the infinite wisdom of God. Had Christ been the
Son of Herod, or Caesar, then it had been no wonder, that all the world went
out after him; but that one so obscurely born, should carry the world before
him, was wonderful! John when in Patmos, Rev. 11.15.
foresaw, That the Kingdoms of the World would become the Kingdoms of the Lord,
and his Christ; which then was very unlikely in outward appearance. He was
sorely tempted by the Devil, we read at large in Mat. 4. Gods end in all we
have, Heb. 2.18. Being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.
Ask the Saints what Suffering this is, that often sweat under this Saddle, when
they are tempted to hate God, or distrust him, have such suggestions as are not
fit to be named.

He was despised in his common converse with men: Luke 8.20.
The Foxes had their holes, and the Birds of the Air their nests, but Jesus had
not where to lay his head. He was reviled as one that had a Devil; Joh. 10.20.
Mark 2.16. Luke 22.44.
and was made as a Friend of Publicans and Sinners.

In his Agonies in the Garden, He sweat drops of Blood, though it were such a
cold season, that one might think would have struck the Blood inward: It was a
cold time, for Peter stood to warm himself. Our Sin was the heavy burden that
lay upon him.

When, and after he was Betrayed: Betrayed he was by a Friend, a Bosome-friend;
to be Betrayed, and that in point of Life, and all by an intimate acquaintance,
goes near the Heart. What David said to him that betrayed, might Christ say to
Judas: Had it been an Enemy, Psalm. 11.13, 14.
I could have born it; but it was thou, my Companion, we took sweet Counsel
together, and walked together as Friends. He was severely handled by Soldiers,
who battered his Ears with Blasphemy, as well as tormented his Body: when he
was on the Cross, Mat. 27. v. 39, 40. they waged their Heads, tell him of what
he was accused, verse. 41, 42, 43. The great men revile him; when usually men
that scarce pray all the year long for themselves, if they see any infamous
Criminal executed, they never tell him in a way of scoffing, of his Fault or
Crime, but say, God be merciful to his Soul. At last, Christ cries out, Mat.
27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? We must warily understand
this, not as if God had forsaken Christ in respect of Strength, for an Angel
was sent to strengthen him; Luke 22.33.
nor in respect of Essence, nor of Complacency; but God forsook him as to
present comfort in a great measure. Imagine you stood as the Devout Women at
the Cross, and saw this. I now come to lay down a few Directions.

DIRECTIONS.
1. Look on, and wonder. Are these things so? 2 Timothy 3.1.
Then great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh! If it be
a Mystery, it cannot be fathomed. Wonder at what Christ is, and at what he
does: What he is, Prove. 30.4. It was the wise man's Problem, or hard Question,
What is his name, or his Sons name, if thou can tell? His Name is called
Wonderful, Isa. 9.6. Wonder that the Divinity did not swallow up the Humanity,
that the fire and the bush can so well agree together. All the Attributes of
God are given to Christ, all the Works of God spoken of him, as of Creation,
Sanctification, Glorification: Therefore Christ is God not only by name, or
secundum divi; but God by Nature. He was God that he might satisfy, he was Man
that he might suffer. Wonder at what he does. Patereulus says, that when the
Lacedaemonians opposed Attica, the Pythian God told them, that that Army whose
General was taken should conquer: Codrus deposita vest regia, etc. Codrus
laying aside his Princely Robes, went among his enemies, and was slain by them.
Our King on Maunday Thursday, (so called, as some say, because of the Command
of Love, Christ gave his Disciples before his Passion, Mandatum novum do
vobis,) I say our King uses to wash the feet of as many poor People as he has
lived years, and yet not the less a King for this humble act. Our Lord Jesus
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, dyed that we might live, abased himself,
that he might exalt us. Psalm 126.1, 2. When God delivered the Church out of
Babylon by Cyrus, they were like men that dreamed. How much more should we be
Astonished at our deliverance from Sin and Satan by Jesus Christ!

2. Let Love be attactive of Love. Let the Love of Jesus to us, make us to Love
him. I have read of Agilmond King of the Lombards, that one day he went a
fishing, and saw a Babe sprawling in the Water (perhaps a base child) he took
it up, and made it his adopted Son, and called him Lama, and left him his Crown
and Kingdom: You may easily imagine what delight this Lama took in seeing of
King Algilmond whilst he lived, and in thinking and speaking of this King after
he was dead. How excellently does God express his love to the poor Jews of old!
Ezekiel. 16.4, 5, 6. As for thy Nativity, in the day thou wast born, thy Navel was
not cut, neither wast thou washed in water; -- None eye pitied thee to do any
of these unto thee, to have compassion on thee; but thou wast cast out into the
open field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born. And
when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy own Blood; I said unto thee
when thou wast in thy Blood, live; (And lest this should be soon passed over,
the Holy Ghost bids them, as it were, stand and hear it the second time,) Yoa,
I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy Blood, live: When Tiberius was in a
Village named Spelunca, Stones fell from the house where he was: Sejanus genu,
vultu, manibusque super Caesarem suspensis opposuit sese, satis incidentibus;
says Tacitus: Sejanus covered the Emperor, that if the Stones fell where they
were, Sejanus might die, and not the Emperor; which as the Historian observes,
made the Emperor ever after to love Sejanus, though he loved him not before.
The wrath of God fell from Heaven, because of man's sin: Christ has embraced
the Sinner and that wrath has fallen on him, that else had crushed us. O let
us love him, let us not be satisfied till we find our hearts burning in love.

3. Crucify Sin, that crucified Christ. Be the death of those Sins, that were
the death of Jesus; Pride, Wrath, Covetousness, and every abominable thing,
which the Soul of God hates: Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our Old man is
crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth
we should not serve sin: Sin is only destroyed by his death; had not Christ
dyed for us, we could no more have killed our Corruptions, or been made Saints,
than the Devils can cease to be Devils, and become Angels.

4. Come to God as those that expect to be justified no other way, but by
Christ and his Righteousness: In him is God well pleased with Believers. The
Names given to Christ are in Scripture given to a Christian, as Son of God, an
Heir, King, yea the name Christ; The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12.12.
As many Members make one Body, even so is Christ: Where it is understood not
of Christ personally, but mystically, for Christians, or the Church of Christ.
Now as Adams sins is imputed to us, though he, and not we disobeyed; so Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us, though he, not we obeyed, 2 Cor. 5. last verse;
Though Adams Sin be imputed to us, yet we were not the first sinners, nor the
involvers of all Mankind into Misery: So, though Christ's Righteousness be
imputed to us, yet we are not therefore Saviors or Mediators. We are often
commanded to be sanctified, but not to be Justified; for Justification is Gods
own work without us. The Grace of Christ, that is the efficient cause of our
Sanctification, and is the essential cause, the matter and form of our
Justification. And therefore when God is said to reward men according to their
works, it shows the order of following, not the Cause; Vno Scripturae exemplo,
ista quaestio elucescit, Calv. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 19.
says Calvin: One example in Scripture, shall make it clear. Genesis 15.5. The
Promise made to Abram in Uncircumcision, in Genesis 22.16, 17. is there made again
on his Offering up of Isaac; By my self have I sworn, because thou have done
this thing -- I will multiply thy Seed as the Stars of the Heavens: Now his
Obedience was not the Cause of that blessing, for Abraham had it before, but
was an occasion of renewing it at that time: God rewarded his good works, and
so will ours, with Blessings promised before the good works were done. Heaven
is an Inheritance of Children.

Obj. If good works justify not, what need is there to press after them? Take
Luthers answer: This is just as if we should say, Money Justifies not,
therefore throw it away; our Hands justify us not, therefore cut them off:
Luthers Comment on the Epist. Gala.
We must attribute (says he) to every thing its proper Work, and Office. A
Woman may not wear a Man's Apparel, nor a Man a Woman's. The Sun shines by day,
and the Moon by night: So he. Gal. 4.7. Wherefore thou art no more a Servant,
but a Son; and if a Son, then an Heir of God by Christ. An Heir is not Agent,
but Patient; has all by Birth, not by Labor; no more than to be born. The
Promise, being of Grace, is sure to all the seed: It was not sure to Adam, he
had his Treasure in his own hand, and so lost it; but we have ours in the hand
of Christ. Justification, and Sanctification are not separated, though they be
distinguished: He that is justified will be holy, Tit. 2.14.
and zealous of good works. The Objection, that we are enemies to good works is
in vain. King Henry the Eighth, in his Book against Luther, de Septem
Sacramentis, (for which Book the Pope gave him the Title of Defender of the
Faith) charge our Reformers, with pleading for all manner of Sins from this
Doctrine; but how true, the world now knows. If any of the Church of England
are offended, I beseech them to read the Homilies about these matters, and
Bishop Downhams large Folio of Justification, and they will find my opinion not
different from the old Protestants, tho I confess different from the Opinion of
some of the late new Protestants, both Conformists and Non-conformists.

5. If you are through Christ related unto God, give Christ the Glory, and take
to your selves the comfort of this relation. We are said to be of his Flesh and
Bone; Ephesians. 5.31, 32.
to be married to Christ; Now if the Husband be beyond Sea, thousands of miles
from the Wife, yet they are one: So is God and a Believer, Joh. 17.21.
though God be in Heaven, and he upon the earth.

Remember Christians what Christ has done for you: He has paid your debts
that you could never do. If a woman were in debt Thousands of Pounds, and by
working hard every day, should pay Sixpence now and then; yet she could never
all her life time pay the Sum: But if a Rich Man come, and pay down the whole
and take the woman to wife, he does that in a day, which she could never have
done in her life time. Christ has done that in a little time, that we had been
doing of to eternity: He satisfied Divine Justice. The Dignity of the person,
makes the Sufferings of such great value. Give God the glory, that you hear of
Christ that you believe in him: pity and pray for the poor Jews, whose eyes are
not yet opened. They have not been a Church, nor Nation for Sixteen Hundred
years past.

When they were under the Babylonish Captivity, it was but Seventy years, and
they had Prophets to Comfort them; but now none comes from God to them, which
Consideration has converted some of them, Schamaria, and Jacob, two great Jews
by Luther. I know no Consideration (in my little Converse with them) that so
convinces them, that they have not been the Church of God for so long time.
Eleazer Bargisha a Converted Jew, in his vain hopes of the Jewish Messiah, has
discovered many of their vain Dreams, and Dr. Addison in his Hist. of the Jews.
Stir up thine Affections, O Christian, let thy Heart burn within thee, in the
Consideration of the Excellencies of Christ. Muse a little on these following
Scriptures: Heb. 1.2. God has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed Heir
of all things: Great Heirs are desired in Marriage; will not this do? Once
again, Colos. 2.3. In him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. We
delight in men of Wisdom, though where they know one thing, they are ignorant
of many. Now Christ is the Wisdom of God; will not this do? I will try once
more, and a threefold Cord is not soon broken: Rev. 19.12. His eyes were as a
flame of fire, and on his Head were many Crowns, and he has a name given that
no man knows but himself. In him is wonderful Majesty, Dignity, and
Excellencies incomprehensible by Creatures. Cant. 2.5.
This is my Beloved, may a Believer say, I am sick of Love. God takes more
kindly our Love to Christ, than he does the Love of Angels: they see him in his
Glory, and cannot but love him; but we meet with many Oppositions and
Temptations. For the Persuasion of the Love of Christ to our Souls, we should
press after it, tho (as our English Divines of the Synod of Dort say, Suf. Brit.
that which many find by sad Experience) this Satisfaction in a Christian is
sometimes vivida, sometimes languida, and sometimes as nulla; sometimes lively,
sometimes weak, and sometimes even as none.

Remember, all the Saints in Heaven and Earth are Redeemed by Christ, Col.
1.20. And (having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross) by him, to
Reconcile all things to himself by him; whether they be things in Earth, or
things in Heaven. All the Saints that went to Glory before our Lord came in the
flesh, were bought by him: As a man may be said to buy that, which he has not
yet paid for; Lands, Goods, Clothes, whilst there is a Satisfactory Promise
made, and Security given: So Christ bought them, in the Covenant between the
Father and him, that he should in the fullness of time, shed his blood for them.

When Christ came into the World, the way to come to him was Repentance, and
Faith; the Apostles preached it, and of these in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of Repentance and Faith.
MEDITATIONS.
THE Apostle Paul gives us a Compendium, or Abridgment of his Doctrine, and
Preaching Repenarnce and Faith, Acts 20.22. Repentance shows a man his sin.
When a Convert is in his Agonies and Pangs; in his throws and conflicts, then
the heart, the once hard heart, falls a bleeding before God. Faith shows a
man his Savior. Acts 16.13.
We are often called upon to believe in Christ.

Quest. Why might it not be as well expressed to believe in the Father, or in the
Holy Ghost, as in the Son? It is true, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost save us,
but in a different way: The Father by sending the Son; The Holy Ghost as sent
from the Father and the Son, in the Hearts of Believers; but the Son by his
Merits, by his Death. The Father contrived, the Spirit applied, but Christ
procured the Remedy. This Repentance wounds, and Faith heals. By Faith we are
said to be justified, Romans 5.1.
and the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith. Now when Christ's
Righteousness is imputed unto us by Faith, it is not the Righteousness of
Christ as God; for that is his uncreated Righteousness, and this essential
Righteousness cannot be communicated to us, and made our accidental
Righteousness; and this is the Righteousness of the Father and Spirit, as well
as of the Son. And then Father and Spirit might be said to justify us, as well
as the Son: But it is the Righteousness of Christ the Mediator, who is God
man, Jer. 23.6. And this is his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness.

DIRECTIONS.
Stay Reader ere thou go any farther, if thou art an unconverted man, get,
and cherish a few Resolutions, to put in Practice the few following Directions:
Lift up thine eyes unto that God whose dwelling is not with flesh, that he
would thus incline thy heart: in hopes of this I direct,

1. Go in secret, sit down and consider the great sins of thy Heart and Life:
Allow time enough for this. Are you guilty of the horrible Sins of the Age? Try
your selves by the Word, by the Ten Commandments. Can you not do this? will you
do it?

2. Consider these things, till you find your Hearts to ache, and Countenance to
change. If you have such Convictions as to say, O that I had not done these
things! Could I live over my time again, things should be otherwise: Tho such
Convictions may not be saving, yet they are too good to be thrown away. Strike,
man, whilst the Iron is hot.

3. Fall down on the Ground, pray to God for Pardon, and Acceptance through
Christ: Say as Ezra, Chap. 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my
face unto thee, My God: for our iniquities are increased over our Heads, and
our Trespass is grown up to the Heavens. Cry as the Leper, Mat. 8.2.
Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean. Look to Jesus typified by the
brazen Serpent, John 3.14, 15.
that thou may be healed.

4. Away to the minding of Secret, and Family Duties. Read the Scriptures, call
on God, lest the sparks of Convictions you have gotten, go out.

5. Converse with them that Converse with God; say as David, Psalm. 119.115.
Away from me you Evildoers, for I will keep the Commandments of my God. Psalm.
119.63.
I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
Precepts. Tell them your Case, beg their Prayers; hear their Instructions.

I have lain down a few plain Directions: Wherefore (I pray thee) O Sinner, Let
my counsel be acceptable in thy sight, as an Ambassador of Christ: I pray thee
as in Christ's stead, as though God did beseech thee, be thou Reconciled to God.
2 Cor. 5.20.
Will not this do? Then I adjure thee by that God that made thee, by that Jesus
that shall judge thee another day; Consider thy ways. If any think a
Death-bed-repentance will serve thy turn, the famous Bolton says, (that Oracle
of his time) in his Directions for distressed Consciences, That he could not
get proof of any man Converted on a sick Bed. I knew one reformed three years
upon sick bed Repentance, but at last grew more vile than ever. In some Respect
we may bless God, that blasteth such Convictions: The World too much depends on
them now, what would they do, if they saw them in any Persons sound and saving?
Mat. 20.7, 12.
If you say, some were called at the last hour; I answer, But none were called
at the last minute. If a man in old age be converted (which is very seldom)
will it follow, therefore a man on a Deathbed may be so. Dr. Hammond (in his
Discourse of Sickbed Repentance) tells us how we should deal with such. Gods
example, says he, must be our rule, Judge. 10. v. 13, 14, 16. to dispense
comfort by Degrees: When they cried, God seems to deny Deliverance, and when
they were greatly humbled, the Lord was grieved for them. He advises Ministers
and others to show such men, the necessity of mourning, and self-indignation:
If I be too forward to comfort them, I ruin them, says he: I would to God
they were of his mind, who are so forward to absolve upon dry Confessions, and
to Canonize in Funeral Sermons, to the great hardening of the Hearers. God will
say by Conscience on a sick bed, What I have written, I have written, The Soul
that Sins shall dye. Some are ready to say, If they mind these things now, they
shall be out of their Wits. Miserable Souls! they have long since told the
World by their Lives, that they were never well in their Wits. You know
Physicians sometimes say to their Patients, Had I come timely, I might have
cured you: If a Patient say, I will take no Physic, I will not be confined to
my Chamber, I will eat and drink what I please; this is to say, I will not
recover, I will dye: So to say in the heart, I will not follow Directions, is
to say, I will be damned.

Remember, God that calls you, needs you not, Job 22.33. Is it any Pleasure to
the Almighty that thou art Righteous? or is it any gain to him, that thou
make thy way perfect?

Let none deceive themselves, and think they have repented and believed, when
it is not so. They may say as Agag, Surely the bitterness of Death is past, 1 Samuel 15.32.33.
and yet be hewed before the Lord. O Blessed God! what a dreadful Surprizal
will it be, in the time of Death to many great Professors, that thought for
twenty, thirty years or more, that they were in the Way to Heaven, and then,
then find themselves mistaken; who find themselves at the Gate of Hell, when
they thought themselves at the Gate of Heaven.

Have you Convictions now? stifle them not, bring them before God, lest he say
of you, My Spirit shall no more strive with you, O man; Genesis 6.3.
I take an everlasting Farewell of thee, seeing thou will be unholy, be unholy
still; and seeing thou will to Hell, to Hell shall thou go. Do as Jacob, cry
and strive long for the Blessing, Genesis 32.26. And he said (that is the Angel)
Let me go, for the day breaks; and he said, I will not let thee go until thou
bless me. What if he had given over an hour or two after he began to wrestle,
or but an hour before he had the blessing, he had spoiled all: No, but he
strove the whole Night.

You that have repented, and believed, give Glory to the Lord your God. When
God made a Covenant with Abraham, he fell upon his face, Genesis 17.3. When Israel
heard of their deliverance out of Egypt, they bowed down the head and
worshipped. He that believes, feels he believes; he knows the Acts of Faith
physically considered, though not Morally: he has the Faith of Adhesion,
though it may be not of Evidence: he finds the lively workings of Faith, though
he may not know whether they be of the right kind. But though our Safety
depends upon the having of Faith, yet our Comfort depends on our knowing that
we have it. If you know it, say as David, when he had great things from God, he
went and sat in his house before the Lord, and said, 2. Sam. 7.20. And what can
David say more unto thee? for thou Lord God know thy Servant. Or as Paul to
the Romans, Romans 8.31.
What shall we say to these things? What indeed! Now may you rejoice, that
instead of the Thorn is come up the Fir Tree, and instead of the Brier is come
up the Myrtle-tree, Isa. 55.13. Instead of Sin in the heart, Grace now grows,
and instead of abominable practices in the life, there are now good works.

They that have repented, and believed, should endeavor the Conversion, and
Confirmation of many in the Faith, as they did, Acts 2.47. that by them, may be
added unto the Church, such as shall be saved. But of this in the Following
Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of Reproof and Counsel.
MEDITATIONS.
WHO can sufficiently bewail the neglect, or slight performing of this Duty by
most good men? though the blessing that follows the serious practicing of it
by some, be very great. How many times have we been by Land, by Water a long
time with many Persons, and never drop one Word suitable to their Condition!
Nay, sometimes the Spirit has spoken to our Consciences, what once it did to
Philip concerning the Eunuch, Go join thy self to him, Act. 8.29. yet Shame,
want of Courage, Laziness has kept from it. All sorts of Christians may be
useful this way. We read, Act. 18.24. Priscilla a Woman, taught Apollos a man,
an eloquent man, a man mighty in the Scriptures, the Way of God more perfectly,
verse. 26. Bishop Usher (converted when eleven years old, by a Sermon on Romans
12.1.) would as soon preach at the Request of a poor Woman, as of a Magistrate;
and he delighted more to converse with poor weak Christians, than with many
Learned men. I may truly say to many Women, on whose Souls the Image of God
has been drawn in a lively manner, what David said to Abigal, 1 Samuel 25.32,
33. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me, and
blessed be thy Advice. It is the Property of a proud Pharisee, not of a humble
Christian, to contemn Reproof and Counsel from an inferior, or a mean Person;
John 9.34. The Pharisees could not bear a few plain, pious considerations from
a poor blind man, but said to him, Thou wast altogether born in Sin, and will thou Teach us? and they cast him out: Thou, us. Thou an illeterate man, as
blind in thy Soul, as once in thy Body: Us great men, great Professors. Let
the Counsel be never so good, it will not take with many wise fools, if it come
from a plain man. F. P. Coun. of Trent.
Mattheo Longi Archbishop of Saltzburge, after he read the Augustine Confession
of Faith, by the Luthetherans in Saxony, and Zuinglians in Zuric, he told every
one, That the Reformation of the Mass was honest, and the liberty of meats
convenient, and the request just, to be disburthened of so many Commandments of
men; but that Luther a poor Monk, should Reform, was not to be endured.

God is so well pleased with this work of turning Souls to Righteousness, that
the Blessed Apostle Paul had his name changed from Saul, to Paul, because he
was the instrument of Converting a famous man, called Paul; Acts 13.9. Then
Saul who also is called Paul; There is the change of his name, verse 7. Paulus,
a prudent man, a Deputy, called for Barnabas and Saul to hear the Word of God.
So one says of this Apostle Paul, Platina de vita Pon. tif.
A Paulo proconsule Cypri, nomen accepit, quem praedicatione sua ad fidem
redegerat. What care then should Parents take of the Souls of their Children,
Masters of their Servants, Friends of one another? For Children, it is true,
whilst they are Infants they cannot be instructed, but may be prayed for: for
as Sin and misery comes on them, and they not sensible of it, so may Gods Grace
and Mercy: they are Members of a Kingdom, Subjects of a King, and yet cannot
understand this: So they may be Members of the Body of Christ, Subjects of the
Lord Jesus, and have no knowledge of this. They may have great Estates, and the
benefit of Rents, and yet know not what an Estate is, or Rents are. Admonished
they should be as they grow up, that they may say of their Parents as Solomon
of his, Prove. 4.3, 4. I was my Fathers Son, tender and only beloved in the
sight of my Mother. He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thy heart retain
my words. Keep my Commandments and live. Happy are those children, that can
say when their Parents are dead: I remember what my Father and Mother now in
Glory, said to me; how they instructed me. In the second Epistle to Tim. 1.5.
we read of the good effects of this duty: When I call to mind the unfeigned
Faith that is in thee, which first dwelt in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy
Mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that it is in thee also. What comfort may
good Parents take in good children! Socrates Scholasticus says of Leonides the
father of Origin, that when his Son was asleep, he would sometimes uncover his
breast, and kiss it with a kind of veneration, knowing his Son was a Temple for
the Holy Ghost to dwell in: Leonides was wont, when Origin was very young, to
teach him some Aphorisms, and Sentences in Christianity every day, which made
such a deep impression upon him, that he was soon called Senilis Puer, the Old
Boy; Vir magnus ab Infantia, A great man from his Childhood: Young he was in
years only, but old in Knowledge and Grace. When Bathsheba had a Promise from
King David, that Solomon her Son should be King after him, it is said, 1 Kings
1.31. That she bowed her face to the earth, and did reverence to the King, and
said, Let my Lord King David live for ever. Adore the Lord God if he has made
your Children, by his Grace, Heirs of the Kingdom that cannot be shaken. Give
me leave, by the way, to bewail the great and common sin found among us, That
many children are sooner taught what Jupiter, Mars, and such Pagan Gods were,
than what Father, Son, and Spirit is. Josiah, when he was young, 2 Chronicles. 34.3.
enquired after the God of David his Father; but many now when young, after
Heathen Gods. Augustine of old complained of this, Aug. Confess. lib. 6.
of hearing in Schools, Joves Thundering, and Adulteries, and for giving an
account of such things, says he, Et ob hoc bonae spei puer appellabar, I was
called a hopeful Lad. Luther also complained, that our Schools were more Pagan,
than Christian. I referr the unsatisfied Reader to Pasors Preface to his
Lexicon; he observes of Pythagoras his golden verses, so much esteemed of (and
I fear accounted more golden by too many, than our Saviors Sayings on the
Mount) how they begin;

(...) -- Honor the Immortal Gods, etc. And (as I have observed) worse after.
I knew an Aged Famous Schoolmaster, that after he had kept School about fifty
years, said, with a very sad countenance, That it was a great trouble to him,
that he had spent so much time in reading Pagan Authors to his Scholars; and
wished it were customary, to read such a Book as Duports Greek Verses upon Job,
rather than Homer and such Books. I beseech Schoolmasters, if they must read
such Authors, do as they do that eat Mushromes, or such dangerous meats, use
strong Correctives. Show Youth the vanity of the Pagan Religion, and the
excellency of the Christian Religion: Persuade them above all things, to be
acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, which alone can make them wise to
Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. when many vain books make many wise to Damnation. If
Children die, what does it signify to say they were ingenious, if they be
graceless? will Ingenuity save them? They are as Thales Milesius, that was
gazing on the Stars, minding their magnitude, situation, and influences, when
he should have been minding his way, and so fell into the water, and was
drowned. I pray God put it in the hearts of a wise Parliament, to purge our
Schools; that instead of learning vain Fictions, and filthy stories, they may
be acquainted with the Word of God, with Books containing Grave Sayings: And
learn in Prose or Verse, the Histories of the Kings of England, the chief
Passages in their Reigns, and some Maxims in Law, and things that may make them
truly wise, and useful in the world. I know I shall offend not a few in thus
writing: But let such remember my Authors before named, Austin, Luther, Pasor,
and others that I might name, and if I must have a Reprimand, I am glad that I
have such good company. It is storied of the old Waldenses in France, in the
dark times of Popery, R. his (...)
they so instructed their Children in the great things of God, that some Popish
Doctors said, that they learned more of the Doctrine of Salvation, by talking
with those Children, than they did by the Disputations of great men. There is
another fault among us to be condemned, the early and unnecessary sending of
young men beyond Sea, to see Countries, speak Languages, before they have
studied the grounds of our Religion, and so are infected with Popery, or
Atheism. I desire such, before they send their Children away, or the Children
before they go, to read Bishop Hall his Quo vadis, a Book to which little can
be added: And then I hope; they may be willing to stay at home.

How sad is it in most houses, where the fear of God is not! Of which it may be
said, what is said of Babylon, Rev. 18.2. that they are a Habitation of Devils,
and the hold of every foul Spiri^^ and the cage of every unclean and hateful
Bird; so many wicked persons, and so much wickedness is in them, that the
serious Christian may sometimes say in the beholding of it, what Job said in
another case, O that my grief were thorougly weighed, and that my sorrow were
laid in the balance, for then would it be heavier than the sand of the Sea!
That there is so much Lying, Profaning the Name of God, and so much of
unsavory, rotten communications in most families, and among Children, that
when they are men and women, these things become common to them: That if it be
then asked, what Christ asked the Father about his Child's disease, how long ago
this happened to them; the same answer may be given, even from a Child, (...),
Mark, 9.21. I now come to a few Directions.

DIRECTIONS.
1. Cry to God for Bowels of Compassion toward Souls, and for Dexterity in this
work of Reproving and Counseling, that you may say with Paul, Romans 9.1, 2, 3. I
say the Truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me Witness in
the Holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness, and continual Sorrow in my Heart,
for I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my
Kinsmen according to the flesh. As if he had said, I could almost be willing to
perish for their sakes: say with David, Psalm. 119.158. I beheld the
Transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy Word. You Parents,
that are so tender of the Bodies of your Children, be much more concerned for
their Souls. You that desire great Estates for them, much more desire Heaven
for them. How many mind their Oxen, Sheep, and Swine, more than the Souls of
their Children? Saul's Father Kish, 1 Samuel 10.2. Gave over caring for the Asses,
saying, What shall I do for my Son? So, be less concerned about the things of
the World, and say, What shall I do for the Souls of my Children? that it may
be said, of you, as in Prove. 10.20. The Mouth of the Righteous is as choice
Silver; when you speak with tender Bowels of Compassion, It is not you that
speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you, Mat. 10.20. When God
bad Moses to speak to Pharaoh, and Moses Objected want of Eloquence, said God,
Exodus 4.12. Now therefore go and I will be thy mouth, and I will teach thee
what thou shall say: That you may by your good Counsel overcome Satan, as
David, by playing with his Musical Instrument, made the evil Spirit to depart
from Saul. 1 Samuel 16.23.
I know for some audacious Sinners, it is better to be silent, than reprove.
Hezekiah his command was prudent, when Rabshakeh Blasphemed, Isa. 36.21. But
the People held their peace, and answered him not a Word; for the Kings
Commandment was, saying, Answer him not. Let Prayer accompany the work of
Exhorting; Neh. 2.4.
stand before the man, as Nehemiah before the King and Queen, praying to the
God of Heaven to direct you what you shall say. Pray, Lord, let my words
administer Grace to the Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. Ask some that are under you,
after the reading of a Chapter, or hearing of a Sermon, what Christ asked his
Disciples, Mat. 13.51. Have ye understood all those things? Heal their
Ignorance, direct their Souls.

We see Afflictions do many times stir Christians up to this Work, and prepare
them for it: Paul speaks of great Troubles he endured; 2 Cor. 6.4. But in all
things approving our selves as the Ministers of Christ, in much Patience, in
Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses. Verse. 9.10. As unknown, and yet
well-known; as dying, and behold we live; as chastened, and not killed; as
sorrowful, yet always Rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having
nothing, and yet possessing all things. What did this blessed Apostle get by
all? verse. 11. O ye Corinthians, our Mouth is open unto you, our Heart is
enlarged. He got a Heart to pity Souls, and a Tongue to Counsel them. There is
Gold, and a multitude of Rubies, but the Lips of Knowledge are precious Jewels,
says Solomon, Prove. 20.15. Good Counsel given, is better than the giving of
Gold. Whilst you are musing, the fire may kindle, and then you speak with your
Tongue. If you cannot speak to some, write to them; Letters will not blush, if
Faces do.

2. Have an eye upon the Sins they are most addicted to, and Reprove for them;
and on the Duties they are most averse from, and persuade to them. It is not
enough that the Words spoken by you be good, but they must be seasonable.
Words. Some are apt to use the Name of God irreverently in their
Communications: Nay, many great Professors, I am ashamed to mention it. It has
been a comfortable Consideration to me many a time, that when I dye, I shall be
tormented with hearing the Name of God irreverently used,
no more. Would to God the third Commandment (Thou shall not take the Name of
the Lord thy God in vain) were often before the eyes of men. Tell such men,
that they ought to fear that great and terrible Name, the Lord thy God: That
they have Reason to adore him, that he will give us leave to use his Name at
any time, and therefore we should not take it in vain: whether theusing in
common Discourse the Word Faith, be Swearing, I know the great Sanderson says,
Saunder. de juro mento.
(that per fidem though from the manner of some Nations, and intention of some
Speakers, it may, be an Oath) yet he says, Non est ex vi Verborum, because
(says he) Fides Humana non est res Sacra, but civilis; and in those words we
call not God a Witness, and therefore is Asseveratio tantum, aut ad plurimum
Testatio: And so he adds, that per fidem, is the same with Ex animo loquor,
Pignerofidem meam, si rem ita se non habere, aut si sciens fallo, nulla mihi in
posterum fides habeatur. So he. If you ask, Is it unlawful thus to use the Word
Faith? I answer, I am sure it is not unlawful to let it alone: it is not a
thing of good report to use, and the more serious decline it. Are they addicted
to Lying, Scoffing at Religion? Show them the evil nature, and consequents of
these things. If they slight Prayer, the Holy Scriptures, Almsdeeds, persuade
to them.

3. Be not soon discouraged, because of the Ignorance or Backwardness of them
with whom you deal: God may in time work on them. Are they ignorant? speak to
them of Christ, and the Covenant of Grace, and of the way of Sinners coming to
God through a Mediator; show them kindness, and seek to make their lives
comfortable as much as you can, that you may the better win them. If any say,
We are ignorant our selves, and how can we instruct others? This is the way to
get knowledge. You know that God made the world: That Jesus Christ is a
glorious Redeemer: That all men are hastening to Eternity. Come man, come on,
thou know enough to fall on the practice of this duty; speak to vain spirits
of these things. Mr. Elliot in his Account of the Progress of the Gospel in
New England, written in the year 43. speaks of one Hiacoomes, a plain,
ignorant, but yet pious and serious man; he converted one Towanquetick a plain
Indian, and this Towanquetick was the Instrument of the conversion of about a
hundred Indians in a little time. If others say, We are ignorant, after all
counsel, and therefore are discouraged; let such often call to mind what they
hear, and time may make an impression. I have read of Hilarious Pictavienses a
famous man of France, Hanmore's View of Antiqu.
finding that little that he read was remembered by him, threw away his Books:
One day passing by a Well, he saw, that by frequent drawing up of the Bucket,
the rope had made a deep impression on the Stones; he thought that by frequent
consideration, and meditation, the things he heard and read might make a deep
impression on him; he fell closely to his work, and proved a famous man.

You that are ungodly, and hear not your Instructors, you discourage them in
their work, that they are ready to say as Jeremiah, Then I said, I will not
make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But zeal for God, and love
to Souls, makes them at last to come to themselves; and add as h^^, Jer. 20.9.
But his word was in my heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was
weary of forbearing, and I could not stay. How many serious Souls have
experienced this! The Life of Mr. Janeway.
When Mr. Janeway overheard some unsavory discourse, in a room nigh to him, he
wrote down their discourse, and asked them, after he had read what they said,
whether they were willing to hear of such discourse another day. Many men by
their evil discourse, poison many hearers, as the Basilisk does men, Morney's
Resolver.
not by looking on them (according to the vulgar error) but by Poison coming
out of the mouth. Children, hearken to your Parents, that prerswade you to mind
your Souls; grieve them not by your folly. Let good men hearken to Reproof from
their Brethren, as Aaron did from Moses, and Peter from Paul. When Luther
reproved Bullinger, for some errors he had about the Word of God, Bullinger
came forth before all the company, and fell at the feet of Luther, and said,
Blessed be the day wherein I saw this gracious face, and had these reproofs.
Let good men counsel then their Children, and Servants, and Friends. It is sad,
that such should say, My Father, my Master, my Friend, that is a great
Professor of Religion, and with whom I am on all occasions, by day, by night,
never was the man that asked me, what I thought of my present, or eternal
condition; never aked me whether I thought I was converted, or should be saved.
Yet set closely to the work, and let it prosper in thy hands, that you may
shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever,
Dan. 12.3. But because the Scripture instructs us, and contains the things
about which we must instruct others, I shall next speak of them.

CHAP. V. Of the Holy Scriptures.
MEDITATIONS.
GODS Works declare, that he is; but his Word only declares what he is, and how
he may be known and served. If we see a Ship under Sail, going toward its
Port, we ascribe not this to the wood the Ship is made of, but to the skill of
the Mariners, whether they be seen by us or not. If I see an Arrow run to the
Mark, I know it is shot off by a skilful hand, whether I see that hand or not.
The Sun, that great and glorious light, knows its rising, progress, and going
down, and acts like an intelligent, rational being, which shows it is guided by
a wise God. As for Gods Providence, which make some doubt his being, Sir W. R.
in his History of the World, Chap. Of Predestination, has this saying of
Gregory (which he said was of great use to him) Qui in Dei factis rationem non
videt, infirmitatem suam consideret, et cur non videt rationem videat. He that
cannot see a reason in some of Gods Works, let him consider his weakness, and
then he will see the reason why he sees no reason. I conclude, That the reason
why many would hope they shall die like Beasts, is, that they desire to live
like such. Now the Scriptures contain a declaration of the Mind and Will of
this God. I will not determine how many Chapters every one should read, every
day, any more than how much meat every one should eat every day. Three Chapters
a day (the usual direction) are too many for some, and (sometimes) too few for
others. I am not persuading to much reading, but serious reading: And for young
Beginners, I think it proper, that they be directed to the chief places in
Scripture, and well to understand them, before they read the Bible in order.
The reading of Scripture with a good Comment, is of great use to some persons,
and Families: I know none for shortness, and plainess, like to Bishop Halls
Paraphrase on the Bible.

DIRECTIONS.
1. Come to the Scriptures, as those that know a Divine Authority stamped upon
them. It is Gods Book, read it as such: It teaches you the two things Austin
would often pray for; Vt cognoscam te, ut cognoscam me; That I may know Thee,
that I may know my self.

2. Beg the assistance of the same Spirit in reading the Scriptures, that the
Penmen had in penning them. A Dial is nothing, unless the Sun shine on it: The
Scriptures are nothing, unless the Spirit illuminate our Understandings. If you
say, what need then of Scriptures? You may as well say, what need then of a
Dial? The Spirit will make you humble. and let you see your own Folly, that the
more you know, the less you know. Weems Christ. Syn.
In Athens in Greece, the Students were the first year called (...), wise men;
the next year (...), Lovers of wise men; but ever after (...), Fools; the more
they knew, the more sensible they were of their Ignorance.

3. Whatever Objections you have against Scripture, be not satisfied till you
have silenced them. To confirm your Faith, remember what is said of Christ's
Resurrection: Had the Jews been able to show the dead Body of Christ after the
three days, they had overthrown the Gospel. Remember Paul's Conversion, Acts 9.
who left a life of ease, for one of affliction. Judas his betraying Christ,
proves that he knew Christ to be no Deceiver: He had not hanged himself to have
accused Christ, had he not known his Miracles were real; many of them were not
done in a Corner, the place named, the Street, and done before many people. The
Disciples conversed with Christ forty days after his Resurrection, and saw him
ascend into Heaven. They preached this to the world, when they knew this
Doctrine would cost them their Lives, and it was never pretended that in all
their torments that any one of them confessed a Cheat, Leviath. Christ. Pol.
but rejoiced that they were going to that Christ whom they had thus seen and
preached. Mr. Hobbs, though he is pleased to tell us, that the Scriptures were
in the hands of the Ecclesiastics, for about three hundred years after the
Apostles, (he had done well to have proved it as well as said it,) yet says,
he believed the Scriptures were not corrupted by them. If there seem to be any
Coutradictions in Scripture (says Morney) we should do with Scripture, as
Scholars with Classical Authors: If they meet with a hard Sentence, they do not
presently throw away the Book, Morney, de ver. Christ. Rel.
but turn it this way, and that way, rather than say, the Author wrote not
sense, or true Latin, or Greek: Discipulus praeceptorem, praeceptor
ignorantiam accusat: The Scholar blames the Master, the Master his Ignorance,
but neither blame the Author. Many passages in Scripture History we cannot
easily reconcile, for want of knowing some Occurrences in those times: I have
in this case, often made use of such a Meditation as this (which one night came
into my thoughts:) If two men writing the History of the Reign of our present
King, one should write, that this year was the thirty fifth year of his Reign;
and the other should write, that this was the twenty third year of his Reign: A
Stranger, or some Beyond Sea would wonder at this different account, and would
cry out, that there was a notorious Contradiction in these two Historians: but
we that know how Affairs have been in England, know that both wrote true: This
is the 35th year of his Reign, if we consider how long he has Reigned de jure,
upon the death of his Father; this is the 23d year of his Reign, if we reckon
how long he has Reigned de facto, or since his retnrn. A young Grammarian,
might quarrel with his Grammar, when he read of a Singular Number, when Number
must be at least of two: Of a Conjunction Disjunctive, and cry, O Horrible
Contradiction in Terms! when there is a conjunction of words, where there is a
Disjunction of Sense.

If any say, But a great part of Scripture we understand not. I answer, And a
great part of Scripture you do understand: What can be more plain than those
Scriptures against Sin and for Holiness? I have heard of an Unchaste Lady, that
was objecting the obscurity of the Scripture, and that she could not understand
it: How Madam (replied one) what more plain than this? Thou shall not Commit
Adultery. Consider again, what did the Eunuch understand? Acts 8.30. God helped
him said Philip to him, Understand thou what thou read? A good question,
How can I, (said he:) And Philip instructed him: Here all met, that some would
part; Here was Scripture, for he read some of Isaiah his Prophecy. Here was
the Spirit that bad Philip go to him; Here was the Preacher, for Philip
expounds all to him. Who throws away a letter of great concern, because he
cannot read all, nor understand all? he reads it the oftener, takes the more
pains, calls for help, and glad to understand most of it, when he cannot
understand all. If any plead, We cannot read: A good Woman (in Queen Mary's
time) that could not read, got a new Testament, went from house to house, and
desired others to read to her, and soon got much knowledge: Knowledge does not
get into the Soul by the Eye only, but by the Ear. Many understand the
mysteries of their Trades, that never read Books about them: Many can tell what
news is going, that never look into Gazets, or News-letters, by hearing and
considering. I have (says God, Hos. 8.12.) written to them the great things of
my Law, but they were counted as a strange thing.

If any say, I want time. Can you find time to eat, to sleep, and not to look
into the Word of God? Some can find time to read vain books, that can find none
to read Scripture: Though such are as Politianus, that left reading the
Scripture, Morney de ver. Rel. Christ.
and studied and disputed about such questions as these, whether we should
write Carthaginenses, or Carthaginienses, etc. As insignificant are all other
Studies, when men contemn the Word of God.

4. If you find Convictions from Gods Word, lose them not as you have too often
done; Cain, when terrified in his mind, built Cities: Saul called for Music;
so some run to their profits, and pleasures. If a man had great Treasure about
him, and came by a dangerous way where many were robbed, and he himself had
some time been robbed, how would he fear? As the Lord lives, thou art the man:
Thou have been many times richly laden with good convictions, affections, and
purposes gotten from the Word of God; the Cares and Temptations of the world
have robbed thee, and feek to do it again.

5. Remember, You that are Believers, what Encouragement they had in Scripture,
you have; and by them, Josh. 1.5. Heb. 13.5.
God directs and comfort you; Hos. 12.4, 5, 6. where he speaks of Jacob,
Yea, he had Power over the Angel, and prevailed; he wept and made supplication
unto him: he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us; -- Therefore turn
thou to thy God: Keep mercy and Judgment, wait on thy God continually. God by
giving Jacob the blessing, speaks to us to wait on God. But to the Scripture,
we must add Prayer: But of that in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of Prayer.
MEDITATIONS.
THE great Benefit and Comfort of Prayer, we read of often in Scripture; and
the People of God find often by experience. Family Prayer, Psalm. 13.2
and Secret Prayer, Acts 10.2.
have been minded by the Saints of Old. In Secret Prayer, it is good to stop
sometimes after some Confessions, Petitions and Praises, that the heart may be
more deeply affected with them. Never did any Believer pray in vain, though
sometimes it may seem long before God answer. When Corn is sown, Rain comes,
Snow comes, Prost comes, and all seems to be lost, but stay till the time of
Harvest, and there is a good Crop; so after Prayer Temptations come, sad
Providence come, and yet at last all is well. When a Child of God is in
Prayer, he is not weary of God, nor of the duty; but weary of himself, and the
corruption of his nature; of Satan and his Temptations; but still may say, How
good is it to draw nigh to God! In Secret Prayer, if unsuitable thoughts come,
of men or business, pray about those things as occasion may be, so will ye
catch the Devil in his own craft. He is not so wise, but he may be outwitted:
He has helped me by his Temptations to matter of Prayer thousands of times,
against his Will.

Directions in answer to a Question.
Q. But what if I have no heart to the work?

1. Pray obedientially, when you cannot pray comfortably. God calls for Prayer,
wait on him in the face of all discouragements. Obedience will make an
unpleasant work pleasant.

2. Remember, that discomposure may quickly end in enlargement. Abraham found
his Ram on the Mount, Genesis 22.13.
and that in the Thickets: So many find their hearts in Prayer (not before) and
that in the midst of violent Temptations.

3. Remember, that many Prayers, we reckon some of the worst, God accounts as
some of our best Prayers; Great are the rewards for what some think to be dead
Prayers. We reckon the goodness of Prayer by composure of thoughts, by
affections, but God by self-loathing, and seeing nothing in our selves and
duties, but all in Christ.

Let us cry earnestly to our God. Pagans have cried aloud to their Gods, 1
Kings 18.26. They cut themselves, and leapt upon the Altars which they made. If
any say, I know not how to pray in Secret, I never yet did it, I know not what
to say: Go to God and say so. It is a good Confession, Lord here I am come, I
would pray, but know not what to say. It may be given you in that hour, what to
confess, and pray for, and that with great melting of heart. Ask the Experience
of the people of God: Love them, but of that in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Of Love to Mankind.
MEDITATIONS.
LEt Brotherly Love continue, Heb. 13.1.
is in many men's mouths, but in few men's hearts. If we enquire who is our
Brother? Not the man nearly related, or the man of the same persuasion, or
opinion only; but chiefly all of the Household of Faith. How many men of
several Parties, are as Jews and Samaritans, that have no dealing one with
another! We must love the Saints, as rich, so poor ones; ignorant as well as
learned; the weak as well as the strong. We must love the ungodly, yea our
Enemies: Love is to be shown in forgiving injuries, in supplying necessities:
If any hate us, we must love them; if they deferve bad of us, they (and we
also) deferve worse of God, yet God feeds them, cloatheth them, Mat. 5.45.
and shows them mercy. If God will use them as his Rod to chastise us, we must
be content. Who knows what wrath will do, or where it will end? It is storied
of Pope Stephen, that he so hated Pope Formosus, that he caused his Body to be
taken out of the Grave, and cut off those Fingers that had blessed the Clergy,
and so made void all his Canons, and Ordinances: And he that came after him
took measures somewhat like, so that at last, says Platina, Nihil enim aliud,
hi Pontifices cogitabant, quam and nomen and dignitatem Majorum suorum
extinguere; and yet all these men were Infallible all the while. Let Husbands
and Wives resolve, that their contentions shall not easily take Air, or be seen
by them in the Family; They are one Body, and contentions between them, are as
if there should be a fight between the Members of the Body; As if the mouth
should bite the hand, and the hand strike the mouth. A wrathful temper is
commonly gotten by conversing with angry men, and therefore says the Wise man,
Make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious man thou shall not go;
lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy Soul, Prove. 22.24, 25. Beware
of men of keen Spirits. That man will never live comfortably, that has not
learned to slight what others think, and say of him; that lives not in the
frequent consideration of other men's virtues, and his own defects: Epictetus in
the 48 Chap. of his Morals, says; (...). If any man tell you, that such a man
spoke against you, do not so much stand in vindication of your self, as
ingenuously to confess; that if that man had known the whole course of your
life, he had charged you with more faults. Few men are so humble, as to say,
The fault was mine, though they certainly know it is so.

Kindness and Love is shown, as in forgiving injuries, so in supplying
necessities. Here we may bewail the disparity, that is between many poor men's
pains, and their wages. Though common wages be paid, yet the pay is according
to custom more than desert; Etiamsi stipendia usitata praestentur (says Ames
de Consci.) consuetudini, magis quam sufficientiae satisfaciunt. Then for
Charity to the poor; No man that has loved the world better than his duty, or
Christ in his Members, Mat. 25.35.
shall be found at the right hand of Jesus in the great day. The saying of
Salvian, ad Ecclesiam Catholicam, has been of great use to me, times without
number; Opes, quas habes in hoc mundo temporarias, been utendo facies
sempiternas; Charity makes Temporal Riches to be Eternal: We have the benefit
of them for ever.

DIRECTIONS.
1. Remember, what God Commands you to give to the poor, that you have no right
to; and it is theft to detain it, as may be made clear by this plain
comparison: One man, by a Carrier sends so much money, or goods to another; if
that Carrier keep all, because all came to his hands, he is a Thief, and is
dealt with as such. God has sent so much to the distressed by you, if you give
not, you wrong them.

Obj. God has sent so much, some may say, How much?

Answ. Ask God by Prayer, Scripture by reading, Conscience by Consideration:
Prove. 3.97. Withold not good from him, to whom it is due. Luke 16.12. If ye
have been unfaithful in that which is another man's.

2. Conclude on it, if the poor die for want of what we are bound to give them,
we are Manslayers, and Murderers before God. He that sees a man in the water,
and will not help him out when he can with ease, he is as really guilty of his
death, as if he had thrown him in. How many poor men, good men have perished
for want of their right! If God should say to some great men, rich men, as he
did to Cain, Where is Abel thy Brother? So where is the poor man, thy Brother?
It may be he would answer as he, Am I my Brothers Keeper? But the same reply
shall be made by the Lord, What have thou done? The Voice of thy Brothers Blood
cries unto me from the ground, and now thou art Cursed, Genesis 4.9, 10, 11.

3. Remember what an honor it is to be Gods Almoner. What if God in Scripture
had named you, as Josiah by name, and called on you to the work, would you not
cheerfully have set about the work? How did Job rejoice in the performance of
this duty! Job 29.13, 14, 15, 16. He caused the Widows heart to sing: That his
Judgment was a Robe, and a Diade: That he was eyes to the Blind, and feet to
the lame, and a Father to the Poor.

Some object, Times are hard.

I answer, Men's Hearts are so.

Obj. Money is scarce.

Answ. How is it then you have so much to lay out in unnecessary Attire; Dishes
at your Tables; in Pleasures? How comes so much to be spent in Alehouses and
Taverns? This, O vain man, is but a Figleaf to cover thy nakedness.

Obj. Others do plead, Few of the great Professors of Religion do mind this
work.

Answ. I answer, But from the Beginning it was not so. The Jews under the Old
Testament did much, Christians in Paul's time did much. Do not what most
Professors do; but what the best do. Many in our time have acted worthily: The
famous Mr. Gouge (now in Glory) he set up an Hundred and fifty Schools in
Wales, and went (at least) once a year to visit them, gave away many Bibles,
and Catechisms, and took great pains in instructing Children in the Principles
of Religion, and would often say; That he had two Livings, the one in Wales,
the other in Christ-Church Hospital in London (where he had done much good)
that he would not part with for a world. My never to be forgotten Friend, the
Reverend Mr. Fairclougb of Bristol, his Purse was always open for pious uses,
especially for educating young men in order to the Ministry. I might say much
of Mr. Henry Stubbes my Father-in-Law, were it not that it seems better to
become another man's Pen than mine. There are yet alive many men that are
forward for works of Charity.

Obj. Some say, What shall I do for hereafter?

Answ. If thou had Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, thou would say to this
Mountain of Distrust, be thou removed and cast into the Sea, and it would be
done: Can you trust God for things eternal, and not for things momentary? Luke
16.9.
Make you friends with the Mammon of Unrighteousness. Riches are unrighteously
gotten by some, unrighteously spent by others, but unrighteously kept by many
more. Many get that honestly, which they do not honestly keep. It is by Gods
Law another man's right: I say to the Covetous, as Christ to that man, Stretch
forth thy withered hand. We read of them, Amos 6.4, 5, 6. That invent
instruments of Music, drink wine in Boles, and are not grieved for the
Afflictions of Joseph: Let such yet say as David, when the Lord gave him rest,
2 Samuel 7.1, 2. When he sat in his house, he said to Nathan the Propet, I dwell
in a house of Cedar, but the Ark of God dwells within Curtains. So I am at
ease, but many Saints in trouble. Love to the Ungodly is also evidenced in
mourning for their Sins, 2 Pet. 2.8. would there were more Lots! whose
Righteous Souls, in hearing, and seeing, are vexed from day to day, for the
Sins of the Wicked. It is not, how many tears there are in the eyes; but how
much sorrow there is in the heart: Let your heart bleed because of them who are
going merrily to the place of Lamentation, Misery and Woe; Like men that should
go on singing, and dancing, and calling for their Cups and Music, to the place
of Execution.

I have spoken of several Duties, of reading Scripture, Prayer, Charity, but we
must remember all must be done in Sincerity, and this is the next thing we
shall consider.

CHAP VIII. Of Sincerity.
MEDITATIONS.
MAny there are, I doubt not, whose Sincerity no man questions, that will be
found formal another day; and many that few thought well of will be saved. Snow
covers Dunghils; Gilt makes common Wood and Stones look like Gold: So does a
Profession, and some seize, make many Unconverted Men look like true
Christians. When Judas went up and down Preaching the Gospel, if any one had
said to him, Judas, thou art now persuading the world to close with Christ,
within a little time thou thy self wilt betray this Christ to death for thirty
pieces of Silver; would he have believed it? or would he not rather have said
as Hazael to Elisha, 2 Kings 8.13.
Am I a Dog that I should do this thing? Many famous Ministers, great
Preachers, men of great Parts and Zeal, much followed by all, and accounted
Angels from Heaven, I fear will in a little time, Mat. 258.
cry, Our Lamps are gone out! Many forward hearers, that have done many things,
set on Reformation, and minded reading, and praying in their Families, will I
fear, in a little time, be found to be Cakes half baked: Hos. 7.8.
On the other hand, there are many Ministers and People, that are taken but
little notice of for Religion, that I hope will be saved. Their Heavenly Father
sees that in secret (hearts broken for Sin, and breathing after Christ) for
which he will reward them openly. Many that deceive themselves thus plead,

I can remember the time when, the place where, the Minister by whom, I was
Converted: 1 Kings 21.27, 28.29. When Ahab heard these words, he rent his
clothes, he fasted, etc. God takes notice of it to the Prophet, See thou not
how Ahab humbles himself before me? Then Ahab remembered the time when, the
place where, the Prophet by whom he was terrifyed, so as to pray, fast, and had
a Promise from God on the doing this work. Acts 8.13. Simon himself believed,
and was Baptized; Verse 21. And yet his heart was not right in the sight of
God. Philips Doctrine and Miracles Converted seemingly him that had deceived
many: Simon might say, I remember the time when, the place where, the Minister
by whom I was convinced and awakened; and yet he was in the gall of Sin, and
the bond of Iniquity, Gal. 4.14, 15, 16. Once again, many of them received Paul
as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, (high words) were ready to have
plucked out their eyes, and have given them to him; and yet at last they
accounted him their Enemy, because he told them the truth: No doubt many of
them were but formal, to whom he said, Where is then the Blessedness you spoke
of? These men could remember the time when, the place where, the Minister by
wom they were reformed. Many such men can say but little else, but their first
Convictions, and Terrors.

Others plead, That God has heard and wonderfully answered their Prayers: and
that they are assured from the Scriptures of Truth, John 19.31.
That God hears not Sinners, but if any man be a Worshpper of God, him he
hears: And they will tell you of Extraordinary Providence, that they have
met with, as an answer to Prayer. I answer, It may be God heard not your
Prayers, but your Murmurings, as Numb. 11. The Quails came at the peoples
request; here was a Providence, but what was the close of all? Some have
desired Children, Riches, etc. but unless these things have made them love and
serve God, they never were given in a way of Mercy, but Judgment: Or it may be,
God heard only the Cry of nature in you, as he hears the cries of Young Lions
and Ravens: Genesis 21.17, 19, 20. God heard Hagar's and Ishmaels Cry; When Hagar
lift up her voice, and wept, an Angel calls to her, and tells her God had heard
the Cry of the Lad, and it is said, verse. 21. God was with the Lad. Hagar and
Ishmael, might they say, God has heard, and wonderfully answered our Prayers,
and God hears not Sinners: And yet both were cast out. I doubt not but God
does work Wonders, or Miracles for their Preservation, or Deliverance, that
shall never be saved. Some plead. But I find I have Repentance, I have Faith, I
yield Obedience to the Gospel, etc. Amen; would to God it may appear to be so!
Yet hear the Word of the Lord, Mat. 8.12.
The Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out. Conclude on it, there is
nothing in Art, that does more resemble a thing in nature, than Legal
Repentance resembles Evangelical; Temporary Faith Saving; Partial Obedience,
Universal; Never was there the picture, or Statua of a man, that did more
resemble a living man, than common Grace does Saving: Never was any Brass
Half-Crown more like one of good Silver, than the life of a Hypocrite may the
life of a Christian. Have you so repented of Sin, as to loath Sin as Sin, for
its malignity, and evil nature? Has your faith made you to esteem of Christ,
his Ordinances and People, more than of all Treasures? Your Obedience
unfeigned, without reserves? In the account we have of the sickness, and death
of Bellarmine, done by C.E. the Jesuit, one passage he has, to make him
famous to the world, (which makes me more to hate the name, and memory of
Bellarmine, than any thing recorded of him,) That when his Confessor came to
him, Such, says he, was the innocence of the man, that he could hardly tell
what to confess; insomuch that his Ghostly Father was in some perplexity,
wanting matter of Absolution, till by recourse to his life past, he found some
small defects of which he absolved him. The Author cries, O Zealous Mind! O
Noble Bishop! (but let the Christian, poor in spirit, that complains with Paul,
Romans 7. of a Body of Sin and Death, cry, O stupid Soul! O vile Hypocrite!) how
secure was thy Conscience, that at thy death had no scruple, but the
exchanging of one good work for another, and that when commanded to it! That
was his leaving the Archbishopric of Capua, for better preserment. What is
related of him, his lying on his bed with his eyes and hands lift up to Heaven;
his falling prostrate on the ground to receive the Sacrament; his bestowing so
much to feed the poor; all these things signify nothing, when the heart is so
proud, so insensible of its own Gailt. Then every man must try himself: The
Famous Divines in the Synod of Dort gave these Marks of Sincerity, Dordrehti
Synodus.
Vera in Christum fides, filialis Dei timor, dolor de peccatis secundum Deum,
sitis and esuries justitiae: A True Faith in Christ, (when a man humbly relies
upon him for Life and Salvation) A filial Fear of God, (when we fear his
displeasure, as well as his Judgments) a sorrow for Sin according to God, (when
we hate Sin, so as to fly from it to God) a Hungring and Thirsting after
Righteousness (a desire of Grace more than any thing on earth.)

DIRECTIONS.
1. Conclude on the absolute necessity of Sincerity, and beg the Prayers of
Gods Sincere ones: Say then to your Souls, we must be upright. If it were
proclaimed from Heaven, that but one man in a Town, or City, should be saved;
every man had reason to give all diligence, that he might be the man, knowing
he cannot dwell with Eternal Burnings. Are your doubts many? beg the Prayers of
the Faithful, do as God commanded Jobs Friends, Go to my Servant Job, and he
shall pray for you, and him will I accept, Job. 42.8. Go to such a Minister
such a Christian, be not ashamed to go to them, to knock at their doors, to
speak with them, and enquire, Acts 16 30.
What must I do to be saved? Cry as they in the Vision to Paul, Acts 16.9.
Come over into Macedonia, and help us. If a man be distempered, or wounded in
his body, away he goes to the Physician, or Surgeon: Be as careful of your
Souls, as you are of your Bodies. If there be any good desires, cherish them:
Cant. 2.3. The Fig Tree puts forth her Green Figs, and the Vines with the
tender Grapes give a good Smell. Arise my Love, my Fair One, and come away. Thy
sincere, though weak desires and breathings of Soul, are pleasant to God, and
promise well. Can any Babes in Christ say, as the poor Indian when first
awakened, being asked what Sin was, Oh, said he, it is the continual Sickness
of my Heart? It argues they are alive to God.

2. Do not too soon shake off all fears, and doubts. Some come and tell
Ministers, how they cannot sleep some nights, being terrified about Sin, and
wrath: I am ready to tell them, where they awake one night, I would they did
many: They that have been so before them, have no reason to wish they had slept
the mean while.

Wounds must smart much before they can be cured. Many break their sleep by
night about loss of Children, of Goods, etc. and make no great matter of it.
You may in a little time, say of your hearts, as Jacob of that place, Gen 28.16
The Lord was here, and I knew it not. The first cry of the New Creature
pleases God, tormenteth the Devil. If you are full of fears now, the comforts
of God will be sweeter to you when they come. If you on a Journey were
benighted on a Down, darkness comes, Rain pours down, one Clap of Thunder and
Flash of Lightning followed another, and you were wet to the skin, affrighted,
and every hour seems as long as ten, and in the morning, when light appeared,
and the Sun began to shine, and you were brought into your Inn, and had the
comfort of a good Fire, warm clothes, good provision, and a good bed; would you
not be the more sensible of the sweetness of these things, because of your
nights misery? O Christian, Sorrow may continue for a night, Psalm. 30. Isa
50.10.
but joy comes in the morning. Are you in darkness, and so see no light? Hear
you the Thundrings of the Law? See you the Flashes of Gods Judgment? Do the
Terrors of God fall upon your Soul? When God shines upon you, then his
Promises and Comforts will be sweet to your Souls.

3. Never stick at any seize, but be always going on. Are you weak? The
strongest in Christ were once so. One has a good meditation upon this, The
greatest Giant was once a Babe in the Cradle; The greatest Oak was once a Twig;
And the greatest Scholar, was once in his Horn-book, learning letters: So says
he, the greatest Christian, was once a Babe in Christ, and weak in grace. All
must grow; sad it is for any to say, if I have so much Grace as will bring me
to Heaven, I am content: But who is content with just so much meat as will kill
hunger, and save life? Or with just so much money as will keep him from debts,
and so from Goal? Strive more and more against Sin: Get greater power over
Constitution Sins, Company Sins, and the Sins of your Callings. If any should
say, our hearts are still bad after praying, watching, and striving, remember
still to go on. If a man went to cut down an Oak, the first blow with the Ax
tends to the fall of the tree, as well as the last; if one should see one blow
given, and another, and an hundred, and the Oak seems as firm as ever, and
should say, it is but in vain to strike any more, what weakness were he guilty
of? At last down falls the Tree: So the first acts of Repentance, Faith,
Obedience, tend to the pulling down of Sin, as really as the last. How many are
prone to Pride, Covetousness, unchaste desires, revenge, have found this to be
true? they have prayed many years, and Fasted, and striven against Sin, and yet
found (as they thought) but a little change, and at last down has fallen the
Sin: And God has made them very humble, very mortifyed, very chaste, very
patient. Then take up the Ax, strike, strike, and spare not Sin; Sin shall be
destroyed.

4. If you find you are Sincere, give God the glory through Jesus Christ. When
King Solomon was Crowned, what rejoicing was there! 1 Kings 1.40. They piped
w^^h Pipes, and rejoyeed with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound
of them: Cant. 3.11. Go forth ye Daughters of Zion, and see King Solomon with
the Crown wherewith his Mother Crowned him in the day of his Espousaels, and in
the day of the gladness of his heart. God that has sanctified you, has
Crowned you with a better Crown, of Grace, and will with a Crown of Glory. The
Angels rejoiced at your Conversion, and therefore you should rejoice: God in
heaven, and those your friends there are glad for you, Luke 15.32 and you
should be glad for your selves. You once were under the same Condemnation with
the wicked. God sometimes pardons Sinners of the greatest sort, and pardons ^ot
some of the lesser sort: As if a King seeing two men, whom the Law had
Condemned, the one for Murdering his Child, and contriving to Murder him;
another only for stealing of a few Cattle, or a sum of Money, he pardons the
Traitor, and lets the Thief go to Execution: Even so Father, Mat. 11 26
for so it seems good in thy Sight. Paul runs up all to the Will of God, Romans
9.23. Yet, says Calvin, Neque tamen ingerin^us commentum absolutae potentiae:
He is not pleased with saying only, That God is a Law to himself: It is Gods
Will, says he, that is true, but why God wills, is not for us to know; why he
would wrap up so many men in Adam, and they all fell by his Sin; Why Beasts be
not men; or why I was not Christ's Humane Nature, is not for us to ask: so he.
Ephesians. 1.4.
You that were chosen, that you might be holy, not because he foresaw you would
be holy, so you were chosen to Grace, as well as to Glory. Blessed are the eyes
that see the things that you see. You are kept by the mighty power of God,
through Faith unto Salvation. No man shall be able to pluck you out of Christ's
hand. If any say then, let the Sincere do what they will, they cannot be
damned. Though they shall not be damned, yet they may be severely scourged. God
can take away their peace of Conscience, deprive them of much Communion with
himself, cross them in their enjoyments, and make them to go weeping to their
Graves. If any reading our Statute Law say, The breaking of such a Law is only
the loss of my liberty, not of my life; or of my hand, not of my head; and
therefore I fear not Law, every one would deride him; 2 Pet. 3.18
Grow in Grace, is Gods Command to them that have Grace; and they do so, though
the change at first be more sensible: Let a white cloth be died black, the
first dip makes a sensible, wonderful change, dip it again it is more black,
but the change not so sensible as before: So it is with the first and after
acts of Grace, first and after Duties.

5. Let us learn more, to enquire into the state and condition of our own
Souls, and less into the state and condition of other men's Souls. I may know my
self, but not so easily another man; some great Professors prove vile, some
weak ones serious, that Dr. Sibs says, that Bucer after long experience of
this, said, he would not exclude from the Lords Supper that man that had
Aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ. I have heard of that holy man of God, Mr.
Cotton of New England, that he once said to his Congregation (who were not
pleased with it) That if any Indian, or other should step forth, and say, I
love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity and truth; and should testify his
willingness to walk according to the Gospel, though his defects were great, for
Ignorance, etc. that he would admit him to the Lords Table. We all are of the
mind of the Church of England, that no scandalous person, etc. should be
admitted (and therefore, by the way, many Ministers are Non-conformists to
their own Canons and Orders) I would admit any man, that by converse with him,
I had reason to believe to be sincere; though I had great fears to the
contrary. Whilst I am writing of this blessed Ordinance, this binding
Ordinance, this Ordinance God so much blesses for the carrying on a work of
Grace; Remember we there receive the Body of Christ. Mat. 26.26
The Elements though not changed in nature, yet are changed in use: As Wax in
Writings, of great use, differs from common Wax. One thus expresses himself: A
Prince sends an Ambassador, and offers a Woman his Son, and gives the
Effigies, or Picture of him? the young Prince in Person, not the bare Effigies
of him is now given: In Person, how? Not in present, personal, physical
possession; but in the true right of Relation, as a Husband. So is Christ
given, how? Not by any transubstantiation, but as a Savior. In this Ordinance
God reviveth the decaying Graces of his People, and gives them more strength.
It is with our Souls, as with our Bodies, they are sometimes sick, and out of
Order: As sometimes when the body is sick, the eyes cannot see well, nor the
mouth taste well, nor the hands work well, nor the feet go well; by Physic,
Cordials, or some means we are revived, and all is well. Some temptations,
corruptions, cares of the world, bring our Souls out of order, that the Eye of
Faith waxes dim, the hands of good Works grow weak, and hang down, the feet of
affections are feeble: But Gods Ordinances, and especially this of the
Sacrament revives us, and sets us right again. Sincerity then is the chief
thing, and above all gettings we should get it, the Price of it is above Gold,
above all Treasures: He that gets it not, gets nothing in the world worth the
having. Solomon says, Fearing God, keeping his Commandments (which is the
same with being sincere) is the whole of man, Eccles. 12.13. for he had proved
all other things to be Vanities: But of that in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX. Of the Vanity of the World.
MEDITATIONS.
ALL things are Vanity. All our Enjoyments pass away like our dreams: We
sometimes have really eaten, drunken, and diverted our selves with our Friends,
which time we desired before it came, delighted in it when it came: We have
sometimes dreamt we have eaten, drunken, and diverted our selves with our
Friend, and we had then pleasure in our imaginations: What difference is there
now in respect of delight between the using these things, and the dreaming of
them? So omon says it often in his Ecclesiastes, that all things are vanity:
but who thinks of it! O Death, when thou whisperest this truth in the ear of a
vain, ungodly man, thou will make him to tremble, though the often hearing of
it now, will not make him thoughtfull. Whatever in matters of Religion, men may
deny, this they cannot deny. Take the Goliahs of their Camp, the Giants in all
Acts of wickedness, they cannot gainsay this; such a place as this cuts to the
heart, Job 14.20. Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passes; thou
changest his countenance, and sendest him away. All the poor shift is, that
they will put these things out of their Minds: Oh but they cannot put them out
of the Bible: Here we are but for a moment, and we are all hastening to a
place, where we shall be for ever. O Eternity! thou that have made so many
stout hearts to quake and tremble, let all men ever remember thee. When we were
Children, we thought we should never forget the Servants that we loved, the
delights that we took up with, and now all is nothing to us: within a little
time, all our present enjoyments, will signify no more to us, than those do
now. Above five thousand years were gone in the world, before ever we were seen
or thought of, and here we look about the world, and are gone out of it.

DIRECTIONS.
1. Call to mind, how uncertain the things of the world have been, to many of
our Fellow Creatures before us. Exodus 14.2
Pharaoh King of Egypt, was drowned in the Red Sea: Dan. 4.33.
Nebuchadnezar was made as a Beast in the field, for seven year: Acts 12.2.
Herod, that glittered in his Royal Robes, was eaten of Worms: Antonius
Heliogabalus Emperor of the Romans, his Garments were very costly, and yet he
would never wear one Garment twice, his Shoes were embellished with Pearls and
Diamonds; his way was strewed with Powder of Gold and Silver; his Vessels of
baser sort were all of Gold, his Rings and Jewels would he never use but once:
Who, among the voluptuous sort of men, would not be Antonius Heliogabalus now?
yet this man had always about him a silver Cord, or golden Knife to dispatch
himself if he saw occasion; but he did not escape so, the Romans took Him and
his Mother (after he had reigned four years) and dragged them thorough the
streets of Rome, and broke their arms, and threw them into Tiber, Speeds Chron.
that they might not be buried, or the Air be infected by them: Who would be
Antonius Heliogabalus now? How have many flourishing Nations, as well as men,
been brought to naught? Heylins Cosmog.
The Spaniards in seventeen years destroyed six Millions of men, roasted some,
plucked out their eyes, cut off some men's arms and threw them to be devoured by
Wild Beasts. This is represented in that dream of Daniel, Dan. 4.11, 13, 15. Of
a tree that grew, and was strong, the height of it reached unto Heaven, and
the sight thereof to the ends of the Earth. He that came down from Heaven cried
with a loud voice, saying, Hew down the Tree, and cut off his branches, shake
off his leaves, and scatter his Fruit: -- What is become of the house that
Solomon built for Pharaohs Daughter? Where are the famous Structures we have
read of, or the men that dwelt in them?

2. Conclude on it, the things of the World are but vain, else Christ, and many
good men had never had so few of them, and so many of the worst of men, had
never had such an abundance of them. Mat. 17.27 Mat. 27.29
Christ was so poor he could not pay tribute, etc. had a Crown of Thorns on his
head, when Tiberius that Idolatrous Pagan, had a Crown of Gold on his. It is a
Privilege the Saints shall have for ever in Heaven, that they shall never see,
nor use any of these toys there. The vilest of men for Blasphemy,
Intemperance, Uncleanness, Oppression, they have much of the world, when
thousands that breath after God, and love him above all, have Poverty and
contempt: God would never deny these things (if they were not Vanities) to the
righteous, and give them to the wicked.

3. Make the thoughts of a time of dying familiar to you. Think, Must I dye!
then Lord it is high time for me, to begin to live; which no man does, till he
be dead to the world. If you had been made when Adam was, and had from that
time to this, lived in all the delights of the Sons of men, and were now to
die, you would be convinced, that all past enjoyments were vanity. If you knew
for certain where your Graves should be, where your Bodies should lie till the
Resurrection, would you not (if you could) go often to that Grave, and weep
there? But that Curse seems to come on most men, that came on the King of
Babylon, Dan. 4.16. Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a Beasts heart
be given to him: Hence it is they delight not in God, but in brutal, beastial
Pleasures; and though they know they must die, yet prepare not for it. As if a
man playing at Cards, were told his house were on fire, and desired to hasten
away to save his House, Goods and Children, should say, I will end my Game
first, and by that time he came all were burnt.

4. Let the spiritual man, the Heavenborn Soul, be ashamed, that these Vanities
have had so much of his time, thoughts and desires. Epictetus directed his
followers, when tempted to flattery, today, (...); Art thou a Philosopher? So
when you are tempted to immoderate delight in Vanity, (...); Art thou a
Christian? A Disciple of Jesus that was de^d to these Gai^ties? Trust not you
in Men, they are Vanity. When Isr^^l was in Egypt, in cruel Bondage, News comes
from the Court, Pharaoh will let them go: You may imagine how glad they were,
and how they did comfort one another; but there comes a Counter word, then they
are sad: Then a Promise again, and they had the Word of a King for it and then
it is revoked again.

Trust not to Men, nor Things; your Treasures, your Relations are uncertain
Comforts. Look oftener to God, less to the World; yet am I not calling a
Christian to any unnecessary sadness: He may and ought to take delight in the
things of the World, seeing they help him to serve his God: Meats, Drinks,
Diversions serve the Body, the Body serves the Soul, the Soul serves God; so
that there is a high end in common things. It is unbecoming a Child of God to
be melancholy, and casts a blot on his Profession. The Turks indeed account
their melancholy Men their greatest Saints, and keep them, as such, on a
public Stock: They, as such, (as melancholy) are sitter for Turks, than
Christians; yet in all our Mirth and Cheerfulness we should fear Sin. I know
Zeal and Langhter may be conversant about the same thing; but (says Ames, De
Consci.) Non sub eadem ratione; Z^lus enim respicit (...), and turpe, risus
autem inexpectatum aliq^^^ leviter placens absque consideratione, vel honesti
vel turpis: Zeal is conversant about a thing, consider it as good or evil; but
laughter may be occasioned by some unexpected thing, that please^h a little,
without the consideration of the thing as holy or profane.

Is all vanity? then wicked men need not much rejoice in their abundance, not
the righteous much trouble themselves for their afflictions. Their sanctified
tribulations shall do them much good; when the unsanctified Prosperity of the
wicked, shall do them much hurt. But the Benefit of Afflictions is the next
thing to be considered.

CHAP. X. Of the Benefit of Afflictions.
MEDITATIONS.
THe brightest day, has an approaching Night; and the pleasant Summer, a sharp
Winter. Some of the best of men have been taken from their enjoyments, and
plunged into all manner of miseries: Job is a great instance of this; In the
Morning he had Children, in the Evening none; in the Morning he was a Rich man,
in the Evening a Poor man: He draws his own Picture, as it were, when in
prosperity, in the 29. chapt. of Job, and also when in adversity, in chap. 30.
of Job: See what a great change a little time made upon him; at one time he was
as a King in the Army; at another time they had him in derision, whose Fathers
he had disdained to set with the Dogs of his Flock. We should expect and
prepare for the greatest suffering, (...). Let the Fire, the Cross, or any of
the Devils buffetings come, says Ignatius, (if I mistake not, to the
Smyrneans, for I have him not by me) (...), I am, says he, meat for beasts;
and yet was satisfied. Some have been driven into Caves and Dens of the Earth:
Heb. 11.38.
So were many of the Primitive Christians: What (says one) would keep them
warm, was their clothing; the Ground was their Table, Herbs and Roots their
diet, Wild fruits and Berries their dainties; Hunger their sauce, their Fingers
their knives, their Hands their Cups; and the next Well their Wine-celler: but
he adds, what they wanted in cheer, they had in Grace, their lives being spent
in Meditation and Prayer. Fullers Church History. Sad indeed was the case of
Mr. Glover, in Queen Maryes days, he was in a Prison very close, very cold,
and very dark, he had no Form or Stool to sit on, only a little straw for a
Bed; but the worst was this, that all this while he was much disquieted in his
mind, and under fear of Gods displeasure, and so continued sad, and sorrowful,
till he was within view of the stake, and then the Comforts of God flowed down
upon him. Whatever our troubles be from men, we should carry it seriously, and
then cheerfully: We should be as the Leviathan, of whom it is said, Job 41.22.
In his neck remains strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before him. The
Church were Brick-makers in Egypt, strangers had taken their houses, and sore
troubles we read of in the Lamentations. Lam. 5.2. Lam. 5.8.
If God make us to be Servants to Servants, we must bear all patiently. But by
the way, let us bring our selves no lower than God brin^s us, and discover
courage under the contempt of some, that would insult over us in the time of
our Trouble: To such a one did the Poet write, when he said, Non ego sic ceidi,
O^id.
quamvis ab^estus ut infra
Te quoque sim, inferius quo nihil esse potest.


What if such a day should be, Isa. 10.14. when the King of Assyria said, My
hand has found as a Nest the riches of the people: and as one that gathere^h
Eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth, and there was none that
moved the wing, that opened the ^outh, or peeped? When we can no more resist,
th^n a Bird can us, when we take Eggs out of the Nest. Now we have gone from
God, it may be, afflictions will bring as home: We read in Jeremy 2.24. The
Wild Ass in the Wilderness snuffeth up the wind, in her month they shall find
her; that is, in the impregnation of her womb, then she is burdened, and so
stayed: so many when troubles come.

DIRECTIONS.
1. Look unto Christ, and his followers before us, with what patience they have
born afflictions. How was Christ reviled, spit on, crucisied, and yet as a Lamb
before the Shearers, Isa. 53.7.
so was he! Do they contemn and hate us, whom we have shown great kindnesses
to? consider how Moses was dealt with by an ungrateful people, though he left
the pleasures of Pharaohs Court for their sakes, yet sometimes they were ready
to stone him: Exo. 17.4.
Though Paul suffered so much for the Gospels sake, yet some in the Church of
Corinth said of him, that he walked after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.2. Because he
pleaded the power he had to forbear working, to have carnals from them, that
had spirituals from him, 2 Cor. 4.1. Therefore seeing we have this ministry, as
we have received mercy we faint not: Hopes he had of doing some Souls good, and
that quieted him. The Pagans of old were wont to ask, Tertul. Apol.
how many Children the Christians devoured, and who were the Cooks that dressed
them, etc? All which reproach they bore patiently: Christ was not strict enough
in his converse, for a number of proud Pharisees; they accused him with
Sabbath-breaking, and keeping company with vain men. Solomon's Counsel must take
place, Prove. 26.4. Answer not a fool according to his Folly, lost thou also be
like unto him; and though there seems to be a contradiction in the next verse,
verse. 5. Answer a fool according to his Folly, lost he be wise in his own
conceit: Answer him not maliciously, wrathfully, or using sinful words, as he
does: but answer him wisely, and with good and convincing words.

2. Call to mind the wonderful Providence that have attended Gods People in
their greatest afflictions. What did God do for Abraham, when he went he knew
not whither, and met with troubles every where? Josephus
for Moses when Tharmutis (for so was the Daughter of Pharaoh called) took care
of him? Sir W. R. Hist.
When God drowned Cheneres (for so was that Pharaoh called as some say;) For
the Church in Queen Esthers time, when the day for their destruction was
appointed? Bish. Spotswood in his History of the Church of Scotland, speaking
of that Holy man Cragge, the night before he was to be executed, Pope Paul the
4th died, which caused his getting out of Prison; having lost himself in a
Wood, and wanting conveniences, a Dog came and fawned about him, having a Purse
of money in his mouth, and laid it at Craggs feet, and guided him to Millain,
where a company of Banditti, or Robbers set upon him; one of them told him that
he knew him, and once had his Charity, and to requite that kindness, he would
now secure him out of the hands of that sort of men. Lam. 3.27.
I will not say much of my self, who bore the yoke in my youth, nor of a series
of wonderful Providence, that nine years ago I met with, in the day when I had
not where to lay my head, which for a year after, I did seldom think of with
dry eyes: I will add no more of that, because I will offend none. Gods care is
such of his own, that he says, Isa. 45.11. Ask me of things to come,
concerning my Sons, and concerning the works of my hands, command you me. I
know some would read by way of Interrogation, Do you command me? but we will
consider the words, as signifying Gods great condescension; yet it is not to be
endured, for any to say (as once I heard a Minister do) Lord we therefore
command thee. If a King say to an ordinary man, in such a thing you may command
me, he does not expect the man should reply, Then, Sir, I command you; but that
he should thus understand him: Your request shall as certainly be granted, as
if it had the force of a Command, or as if you had the power of commanding me:
Let us consider Gods past Providence to us, to take encouragement from them;
Luke 22.35. When I sent you without Purse or Scrip, lacked you any thing? and
they said, Nothing: What did God for Joseph in all his troubles? Psalm. 105.18,
19. Whose feet they hurt with fetters, he was laid in Iron, until the time that
his word came, till the word of the Lord tried him: Then the King sent and made
him Lord of his house, and Ruler of his substance. 1 Kings 7.21. When the
Pillars of the Porch of the Temple were set up, the right Pillar was called
Jachin, (which signifies, He shall establish) and the left Pillar was called
Boaz, (which signifies, Strength is in it;) All this shows the care God has
of his Church and People, notwithstanding all contrivances against them.

3. Take a Prospect of all the happy consequences of sanctified Afflictions. 1.
Romans 5.4, 5.
They work Patience, and Patience Experience, etc. They bring forth the
peaceable fruits of righteousness. 2. They make us look to God for comfort,
seeing none can be found in Creatures; Micah 7.5, 6, 7. Trust ye not in a
Friend, put not confidence in a Guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her
that lies in thy bosom: For the Son dishonors the Father, the Daughter
rises against her Mother, the Daughter-in-law against her Mother-in-law; a
man's enemies are the men of his own house. This was a sad case, but how much
good came of it? Therefore I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God
of my Salvation: Trust not in an Enemy, or a Stranger, one would think to be
good counsel; yea, but trust not in a Friend: But what if that Friend be an
intimate one? No, put not confidence in a guide: But my Wife is my second Self;
shut the door of thy lips from her that lies in thy bosom: But if I am a
Father, I hope I shall have comfort in my Children whom I so much love, and of
whose Education I am so tender; No, the Son dishonors the Father; but says
the Mother, Daughters are more flexible, and I may have Comfort in them; No,
the Daughter rises against the Mother; well, if my Children be bad, I hope to
please my self in Children in Law, Sons Wives; No, The Daughter-in-law rises
against the Mother-in-law: If the case be this, then I will (say some) take
comfort in Servants, or any one in the house that loves me; No, there is no
Comfort there, For a man's Enemies are them of his own House: What follows?
Therefore I will look unto the Lord; Therefore, wherefore? because he could not
comfortably look to any other: Away to Prayer, to Meditation, to Reading: When
any say they can take Comfort in nothing in their Houses; No, have you no
Bibles there? 3. Afflictions make us call to mind our own faults; do others
wrong, abuse us, have not we done the like to some men in time past? Solomon
disswades from fretting, if we hear our Servants Curse us, from this
consideraon, Eccl. 7.21, 22.
Thou thy self know that in time past thou have cursed others: I have heard
of a man that beat his Father, and drew him by the hair of his head toward the
street, when he came to the Threshold, Stay Son, (said the old man) drag me no
farther, for so far I dragged my Father, and here I left him: I have had the
Story from the Inhabitants of that Town, it being a place where Providence has
often called me. 4. Afflictions make us also to desire Heaven. A man in a
Journey, if the way be bad, if the weather be bad, if his Horse be bad, and if
his Body be out of order, he more desires to be at his Journeys end, than
otherwise he would do. When the Saints come there, they shall have their
reward. Josephus says, that when Caius Caligula caused Agrippa to be brought
out of Prison, that was committed there by Tiberius, he gave him a Chain of
Gold that weighed as much as his Chain of Iron, and preferred him: Now the
heavier the Chain of Iron was, the better for him, the greater was his Chain of
Gold. The righteous man will bless God for ever, for all his trouble; when the
wicked man shall for ever, curse the time in which he enjoyed Prosperity. 5.
Afflictions put us on Prayer. David was a man of great troubles, and therefore
much given to Prayer, and God delivered, and his Prayers were turned into
Praises. If any say, I have prayed long, and yet the trouble is not over. Long:
How long? Thy Life is not long. How long did the Jews pray, and wait for
Deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity? Even seventy years. Continue in
Prayer, and you know not how soon God may appear.

Whilst I mention Afflictions, let me call on all sorts of men, to prepare for
national Calamities; they may be such as God speaks of, Deuteronomy. 28.34. So that
thou shall be mad for the sight of thine eyes, which thou shall see. Where then
will be the Cups, Cards, Music of vain men? I speak to you from God, as Moses
to Pharaoh, Exodus 10.3.
How long refusest thou to humble thy self before me? Jer. 6.4.
We may cry as the Prophet Jeremy, Woe unto us! for the day goes away, the
shadows of the evening are stretched out. The day of peace, the day of the
enjoyment of Gospel Privileges seems to draw to a close, when that judgment
may be executed, Jer. 20.25. Wherefore I gave them Statutes that were not good,
and judgments whereby they could not live. I humbly conceive, he speaks not
of the ceremonial Law that he appointed, but of Idolatrous Commands from men,
verse. 23. I lifted up my hand also to them in the wilderness, that I would
scatter them among the Heathen, etc. I gave them statutes that were not good:
not as if God gave them by command, but only by his Providence. If any say, if
that be the worst of it, we care not: If Popery prevail, we will never be
Non-conformists. Go Judas, take thy thirty pieces of Silver; and thy ease and
treasures shall do thee as much good, as that Money did him, which he purchased
by betraying his Lord.

The Wicked, that now receive their good things, shall be tormented; and the
Righteous that receive their evil things shall be comforted. Luke 16.25.
But of this in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI. Of Heaven and Hell.
MEDITATIONS.
OUT of many Tribulations shall the Righteous enter into the Kingdom of God:
Acts 14.22.
Lo, this is the happy condition of every Man that has minded the Duties we
have before considered. In Heaven they enjoy a completing of gracious
Principles; there they have what here they groaned for, prayed for, a perfect
and uninterrupted Love to God, and Enjoyment of Him. The Love the Soul has now
to Christ, is so powerful, that he may say with the Spouse, I am sick of Love;
and yet, that Love, if compared to that in Heaven, is but as a drop of Water to
a Fountain: Yet if now you ask the Christian, which he loves most, God or the
World; his Love is so strange, that it is such a Question, as if you should
ask, Which were better, or which he most loved, a piece of Gold, or a clod of
Earth: There is also in Heaven Converse with the best Company; Mat. 8.11. Many
shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. What would we now give for an
hours sight of Paul, David, or other Saints in Heaven, or Converse with them?
Remember, if we have wicked, unkind Relations, with whom we now dwell, in a
little time we shall be with them above. We are now pleased not only to see a
King, but his Lords about him; (here is my Lord such a one, famous for such a
thing;) so above, there is my Lord Moses, by whom God wrought Wonders, my Lord
David, a Man after God's Heart, my Lord Paul, the great Converter of the
Gentiles. Joseph when he saw his Brother Benjamin, Genesis 45.14
fell on his neck, and wept for joy; so will they rejoice in Glory, as Children
of the same Father, God, and of the same Mother, the Church of Christ on Earth.
There is also the Society of Angels, Creatures of such excellency, that they
seldom come into the world, and when they do, they are soon gone, here being no
place worthy to entertain them. There is in Heaven an immediate fruition of the
blessed God, 1 Cor. 13.12. Then shall we see him face to face, and know even as
we are known: He seems not to speak of the Vision of the divine Essence, for
that is every where; but of the knowledge of God, and his glorious attributes.
And by the way we must consider, that the communicable Attributes are as really
the undivided Essence of God, as those we call incommunicable; and therefore no
Attributo of God can properly or strictly be communicated to any Creature, for
they are the Divine Essence; and if the Attributes were communicated, so would
the Divine Essence be: And therefore the Communication we speak of, is only
Analogical, no Communication of the Attributes themselves to us; (for they are
all infinite, and therefore no Creature is capable of them) but in respect of
the Fruit and Effects of those Attributes, God works that in Man which
resembles his Perfections: So we shall be made like him, 1 John 3.2.
as John says; 2 Pet. 1.4.
and so be Partakers of the Divine Nature, as Peter says. How sweet is
Communion with God now! how much more sweet will it be then! Bernard says,
Tuipse Coronatores, Ber. Med.
and Corona; Promissor, and Promissio; Praemiator, and Praemium. O God, Thou
art the Crowner, and the Crown it self; the Promiser, and the Promise it self;
the Rewarder, and the Reward it self. 1 These. 4.17. We shall be for ever with
the Lord. Well may we comfort one another with these words, Where I am, John
14.3. Joh. 17.21.
there shall you also be, says Christ; for we are one with Christ, though not
Natura, yet I acto: The Husband will have the Wife with him. As we now have
Communion with God, and Christ, is our Heaven begun, Ephesians. 2.6. And has made us
to sit together in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus. Heaven is such a place,
Heb. 11.10. whose builder and maker is God. The Structure is too glorious to be
made by the Saints above, or Angels there; they cannot build their own
Dwellings, as Men do on Earth, for the Workmanship is too curious for them; no,
God does it: Infinite Wisdom contrived the Mansions there, and infinite Power
made them. This is the place that God purposed to bring his People to from
Eternity. Mat. 25.34 1 Kings 7.8, 9, 10.
What was the House that King Solomon built for the Daughter of Pharaoh, when
he took her to be his Wife, but as a mere Dunghill in comparison of this House
that God has made for the Sons and Daughters of Men, whom he has made his
beloved Ones? Then shall that be fully accomplished, Zeph. 3.17. The Lord thy
God will rejoice over thee with joy: He will rest in his Love, he will rejoice
over thee with singing. Courts on Earth have their Troubles with their
Pleasures: A. to his Son.
one says that well knew what they were; That a Court is a place of most
uncertain Air, full of Damps and Exhalations; then there is over-scorching
Heat, and soon over-casting of Clouds, by the sudden rising and depressing of
Favorites. Great Men are most alterable; every puff of Wind fans them into
various shapes; they which have extremely loved to day, have hated deadly the
morrow. So he. But in Heaven there is no fear of the frowns of God, nor
abatement of his Love to Eternity.

But the Ungodly shall be cast into Hell. I shall not contend about the place,
whether it be in the Air, or whether in the Center of the Earth, or whether
beyond the Superficies of it; I content my self with that of Luther, I am
satisfied in not knowing where Hell is, whilst I know that it is: We had
better enquire how to escape the place, than where the place is: It is a place
of Misery, where the Ungodly shall for ever bear the Indignation of the Lord,
against whom they have sinned, Mat. 25.46. Sin is objectively infinite, as it
is committed against an infinite God: An infinite Offense calls for an infinite
Punishment: This Punishment must be either infinite for Nature, or Duration;
for Nature it cannot be, no finite Creature could then bear it; it must be
therefore infinite for Duration. God has given to Man an immortal Soul; this
Soul goes out of the World laden with Sin and Guilt; is it not reasonable, that
whilst Sin remains, Punishment should remain? But Sin will remain for ever;
for, how should it be gotten out, or taken away? What was the punishment of the
Vestal Nuns in Campo Scelerato, among the old Romans? What is the Spanish
Inquisition? What is our Pane forte and dure, or Pressing Men to death? Nothing
to this: And yet, were any Man sure, that after ten or twenty years Pleasures
he should endure such Misery, how would he quake at the thoughts of it, in the
midst of his Delights? Mat. 25.41. The Ungodly are committed to the rage of the
Devil. What becomes of the Lamb, if the Lion have him? How sad is it for any
Man to be delivered over to the Will of his greatest Enemy, that had no Pity,
no Humanity, but should take more delight in torturing, than in eating when
hungry? It is not in vain put in, Depart from me, Mat. 25.41
-- with the Devil and his Angels: Now they are but Executioners, God is the
Judge. Well might David say, Who knows the Power of thy Wrath! Psalm. 90.11.
It is the Wrath of an infinite God, of a sin-revenging God. Let such as fear
not Eternal Burnings consider, what would an eternal Gout, an eternal
Toothache, an eternal Strangury be? The Ungodly shall cry, and not be heard;
cry as they, Jer. 47.6, 7. O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be e're
thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy Scabbard, rest and be still. But that
answer shall be given? How can it be quiet, since the Lord has given it a
charge to destroy? I have many times thought, when I have read the 48, and 49
chapters of Jeremy, and the last Verses of both, though dreadful things were
threatened to be executed on Moab and Elam, yet the Close of all is, Yet will I
bring again the Captivity of Moab, in the latter days, says the Lord; but it
shall be in the latter days. I will bring again the Captivity of Elam, says
the Lord. But when Christ will condemn the Wicked in the great day, there is
not the least Promise of Pity after thousands of Years or Ages. Egyptian
Bondage (though long, yet) ended, so did the Babylonish Captivity, but there
will be no end of this misery; God is not a man that he should repent; 1 Samuel
15.29.
there will be no change of his mind; If God changes, Al. in Philos. Platon.
(says a Platonist, (...), etc.) he must be changed of himself, or some other;
if of another, he must be greater than God, or wiser, which none can be; if of
himself, he must change either for the better or the worse, both which would
argue imperfection in God, and therefore he shall be known for ever to be a God
that changes not: God is now preparing his Instruments of Death, though vain
men consider it not, but are as Sheep, or Oxen, or other Beasts of the field,
that are grazing or sporting, when one stands by whetting his Instruments to
slay them.

DIRECTIONS.
Prepare for the day of Judgment, and when prepared, pray for it. The
completing of the happiness of the Saints, as to their body, will be in that
day: What think you of the particular Judgment in the time of Death? When Saul
was told he should dye, (for that is the meaning of the word, be with me, that
is in the number of the dead; for Jonathan was a good man,) 1 Samuel 28.19, 20.
Then Saul fell strait way all along on the earth, and there was no strength in
him: In the sixth verse we find, In the day of his trouble God answered him
not, neither by Dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets: Neither will God speak
comfortably to ungodly men when they die, by Ministers, nor Scripture, nor
Conscience: If you ask what that Vrim was? we read not of it as a thing made by
Moses or the People; some think it was a precious stone in the breast of the
High Priest, that by the change of its color, showed what success the People
should have in War; as by Thummim what Offerings were accepted: I know Mr.
Weems throws in one rub against this, Because, (says he) when the Priest put
on Vrim and Thummim, he asked Counsel at the mouth of the Lord: He pleads, if
there were such a wonderful miraculous change of the color of Vrim, there was
no need of asking of God; his Opinion therefore was, when the Priest had it on,
he was inspired to answer to the question: I will not gainsay the Opinion, only
I conceive the objection is of no force, for that change of the color might be
made by, or in Prayer, and calling upon God: Saul had no answer: the Ungodly
shall cry in a time of Death, and not be heard; and when the day of judgment
comes, that great day, the Consciences of the despisers of Christ, may say to
them, what once Zebul said to Gaal, Judge. 9.38. Where is now thy mouth,
wherewith thou said, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? Where is now
thy mouth, wherewith thou said, Who is Christ that I should serve him? Then
will he say to such, Exodus 6.1.
what once God said to Moses of Pharaoh, Now shall thou see what I will do to
Pharaoh: Now shall Angels and Saints see what God will do to the ungodly; but
such as are prepared for that day, may Pray for it; Aug. Medit.
Aspice Domine Jesu, (cries Angustine) viduitatis, and orbitatis meaelacrymas,
quas tibi offero donec redeas: Behold Lord Jesus the tears of my Widdowhood or
fatherless condition, which I pour out 'till thou returnest: Pray for the
Judgment day, that sin may be no more, that all the faithful may be gathered
in: Pray for the eternal Kingdom. Mat. 11.12
The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force:
You see how poor hungry Beggars cry at your doors for an alms, if you do not
presently answer them, if you frown on them, they will not be gone. Let us all
smite our breasts; Blessed God, what an infinite disproportion is there between
my desires, and their objects! how coldly do I Pray for a Heaven!

2. Get a Settlement in your Hearts of the truth and certainty of all these
things. It is reasonable to believe, that verily there is a Reward for the
Righteous; Psalm. 58.11
verily there is a God that judges the earth. God rewards not his People
now, God punishes not his Enemies now, and therefore will do it hereafter. The
worst of Men have many times the best of the World, and the best of men the
worst. God has put breathings and longings of Soul in his own after the full
enjoyment of himself in Glory, and he puts not those desires there to torment
them, but to satisfy these desires. Men venture much at Sea in hopes of great
gain: Let hopes, even weak hopes in many, put them on diligence in God's
Service. Wherefore, 1 Cor. 15.58.
my Brethren, be constant, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, knowing your labor shall not be in vain.

3. Let all the Saints admire and adore our Lord Jesus, that saves them from
Hell, and brings them to Heaven. Mr. Ambrose in his Looking unto Jesus, says
thus; Suppose for an Offense thou were to be racked leisurably, that thy Bones
and Sinews might be pained thirty or forty years; that so much Flesh should be
cut off-one day, such a Bone broken another; and by Art the Flesh should be
restored, and the Skin cured again; and all th^se years thou be dying, and
never dead; and all this while thou should have no Clothes, F^od, or Sleep
convenient for thee; and when thou thought there was no hope, a great Prince
should come, and deliver thee from all this misery; and not only so, but give
thee great Treasures, and one of the most pleasant Habitations in his Kingdom;
how would thou love that Prince! -- Our Sin had condemned us to far greater
Misery, and our Lord Jesus has procured for us far greater Mercy. It is well
God has prepared an Eternity to admire this Love in.

4. Do God that Service here on Earth, that you can never do him in Heaven. I
will name a few Particulars, and leave the Amplification to your Meditation.

1. Take thy fill of spiritual Mourning for shine own and other men's Sins now:
Thou can not do this when thou come to Heaven; for there is no Sin there.

2. Bear up patiently under all thy Trials now; thou can not do this in
Heaven, for there is no trouble there.

3. Deal liberally with distressed Christians now; thou can not do this in
Heaven, for there is no distressed Christians there.

4. Delight in Scripture and Ordinances for the healing of thy Soul now; thou
can not do this in Heaven, for there is no unhealed Soul there.

A Word to the Unconverted.
Are these things so? Then may I say to you what the Prophet said of Moab and
Kirharesh, Isa. 16.11. Wherefore my Bowels shall sound as a Harp for Moab, and
my Inwards for Kirharesh. When Men ran from God, though God offered Grace and
Mercy, it is said, Genesis 6.7. It repented the Lord that he had made Man, and it
grieved him to the heart: Sin has made him such a Monster, that God loatheth
him, and the People of God are often in Anguish of Spirit because of him. What
aileth the Unconverted Man, that though he knows he has sinned, and is
exposed to eternal Judgments; yet can eat and drink by day, and sleep by night,
as if all were well? Men condemned to die for Theft, Murder, how sad do they
look! but Sin is of a hardening nature: Hence it is that their Hearts feel not
the ke^nest Considerations in Religion. Ungodly Men are, as one says,
Whately's N^w-birth.
as little Devils, and differ from the great Devil, not in Parts of Corruption,
but Degrees; as a Child differs from a Man.

But O man! thou must die, and if it be so thou dyest before thou art made a
new creature, thou art damned for ever. Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to
meet thee at thy coming, Isa. 14.9. If there were a Sword, a Pistol at thy
breast, how would thou beg for life, if thou had any hopes of being heard!
the Sword of Justice is drawn against thee, and ready to be sheathed in thy
bowels. Cry, cry aloud to the merciful God for Mercy. How often in the night
season, is there a scrole before thine eyes of thy past iniquities, and of
judgments to come; and thou turnest from one side to another, Shall I, shall I
yet reform! When shall it once be? If any say, I hope to be saved though I obey
not the Gospel: This is to say, I hope God will prove false of his word: or as
if a man called to work, and promised pay, should say, Though I sport, or
sleep, (but work not) all day long, I doubt not of my wages; and should argue
from the goodness of the nature of that man that employed him: If others say, I
will repent hereafter; So thou shall; but I fear that hereafter will be in Hell
for ever, when there is no hope of mercy. The Scripture calls obstinate
Sinners, Sons of Belial, 1 Samuel 2.12. 2 Samuel 20.1. the Sept. read in one place
(...), Pestilent men, infectious men; in the other place, (...), Men yokeless,
against all Law: And this is the case of men, that were once glorious
Creatures, when in subjection to their Maker. It is a comfortable consideration
to them that are holy, 1 Cor. 6.9. Rev. 21.27.
That no unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of God: Your graceless
Faces shall occasion no sorrow to them there. When they see you in the great
day, yet they, nor their God will have any pity upon you. Fathers, whose hearts
were once ready to break for their ungodly Children, or Husbands for their
ungodly Wives; or Brothers for their ungodly Brethren; they will not wish in
that day, O that I could save them from the Wrath of God! They will be
contented, and not only so, but will rejoice that Justice is executed upon
them; that God has honor upon them in their eternal Damnation, who had none
by them by any Reformation or good works. Turn you, Ezekiel. 33.11.
turn you, why will you die? Mind the duties I have persuaded to before. Let
none complain for want of time, when they know, that many of as much business
as they, can find time to mind God, and their duty in. Jer. 13.17.
But if you will not hear, my Soul shall mourn in secret for your pride. You
that cry in Youth, It is too soon to be serious, or in Middle-age, It is time
enough, will in old age say, It is too late. I turn from you, to them that I
know will hear me, and with whom my pains are never lost.

To the Righteous.
Praise the Lord all ye his Saints, whom God has sanctified, whom God will
save: You may sing that Song, Exodus 15.21. The Horse, and his Rider, has he
thrown into the Sea: So your vile affections and Satan has God conquered for
you. Grow in grace, as the Children of God, and as the Brethren of the holy
Prophets and Apostles. Epictetus gives a direction to Philosophers, to consider
when about to do an action; (...); What would Socrates, or Zeno do? So how
would David, Paul pray, read, or do the works of Religion, if they were by you,
and were to do the same? If your Brethren in Heaven could speak to you, how
would they persuade you to be zealous in good works, as Children of the same
Father, and Heirs of the same Kingdom with themselves? A strange sight would it
be, to see a King, with a Crown on his Head, taking in a Dunghill: Sad is it,
to see the Christian that has Grace, and shall have glory, to be immoderately
concerned about the things of this life. I persuade you to that which tends to
make your lives happy on all accounts, and which I have often spoken of; Piety,
Industry, Usefulness, and Cheerfulness. Piety, be serious in Religion, and seek
for comfortable Persuasions of the Love of God: Industry, be laborious in your
Callings: Usefulness, do good to the Souls and Bodies of many: Cheerfulness,
flee all needless sorrow, adorn the Gospel of Christ, and let your
Conversations invite others to receive it. Faults in you are bad indeed: The
better the Garment is, the worse is the rent; the better the Cup, the worse is
the crack; the better the man, the worse the disorder. For your encouragement
to walk with God, hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches: Rev. 2.7.
To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God. Rev. 7.16, 17.
They are before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple:
And he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them: They shall neither
hunger nor thirst any more; Neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat;
for the Lamb, that is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall
lead them unto the Fountain of living waters; and God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes. Rev. 22.1.
There is that pure River of the water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding
out of the throne of God, Rev. 22.6.
and of the Lamb. These sayings are faithful, and true. And the Lord God of the
holy Prophets has shown to his Servants the things which must shortly be done.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, Rev. 22.14
that they may have right to the Tree of life, and may enter in through the
Gates into the City. I end all with this humble Address unto the Lord, That he
would come with all his Train of Graces, and put an end to all our Heats and
Contentions about the smaller things in Religion, and make us zealous of all
good Works, and then bring us to himself in Glory.

Even so come, Rev. 22.20
Lord Jesus; That all the Saints may enjoy those Delights, of which it shall
never be said, Here is

THE END.

