THE ROYALIST REFORMED Or Considerations of Advice, To Gentlemen, To Divines,
To Lawyers.
Digested into three Chapters. Wherein their former mistakes are examined, and
their duties of obedience, unto the present Authority, succinctly held forth as
rational, and necessary.

Proverbs CHAP. 27. Verse 6. Faithful are the wounds of a Friend: But the
kisses of an Enemy are deceitful.

By Albertus Warren, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Francis Leach for George Thompson, dweling right against
Lincolnes-Inne in Chancery Lane. 1650.

Ad Lectorem candidum, de Serie et usu LIBELLI.
DIssingens regulas generosis, sponte Libello,
pacis adest nostro tempere, Causidicus.
Dira Malignantis recolens molimina Cleri,
Pneuma Sacrosanctum stringere fraud pia.
Sphalmata Doctrinae legum subrepta notavit,
sic leges pateat DOSE carere sua.
Invicto ALBERTVS rationis flvmine victus,
dux tibi sub rabido sidere (lector) erit.
Ergo inter quondam tollentes regna Monarchae,
ingenuo velox huic referatur honos.
T. M.

To the Judicious Reader.
BEing my self a free, unmercenary agent, how dishonorable soever (unto some
men springie brains) my discourse may appear, J pass not: because, wiser
heads will report me just in not smothering light upon terors of Relations, or
prejudice. If to honor my protectors from Forreyne and Domestic tyranny be a
suine, I shall offend till my death without regreat, the Crime wanting a name:
we see the Governing part of our Chivalry may challenge that respect as due,
they being a People designed to great transactions; But how far the sympathy,
and antipathy of sounds distracts many ears we daily find; A restless
Generation, undervaluing present felicities, rayseth a Dust in our eyes; But
wise Men's discretion will either close their sights at its approach, or fan
it away. What shall we say unto Presbyterians unpardonable folly, in coveting a
regard (when formerly disowned by now expired Regency) from their
Church-Governments natural Enemy? What to Royalists Dreams after Materials,
which Heaven has solemnly declared unfit, and given many judicious verdicts
against them? The first are only angry they mist the Honor in not cutting of
that head, which they themselves had long before fitted unto the block, the
second vainly would indent with God which way they shall go to heaven, and
both these rashly weigh most persons above us, in a Carnal scale, both are
accessory unto the need less arraignments of their own indiscretions.
Emulation and and presumption will disparadise whom they captivate: God has set
a period to every form, upon whose providence, who prudently depends, has
pitched upon an Object, shall never taint his imagination. Let private
interests, or disaffected relations throw what scorn they can upon the seeming
weakness or audacity of my reason, she shall never fail to concenter, and
triumph in her high, undoubted, Divine parentage.

Non haec sine numine Divum eveniunt.
page 33 read diffutit for dissit, Line 34 (...) for (...) Page 38 line 9, read
of for a.

CHAP. I Respecting Gentlemen
I Have been as much beholding either to ancient riches, learning, valor, or
the like uncertain seed of Heraldry, as most men. and am thereby obliged to a
special regard of gentlemen; and gentries reputation: your exception (Gent.) is
the less against me, yet I know neither birth, field valor, Ecclesiastic
employments, profession in the Municipiall laws of England, either in a
Theoretick or practical way, are sufficient to maintain a stock of virtue and
discretion, but the variety of these qualifications forces me (who have little
logical art) to use some rude Method in my intended reflections, in order to
each respective qualification I deal withal, beginning with those who stand
so much upon their right of respect by extraction or birth.

Unto such it is not denied, but that the virtue of their Ancestors has of due
cut out great respect, yet such is that regard, as must take its collateral
prop also upon, and from secondary endowments, adding lusty to the remote
cause; and whereof your selves (Gent.) must be propper Masters; otherwise empty
pretensions of bloud-worthiness are idle, and indeed render the pretenders
ridiculous, if not more conspicuously sordid.

No Rant of breeding, as by most understood and confyned, either to a good
pronuntiation of some foreign tongues behavior with ladies, postures
artificial of defense or the like (most usesull for all Gent. in due place)
can with me be ever able to cancel the general prejudice taken up against
you, for doting to much upon those external garbs and modes, while yet, the
study of circumstances, of men and times is so far neglected by you: while no
discreet and religious observing survey is made of Gods extraordinary actings
in these days, neither of the height of Agents and Patients by Strange (to us)
counterworkings.

Many of you mark not the rising and falls of men, Popular, Worldly, Wise,
aiming at a Reformation of their own, others at Gods, yet miserably in the
pursuit thereof, clogged with Carnal passionate Interests.

But I descerne many reasons (as they seem) deterring you from making a severe
disquisition of contingences (whose neglect is follye's Nurse) and these are
only specious glosses, partly colored, and set out by rigid Episcopal men,
partly upon fears of I know not what loss of Honor and Respect are they
begotten; but much upon an hurtful fancy (grounded yet upon that Episcopal
Anvill) of the indispensible necessity of Monarchy, which many foolishly deny
to have been at all qualified (but by mere grace of the Monarch) in this or
any other Nation, looking into the Iudaick History (undesigneable to ours, or
any peoples regulation, but the Jews) for all such strained Maxims, wherewith
they most vainly abuse themselves and you. The wisdom of this age has
sufficiently to intelligent men, held forth the fallacy of those impertinent
disputes.

That there has been, ever will be, in all ages, several specific notions of
rule, in every Kingdom almost, several sorts of Governors, is evident, by
concessions of all Hystories sacred, and profane, this to make good, neither
mood or figure wants.

Who, without high presumption dares ask why God (for secret reasons in his
counsel) has suffered here a translation of legislative supreme power into
new hands? this is in men, language, Alternacye of Providence in Divine Speech;
It is his pleasure.

It is, in my judgment, a notorious piece of Foolery for any man to ask, by
what right of Justice the Hollander shook of their Usurper most fortunatly;
his present quiet exercise of Religion, Peace, Riches, and all earthly
happiness answers it.

The Gent. of England loose themselves in being too credulously concluded by
other men's Doctrines; Examples teach better then cold Logic, Persons now a
days are most to be stedied.

Divide this Kingdom with your Eyes, and the Spawne of distracting Interest,
either in Court, or Church, will appear to have had to great an influence in
generating Gentlemen's extremities. In my retired thoughts, I have often
admired, this Nation could so long endure the horrible mischiefs, that little
(now headless) Bishop) by holding the Heart, and Ear of a King over us,
brought to pass: his Beagles are good at cold hunting, but my advice unto you
all is, (tendering herein your moral and Religious safety) that hereafter you
do manage your consciences, and Interests (planted by God) like men and
Gentlemen, that you do more narrowly look into their designs, who have thus
captivated your understandings; see whether they and others, do not drive on
their interests against God's design, and how unhappily they have engaged many
of you into desperate attempts, loss of Estates, Privileges, Freedom etc.
nay and many times driving on the torrent of youthful heat, into an
unreasonable wilful pertinacie in apparent impossibilities, ever since this
Parliament sat. I wish it were not so. But I perceive the devices those Clergy
creatures have to ensnare you are diverse, as the manner of their contrivances,
for every one will not be caught with the same bait, there is amongst them a
deboyst fort of men, not much learned, yet able enough, upon every emergencie,
at a Taverre, to show all that is in them, by a kind of unprofitable
eloquence, these spend their time and precious hours in composing premeditated
scurrilous Poems, or at least sputter out (between Hawke and Buzzard) a few
extemporary Satyricall Rymes upon the visible Authority of the Nation, the
tickling foolery of which, inviteth Gentlemen to beg a Copy, sound in their
Fobbs by the next Officer at midnight, to their great hazard and disquiet. If
these black Coats be not Poetical, they are great Newes-Mongers, But it is ten
to one, if one word they utter, among a thousand, be true, for these Gentlemen
must pay reckonings.

I have often wondered at them, that they are so open in their discourses, but
upon severer sense, I find the reason why they are not reserved, is, that
Gallants may (at their first compellation) understand their humors, who have
nothing to loose, and they had rather go slinking up and down London in
thredbare Coats, glorying in their sufferings forsooth, then (temperately
giving way to the premissive providence of Heaven in alteration of Government
civil) teach a School, or upon a new score, go Preach Gods Word, remitting
State matters and Architechtonick administrations to States men, their ordinary
is a non entity, they are at liberty. Of their dividing private turbulent heads,
I wish honest Gentlemen to be ware, for avoydance of their poisonous
instillations, I would have it well weighed.

1. That is not material to Salvation, what government Civil a man lives
under. 2. That it is not yet discovered, what Church government is of Divine
right. 3. That heroical virtues are furthered mere (not hinderd) under a
Democraticall Government then under a Monarchical.
There is no need why I should (others have said so fully already) make a
candid exposure of the undoubted truth of the two former assertions. But the
consideration of the latter third position: viz. That Heroical virtues will
thrive, and may be exercised better in a Democraticall, then a Monarchical
dispensation, will in a Domestic way be pertinent, toward the leading you out
of that erroneus supposition mentioned before, among the causes of the the
deterrence, and keeping so great a distance from searching into the reason of
things, and present condiscention to Authority, scilicet. That fear of Honors
loss from that cause, less doubt, I say, deterring Gentlemen from suffering
quietly (as Heavens pleasure) the immediate transactions of Public trust, not
in their Powers to avoid,

If it delight your spirits to pry into such rudiments, either of Theology, or
Law Municipall, of this Kingdom, as lead Men instrumentally to honors, and
places of trust in this Kingdom; It will appear in reason, that men under a
Democratick or Sanatory rule, shall not, will not be wholly at the Devotion of
a Prince, or Tyrant, capacitated or empowered to throw them down causelessely
from their deserved honorable trust at pleasure, so that in such places of
public employment, men may (under Democracy) do justice more boldly, and
discover to the world, upon every opportunity, their gifts of vnawed nature
(not insisting upon though very considerable) that under Democracy or
State-government, offices public will not in probability be often referred to
Deputies, as they usually have been, partly by reason of hability presumed for
the future to be in future Officers, they being eligible by desert, not
Aulicall favor, and especially regarding how all things will (as in their
carriages of such places) be laid forth, and subjected to general and public
question, when as a fixed, standing power for appeals, in cases of injustice,
will be existent, for punishing offenses starting up, for which no law was, or
could be written: a great defect in Monarchy it was, where Laws, respecting
general equity suffered damnable mischiefs in particular.

What therefore can be greater, or more pregnant encouragement to a Religious,
active noble mind, then to breath in such a Common wealth, (may ours prove so)
where a Gappe is not only set open, for every ingenuous spirit, by Virtues
stairs, to climb up Honors Temple; but also a contrivance laid, that Envy,
malice, ambition, covetousnes, or the like, shall notably be stated of, in a
Prudentiall way, from tumbling him down from those sweet turrets of reputation
and trust; unless those Cardinal Vices, or their friends, be able first to
bring in all the Studds, and groundcels of the Mansion or Manor house, (which
must be rare) jointly together, or the major part of them, into a conspiracy
against virtue, a conjunction of difficulty that must needs be, and very
unfortunate; for doubtless, a Community (as has been often intimated) cannot
be so easily misled, neither so frequently defect from discretion, as the
private Judgment or passion, of one individual Numericall person.

Thus far I have already endeavored succinctly a preoccupation of your
prejudice. (Fellow Gentlemen) who mind something higher then an horse, or
dog, your mistresses, or recreation at Tennis or a Bowling alley; for it is
your good I principally intend hereby. Give me leave before I pass any
further, to take a lttle pity on such others (whose heads are Synechdochcially
soft) for quietness sake, for they are afraid high shoe's will sit above
them, wherein I refer (with reverence) also unto the understanding
conteurplative Gent. (then whom I have none more happy in this world) In order
whereunto, as to a possibility or probability of extenuating that respect and
honor, (wherewith born Gent. are already invested) under a State-government (if
Heaven will have it so) it is not greatly to be suspected in reason; For as
most men either are gentlemen or would be so, and one main reason, as may be
supposed, why the Lineall gentlemen (not of the first, second, or third head
(these are things much looked into by many I promise you) but of a long series
in Herauldry, were no better esteemed in Regal times, was, because Honor lay
then radically in Kings of this Nation, it dwelt in their natural, not
Politic capacity, yet was it so corruptly shed in hands of subordinate
Officers, for dispensation of it, that any man might be made a gentleman for
money, money would make a man a Knight though no gentleman; but if a Parliament
be the supreme Judicatory of the Nation, though as you see now abstracted from
Kings, actually empowered heretofore by a King; If I say you grant or but admit
them (as who can deny that) Nomotheticall at present, questionless, they are
capacitated to give, and create honors, as well as laws, they may and will
grant honors, defer rewards for services Civil and Martial; And in all
likelihood, they will be prudent in foreseeing, That as accessions of honor, or
creation thereof, are great incentives to gallant Spirits, toward heroical
Virtues; so the too to frequent collation of titles, will render honor less
desirable, less esteemed. Upon which it must necessarily follow, that ancient
gentlemen's honors, being already their own, and other men's acquirable only
upon such extraordinary presumptions, the latter will not exceedingly multiply,
their Lineall splendour will shine more uncontroulably, without numerous
Rivalry, or Competition,

And without question, in such governments, where preserments will be gainable
by desert (presuming it for the suture so in our State) Learning is like enough
to flourish, (though some lazy functions and vast misimployed proventions be
dissipated) for as much as this obstruction will be canceld.

Quorum virtutibus obstat res augusta Domi, when to be borne of honest, but
poor Parents, shall not obscure those excellencies (under a Cottage, better
beseeming a Court) bestowed by the God of. Nature not in vain, when money, or
favor of friends shall not wholly prevail, for investing in places of trust
undeserving men, where, virtue shall not wait upon persons. ( The bane of all
States) which indeed was our case under Regal government, where, prerogatives,
privileges, and exemptions shall not nurse up in justice or Tyranny. Learning
will increase in such a Kingdom, where, a man may get a fortune by his
learning, sooner then by his friends, Privileges and exemptions are not
friends, but Enemies to the Muses, let men be what Scholars they will, without
judgment, they are unfit for the Ministry, or the State. Nothing is more
hurtful to a free People then particular exemptions from general Laws, then
Royal or Subject prerogatives, then Regal non obstantes, reserved in grants
formerly, but the present visible Authority has well curtayl'd those
inconveniences in their extention, by subjecting all men generally to Law, none
of the least happinesses to a Nation, I assure you. But I return to my
discoveries premised, and the instant hindrances of Gentlemen's abhorrence from
duty that Jealousy of Honors loss, being removed, and the contrary cleared
conseqnently, as I hope in natural reason.

There starts up next, a second sort of Ecclesiastiacall persons, who pretend
to know much, mightily oppugning your condiscention to Authority, and
subscription to that power, under which God has placed us all, they are
Presbiterian Divines, that will hand over head, have such forms of external
discipline, and impulsions upon tender consciences fixed, or else endeavor they
will, a confusion of all civil society and corporate strength of this Nation,
by talking up, and elevating their humane inventions under Seraphick notions of
Christ's government, these will not suffer you like wary wise men, to sit under
your own Vines, sleep in whole skins, while Martial men try the quarrel,
I fear they drive on an Episcopal design (though pretenders to a pious
Reformation) beware of them, at present, let it suffice, they are no fit
advisers of you unto whom afterward also in a more seasonable and methodicall
place, I shall more fully remonstrate their duty!

Amongst other causes of gentlemen's unhapy pertinacy, and stubbornness, I find,
That a conceit of a certain New sin called falling or defection from
Principles, carried forth in discourse by Parsons, and made fellows, from one
Tavern to another, mainly hinders their condiscention, and as conscious of such
appostacy, I have by ignorant pretenders been often taxed; the meaning is, that
because a man was once wedged up with an implicit faith, believing what some
grave hobby horses said, viz, a King is above all Law; Bishops are of divine
institution, The Laws of England are so exact, as they need no Reformation
etc. I may not forsooth upon more light intervention of better reason,
conviction of conscience or judgment, unhalter my self (so likewise others)
from those paradoxes, for fear of being subjected to the scandal of falling
from principles. This humor of perseverance in misguided reason, is so
ridiculous, and yet withal so prevalent, in the soft brains of some Gent.
that I have admired to hear it objected, much less brought forth as
Categoricall, in settling vain constancy; because once a fool therefore ever a
fool.

Neither am I ignorant that many of you of good capacity and tempers, are
extremely culpable, upon another ground, though seemingly more politic, yet
indeed altogether as unreasonable in Christian consideration, you will not
stoop one tittle unto those mighty reflections of Scripture, and reason
commanding you (under pain of being accounted worthily some of Paul's infidels,
in not providing for your families in things indifferent) to concur.

Gentlemen bluster at Authorities indictions, discover their dissafections,
drink healths, making themselves liable to every Tapsters and Chamberlains
malice, sometimes against their own sense; say as the Company says,
abundantly fearful in all things; least the world should occasionally think,
they are fallen from principles. And why is all this tepid foolery in these
wiser ones, think you? it is, for that having once maintained such or such a
tenet, it being notorious they were of such a Faith, they will not be so
ingenuous, as to confess an error as men. Augustine was of another mind in
his retractions; and, had they bin so religiously politic, their Fynes
happily had been more favorable. I persuade no man against his Conscience; but
I say, unreasonable stubbornness in matters of a midling indifferent nature,
is no sympsome of valor; or magnanimity Fitting a Gentleman's breeding.

I have ever found old Grand Jury men (generally by country people supposed to
know much very unfit to judge or direct a man's comportment, in these
troublesome times, for as the old saying is, wise at fifty or never, they being
only knowing in such transactious as concerned Indictments, and the like County
affairs, and many of them supposing Laws are sacredly upon the matter
unalterable, neither that their influence may be suspended, upon some exigence,
where Salus Populi comes in question, yet the manner is, to fly unto their
gray Beards as an Oracle for Counsel, when a new Ordnance of Parliament first
appears, wherein it cannot be avoided, but sometimes, something must be lest
to men's discretions, and election of parties, here Grand lurors are at a stand,
for the more any man is used to Forms, the less is he able to judge of an
Emergent.

But above all others, mere Scholars would be avoided by Gentlemen in point
of consultation of the times, for they are only skilled in Contemplation, and
the chief books about governments, were written in old dark times when
Tyrants were the only Kings, and doubtless, people had not that vivacity of
understanding what it is, to be envasseled unto despoticall Arbitrary powers,
in those days, wherefore how is it likely, that Academick men, tuter'd up by
such Masters as the University afforded, (Apes only to those books) whose
interest, and dependancyes were linkt to the Royal Seat, and who were not
preferrable, unless of a temperament ready for asserting of a Monarchical and
Episcopal governments, should well direct you, I see not.

No man alive honors Learning more then my self, though the tennity of my
capacity be such as can add no honor unto it. But temper and reason must guide
the opinions of Ayrie terms, and Metaphysick notions, otherwise, how
mischeivous they are, when falling upon either a vile, or towering Spirit, is
ordinarily discerned, yet may it be lawful to affirm, that School learning
poisons some constitutions. God is judge of my candid ambition in these Papers;
So far prudent I would have Gentlemen, as not in indifferent things,
irrationally to strive against the Bent of Heavens decree, least by rash and
needless extravagancies, you compel Authority unwillingly to make you get
power, a thing truly I hope, not desired by Authority. How much wiser will it
be for Gentlemen to keep their heads above water in these present currents,
since we are in England yet (thanks be to God) bounded with Laws, where a well
composed man, may enjoy freedoms of conscience, air books and recreations.
And although you judgments be not wholly satisfied of the lawfullnesse of
somethings, yet let reason teach us all; that however it happen, we are now in
a most fair way for getting most wholesome Laws established (though with
alterations of some old ones) such I say, as that, if God will afterward in
his high discretion introduce a pristine form of Government instead of the
present existent, those after Ages will blush to abrogate, what so wholesome by
present Lawgivers have decreed.

Neither let the fancies of those men, who (too much affected, either with an
overweening apprehension of their own skill or deserts, or precipitantly
carried on by a secret divine power, for houlding forth Gods work, er'st prime
instruments in those actions wherein the Parliament has so mightily prevailed)
bustled somewhat this Summer, but more dangerously the last before this,
speaking perhaps somewhat beyond themselves in some particulars, (yet to wise
to endeavor a parity in Civil Administrations) let not such I say, befoole
you into groundless hopes nor cause yet in Gent. a further abhorrence from
condiscending to Superiors: for of this be assured, If you act as common
enemies, let the embers of such impolitick drifts blaze when they will, that
flame will beget a surer fixation and conjuncture against the common Enemy, and
it shall prove a mere exhalation, but the matter of it, will light upon your
heads.

The main pretensions of many now mingled, discontented and ignorant parties
(beside the old royalists) are in effect, these. scilicet, That the present
Authority at Westminster has not done such and such acts, in pursuance of such
premised forms and modes of actings in civil matters, Qui judex est Rei judex
est causae: their own concessions will stiffle their own arguments, which grant
the parliament supreme, and of power to give Laws, and definitive sentence;
what then if intentions in things purely moral, were premised, might not such
reason interveen, as might cause them (not to alter resolutions perhaps) but de
mado, to traverse their own tempestive, and opportune votes, as tempestively,
and opportunely, as prudentially as providentially (causes changing) and with
as great reason, to retract as art. Their unhappiness lies only in this, that
(enduring so great and multiplicious cares) they cannot possibly preamble every
vote, or art at large, this may excuse them, since it must be granted by common
indulgence, though few observe it, that the reason at large of few statutes can
be prefaced, unless the preface or preamble, should swell beyond the Law; like
the gates of Mindus, wide enough for the City to run out of it,

The nescience, or at least neglect of which knowledge; has sometimes it is
probable, exposed the houses Declarations to unworthy scandalls, because of the
seeming diametricall oppositions in several ordinances of one indiction to
another, and yet these are not opposite senses, nor contradictions in the
adject, but an alternate effluxe of discretion in emergencies of necessity
requiring such refractive docision, adapted both, upon rational grounds; which
alas is cleared unto us as lawful in Domestic affairs, where alterings of
resolutions was never (but as it may be circumstantiated) nakedly a sin, or
accounted so, and in truth can no more be imputed as declivitie from right
reason (or understood as inconstancy, then when a man shall say, he will ride
to London such a day (perfining unto himself his end in that journey) when in
the mean time, by some intervening accident his end is atteyned, and journey to
London stopped.

Upon this discretion of alterration all humane laws depend; this is now very
remarkable to my apprehension not so before; but I the rather now confess it,
because I think it most ingenuous so to do, and heartily wish you the same
light, be not ashamed to make recognition of extrication from errors as to
heaven and Earth.

I am now (presupposing your discretion (Gent) that there may be chang of
governments in Kingdoms, and that there is no necessity of an identicall
government) come to show you some thing in reason, why I think, Monarchy will
cease here, advising still obviously as occasion happens.

Before I come to that, the Pragmatick Lawyer will draw me aside into
admiration, who the better to bolster up his Diana, says, that the Privileges
and Prerogatives of Kingly Government (which I know is also Gods Ordinance) is
of indiscensible divine right, truly, no sound Theologist but will acknowledge
other forms also so to claim, but neither of them all of an indispensible
necessity, but the truth is, they of the Book law in this state, have borrowed
many shifts out of the Civil Law (to make good their assertions) used most
what in times of absolute regal, unlimmitted power; and insensibly put upon us
by cowing out the peoples spirits, no less by Pontificiall then Monarchical
usurpations, To the Lawyer we intend to speak apart.

But that it is now very probable Government by a King will cease in this
Kingdom, upon serious consideration of matters and things no temperate man
will deny. I am none of those, who build their confidence of it is ruin upon
pretended prophesies, neither upon judicial Astrology, but by the Star of
humane reason, and by comparison of past and present transactions; near guesses
are often made, yet I suppose [letting pass remote causes] it will be worth
while to consider the infinite successes on the Parliaments side, [for it is
not so heathenish as some would have it, in all cases to judge of matters by
event] that perclusion of censures by contingencies, must, as I take it be
referred or understood with reflection to the fortune or accident, of some
particular sights, or singular manageries of some few actions, by party against
pary, as the Jews against the Philistines; our case is otherwise, and not
merely fortunable; for, we have for 7 or 8 years observed how all open force
(upon equal congresses) private public stratagems, and machinations, plots
and contrivances for moral advantages, carried on many times by persons of
extraordinary capacities (Heavens aid being solemnly as in appearance prayed)
defections of Trustees from the State, or whatsoever else tentations for
re^se^ling the late King and his Interest, have been fruitless, and, which is
much, by how much more likely any thing was to take effect; God in its
prevention and frustration (cassating men's policies) in their height, has
then in such nicks of Time, made bare his arm against it, and notably blasted
the managers of such devices.

It is confessed the calmest of Gentlemen object not impertinently, how all
Histories witness, that God has permitted wicked parties to do great matters
against a better cause, slaves say you, have envassaled their Masters, Rebels
(such is your language) have slid into Sovereignty: But I am confident no
History can parallel our times, observe the difference here, God has suffered
not one party, not the ambition of one man, not sometimes the prevailing
indirect party of our Corporate body, to carry on his work; his Divine Majesty
has often by strange alterations done wonders, by those, whom presently again
he has cast of, discerning falsehood from truth rallying up public spirits,
when there was inhumane judgment, little hopes of such helps, and in the
close, has set up this new Modellizd army (thought very inconsiderable) which
as a clowd has obscured, by its atcheivements, as well Martial as Civil, even
I say, with a Curtain of terror and obliv on has darkened all former victories
and actions, since this Parliaments first convention: whence it is evident
(looking well into things, and persons now at the Stern politic and martial,
that they who in your apprehentions, long ago, did hatch these alterations are,
if it were so, prevented of their deep and secret hopes, and this present
supremacy, or persons acting in it (in respective capacities) called to act but
of late, in respect of such old contrivers, could not orignally be guilty of
such ambitious designs; I am sure small hopes they had in their private
capacities of those great honors, and trust, whereunto providence has now
called them, and fastened upon their sholdiers.

Neither the late Kings, great knowledge, errors or unfortunacy were obtruded
upon these Kingdoms by accident, providence also would have it thus, and
undone it cannot be, he is a fool that wishes it.

It is above me, to dispute, what poor hopes his issue has actually to were
the Scepter of government here, yet I believe, the Spanish example in 88. will
startle many sorreyners, when especially they shall consider our present
posture of defense, and offense. We might go backward, and see what the Pore
(supposedly Christ's Vicar) could do to England, in H. 8. time upon our
politic defection from him. I will not deny, but God may permit us again to
be governed by a King, but few examples can be produced of any people, having
shook of that government, over whom Regal interest could presently prevail;
that introduction of Kings upon the Romans, after expulsion of their Tyrants,
was late, and after many ages. It is fresh in memory how Queen Elizabeth
assisted the Hollander against Spain, a thing held lawful then, evinceing
thereby that species of government are of a politic, not religious
concernment, the mediocrity of Specifical modes of governing, is Analogicall,
respecting times, persons, and safety of Nations governed. However it is scarce
possible for a King to be vested with government here, without an absolute
conquest, and that by outlandish mercinaryes, our condition then must be bad
enough, we shall pay full dearly for a King. When safety outweighs Danger, he
is a fool that neglect it, when danger out weighes safety, he is silly that
attempteth it.

What ever Heaven will, must come to pass, leave these things to God, nothing
of humane passion can hinder his designs, therefore, come it to pass how it
will (as to resetling of pristine interest or not, whereof there is so slender
hope) better it is to be a Willow then an Oak. And for our mean carriage, let
us not so much examine other men's Religion as our own, sooner, or latter most
of you must come to my humor of Reformation.

But I perceive there is one thing stumbles many Barbatulous Ladds amongst you,
enough, many think, to foment disaffection, and make any man a Malignant; And
that is, a putting down of Stage plays. Alter but the Scene, and many Pulpits
will be as whimsically apish to your wild sense; and for sevearer Eires of
Gentlemen, the Tragic Commedy of flacessent Tithes, supercilliously acted
every seventh day by the Pulpits-demised premises, terribly deploring the but
necessary regulating of them, is super excellent: wherein least you should be
wanting that have right of Presentations, I have lately observed, how unable
you are. O strong Policy (upon all lapses by Gods privation) in preferring a
pontifical creature for fear the Respective Parishes should petition for
election of their Minister. A thing so reasonable and just, as nothing can be
more equitable.

Thus we show our teeth, and cannot bite, foreseeing not, how easily one lift
of the Soldiery can scatter and dismantle that weak excrescent Babel, no hard
matter to be done, because already, most Ministers languages are different, and
their doctrines like convertible responds of an Oricle. Cease then to wonder,
why generaly, Ciergy men neigh after new quarrels, and combustions continually
yelp and bark against Armies, peace and settlement under present authority,
since it is evdent, there is good cause for such excursions, as well regarding
their double malice as policy, their malice against all not crediting their
doctrines to be EVANGELICA^LL, (though never so carnal) their policies in
begetting troublesome matter for Ephemerides. or Journall Book, whose matter,
dilated upon, is of great effieacy for spinning out discourse, till the
hour-glasse become as empty above of sand as their Brains of true knowledge.

I beseech you (Gentlemen) be not too much prejudiced against private exercises
in Religion, for Charityes sake I will suppose though they (in your judgment)
may miss in circumstance, yet there is much of devotion in them. Churches, and
houses are alike in themselves, but as they are circumstantiated: And my
conscience forces me here to discover, how rational the objection raised by
some (no fools) against the more Public and solemn dispensations of Divinity
in Churches, is, in my apprehension, viz. We cannot (say they) make answer in
the Churches, to false Doctrine delivered, neither soberly rectisie an erring
spirit. Indeed this objection is subnixt with great reason, for it springs
naturally from not less care, for avoydance of disturbation, then fervent
zeal of Edification.

Neither are the maine reasons of many men's averseness, and abhorrence from
those kind of domestic duties obscure unto me, which are couchible under
this fallacy, That Canonical Doctors teach Truth, as it is truth, abstracted,
from degrees intensive, in matters of Religion, is (say they) already so
dogmatically laid down and made out, that beyond these, or these Catecheticall
or did acticall positions of Orthodox doctrines, there is no plus ultre. this
was never denied by me.

But leave is craved to tell them, Orthodox is a very hard word of digestion,
and that want they impose, as to a necessity of some necessary, standing, fixed
and perpetual formal administrations, is often but mere deduction logical
from Allegorical scriptures, capable of other constructions, beside theirs.

Wherefore enlightened Saints dare not otherwise believe, but that God, in his
infinite wisdom, has, and ever will reserve (till the common annihilation of
earth) many secret truths communicable in all ages, and that in a more
transcendent way of light, then what has been delivered apart ante, or (as
Scholars say) from the antecedent cause, otherwise to what purpose are those
commands in Scripture of searching, waiting, etc. otherwise, we should have
nothing to do with speculation in Divine matters; and we could have no other
work then a common perseverance up Jacobs ladder into Heaven.

You are not to believe any tenet, because such men have said so, a man's own
discretion (from above originally) will be his best guide, in moral and
Religious actions, modern Pulpit men will affirm, That most of the Fathers,
celebrated for Orthodox Volums in Christianity, were but so orthodox in a
favorable acceptance: I believe they were knowingly religious in those times,
yet far inferior in knowledge to many men now a days, so as (not palliating
any soul living) In truth I think, there is a possibility of atteyning an
aetheriall blessed ubi through Christ, without beleiving all for necessary
truths, which either Synods, or late Churchmen have laid down, as essential to
my journey, to a place they know not where, and vainly labor to presine
circumscriptively.

For your deportment in condiscention to the formal outward Church and
Officers in it, there is no more pendentiall way for rightly fixing you in a
possure of indemnity, then in detecting unto your sense, the indifferency of
many things obtraded, as that of a basin instead of a Font.

A Gentleman is not mnch the worse (keeping his Conscience upright) though a
Clergy man pronounce him Aheisticall, merely for that he will not rest, either
in fallible decisions of any Synod, or inithe urgement of any Individual
Presbyter implicitly. Some say, it had been wiser, and easier (reflecting to
the erection of the Basin in many Churches) by declaring the indifferency of
such circumstantiated decencies as well to Papists as Protestants to have
retained discontented men from Separation (as they term it) then in these
observing days by altering forms for form, or adding form to Forms, to
generate a more quick discomposition against order external, against goeing to
material Churches, which is the most decent and convenient way.

The best use can be made by wary knowing men, of that and other impositions
like it, will be gatherec, by a rational reference unto what I have said or
shall say in favor of the present Authority, and their discretion, religiously
actuated in cancelling such rigid Statutes, which to much tortured tender
consciences, upon pretenses of Error, Hernsies, Schism etc. for I have heard
very religious and wise men affirm in their judgments, that the tenderness
of many in the Parliament was over voted, when in many things prevalent voices
to gratefie the Synods importunity, silenced at present, others (that had not
then liberty to enter dissents) of a contrary judgment.

Although it has often repented me for the four pence spent in purchase of
the Directory, yet, the honor put upon it by Authorities approbation, made me
very ambitious of it for perusal. If you think there was no great worth in
that Canon, keep it unto your selves, let that be (if an error) only the
respective single. lapse of your understandings. A dangerous defection it is,
for private persons to condemn the Act of a Community.

Nothing has done Gentlemen more hurt then a vain resolution against so much
as reading over books; Ordinances and Votes of Parliament, only so fear they
should be infected (forfooth) with errors (as some peevishly think) both in
Church and State, how can men judge rightly, or behave themselves temperatly
avoiding Rocks and Shelves? If they will not by reading, observe the commands
of Authority, the Bent of every party and Interest.

If (all this notwithstanding) any amongst you, be persuaded that Monarchy will
resettle here, and upon that improbable hope, will not compound, when as
hitherto the indulgence of Parliament, and their unwillingnesse to ruin you is
evident, let me tell you, such men are the greatest Enemies to themselves,
their Children and Families. I wish them wiser, and that Gentlemen would read
and observe all Ordinances which concern general goods, so may you know when
to act, where to avoid, by respective condiscention, concurrence, or giving
way, unto the rapid torrent of these nimble days.

On the other hand, supposing some glimering of light, and high reason in many
of you, formerly more devoted to obsolet forms, shall prompt a Theoretick
severe disquisition, or observance what small hope there is of resetling former
government; stick not to confess it, that others may instrumentally add more
sparks thereto; least you do utterly discupacit te your selves (by further
vain holding of) from places of trust in the Commonwealth; least inferior men
of birth, and breeding ingrosse all places of honorable civil command, and
most Gentlemen for ever afterward walk up and down, like useless Pageants.

I am confident this advice of mine with the wisest Gentlemen will be well
taken, the rather, because. I have ever since the first of this Parliament,
lead a private life, never intermedling with profitable public employment
which, it is well known I have been offered, not unbefitting a Gentleman (still
contenting my self with a descended competency) how how much I have said, what
I have hazarded upon the royal interest upon a principle of apprehended duty
then, (not carried on implicitly upon the wings of others discretion) a way
very unsuitable to my temper so long as it pleased God to keep it upright in
this Nation, yet all this without malice, to the honorable House of
Parliament. This by the way remembering, (because it being cleared unto some
examiners of my actions, that my engagements were not altogether unsubnixt with
a general desire of my Countries liberty, and quiet, and my reason was
quadrated into a candid confession upon what discretion: I had waded, upon what
I would acquiesce; and not strive against Heaven) I received infinite
courtesies from the Army at Colchester Leaguer, and some knowing Gentlemen of
Essex Committee, at a time, when I was justly represented as disaffected, which
lawful favors challenge from my pen a grateful commemoration.

A year or two more (Gent.) will habituate the present Government, and then
perhaps this council will be thought good by most of you at instant, it is
hoped, much prejudice may be removed from these lines; for that this birth is
spontaneous, free, voluntary, not brought forth by subtle midwiferv of other
men, given by a quiet unsequestred hand, and most affectionate lover of his
Native countries peace. Remember then who pretend they had not thought, thank
your selves if too late you cry out 'O Vtinam. I know your heart; are much sick
with expectation deferred, whose fruition (as is most clear) is not esi^ntially
necessary to your well being here, and which ought to be the greatest comfort)
God can save eternally under any outward politic dispensation. This Paper (let
what will come to pass) will bear testimony of my good will toward my fellow
gent. of Englands Common wealth.

Sapientis est in consilio, fortunam semper habere.

While the scales were equal; nay, while there appeared but a possibility of
restoring a King, something of reason and discreet principles, might create in
loyal hearts (for not one in twenty engaged merely upon loyalty) a desire and
flagrant fervency of acting and managing all seeming opportunities, toward
that end.

But for Men of any breeding, now in this state of things, and pleasure of
heaven (not fortune merely for with a Christian there is no such thing as
fortune) to talk themselves into discapacity, contempt and misery, for a man,
that can neither help himself, nor his followers whose very interest
(originally by conquest) is precluded actualy, whose title of guardianship, all
men in England confess fiduciary, If ever it had been reduced to real
investiture, and could not, cannot much benifit privare persons what ever some
please to say, I say for Gent. or others still to continue in Rebelion against
reason, is a design either of ignorance, pride, or weak malice.

Let it suffice we have not (as in a dream) parted with Kingly Government, the
world will believe our Nation is generally valiant, let it also understand we
are rational; the terror of the one, and notable contemplation of the other
may probably startle foreign enemies, from whose violence, who will not pray to
be preserved, for preventian of whose intolerable insolencyes, who will not
lay out his natural faculties and estate, deserves neithe: the title of a
Gentleman or protection of a Subject.

Upon the whole matter lastly. Are we eitheir aware of those unavoydable
mischiefs, another alteration of Government, usherable in by foreign powers
must expose the Bulk of our Nation unto? Or if God afterward shill resign us
up unto the pleasure of any single person (when we will have a King like other
Nations) in his judgment for our present discontents and grutchings. Are we
sensible how farte ingratitude on our parts, for blessings received may seem
preparatory for the equity of heavens decision; and re-assubiecting us under a
pretending Lord, from whom for us to crave sobriety in administretion of
Justice, will be abstracted impudence? have we relations parental, filial,
uxorions? have we fortunes or tranquilityes privations before our eyes? we will
certainly confess, as things now stand, some few accidental inconveniences, or
at most but temporary, necessary taxations. upon our outward creatures, are
fitter for an embrace of Christian patience: then a general hazardous
exposure, of what we already possess, unto fortunes, (or rather indeed moral
indiscretions) Racket.

If I have flattered my self into these presumptions of advice; or if ignorence
or malice can imbody, to undermine the honest tendency of my pen, my Judgment
(as a man of green years) may happen to make the offense Bayleable, and the
general scandal of our Iron age, shall encourage me, [upon a pious ground no
less then moral policy) to a pitiful respect of undiscerning men; while my
severer thoughts (by gods help) persevere in the undoubtedly warrantable
consideration of Gods providence and charity of forgiving mine enemies, whether
ignorant, or envious.

CHAP. II. Respecting Divines.
Far from my Abmition it is, to hunt after infamous reputation, by opposing
godly Ministers, the ready way for Putrefaction of a good name; But I will
speak my conscience and judgment least I be apprehended as unmindful of that
noble object of cloquence, Elocution, and reason; Wholesome Admo, nition.

And I must here walk warily, some will say, least I justly contract the
justice of that Sentence, It had been better for me to have had a stone tied
about my Nec, and therewith imbulg'd to be thrown into the Sea. So ready are
Clergy men, whether Episcopal, Presbyteriall; or Independent, to account
themselves Gods special little ones. But the general diseases of all Churches,
since there was a Church, changing the Candlestick from one to another, viz.
Pride, Ambition, and Covetousness, are as predominant in our Ministers as ever
they were in any since Christian Religion was first planted in Europ: else, to
what purpose is it, I pray you? Clergy men of the Episcopal strain! that you
have so long, so mightily struggled to prove (though weakly God knows) Bishops
divine right, and an indispensible necessity of many needless formalities in
outward administrations, (extrancous to edification.) Why do you Presbyterians!
bustie so vigorously to the disquiet of godly people? and the present Civil
government, for settling of a Classical -- Presbyterial -- and we know nor what
-- congregationall Church polity, the very high rode to subject us Laymen to
more imediate domination then ever, in religious matters? And why lastly do you
( Independent Ministers) exclaim against all order? and cannot or will not
discern between Ataxie, and Eutexie? Is it possible any thing can be done any
duty performed without some Ceremony? Surely none either moral or sacred.

The height and extrem 'tie of passions, fluctuating between these three, has
rendered all that wear black Coats in some measure contemptible, and to
justify their respective quarrels, they pretend these Three principal grounds
obliging.

1. The Episcopal men pretend a necessity of Oaths observation taken at
institution and induction; requiring obedience unto their Ordinary.

2. The Presbyterians are imbosted with the Covenant.

3. The Independent cries out for liberty of conscience.

To the first I say again their ordinary, is a non eus, wherefore they are at
liberty; they cannot: are not bound to hunt after anninihilations, or sacrifice
themselves upon an Alter of impossibility.

To the second (not mentioning what poor interest of reason the Scottish
Nation had to Covenant with us for a Covenant. in imitation of them, who were
not long since Feudatory to us, and were never Enfranchised from their homage
by a right National concession,) it is I will not say a mere Politic, but a
convertible Engine good or not so good, in qualified and unstrained senses: for
if we and they swear to maintain Scottish Ecclesiastic government, (take it
so Hypothetically) we did not understand what it was, and Doctors of their
Church, confess it has suffered much alteration since its first footing
there. If we take it Categorically, admitting they swear (who took the
Covenant) to comply to the Polity most agreeable to Gods word we nor they can
be our own judges therein, it is a thing so purely spiritual. If the Synod
could not define which kind of Church government was only imbraceable, their
presumption will not differ from a venial sin (if such sins there be) since
the putting down of Episcopal government, was only lawful and expedient in
order to safety of the Nation, that the best might be set up and men are
justified as I take it by a Vote. That no Church government is of perpetual
divine right, which did wisely let in satisfactory light for the paineful
Midwifes of Reformation in all and every respective sunctions and callings.

To the third, what can be said to be truly conscience, unless grounded upon
Gods word or some necessarily emaning consequence thereof, otherwise (say
Divines) how easily will private apprehensions resolve into Error, these are to
take care they make not torrid misguided zeal fruitful in production of
scuffiers against common decencies, withal remembering that the ground and rise
of superstition, was always zeal, zeal is its parent, time its nurse, and
cunning Priests it is Fomentor. Witness, Rome.

But i will resume the first viz. The Episcopal Levites many of whom I confess
I honor much for their learning, civility, and breeding, who, were they
perhaps well harnessed, would draw in the Lords yoke gallantly, though as they
now stand, what mischiefs, mseries, affronts, and abuse^^ many of these will
redact themselves unto, rather then leave off a Canonical Coat, or a blessed
Tassel from their Wastes is wonderful? how vigilant they are to pry into the
Vacancy of some blind Qratory about London, or the Country, there with abundant
zeal to vent definition doctrine, reasons and use, not missing one of these
rare ingredients, least they should miss of being laid by the heels, and so
not be celebrated at the next Tavern for Counter Martyrs, where, having layn
three or four days or weeks, they get more useful learning then in all their
former Academick disceptations and ayrie diputes; besides, happily better
furnished, at their egresse, with humility then before, when afflicted with a
piece or two in thefr Pockets.

Some of these Episco pall Ministers are very ignoramuses and have justly
because unfit been evicted, yet these looking big, will speak with a great deal
of formal gravity and are by many extolled for learned fellows, whom these
Black Coats out presence, with a pontifical kind of deportment. I could never
much admire such men, who can neither speak nor write their supposed
excellencies.

If they have any thing in them, it is useless, yet a man must conceit their
rests some mighty, invisible wonders in their sculls. And I will heartily
confess, this distinction J learned from some Commanders at Colchester
Leagure, unto whose sagacity much is by me owed; in order toward right
scanning of men and interests, where J received infinite courtesies from
Martial men insomuch that (to many good respect;) my genius prefers a
leagure far before an university; There was I taught not to adore black
gaberdines, more then gray cloaks, there, men's discretions as conquered,
conquerours were discovered; and I had just cause to go home with a strong
conviction, that there are good Preachers, besides qualified Ministers: But
this is a digression.

The good degree of perfonall love I bear to many ministers of the old stamp,
wrings truth from me and my ambition would center in satisfactions cape, so far
see you love your selves, as be. comes discreet men, not biassed fot
upholding despoticall intercsts in Church policy, fervently zealous for
promotion of godliness, in its powerful vivacity remitting state matters to
states men; not picking out texts on purpose to give scandal, believe me, it
is a very high ofence for men to make Gods precious word seem accessory in
procreating sinister excursions. Christ never presidented pragmatick invasions
upon public magistracy set over us undeniably by his permissive divine
providence; which he will not endure to be pieced out with our own.

No tongue of man, or Angels can excuse you from contracted scandal by being
wedged up, and doting too much upon formality. I see no reason, why the places
in the Old testament denoting the Majesty of the material temple, should be
strained to elevate the necessity of preaching in our Church, only, for
although in Metaphilick reasoning ubieties are explicated with respect to
bodies, and therefore, if one ask, where Christ is? an answer is well given, In
heaven he is, the apposite answer might have been He sits at the right hand of
his Father: for, the first respond. scilicet he is in Heaven, does rather
declare unto us his Majesty, then ubiety, for, circumscriptive or finite ubiety
falls not upon him as God, infinite locality or ubiquity (a divine attribute)
is competent to God alone, spirits have it not; why then are you afraid of
private exercises in these times, by you termed times of persecution; when as
(not despising reasonable Order wherein Room excells all Churches, though
otherwise she harh little piety,) your selves must acknowledge, God is in every
place, in houses, in Churches, in fields, and what is spoken: My house is an
house of Prayer, must be understood (as to the term, House) in an Allegorical
sense, that is, My People being gathered shall pray servently, and I will hear
them, the duty is there held forth, not the place prefined to perform the duty
in.

But some will by and by object, that I am a slender Divine, and unfit to teach
or tereat of misteryes, beware of proud ignorance, for it i^ your vice, who
think Laymen unworthy to disquire or examine Parsons more learned Axioms, the
spirit of God is not, cannot be concluded in this or that humane qualification,
no better expedient for restraining from a spirit of contradiction, and
opposition to Public material Churches, then useing or them as indisterent.

Trouble not your selves with Species of Government civil, for if government
be but exercitium Potestatis, no scruple need be, but that Texts for obeying
Magistrates, and that parentall clause of the Commandment extending to
Governors no less then natural Parents, may be, without impropriety of
reason, understood as imposing subservience to present Authority, under which
God has placed us all. Such was due to Caesar.

The wisdom of Superiors is such, I hope, as will easily forgive former
extravagances, whereunto perhaps a vehement persuasion, that God would a
continuance of things in Statu quo, made many of your Coat obnoxious.

And I think, some thing higher, then moral indemnity from want, may reduce
the discreetest Episcopal Clergy unto a temperament of silent dissaplause, if
not condiscention, unto Heavens pleasure in alteration of Government, and that
is, an hope for liberty to preach Gods word; A felicity (if truly valued) by
vain spurning against Horns of Authority, precluded your selves and us, who
desire to profit by you? Wherefore the Scope of that gayneable hope (in
discretion quickly, perponderating any moral dislikes in public transactions)
will one day (believe it) at the great Tribunal be called upon because
slightingly neglected, and opposed to all foolishly perverse Ministers, who
because, they may not be suffered in their Pulpits meddling, with what concerns
them not to meddle withal, will render themselves incapable to preach at all,
interring many times their rich Talents in the Orbs of their own Brains. A
sin against the Holy Ghost.

Neither are you to doubt, but the State will reunite and fix you (upon
compliance) as members of our Corporate body of England and Ireland in such a
way, as shall cancel all reares of imposing extraordinary disfavours upon men
of former disaffection; so may all former necessary severity used toward
Ecclesiastic persons be turned into a more sweet aspect, whereunto all
Subjects are generally invited in the neat, and weighty closure of their
Declaration of the causes moving the Parliament to alter the government;
whereupon further it will follow, that it may be also casie for such or you
(not scandalous in life) to be vested with Cure of Parishes wanting able
Pastors, and if it be adjudg'd expedient Tithes be taken away from
Ecclesiastic persons, it is probable your interests being parochially fixed,
will be subnixt with proportionate shares in any new more equal establishment
of provision for a Godly Ministry.

This counsel will appear more rational, when God shall give you grace to
consider, that the old Clergy (acting in a perseverance of contumacions vain
struggling against Authority) unawares wrackes it selse, upon those shelves of
mischeivous rebellion, where from, it has unthankfully sweat for deterring of
others seven or eight years together: for what Rebellion is comparable unto
that of rational creatures against reasons aymiable indictions, against that
light of moral, and natural preservation, whose radiant luster shining in our
souls, commands every man (where Gods glory or Religion come not immediately
into competition) to reserve himself for Christ's service, in his due time
calling men either as Ministers, or Martyrs?

Object. I know it will be quickly replied what hope is there of true Religions
flourishing, or increase of godliness under this present government.

Answ. My Answer is (though not well understanding wherein true Religion is
placed by many men perhaps) experience common of most powerful piety free from
sordid formality, and unlimited looseness pregnant in this Kingdom, may
sufficiently anticipate that needless objection: Many men may be produced of
different judgments, touching government civil, yet with a blessed harmony
together aiming at the fruition of Christ.

But a more immediate estoppell will this following be. God in his eternal
prescience knows well, what forms of Civil Administrations [in order to men's
sins clogging respective ages of the world] are fittest, for making out his
own glory, and dissipating those congested mountaius of Form, whose politic
contrivances (as to linking of carnal personal interests, with prentensions of
piety) must be unraveled, before Christ's second coming, that al things may
alternately stoop unto the scepter of his power.

The pregnancy of which light is abundant satisfaction evincing thereby unto
many discreet men, the necessity of putting traditional maxims of unqualified
or qualified Monarchy in suspension or abeyance (as Lawyers call it) of, I say
acquiescing under present Civil Supremacy, because, if there be no accessaries
in high and lowest offenses, they fear to be made principals in occasionally
obstructing Gods design (a very high offense) perpetrated ignorantly oftentimes
by holy and good men, where, upon a sudden dereliction of good spirits from
them, for their trials here below, but a little space, they walk darkly under a
Carnal Veil until again rightly fixed into penitential contemplations, by
Gods sole indulgence.

Besides, admitting as some would have it, a kind of necessity of Kingly
Government (an error sufficiently refuted) for dispute sake, straining a moral
precept of obedience unto that in an especial regard, the concession thereof
will instantly expire in reasons bosom; because that last mentioned
dispensation (if a tie unto Monarchy were created by any moral or Judaick
precept (only proper unto Jews Monarchs) is just fiable according by way of
Letter) where founded upon rules of inevitable necessity that necessity, being
clear, absolute present, certainly yours and all subjects cases in England at
present, through permissive providence atleast, if not conservative.

God may yet bring the Episcopal Ministers into a fight of their defections.
which with all my soul I wish, and am drawn into a be, lief, that one reason
why their prayers hitherto have little prevailed to extricate them from eminent
vexations; is; for that they have prayed too much with a limited love unto
themselves, how idle and impolitick a stratagem your persuasions of the People,
that certain sacred Levitical debts are due from lay people, payable toward
Ecclesiastic establishment, who sees not? the rout can no longer be haltered
with groundless terrible fears of spiritual censures; so much has the
Apostles order for Excommunication been abused to good men's grief, and the
great discomposition of necessary order, indeed you may blame your selves, if
palpable weaknesses on Ministers parts have let ordinary capacities understand,
the Parsons anger is not as the breath of Gods nostrils, leave off supercilious
frowns in preaching, time may wear out many inconveniences, no more wholesome
way for Episcopal Clergy men, then an humble undistracted perseverance, in
edifying themselves, and others in the doctrine of penitence for what is already
past, (reflecting upon their scambling positions about government) and a final
and judicious Resolution of following the dictates of providence for the
future, which I leave to your timeous consideration.

By this time it may justly be expected, I should deliver some things, as well
of discovery as admonition, to the Presbyterian Ministry, who (being generally
of a Pharisaicall temper, ambitious of terms of frothy honor) are indeed so
much the more inexcusable in their ordinary; defections, by how much they have
enjoyed peace, quiet and repose (three cardinal enemies unto flatuous
Hypocondriack passions) yet bustling with restless endeavors for imposition
of such an outward Church-policy as may adequate Ministerial command, unto
Magistraticall, and make state policy dependent upon Eclesiastick humorous
influence.

These cry out, The Army has deceived them, nothing so for the Soldiery, by
qualifying Presbytery, and granting moderate faculties unto men of tender
Consciences, has preserved them from sliding into potentiall tyranny over the
very souls of men.

The more often Presbyterians echo out expostulations, against Martial men,
that, they have preached the soldiery into a Capacity that but for them, the
work could not have gone forward that, they, in a word are ungratefully dealt
withal, doubtless a more serious black scandal, by such ingeminations daily
is contracted unto the discontented Authors of such carnal repercussions; for,
if they did preach the Soldiery into a capacity, it was either a good work in
them, or a bad one: I a good one, their rewards are in Heaven, if indeed never
so good in it self, yet, their ends in preaching, might make it bad as to
them, they might dream after temporal dominion; no man ought to do evil (that
is against his conscience) that good may come thereof. I dare not charge them
with Hypocrisy, Avarice or Ambition, yet if most probably men discern the
bent of immanent actions, by several out goings, and it be no sin for us to
judge, where God has judged before us O Presbyterian Ministers. Your
unquenchable desires of fat Benefices, linking some times two or three
competencies together, removing from place to place; familiarly slighting
flocks destinated unto your charge, aiming at an art in Preaching, are shrewd
Symtomes of carnal hearts, of Gods imminent displeasure over you; and that it
may justly be suspected, you are not prefined men for setting up instrumentally
Gods design, in parity of Reformation.

The greatest discretion I ever observed in you, is, that how ever generally
men of plausible consciences yet are you al blessed with restraining grace: not a
man (for all the great noise) that I hear of will venture Sequestration for
meddling with State affairs in Pulpits. I would you would as well leave of
private instillations into men's heads about the Covenants obligation; and
against necessary liberty of conscience, since; why we should dance after a
Scottish Kirk for a government, (when it is notably disputed whether Christ
will be pleased any formal polity should be obtruded on his Saints) no good
reason can be given, Gods word (as a touch stone) being subnex'd unto that
clause in the Covenant. It is a known sin with Civilians, for a man to perform
any Oath comporting in it is performance, damage to Religion, Justice, and the
Common wealth, and I dare appeal unto your own consciences, whether your
former Doctrines for seven years together, did not condemn restrictions put
upon consciences? whether private exercises were not then by you highly
magnified? whether quenching of the Spirit (which may well be understood as in
forceing of Consciences) were not marked out as an almost unexpiable sin?
Lastly, whether your out cry against Tyranicall forms, obtrudable upon
consciences, were real in those days or no? If real, you are the maine and
greatest defectors from just principles, if not real, and that such Doctrines
were politickly delivered, only out of a secret wicked ambition by serving
times upon hopes (in unhappy conjuncture of affairs) of obteyning Episcopal
preventions, and fat benefices, thence fostering clat cularaymes (with your
Scottish Brethren) gradually to divide with Laymen, even in disposition of
Civil administrations: those designs were inconsistent with Ministers of
Christ.

In sadness let me tell you (Learned Pastors) admitting you talked heartily,
and had no such sinister ends, you are at present unhappily subjected unto
blame on all hands; how justly God knows, and some of your consciences can
well assign reasons why, God should in justice retaliate upon you, that
contempt, Presbyterian Ministers put upon others of the same function, divided
only from them in opinion about Church government, unto the lamentable miseries
of which wretched Episcopal men, many of you (to your eternal shame be it
spoken) added a full cup, by substracting the fifth part (allowed by the mercy
of the Parliament) from their Wives and Children. O unparalelld cruelty! O
heathnish irreligions, Authority knew it not just, for innocent Women and
Babes to be ruined, for their Fathers heady extravagances, and our most just
Creator makes it good often on Earth, that misery finds lovers of other men's
miseries out.

It is no Paradox for me to say unto you (sad Christians) your mischeife and
disrespect is from your selves. The best advice I can give unto the Pulpit
demised premises, will be, that for future they would bear such a
proportionable respect unto other men's consciences, unto other men's pledge, of
Gods love (their Wives and Children) as they desire Heaven should bear unto
them this will be their best mean toward recovery of their lost reputation,
this their principal antidote aganist scandal; especially in these days,
wherein many say (not regarding rules of contraries) there is no such thing as
error for, if (say they) the greatest Divines are divided in judgment about
matters of faith, the strongest Lawyers differ about what is Law, what not, and
most sapient Statesmen, are plunged in their own devices; we cannot believe
their is any such thing as eror, because we know not the truth; If no error, no
sin, what follows? no God, no hell. A strange world we live in, and of these
wild extravagances in sin, which ground such vanities, it seems Clergy men's
general inconstancy arogance ambition and malice are fomentors, whereupon a
modern Poet taking it ill to be branded with the name of an Athiest by a
Presbyter, has Satirically descanted in this following Rith. micall Poem.

Satyrus de Caco-presbyteris
I Am jam subtristis increbuit Echo,
Dummodo Presbyter, egregius praeco.
Me dixit Atheismi totum Integrale.
Ostendens suo pectore multum in esse mali.
Sin illud verum ratione facias,
Agam tibi (Sace dotule) gratias.
Contra miraturus cum sit rumor altus
Doctores Synodo evasisse per Saltus
Jam dudum: remanes tu Dulmanus,
Insulsus Juvenis, at multum scurra Canus.
Quid te miles odit, ridentque Generosi;
Handquaquam cluat esse aliquid monstrosi:
Quateuus diu C^e um^ obstruxisse pacem
Christianam recte fertur, ac Martis esse facem:
Qui nisi suum polleat interesse stabilire
Memphitticum, garrit, Reformatio non in fieri est,
Populumque jugum Christi saluberrimum
Contempsissie prave, et expetere terrimum
Libertatis Vadum; male Judependentem
Chymaeram adhinire verum minime advertentem.
Vah! jam tandem Laici didicere verum,
Nigra vestimenta minns esse Dei Clerum;
Religio cujus est solummodo formalis,
Sit aeque pium Decimare quam ludere cum talis.
Subridet porro purior Ecclesia Sanctorum,
Presbyterum tenere aedhuc ambitum terrenorum,
Praeferentem Evangelio, ubique predicabli,
Rostrum (qua tale) valde quidem amabile
Apostatieae Stigmate crudeliter percutit
Private excercentes, premeditata diffint.
Quale docent passim Seraphici Doctores,
Sibique datum Coeli distribuere rores.
Infra muros spiritum impie circumscribunt
Ac vastis abdominibus decimas imbibunt.
Hi ne Coeli liminis fiunt Clavigeri?
Nil minus, Sathanae potius Scutigeri.
Ergo ne credas (lector] Omnipotentem
Hos reformandi velle causam contigeutem?
Heraclitus ad terras rediens Cothurnalis.
Rideret ad conspectum Presbyteri parochialis;
Episcopatum versus dum succussaret lipide,
Illudque Christi regimen predicans intrepide.
Cur Po idorns olim Volsoeam sit notatus,
Quod primus Angliae Sacerdotum grassabat Sericatus?
Volseos mill dabo, crudelis Polidorus
Tantum in Cardinalis vitium sonorus,
Praelati nomen prae Regali positio, Ego and Rex meus.

Lege comparatus, sibi vix vertetur vitio.
Confidunt nostri quatenus Spurcitijs tentare
Duris formalitatibus Christum concatenare.
Seeurt nunquam Sancti pia fraud satis,
Sacerdotibus usa Frock-butroniatis.
Quid queso? none Rumor divino jure niti
Ecclesiae nullum Regimen, det medecinam liti?
Evincat saltem minime Sacerdotes decere,
Altercationes strenuas in statu commovere.
Compede sed faederis Albanici ligantur
Haud (...) conscientijs mandantur.
Sit modo praecox votum modo fides rescindenda
Temere suscepta, ac Pelinodia conciuenda.
Quis inde regno hactenus extitit necon ior
Pateat, Presbyter vel Episcopus confidentior,
Conscientias ligari, hi quoque dicunt vitium,
Independentes obtrectantes, nec non et Comitium:
Atqui, ut Catholice zelus hic inclaruit,
Ad votum salubre Parliamenti subito disparuit:
Hinc misere confrendunt, nescientes praedicare;
Vetantur quia Plebem titillitio dementare
Presbiteriali, ac Species regnandi
Rostro definire, sub Poena Sequestrandi.
Latratus partim lividus confraenatur protinus,
Recessus pertinacia coactus, et serotinus.
Accessit terror Panicus, horum livor flaccescit,
Sedantur multo Malignantes, Reformatio crescit,
Recente pergant Ephori incude collimare
Ebullientes Cleri linguas, si vellent Regnum stare.
If there be any biting truths in this Poetry or Latin Rithms, Ministers must
take in good part (if good they be) for it does not touch them. As for the
spiritually proud Minister (that white Devil of our age, and disturber of our
quiet,) It matters not three pence, how he understands them. If the Vanity of
Preachers have not discomposed this Kingdom much of late, and ruined others
heretofore, let all men judge. But the piety of some humble Churchmen, (who
have wisely unfettered themselves from earthly cares, and do quietly preach (in
season, and out of season) true sound Christianity, without mingling
State Affairs into their dispensations, I always judge it necessary to hear
and imitate; and am very glad even of late the Parliament has (for the
unprejudicing of many) declared, they will maintain a Godly diligent
Ministry; unto whose dictates (because men) though we must not wholly resign
up our discretions in Religious matters; yet will every quiet spirit (for their
gifts sake) give encouragement, and defer treble respect unto them.

CHAP. III. Respecting Lawyers.
I Am now at last come to speak some thing unto the Lawyers of England, men of
mine own profession; who I know generally will take it ill for any unwinged
Gownmen, to be pretendedly wiser then Law. And I also (confessing my self a
mere Lime or Hackney of the Law) am not much fledged with an Apprehension,
that I can speak half so much Law as reason.

The Theoretick part of Englands Law (though in some things defective, in other
redundant) I honor, especially for that I believe it wisely distributh real
inheritance, and uprightly devolves discents, whereof also Authority has said
they resolve a permanence, upon former foundations, which decision my reason
teaches. I do not slight or trench upon, when I endeavor a candid
representation of errors in Superstructive practice: that must of necessity
challenge from piously disposed Governors a timely discontinuance, and
alteration, where inconveniences and mischeifs are Epidemical.

The great fluttering noise as well old practizers in the Theorie, with Almond
Trees on their formal Crowns, as puny Clarks will make, about known Axioms,
Maxims, custom, practice, and Moth-eaten Records is such, that it has
startled most men, desirous of a more compendious, succinct, and expeditious
passage and decision of litigious debates. But I well hope, my contemptible
vessel will not split upon those lofty, towering Rocks.

However, this I dare affirm. It is the great mystery under which our Laws
are Couch't, and the Barbarity of that corrupt Latin and Norman language, have
amused many into a strong fancy of the excellency of our proceedings in suits.

No small wonder it appears unto me, men should so much dote upon actions of
our Ancestors in times of Popery when (if it be well observed) few laws were
free from pontifical influence, that they cannot see the healing of present
Supremacy is wanting, for reforming things in practice Religious, and Civil.

Time, heth drawn a vail, cunning heads have fomented, and Interested parties
alternatly have fixed a great and seemingly good reputation upon erroneous
transactive practices, in actuating the most necessary and ordinary projects of
our Municipiall Law! endless Maeanders, length and nicity of pleading
formality perching above equity and sometimes plain distinguishable justice,
have rendered very Law it self odious: whereunto if we subioyn, that most Just
captations may be taken against proceedings, in our chargeable Chancery, Reason
will back our assertions.

Many wise men have thought (regarding how a perfection in distributive Justice
is, or ought to be the scope of every law) it were proper and convenient for
the Subject of England, If the same Judge, at the same time (with the Juries
consent) might definitively correct strictness of law, together with his
pronunciation directly, where men's positive laws have with all humane possible
care provided against probable contingencies, whereby some times, a 150 orders
might be spared both Plaintiff and Defendant and suits no more intailed in
Chancery from generation to gene ration For, it is an ordinary thing in our
Coure of Equity, for a cause to spin out 8. years before it can come to an
hearing.

Others have quarrelled as much, saying that it is less reason for law
proceedings (if any reason at all) to be in Latin, then chancery Bills, because
of the great danger to a Clyent in missing form at Common law. But these my
great Masters at law, can, if they please determine: were not men besotted to
horrible avarice, and Apes to one another wickedness.

Some may suppose I speak by roat, when I shall affirm twenty years are not
sufficient, to learn the practice of one Attorney in; so full of variety is law
practice, and indeed head Officers in Courts make it upon the matter what they
please, no vivacity of wit can reach the Vanity of Forms in reasonable time,
these Mysteties make the Subject more miserable (truly we may say it) then
those Nations whose laws are unwritten, For, upon the nicetyes and intricacies
of Headings are hatched demurrers, See Basilicon Doron lac. Regis page 90 lib 2.
a device merely to spin out money and time, such exceptions being mostwhat
taken to formal defects, not material, and though the parties meaning be
evident, a misplaced word or mistaken sentence shall cancel all done before.

Men of slendrest capacityes discern, how much plaintiffs are favored in our
Courts. And strangers admire at the Multitudes of Men depending upon legal
matters here in England I believe there are at least ten and ten thousand
qualifyed Officers at law in England, reckoning upon a true account, beside
running solicitors infinite, this most superfluous brood (maintained only by
prosit arising by Law) is generated not through defect in the fun damentall
part of our law, neither does it require such Multiplicious managery, were the
ways and means tending unto the just ends of law explained smoothed made right
and shortened; for prevention of which ambages, and circuit in actions these two
rules are very (in my poor judgment) expedient as a preparatory to more.

1. That the general Issue, be pleaded in all actions. 2. That good Costs be
Ordered upon unjust Suits. and Judgment for them presently awarded.
The Attorney will instantly cry out. What then shall become of all our
President Books? if the general issue be pleaded? It were very hard if a
People should generally suffer for fear they should make their presidents
useless.

The like will Counselors allege, when thousands of Fees in a term shall be
saved by General Pleas.

Thus (lawyers) you seek a preservation of your own Interest in the distemper
of our whole Nation.

As the Case now stands, he that has the weightiest purse many times carries
away the Bell, right or wrong. for any man may bring Error upon Error, even in
personal Actions, and men are tired out with seeking for their own.

A man may outlaw his Neighbor for a cause, or without a cause: the remedy
against the Sheriff is troublesome, and mostwhat, worse then the disease: the
grounds of these proceedings I know, but they are damnably abused: Sheriff, cry
out as much against Chequer men's abuses not without reason.

No uninterested man can plead for continuance of these, and forty worse
inconveniences, which may in due time be represented. Attorneyes would get more
money, I am sure more honestly, if practice were contracted: for as things are,
needless, lazy, standing Officers, Monopolize making up a process, and
transactions, Attorneys lay out their money (getting it again with curses in
the Country) while trudging up and down they can get (besides cutting and
making, or sharpning good hand-bills) but ten groats a Term. In so much, that
it is now as essentially necessary for an Attorney, to be a good footman; as
not to have a soft place in the hinder part of his head.

And who will not stand amazed, that is not a corrupt Lawyer., when it shall be
truly told him the mystery of an Attorneys trade is greater then that of a
Counselor? That the smallest actions trial will cost at Westminster six or
seven pounds (where shall a poor man have it?) That men must pay Fines for
liberty to enter Actions by original writ? that money must be paid in the
pound for damage laid, and damage clear? that one Court never gives less then
forty shillings costs upon judgments by default, or consent, the other seldom
more (but when finable) then Twenty. That Allegories are ordinary in Law
suggestions, both in cancellarian and legal proceedings. That by laying an
Imaginary Mutuatus, a man may bring an action for a shilling in the Courts at
Westminster? That the same costs are given where the Damage to the Plaintiff
appears not to have five shillings as where the Plaintiffes prejudice was forty
times, as considerable? That, a petty legal Tyranny is howerly exercised by
forreyne North, and Western Attorneyes, by reason of the distance of the places
from London. But time will not permit, let these hints suffice at present, till
more leisure, to remonstrate, how necessary Law Reformation is, and how far
from an happy and well ordered Polity Englands Administration is, till these
things be reduced into order, and pragmatick busy Lawyers, whether qualified
or unqualified, be restrained from taking advantage of these laxations in the
practick managerie of Law. Authority cannot do all at once: wise men know every
Commonwealth is judged by what is commonly and ordinarily done; and it is a
very hard thing to prove Common Barretors. Is there any man so senseless to
think it a sin, that either that Law against them, or any other Law humane be
corrected, usage is an Ass, when time comes in, umpire of practice, Laws are
cancelled, when obsolete, or noxious, soft, or cruel, disconstitutionall, or
idle for a people; when organically they are imperfect, and self Ministers
accidentally (though good) of bad manners.

In order whereunto to make out my assertion domestically: lest I should seem
to owe more unto the nimble wits of these days, then unto that great reason
(without vanity be it spoken) I am able to bring for translating our Laws into
the English tongue. I will here declare my well wishes, that it might not any
longer be locked up in an unknown Barbarism, or impectorated with a few.

The dangers conting ible in possibilty must be rare by it is Englishing, the
advantages very considerable, when (being reduced from her loose expatiated
volumes under Alphabetick divisions) she shall wed an English Government of
simple luster.

This is the way to put her into a capacity of winning her causeless Enemies
unto obedience of her just sanctions; she will then, more clearly evidence
(being a little reformed by competent hands) it was ever and is still in part,
her Midwives either nescience, corruption, or retchlessenesse, which has
hitherto caused many of her Children to grow Ricketty. In her the cause is not,
yet are not her gray hairs signs of perfect wisdom:

Men talk of moral Equity, right, Fredome from Ty^ranicall usage; I dare
maintain it, until every one, as an English man, may freely read his duty in
English, and look into that which must regulate his deportment, and interest
Civil (not representable by Statutes) and thereby discern the necessity of
some times admitting particular mischiefs, rather then general inconveniences:
Vain have been, ever will be all arguments or pretensipreferring respective
discretion of precedent, present, or future Lawgivers. Thus may the Reason of
Law be cleared; and upon what grounds, prudence and respect unto moral equity,
of Iudaick laws, laws of England are founded.

Neither is it ever expectable vulgar heads can be reduced from general
prejudice against our Laws, while they are looked upon as inconsiderable or
unfit objects of Pity; and no expedient laid, for their satisfaction in their
just Cavil against Law language, that Relick and badge of our Norman slavery.

I can admit the current of that Objection, viz That ordinary men will not be
much wiser for it is translation: But certainly it is impertinent, for they will
be better satisfied, if not with the reason of the Law (because perhaps they
cannot reach it) yet will this Cordial refocillate their spirits, because then,
it shall lie in their own Powers to be their own Counselors.

Besides, it may be well supposed upon Englishing of it, the people will not so
much murmur and repine at Judgments, and decisions given in Courts of Justice:
When as all along both plaintiff and Defendant may track with much facility
those paths, wiser heads have chalked out for preservation of Common right, and
reciprocal Justice between parties.

They are mistaken who say ignorance is the Nurse of Civil devotion. Englishmen
naturally disgust or slight things placed above them. Every man is not bred a
Scholar, or book earned, what if the Mases have been favorable un to him?
employments of many men will not afford them time for studdying the craggy
Language of our law, upon this ignorance is an Epidemick vice.

And yet I have not known more unhappy men in suits, then mere Scholars, for
they looking upon general rules of Equity only, can hardly be drawn (till they
are well smarted for their Scholastic presumptions) into a belief of the
wholesome composure of our Laws fitted in their position, as well unto adequate
reason of natural right, as appropriated most part unto the constitutional
bent of our Nation: upon this anvill of causeless discontent and prejudice it
is true, occasion is improperly taken and Ministers heartily threaten
Attorneys, as brambles in the State, because, our bills are neither by them
intelligible nor legible, in that, they are unreasonable.

All arts have their forms, terms. Lawyers theirs. It is said a Parson lately
preached this doctrine. That his parishioners ought to observe, Court hand was
an Idol, and God would dash Lawyers for all their dashes, But at such we smile,

As violent on the other hand are Counselors, and most attorneys against all
military men, who dare speak plain English, and petition for Reformation in Law
practice. These men consider not, being wedged up with present forms, how most
of our laws in England had military grounds for their begetting. And thus much
my Discretion teaches me, to affirm impartially; Many of the Governing part of
the present Army, are blessed with extraordinary Reason, far beyond most of our
learnedest Ply-baggs. It matters not from whom our help flows if we get cure
of civil Distempers, and from their endeavors it is most likely to proceed If
I mistake not.

I perceive that a strong fancy pessesseth most Lawyers of a necessary single
Governor, whom they always (vainly enough) looked upon in his politic
Capacity as an immortal Deity. But that is a mere fiction, like the houses in
astrology.

I desire to be resolved how a parliament could order the succession of the
crown of England from Hen 6. to Edw. the 4th. upon breach of a Condition; if a
condition be an Hereditament. Henry the 6th was in by descent from Hen. the
5th, Edw. the 4ths entry was tolled, yet (by that Parliament at the end of H.
the 6th. reign and beginning of E. 4th. judged lawful, where was the King in
the intervall of H. and E? These are bables for a man to think upon seriously,
for that paradox of the immortalities of Kings and Bishops here, is actually
resolved to annihilation.

All States and Potentates are taught by natural reason to engage their
subjects into obedience.

The present new engagement must not be judged any innovation or cruel
Obtrusion, but rather a careful indulgence for safety of the whole,
complecting every man's exactible duty, lest any should pretend ignorance of
that duty, for actuating whereof, to wholesome ends, he is designed. This
every man will believe convenient, whose Brains are not disturbed with the
QVEEN OF WATERS influence; and our immediate rivolets of dangerous honor, need
not much complain or curse their fates, FOR BEING SVBIECTED TO THE LAW; since
upon their own stock of exhalations, reshowred down, they for a time survived
their fountain; and may yet run a more direct course in another Region, if
they please, or can stoop to Providence.

Neither has the Common Lawyer above all men, any cause to repine at present
fixing of our State, for that his craft or mystery is preserved intine, his
rode toward subsistence the same, only it may seem reasonable, in lieu of that
felicity, he should rightly value it, and inform where Reformation of abuses
is most wanting.

For mine own part, having (with a good intention) composed these papers: I
must beg leave in one word, by way of preventing prejudice, to Apologize, lest
my advice herein given, or any representation obvious unto my scope, should be
unworthily apprehended as savouring either of pride, base ends, or partiallity:
for what ever I have written to those three forementioned qualifications of
Gentlemen, Divines, or Lawyers, my request is, should be understood, as an
efflux upon exigence of Method proposed: not that I any way undervalue others,
whether Merchants, Tradesmen, Mechanics or Yeomen, nay not the more low sort
of men, because to my sense, every respective part of these are equally as
considerably useful in our Common wealth, and it is civility makes a Gentleman
deboystnesse a Clown, and son of the earth, my Prayer unto God shall be, that
all men (setting aside frothy Titles) would center their ambitions in him, who
is alone able to reduce certainty, peace and rest in this unsettled humorous
age: an acquiescence in his providence will dispell Melancholic perturbations:
when all Physic besides must prey a little upon the natural Spirits of the
Body, that will compose the Soul, and set the turmoyled creature free from all
possibility of miseries, dangers, and fears. As for the Species of Magistracy
(in its abstracted essence with Heaven in variable) yet as to men alterable in
all ages, the less private persons unhinge their brains in consideration of
it. certainly their night rests will be more quiet -- But,

Caelum ipsum petimus stultitia, neque
Iracunda Jovem ponere fulmina patimur. Horat,
We shoot at Stars, and vainly aim to stop
Jove's Thunderbolt, as it is about to drop.
Such is the presumption of this age, that men sin advisedly in swallowing up
general freedoms by special interests; some are as preposterous in hurrying
the wheels of Reformation to fast down hill, dangering the very Axell-tree of
its whole carriadge, as others are to Curious in avoydance of shallow rakes,
wherein she cannot sink deep; others say a Sledge without wheels may serve a
Lady of her condition that will (they think) convey her from Constable unto
Constable well enough, and time enough for any necessity, or haste there is of
her progress.

The honest well affected Country man who thinks all things can, or should be
perfected with one Swap, now the King is gone, may seem to be the first, with
whose not well guided reason, perhaps a few discontented private persons
among'st our Army may jump also.

Next those, will follow the temperate mere Divine in the second resemblance,
and as subservient unto him, a Brace of his best Parishioners (commonly old
Gentlemen; good hunts-men) these could be content with a Reformation, But are
afraid of her looks, and necessary attendance.

Into the last resemblance, Lawyers must most properly be redacted
Analogically, ours is, say they, a profession, and it can be no sin for a man
to follow his calling: But I fear, to take issue with Heaven upon a dispute,
that for the maintenance of their families, and for avoiding the Caracter of
one of Paul's Infidells in not providing for our charges, we traced corrupt
practices, will at Gods tribunal, prove a very sleevelesse allegation, when
Madam Justice shall file in Heavens most Christian Court, a provocation against
fac simile Clerks, where I say, quaint protestations by way of exclusion, shall
not hinder taking issue upon the whole matter, no Jurisdictions of a Court
incapacitated can be pleaded; no errors alligned afterward, in a word no
essoign nor imparlence can be admitted. While we persevere in screwing rigor of
general laws, up to the height of injury, we are a burden unto our fellow
Subjects, we weaken the esteem of the common-lawes wholesome constitution, and
mainly suffocate possibilities of felicities attingible by the public, we hand
Reformation from one to another, bewilder our selves, and hazard our future
safety.

But integrity is the best policy, and as a Lawyer lately upon another occasion
did affirm: That all the lawyers in England could not make one case law, which
was not reason: so let us uanimoufly pray our practice may be regulated in its
exorbitances by reason, and vindicated from those many just aspersions it
groaneth under, least though the bread of deceit be sweet our mouths may
afterward be gravelled.

For present, My thoughts are no longer mine own. This corollary caution I
shall leave unto all sober men of the three qualifications prereflected upon,
That they would well consider how dangerous a New Representative may prove,
till Ireland be fully reduced, and people fixed into a better sense of their
Duty: regarding that no wise Neighboring Nations will commend in us, a
disimpowring experienced men from winding up their long labors into a Bottom,
whose honors, lives, and fortunes are reciprocally involved in the extreme
diffusion of Policy for general safety: It is our defection from present
Patriots all discontented parties attend, as their last and secret stratagem
for our further disquiet; which sad consequence, after so vast expense of blood
and treasure may concern every discerning spirit to deprecate.

FINIS.

