The Cure of MISPRISION: Or Selected Notes, upon sundry questions in
controversy (of main concernment)*

Between The Word, and The World.

Tending to Reconcile men's judgments, and Unite their affections.

Composed and Published for the common good: as being A probable means to Cure
Prejudice, and Misprision: in such as are not past Cure.

by R. Junius.

Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you for so did their Fathers of
the false Prophets.

Luke 6. 26. LONDON.

Printed, by Tho. Pain, for Benjamin Allen, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley, 1646.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader,
The disease to which this Cure is applied, is epidemicall. The hearts of men
being anatomized, it will be found, that the grand cause of their alienation
from, and opposition unto the ways of God: is a secret obstruction, arising
from that which as the seed of it, the Author calls Misprision. This Book
describes the disease very lively, in the Symptoms of it, and prescribes the
Cure in a very artificial method; laid down in great variety of matter, and
elegancy of conveyance. The receipt is made up of well chosen ingredients:
strong, and therefore likely to be operative; sweet, and thereby inviting the
patient to take it. If the Jaundies be removed out of thy eye whereby the things
of God have been represented to thee in a false color: Let the chief Physician
have all the glory of thy recovery, which is all the reward the confectioner
expects for his pains.

THO: GOODWIN.
JO. ARROVVSMITH.
RICHARD VINES.

To all such, as speak evil of the Way of Truth, and of the things, which they
understand not. 2. Pet. 2. 12. by way of Preparative.
WEc desire to hear of thee, what thou think; for as concerning this Sect;
we know that every where it is spoken against, Acts 28. 22.

They call evil good, and good evil; put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; They justify the wicked, and
take away the righteousness of the righteous from him. Isay 5. 20. 23.

By honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as deceivers and yet
true, 2 Cor. 6. 8.

They think it strange that ye run not with them: unto the same excess of
riot; therefore speak they evil of you. 1 Pet. 4. 4.

These things will they do unto you for my names sake: because they have not
known the Father, nor me. Job. 15. 21. and 16. 3.

We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery; even the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world, unto our glory; which none of the Princes of this
world knew, for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory, 1 Cor. 2. 7. 8.

Because they received not the love of the truth, tha^ they might be saved, for
this cause; God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a ly;
that they all might be damned; who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousnes. 2 These* 2. 10* 11. 12.

And this is the condemnation; that Light is come into the World: and men loved
darkness, rather then Light* because their deeds were evil. For every one that
evil does hates the light; least his deeds should be reprooved. John 3. 19*
20.

Should men hold their peace at thy Lies; and when thou mockest others, shall
none make th^e ashamed Job. 11. 3

We would have Cured Babylon, but she would not be cured, Jerm. 51. 9.

This peoples heart is waxed fat, and their ears are dull of hearing; and their
eyes they have closed; le^t they should see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears; and should understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I
should heal them. Matthew. 13. 15.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. 2 Timothy
2. 7.

The Cure of Misprision: or selected Notes, upon sundry questions in
controversy, (of main concernment) between the Word, and the World: tending to
recon^ile men's judgments, and unite their affections.
Section 1.
Question, WHy is there so much jarring and discord, so little love and peace
amongst us: since we all profess our selves men, the best of creatures:
Christians, the best of men: Protestants, the best of Christians*

Answer, It proceeds primarily from the variousnesse of our dispositions, for
(since the fall) there is not more variety of faces, voices, hand-writings,
etc. then of humors. As take twenty men where you please, (as they dwell or
pass the streets) there will not be two of them conditioned alike, as were
David and Jonathan, yea go into the same Church, (be it in City or Country*
where is a mixed audience of men, seeming to profess the same Religion and cull
out the like number: may it not be said of them, Quot homines, tot sententia?
so many men, so many minds? or may they not be styled, or described much after
this manner?

the Rich worldling, the Civil Justiciary, the Loose libertine, the Temporary
believer, the Opinionist. the Formalist, the Weak Christian the Experimental
Christian the Atheist, the Papist, the Moderate man, the Common Protestant the
Newter, the Ignorant Man* the Prudent Man* the Proud Man* the Persecutor, the
Profound humanist the Cunning politician, the Cauterized drunkard, etc.
And are these likely to agree in all points of Religion, which are infinite?
when the same sermon shall be admired by one, slighted by another, deeply
censured by a third, yea when a fourth shall weep at it, a f^^tlcoffe and
jeere at it, a sixth tremble at it, a seventh curse and blaspheme both at it and
the messenger (our Saviors own case John 7.) which yet is no wonder, since
some are as deeply in love with vice and error, as others are with virtue and
truth.

But secondly: What hope is there that we should all agree, when the holy Ghost
(who best knows our rame) compares several men to almost every several rall
creature in the universe? purposely to show, that the Epicure is not more like
a Swine, the lustful person a Goat, the ^raudulent man a Fox, the backbiter a
barking Dog, the slanderer an Aspe, the oppressor a Wolf, the persecuter a
Tiger, the Church-robber a wild Boar, the seducer a Serpent, the traitor a
viper, etc. then every one of them is unlike another:

Which yet is not all, for let carnal men be at never so much ods one with
another, yet they will concur and join against the ^odly: as for example,
Edom, and Ishmael, Moab and the Hagarius, Gobal and Ammon, Amaleck and the
Philistines, the men of Tire and Assure had all several Gods, yet all conspire
against the true God: Psalm. 83. 5. to 9. Manasses against Ephraim, and Ephraim
against Manasses, but both against Judah: H^rad and Pilate two enemies, will
agree so it be against Christ, they will fall in one with another, to fall out
with God: the Sadduces, Pharisees, and Herodians were sectaries of diverse and
adverse factions, all differing one from another, and yet all these join
together against our Savior, Matthew. 22. the Libertines, Cyrenians,
Alexandrians, Cilicians and Assians, differ they never so much, will join in
dispute against S^^ven, Act. 6* 9. Herod neither loved the Jews, nor the Jews
Herod, yet both are agreed to vex the Church. Which is just our case, if men
had but wit to observe it: a wicked man can agree with all that are wicked, be
they Papists, Turks, or Atheists, prophans and loose persons, civil or moral
men for all these agree in blindness and darkness, and they are all, hail
fellow, well met, but with sincere Christians and practizers of piety, he can
never agree, the religious shall be sure of opposition, because their light is
contrary to his darkness, and grace in the one, is a secret disgrace to the
other.

Sect. 2.
Quest. I confess contrariety is cause enough of contention, for different
dispositions can never agree: witness ^ain and Abel, Isaac and Ismael, Jacob
and Esan, there can be no ami^y, where there is no sympathy, yea, though they
be man and wife, Parent and child, yet if they be not alike, they will not
like, Isa. 5* 20. 2 Cor. 6. 14* 15. But in these times, wherein are so many
differences and opinions, even touching the Protestant Religion, how may one
know who are in the right.

Answ. First. He that would know which is the truth, must become spiritual,
for the Natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, but he
that is spiritual, understands all things. 1 Cor. 2. 14. 15.

Secondly, He must resolve to practice what he knows; for if any will do Gods
will, says our Savior, he shall know the doctrine, whether it be of God or
no, Job. 7. 17. Psalm. 111. 10.

Quest. What special signs are there to direct the weak.

Answ. That must needs be the truest Religion, which is most reformed from men's
traditions, and comes nearest to the primative Church in the Apostles time: and
they are the best Christians, who strive to imitate Christ, and endeavor to
square their lives according to the rule of Gods word.

Quest. So far as I am able to judge, none are so much cried out upon, and
exclaymed against as they.

Answ. And not without reason, for if Christ has once chosen them out of the
world, the world must needs hate them: John* 15* 19. Neither can that be the
true Religion which is nor every where spoken against, Act. 28* 22* It is the
portion of all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, to suff r persecution, 2.
Tim. 3. 12. yea to be hated of all men and Nations for his Names sake, Matthew*
10. 22. and 24. 9 that is, of all natural men, or the greatest part of men in
all Countries and Nations, for* he that is born after the flesh, will be sure
to persecute him that is borne after the spir^t: Gal 4. 29. and it is quarrel
enough to men of the world* that we will no longer run with thet to the sa^^
ex^esse of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Neither is Christ a sign to b^ spoken against of
many in Babylon, or Assiria, but of many in Israel: Luk 2. 34. where all
profess themselves to be Gods people.

Sect. 3.
Quest. But such as the world hates and persecutes, for being religious, are as
opposite one to the other, as Papists and Protestants.

Answ. Not so, for they differ one from another in nothing material, at least
not in the maine and fundamental points of Religion: but chiefly about
discipline, and things circumstantiall: wherein each side strives according to
the light they have received, to come nearest to the form which our Savior
Christ has prescribed. And this should be considered (more then it is) that
honest and good men may differ in opinion, not only in things trivial, but in
matters of great moment, provided they agree in the Fundamental Articles of
the Catholicque Faith, and yet may, and ought to continue brotherly love and
communion, as members of the same mystical body: as many examples witness, both
of the fathers, and other eminent Christians, as also our Saviors words, who
speaking of the fundamental points, penneth the league thus: He that is not
with us, is against us: Luke 11. 23. but of points not fundamental: thus, He
that is not against us, is with us: Luke 9. 50.

I confess in these last and worst times, of which our Savior foretold,
Matthew* 24* Love is waxed so cold, and contention so hot, verse. 12. that it is a
shame to see, how even the best and holiest Christians, differ in affection, as
they differ in judgment* but this ought not so to be, only God permits the
same for sundry reasons: as, 1 For the trial and exercise of his children. 2
That hypocrites may be discovered. 3 That all obstinate sinners may be hardened.


Wherefore if we will be friends to our selves and the Gospel, let us love all
that profess Christ in sincerity, and prefer (as our heavenly Father does) the
meanest believer that fears God, and makes Conscience of religious duties,
though in much weakness: before the most just and best accomplished formalist be
his moral virtues never so rare and splendant, always provided, they hold no
opinions that raze the foundation. And this is according* to Gods estimation,
for the righteous (that is, the regenerate who are covered with Christ's
righteousness,) is more worthy then his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. therefore to
be preferred. And better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he
that perverteth his ways, though he be rich. Pro. 28. 6.

With God it is not how rational* but how religious* he respects a man not
for his own moral righteousness but for Ch^^sts righteousness: not for his
grearnes, but for his goodness: not for his birth, but for his new birth: not
for his honor, but for his holiness: whence godly Const^ntine rejoiced more in
being the servant of Christ; then in being Emperor of the whole world.

Sect. 4.
Quest. But many grievous things are laid to the charge of all Professors of
Religion: which makes me I know not what to think of them.

Answ. Do you know any evil by them, if so, suspect such: but otherwise go
not by report, and that from the devils servants, for then you will think
meanly of all the Prophets, Apostles, and our Savior Christ himself, for they
were slandered as much as any, as the whole current of Scripture shows.

Quest. I can speak little of knowledge, but they are accused of many things:
as first, that they justify themselves, and are pure in their own eyes.

Answ. I know this is laid to their charge, but the truth is* not they* but
their accusers (viz* Papists, profane, ignorant, and mere civil men*
Prelaticall, Arminian, scandalous and malignant ministers: who are pleased
either out of ignorance or malice to call them puritans) are gu^^ty thereof,
as I shall sufficiently prove, if God permit.

First* It is manifest* that the accused are so far from justifying
themselves, or being pure in their own eyes: that their thoughts are chiefly
taken up with their manifold faylings, and infirmities, and with a continual
bewayling of the corruption of their nature, ^he wickedness and hardness of
their hearts, their offending God, want of faith, and other graces, Job 40 4.
and 42. 6. Psalm. 22. 6. Isa. 6. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 15, Romans 7* 14 to 25.

For touching a privative holiness, they will all acknowledge, that there is nor
one of those righteous precepts, set down Exodus 20. which they have not broken
ten thousand times, and ten thousand ways: ye^. O God (will the best of them
say) there is no veyn in me, that is not full of the blood of thy Son: whom I
have crucified, and crucified agein, by multiplying many, and often repeating
the same sins: there is no artery in me that has not the spirit of error, the
spirit of pride, of passion, of lust, the spirit of g^ldines in it, no bone in
me that is not hardened with the custom of sin, nourished and suppled with the
marrow of sin, no sinews, no ligaments, which do not ^ye and chain sin and sin
together.

And as touching a positive holiness they well find, and will freely conlesse;
that they are not sufficient of themselves to think, much less to speak, least
of all to do ought that is good, 2 Cor. 3 5. John 15. 4. 5. and that there is
so much wearisomnes, pride, pa^sion, lust, envy, ignorance, auke^d^esse,
hypocrisy, infidelity, vain thoughts, unprofitablenes, and the like, cleaving
to their very best actions, to defile them; that their very praying and
fisting, and repenting, their hearing, believing, and giving, their holiest
communication their most brotherly admonition, etc. are in themselves as filthy
rags, Isa. 64. 6. were they not accepted in Christ, covered wi^h his
rig^^eous^es, and washed white in his most precious blood.

True, in Scripture phrase, and in Gods account they are pure, and holy, and
just, either because they are sincere, that is, holy in their purposes and
endeavors, and aspiring after perfection of holiness, or in regard that
Christ's holiness is made theirs, or holy in comparison of the wicked, or in
regard of the worlds unjust censures. But otherwise the more holy a child of
God is* the more sensible he is of his own unholinesse: thinking none so vile
as himself (though few enemies to holiness will believe it) as it fared with
holy Job, Job 40. 4. and 42. 6. and with Isaiah, chap. 6. 5. and 64. 6* and
with St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1, 15* Romans 7. 14, to 25. and with holy David, who
(almost in every Psalm) so much bewailes his sins, original and actual, of
omission and commission,

Well may a blind sensualist (that thinks the commandment is not broken if the
outward gross sin be forborne) brag of a good heart and meaning, of the
strength of his faith and hope, of his just and upright dealing, etc. yea in
case such abstain from notorious sins, what should hinder but they are
excellent Christians? If God be not beholding to them for not wounding his Name
with oaths, for not drinking, and playing out his Sabbaths: for not railing on
his Ministers, for not oppressing and persecuting of his poor members

Or secondly, Well may a Papist (that by maintaining men's works, works out his
own maintenance) think he can fulfill the law with ease, and by works of
supererrogation, merit of God for others. That he may deserve heaven by his
good works, or at least bear half the charges of his own salvation.

But those that are of Christ's teaching, know both from the word, and by
experience: that of themselves they are not only weak, but even dead to what is
good: moving no more then they are moved: that their best works are faulty, all
their fi^s deadly, all their natures corrupted originally. And that they
deserved to die, so soon as they began to live. That their understandings are
darkened and dulled, their judgments blinded their wills perverted, their
memories disordered, their affections corrupted, their reason exiled, their
thoughts surprised, their desires intrapped and all the faculties and functions
of their souls no better then poisoned. Or as one expresses it. My powers are
all corrupt, corrupt my will,
Marble to good, but wax to what is ill.


True we have ability, we have will enough to undo^ our selves, scope enough to
hell-ward: but neither motion, nor will to do good: that must be put into us
by him that gives both power and will, and power to will.

Finally each sanctified heart fe^les this, but no words are able sufficiently
to express, what impotent wretches we are, when we are not sustained: For as a
child may as soon create it self, as a man in the state of Nature regenerate
himself: So in the state of Regenerasy, there is the like impossibility to act:
except God bestow upon us, daily Privative grace, to defend us from evil: and
daily Possitive grace, enabling us to do good. So that we have no merit, but
the mercy of God to save us: nothing but the blood of Christ, and his
mediation, to cleanse and redeem us: nothing but his obedience to enrich us.
As for our good works, we are beholding to God for them, not God to us, nor
we to our selves: because they are only his works in us.

Thirdly, They are so far from justifying what they do, that they are humbled
for those very sins from which they are in a manner exempt: knowing that they
are beholding to God, and not to themselves, that Cains envy, Ishmaols
scoffing, Rabshekeyes railing, Shemies cursing, S^nacheribs blasphemy, Doegs
murder, Phar^ahs cruelty, Sodoms lust, Judas his treason, Julians apostasy,
etc. are not all their sins; and as much predominant in them, as they were in
each of these, for all of them should have been thy sins, and mine: if God had
left us to our selves* for out of the heart (naturally) proceeds nothing but
evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies, and the like. Matthew. 15. 19. And we are all cut out of the same
cloth. Lord says St. Austen, thou have forgiven me those sins which I have
done, and those sins which only by thy grace I have not done. They were done
in our inclination to them, and even that inclination needs Gods mercy: and
that mercy he calls pardon. If we escape temptation, it is his mercy: if we
stand in temptation, it is his mercy: if our wills consent not, it is his mercy:
if we consent, and the act be hindered, it is his mercy: if we fall, and rise
again by repentance, all is his mercy. And this likewise proves that they are
no Puritanes.

Briefly, to sum up all; there is not a believer, that is any whit acquainted
with the Scriptures, but when he has done any thing amiss: he accuses
himself, if any thing well, he gives all the praise to God. And indeed, this
is the test of a true or false Religion, and may be applied to each particular
Christian: that which teaches us to exalt God most, and most to depresse our
selves, is the true* that which does most prank up our selves, and detract from
God is the false.

Nor would their scoffing adversaries, accuse the religious of this crime, were
they not stupidly blind, or divelishly malicous; for how can it be thought that
they are pure in their own eyes, when ministers or other faithful Christians
can hardly comfort them, or persuade them of Gods favor, whereas their
profane accusers, snatch the comfort of every promise they hear, as belonging
to them, and find nothing amiss in themselves (as commonly they think best of
themselves that have least cause) yea, how afraid are the one to approach unto
the Lords Table* by reason of their unworthines, whereas the other cannot be
kept from it: though they are told from the word, that they eat and drink
damnation to themselves, as not d^cerning the Lords body, nor once examining
their own hearts, 1 Cor. 11. 27. 28. 29 30.

Sect. 5.
I confess there are a generation (whom the blind world suspects for
religious) that think too well of themselves, whom the holy Ghost has well
painted out, Pro. 30. 12. Isa 65. 5. Luke 18* 9. they are as righteous as
Christ himself, they cannot sin, or be n Christ, and then sin if you can;
they need not ^ray, nor repent, God can see no sin in them, nor be ^ngry with
them, etc. namely, your Antinomians, ^ut far be it from me to acknowledge
them religious; a people who will not allow the Law, either to ^e a
schoolmasters unto Christ, or for a rule ^o walk by; yea if I speak for, or
spare to speak against these white devils, let my words be underva*ued, and my
errors aggravated, for such take the ^eady way to pluck up all piety, and the
power of Religion by the roots, yea, they shame Religion by professing it, and
make Gods truth suspected; though i^ men were wise, they would not accuse the
sober, for what drunken men do, nor the wise, for what fools do.

True, they have a form of Religion, and a fe^orish kind of zeal, but hear
them discourse, and you shall soon see, that an ignorant pride has frighted
them out of their wits; and that they are a people whom Satan has reserved for
there last times, and violently stirred up to disturb the peace of our Church,
and to hinder that blessed reformation (so much fought after, and hoped for)
which nothing could hinder so much as errors on the right hand, and Satan's
transforming himself into an Angel of light. ^ Cor. 11. 14. And so much to
prove that the accused do not in the least justify themselves.

Now bring we their accusers to the trial, and you shall see it is far
otherwise with them. As,

Sect. 6.
First, How common is it with all that are in their natura^l condition, that
are scoffers at Religion, or that at any time use the name Puritan in ^^risi^n;
to have all their thoughts, yea and their words too, taken up with other men's
faults, and their own perfections, Luk 18. 11. etc. yea whatsoever their words
and actions be, they thank God they have good hearts, and mean as well as the
best, and they have so strong a faith, that they never doubted in all their
lives; yea it were pity they should live, if they did not believe in Christ,
and hope to be saved by him: never considering how that persuasion only which
follows sound humiliation, is faith: that which goes before it, presumption:
for as Saint Ambrose speaks, none can repent of sin, but he that, believes the
pardon of sin, nor none can believe his sins are pardoned, except he has
repented.

No they have not the wit to know that as faith is* wrought by Gods spirit, so
where it is wrought it brings forth the fruits of the Spirit, mentioned Gal. 5.
22. whereas presumption, as it is of the flesh, so it brings forth the fruits
of the flesh, verse. 19.

But the better to know the purity of their hearts, Ask them, are you proud,
(a good question to try whether a man be spi^^tuall, and his knowledge
experimental: whether he be acquainted with his own heart etc.) they will
answer proud, no not they, none are proud but fools; and they hate a proud man
etc. And yet it is pride only, mixed with ignorance, that makes the answer, they
condemn pride, but it is with a greater pride.

Men that care only to seem Christians, if they can get Gods livery on their
backs, and his name in their mouths, if they can keep their Church, give an
Alms, bow their knee, say their prayers, pay their tithes, and once a year
receive the Sacrament (not caring how corrupt hearts, how filthy tongues, how
false hands they have; they think themselves as complete Christians as live:
and that they may outface all reproves when the truth is, they are so far from
being Christians; that they have not made one step toward Christianity: for
the first step to Religion is to love Religion in another, whereas these men
generally hate scoff at and persecute the power of Religion, wherever they
perceive it: And does not God hate them so much more then pagans, by how much
they being pagans pretend themselves, and might be excellent Christians. But

Sect. 7.
Secondly, Let a Minister come to any ignorant worldling (and such are all that
are not Religious) and question withthem upon their deathbeds, about their
estate; or ask them how their souls fare, and what peace they have; What is
their manner, of answering? (especially if they have not been notorious
offenders) are they a whit troubled for sin, either original, or actual? or
will they acknowledge themselves to be in a lost condition without Christ? no*
their consciences are at quiet, and they are at peace with themselves, and all
the world; and they thank God no si^ne troubles them; they have been no
m^r^herers, no Adulterers, no common drunkards, neither have they been
oppressors: yea will such an one say, I do not know that I have wronged man,
woman, or child, I have been a Protestant, and gone to Church all my days: etc.

The middle sort of Christians (so called) have a notable way to delude their
own souls* and to put of all reproves, and threatenings; namely by comparing
themselves with such as are worse then themselves, counting none wicked, but
such as are notorious for wickedness; as for example, because they are not so
drunk as Nabal, they think themselves sober: because not so proud as Haman,
therefore they be humble: because not so bloodily minded as Doeg, therefore
they are merciful: because not so treacherous as Judas, therefore loyal:
because neither Gallows nor pillory can take hold of them; therefore they are
honest and square dealers.

Nor can there be a more plausible deceit; for as the swarthy compared with the
Blackmore, thinks himself fair, so civi^l men looking upon the profane,
admire their own holiness. But such should do well to mind what our Savior
^a^^h, Matthew. 5. Except your right^ousnesse exceeds the right^ousnesse of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom^ o^ heaven
verse. 20.

Alas Tamar was more righteous then Judah, yet was Tamar sinful enough: and
that Justiciary Luke 18 was not a publican* but he was a pharisee (like thee)
which was worse: wherefore compare not thy self with the worst* to see how far
thou art beyond them ^or the thick ^ar^d hear well ^o the stark deaf, and the
Pigmies wonder at his stature, whom we esteem a dwar^e, but compare thy self
with the best, and see how far thou art ^hort of them; the Moon is glorious to
a candle, but pale to the Sun, the Lilly white to the wool, but short of the
snow* etc.

Wherefore thou that think thy self charitable and just, compare thy self
with Zacheus, after thy fourefold restitution, have thou given half thy goods
to the poor? Thou that hold thy self zealous in a cold Generation,
consider David: The zeal of thy house has eaton me up: thou that art humble,
meditate on Paul* yielding to them that hated him. That art sober, think of
the R^chabites, that chaste look upon Joseph, tempted and solicited by his
honorable m^stris.

Though thou may be free from many sins, without being beholding to thy
self: As what wonder is it, if a dumb man be no swearer? an Evenuch no
Adulterer? a Beggar no Broker? where is no assault there can be no victory.

Indeed they will in general, or in gross acknowledge, that they are great
sinners, but come to particulars, they can hardly tell in what; they never
brake the first Commandment, of having many Gods, for they are no Papists, nor
Idolaters; they never brake the second, for they worship God aright; nor the
third, for they have been no common swearers, only a few petty oaths* not the
fourth, for they have every Sabbath gone duly to Church; not the fifth, for
they ever honored their parents, and are as loyal Subjects as may be, not the
sixth, for (like the young man in the Gospel) they dare justify themselves to
Christ's own face, that they have kept it from their youth, for they never
murdered any man, though others find that they never ^oe without enmity and
malice in their hearts, against such as are more Godly and sincere then
themselves, but to their unseeing eyes this is no man* slaughter; not the
seventh, for they perceive not how the lust of the eye should be a sin, so long
as they lie not with their neighbors wives, not the eight, for (though they
have cosened a ^^^dred indirectly, yet) they never stole in all their lives;
not the ninth, for they make Conscience of perjury, though none of backbiting
and slandering their neighbors; As for the tenth, that indeed makes them at a
stand, till they hear what is meant by thou shall not covet. And so by
consequence, they prove that they did but lie and dissemble, when they
acknowledged themselves sinners: for indeed and in truth, they think themselves
no sinners, or almost, for like that ruler, Luke 18. they have kept all the
commandments; verse. 18. to 22. and therefore if they be not rank puritanes,
there are none alive. But,

Sect. 8.
Thirdly, admit you take them in the very act of sin, that they cannot deny it
(and yet I have heard sundry of them, when reproved for swearing, deny that
they did swear) they will either justify themselves in it, like those
hypocritical Jews, Mal. 3. 8. 13. 14. 15. and Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 18, to 22. or
secondly with Iephta, Judge. 11. 35. Ahab, 1 King. 18. 17. and the same Saul,
they will shift it off to some others, 1 Samuel 15. 20 21. or as Adam shifted off
his sin to Eve, and Eve to the serpent, Genesis 3. 12. 13* and for want of better
excuse, their callings, the times, or their natural inclination, and so
covertly God himself shall bear the blame of their sins, as Adam when he told
God, the woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I
did eat; so slily and covertly laying the fault upon God. Genesis 3 12.

Fourthly, If their sins be not scarlet, or gya^tlike sins, they will by
subtle distinctions make them ^o sins, at least not worth repenting of, like
the Scribes and Pharisees, who thought it lawful to swear by the Temple,
though not by the gold of the Temple: by the Altar, though not by the offering
upon the Altar, etc. Matthew. 23. 16. to 23. As for example, how many of your
civil honest men, think they may swear by petty oaths? as faith, troth, and
the like? so they swear^ not bloody oaths, as damn me, etc. commit small
sins, as tell a lie, deceive a little, drink as much as they can well carry a
way, Requite an evil turn with the like, so it exceed not; to be charritable
with their masters goods, wastfull with their parents, to rob the King of his
customs, to compound with Creditours for ten shillings in the pound, when they
are able to pay all; in bearing witness, to speak so much truth as may make
for the Plaintiff, though they conceal what makes for the defendant, spill
their seed upon the ground like Onon, Genesis 38. 9. 10. (a common, but a most
foul sin) so they commit not fornication in act, with a thousand the like,
which I reckon amongst the number of small sins: not because they are so* but
because blind worldlings are apt to count them so.

Sect. 9.
Fifthly; As for evil thoughts, vain, and unprofitable words, for the evil
which cleaves to their very best actions: Or for sins of Omission, as the
want of Faith, and Love, and Repentance, want of the true fear of God, the
neglect of preparation, and profitable hearing, of praying, and reading in
their families, of instructing their Children and servants, of sanctifying the
Sabbath, and seeing that all under them do the same, their unfruitfulnesse
under the means of grace, their not fearing of a lie, an oath, and a hundred
the like: they think they need not be humbled for. Yea, they account the care
of these things, but as the tything of mint and cummine.

But they shall once know (and deerly pay for it eitherwith tears or torment)
that only to refrain evil, unless they hate it also, and do the contrary
good, is to be evil still. For when the truth of obedience, and power of
godliness is wanting: what difference between an Iseraelite, and an Ishmalite,
a circumcised Hebrew, and an uncircumcised Philistine; a baptized English man,
and an unwashen Turk.

Christians are bound to shine out as lights, by a holy conversation: To
gloryfie God, and to win others. To admonish their brother when he does
amiss, to be able to give a reason of their faith and hope 1 Pet. 3. 15. To
grow in grace daily, for as he is a Cain that says, Am I my brothers keeper:
So he is an Esau, who says in respect of spiritual things* I have enough my
brother, for not a child in Gods family, leaves of growing in grace: till he
is grown up into glory. And a strange thing it is says Chrysostom, that a
Physician, a Shoemaker a Tailor, and generally every Artificer, is ready and
able to render a reason in defense of his profession and trade, and yet many
Christians, (even Parents and Masters, and Magistrates) cannot give an account
of their religion.

Sect. 10.
Sixthly, They are so far from being convinced of the sinfulnes of their
ordinary evil thoughts, word^* and actions (though a very thought, may be
unpardonable: as Simon Peter intimates to Simon Magus* Acts 8. 22.) that they
think they do well; and deserve praise for the foulest sin that can be
committed: namely for persecuting Christ in his members. Witness Bishop Laud,
Wren, and their fellows, when they have been examined. Nor is this the case
of a few, but of all natural men. Nor of the meanest, simplest, or
uncivill^st, but principally of the greatest and wisest, and learnedest
Civilians, and Moralists. Yea who have been so active and forwards, as some
hundreds of Preachers, and Prelates in this land. And not only with tongue
persecution, in railing upon, slandering, and nick-naming all godly Christians,
and preachers, even out of the pulpit, and that in words of Scripture, (which
shows a reprobate judgment) but even excommunicated, arraigned, imprisoned,
whipped, *beggered, branded, banished, dismembered, and in the end, when all would
not beat them off from Christ, and from keeping a good conscience, killed
them. Yea, how many of these Bishops, and Clergy men, have been the
incendiaries of this bloody, and worse then salvage war, in all the three
Kingdoms? merely out of a mortal hatred, and enmity which they bear against
zealous Christians? their sincerity and the power of religion. In which they
but fulfill those words of our Savior. Luke 21. They shall put you out of the
Sinagogues, persecute you, imprison you, and kill you for my names sake. verse.
12. and in all, thinks that they do God good service. John 16. 2. So far are
they from thinking the worst of murders a sin. And no wonder, when St. Paul
tells you, that it was his very case, so long as he was in his natural
condition. Acts 26. 9. and 1 Timothy 1. 13.

Sect. 11.
Seventhly, So far are natural men, from seeing their sins, or desiring to
see them, that if a Minister in discharging his duty, shall but deal plainly
with them, in laying open their sins, and declaring the judgments of God due
unto the same. powerfully applying it to their consciences, they will persecute
him for it, even to the death, as the Jews served our Savior. John 7. 7. and
all the Prophets before him, and Apostles after him. Pro. 15. 12. Amos 5. 10.
Mat. 23. 37. Gal. 4. 16. 1 These. 2. 16. Acts 4 17. 18. and 7. 27. and 19. 28. 1
Kings 22. 8. John 3. 19. 20* 21. And so you have it proved, that all natural
men justify themselves more or less, and think they are pure and without sin.

But hear the reasons of this their miserable mistake, and you will the less
wonder at it.

Sect. 12.
In the word of God I find 7. reasons thereof. 4. Negative. 3. Affirmative.
The reasons Negative are these. 1. The deceitfulness of their hearts. 2. They
are unregenerate. 3. they want the eye of faith. 4. They are not vers*d in the
Scriptures, nor have they the spirit to convince them of sin.
The affirmative reasons are these. 1. Sin 2. God in judgment 3. Satan
further
blinds them. that they cannot see their finfulnesse.

Only observe by the way, that the four first reasons, are applyable to all
natural men, even the civillest and wisest of them, the 3 last pertain chiefly
to the obstinate and superlative in sin, in whom this ignorance, and
blindness is much increased, for there are Three de*grees of ignorance. 1.
Natural, which is the effect of Original Sin. 2. Adventitious, which is
accompanied with actual* Sin* 3. Habitual, which arises from the excess of
Sin.


But least in handling all of the^, I should tire my Reader, I will in a few
words give you the sum of all.

Are they unregenerate (as none can deny) then there is a mighty and vast
difference between natural men, and the regenerate in many particulars. I Will
give you an instance or two well worth your observing.

Natural men in Scripture, (for I will lay down their several Characters in
the very expressions of the Holy Ghost) are said to have

Uncircumcised hearts, Jer. 9. 26. Romans 2. 29 Gross hearts, Mat. 13. 15.
Brawny hearts, Isay 6. 10. Fatt hearts, Acts 28. 27. Hearts without feeling,
Ephesians. 4. 18. 19. Foolish hearts. Romans 1. 21. Bl^nd and dark hearts, Romans 1. 21,
Beasts hearts, Dan. 4. 16. Jer. 51. 17. Dead hearts, 1 Samuel 25. 37. No hearts,
Hosea 7. 11. Evil and wicked hearts, Genesis 6. 5. and 18. 21. Uncle ane hearts,
Ezekiel. 14. Impure hearts, James 4. 8*

Hearts Slow to believe, Luke 24. 25. That cannot repent, Rom! 2.


Fained hearts, Jer. 3. 10. Pro. 11* 20. False hearts* Jer. 5. 23. Deceitful
hearts, Jer. 17. 9. Divided hearts, Hosea 10. 2. Double hearts, 1 Chronicles. 12.
33. Psalm. 12. 2. A hear and a heart, Jer. 32. Proud hearts Deuteronomy. 17. Froward
hearts, Pro. 11. 20. Stubborn hearts, Hosea 13. 6. Obstinate hearts, Jer. 52.
Hard hearts, Exodus 9. 12. And Stony hear^s, Ezekiel. 11. 19.

Whereof not a few by custom in sin harden their own hearts, Deuteronomy. 15* 7.
Heb. 3. 8. Pro. 28. 14. Yea* make them as hard as an Adamant, Zach. 7. 12.
Least they should hear the Law, and be converted by ^he Gospel, Isay 6. 10.
where upon God in judgment hardens them, Exodus 7. 3. 22. and 10. 20. and 14.
8. so making them more hard and brawny, Isay 6. 10. John 12. 40.

Whereas on the contrary, God circumciseth the hearts of his children that
believe in him* and of stony hearts makes them fleshie and soft* Ezekiel. 11. 19.
Romans 2. 29. Yea, takes away the stony hearts out of their bodies, and giv^th
them new hearts. Ezekiel* 36. 26* even pu^ting a new spirit into them. Ezekiel. 11,
19.

Besides, he so farther softens them, that they become like m^lling wax. Psalm.
22. 14. then op^ns them to hear and receive his word. Acts 16. 14. 1 Samuel 10.
26. Yea he wash^th them from wickedness* Jer. 4. 14. cleanses them, Psalm. 73.
13. purifies them by faith, Acts 15. 9 and sheds his love abroad in their
hearts by the Holy Ghost* Romans 5. 5. And having thus prepared them* he writ^ ^
his law in their hearts, Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 10. and 10. 16. And put s in them
such a filial fear of his name, that they shall never depart from him. Jer.
32. 40,

Whence they are said by the Holy Ghost, to be pricked in their hearts, Acts
2. 37. To set and apply their hearts to understand his precepts, Pro. 2. 2.
Dan. 10. And to seek him with their whole hearts, Psalm. 119. To have
perceiving hearts, Deuteronomy. 29. 4 To lay up his word in their hearts, Psalm. 119.
11. Yea to have it written in them, Psalm. 37. 31. And to keep his commandments
in their hearts. Pro. 3. 1. and 4. 21.

To have* contrite hearts, Psalm. 34 18. Repenting hearts, Rom 2. 5.. Faithful
and believing hearts, Romans 10. 9. Willing hearts, Exo. 35. 5. Meek, humble and
lowly hearts, Mat. 5. 3. to 6. and 11. 25. To have steadfast, Isay 38. 3.
stable, Heb. 13. 9. Wise, Pro. 18. 15. and understanding hearts, 1 Kings* 3.
12. To have single hearts, Ephesians. 6. 5. Sincere hearts, Genesis 20. 5. True
hearts, Heb. 10. 2^. Honest and Good hearts, Luke 8. 15. Pure hearts, 1 Peter.
1. 22. Mat. 5. 8. Clean hearts, Psalm. 51. 10* and* Perfect hearts, 1 Kings 8.
61. Psalm. 101. 2. Isay 38* 3.

And what can be further said, whether in praise of the own, or in dispraise
of the other. But take another instance, for our scoffing Adversaries will
never be sufficiently convinced* until God gives them new hearts.

Sect. 13.
Secondly, As the regenerate and unregenerate, believers and unbele^vers differ
in their hearts, so no l^sse in their sight and knowledge of spiritual things.
Whence all men in their natural condition are said by the Holy Ghost to be
blind and in darken^sse, Psalm. 69. 23. John 12. 40. Matthew. 4* ^^6. and 15. 14.
Eph^s. 4. 18. 19. and 5. 8. 1 Peter 2. 9. Whereby is meant the darkness of
their understandings.

To be Foolish, Isa. 56. 10. Romans 1. 21* 22. Jo. 3. 19. Ignorant, Jer. 4. 22.
Rev. 3. 17. Drunken and Asleep not knowing what they do. Luke 23. 34. Mad,
Luke 15. 17. 2 Pet. 2. 16. No better then Beasts, in their knowledge of
spiritual things, Jer. 51. 57. Psalm. 49. 12.
As the Horse and Mule which perceive nothing, Psalm. 32. 9. Acts 28. 26.

And as if this were too little, many of them blind their own eyes with their
wickedness, Psa. 2. 1. to 17. prejudice, 1 Cor. 2. 8.


Yea, wink with their eyes, that they may not see the truth. Mat. 13. 15* Acts
28. 27. Whence God in judgment gives them the spirit of slumber, eyes that
they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, Romans 11. 8. Yea,
shuts up their eyes, Isay 6. 9. 10. and blinds their minds. John 12. 40. And
delivers them up to the prince of darkness to be further blinded. Psalm. 69.
23. Ephesians. 6. 12.

Whereas on the contrary, God opens the eyes of believers, Isay 42. 7. Acts 26.
18. To see the wonders of his law. Psalm. 119. 18. Yea, gives them the spirit of
wisdom and revelation to teach them all needful truths, Ephesians. 1. 17. 1 Cor.
2. 10. Whence they are said in Scripture, to have their eyes in their heads and
open. Eccle. 2. 14. And to have.

seeing and enlightened eyes, Ephesians. 1. 18. and called children of the light and
of the day, 1 These. 5. 5. Counted a Sober Wise, Knowing Understanding
people, Deuteronomy. 4. 6.

And that increase in knowledge daily. pro. 4. 18. And many the like
expressions mentioned in the word of God, which I purposely omit.

Sect. 14.
Which being so; were the same but truly beleevrd, rightly applied, and
seriously considered (As O that men would but believe the word of God to be
Gods word!) it would soon put an end to all strife, cure scoffers of their
prejudice and misprision, and make them love where they hate, and hate where
they love, but this is the gift of God alone. Wherefore I crave no more of thee
but to mind what has been spoken.

If it be thus, that so long as we remain in our natural condition, we have
eyes and see not, cares and hear not, hearts and understand not spiritual
things, as Christ himself plainly affirms, Mat ^13. 15. and his Apostle,
Acts 28. 27. and before them both the Prophet Isay chap. 6. 9. 10. And that we
are only bent to follow the way of our own hearts, Isay, 57. 17. which are
deceitful above all things, Jer. 17. 9. How is it possible the natural man,
should be truly sensible of those swarms, those litters, those legions of
evil lusts and cogitations that lie lurking in his heart? No this is only
proper to the regenerate man, who daily communes with his own heart, Psalm. 4.
4. brings it to the rule of the Law, which is holy, just and good, Romans 7. 12.
has the light of the Gospel, Luke 1. 79. and the spirit of God to teach him
all things, 1 Cor. 2. 10. and who is in continual combat, between the flesh
and the spirit, Romans 7. chap. Gal. 5. 17.

For it requires thel ight of grace to see, even the dust and cobwebs, but to
discern the smallest moats of evil in the houses of our hearts, the Son of
Righteousness must first arise in our souls,

Again, if their hearts be ^ncircumcised, brawny, hard, etc. they cannot feel
sin. If they are ignorant, foolish, no better then beasts in understanding. If
they be blind, drunk, and in the dark. Yea, if they be stark dead in sin and
in soul, they can no more see the spiritual corruption of their souls, then
a blind Ethiopian can see his blackness, or then one in the dark can see his
foulenes and deformity, or then a dead man can feel the weight of a burden,
when it is laid upon him.

Sect. 15.
True it is that Korah and his company (not for want of ignorance) will compare
themselves with Moses and Aaron, and those shallow headed verbalists, Acts 17.
18. will undervalue St. Paul, not thinking him worthy to carry their books
after them for learning, because he does not in like pompous ostentation set
forth himself, but it is only in conceit wherein alone pride consists.

Secondly, it cannot be denied, but many natural carnal, yea vicious, wicked
men, have enlightened heads, and flueent tongues; as had Balaam, and Judas, and
Paul before his conversion, and the Scribes and Pharisees, but their hearts
remain dark and foolish, as is plain by Romans 1. 21. 22. 25. 30. John 3. 10.
whence even the wisest of them, are called by our Savior fools and blind,
Mat. 23. 16. 17. 19. 24. 26. and 27. 3. 4 5. 2 Pet. 2. 16. And take this for a
rule, he that has but a show of holiness, has but a show of wisdom.

There is no knowledge, to the knowledge of a man's self, nor no knowledge of a
man's self, to the knowledge of his own weakness. Nor do we know, that
until we can discern sin in every thing we think or speak, or do, and
still the more of either grace or wisdom we have, the more we know our sins
and wants.

Thirdly, I grant also that the most beef brained Sensualist, is wise enough
to see small motes in others (especially in the godly) though they cannot
discern their own beams, as our Savior shows, Mat. 7. 3. But this is no
privilege, but a misery springing from the deceitfulness of their hearts;
and which aggravates their offense so, that it leaves them without excuse, and
will make them speechless as the great day of their accounts.

Fourthly and lastly, it is acknowledged, that a beggar may dream he is a
King, or a Traitor that he shall be crowned when he is to be beheaded, yea, and
for the time be as much pleased there with: we have several presidents for it.
The Church of Laodicea could flatter her self with an opinion that she was
rich, and increased with goods, and had need of nothing, when yet she was
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind and naked, Rev. 3. 17. The young
man in the Gospel could brag, that he had kept all the commandema^^^ from his
youth. And that cackling Pharisee, Luk^ the 18. 11. 12. could tell God to his
face, that (...) not like other men* (in which the clock of his (...) went
truer then the dial of his heart, for he was like none that should be saved)
he meant he was not given to this or that sin, no, he was not like that
penitent Publican, for he did this and that duty, for which God was beholding
to him, when yet God even abhorred him the most of any.

Sect. 16.
And just so it fares with these men, they are no dissemblers* yea they hate
the hypocrisy of professors, they do not justify themselves and despise
others, like the Puritans, they are not factious, scismaticall, singular,
sencorious, etc. they are not rebellious nor contentious like the Brownists and
Anabaptists, they pay every man his own, and do no man wrong, they love an
honest man with their hearts, etc. And as touching their faith in Christ, they
never doubted in all their lives* nor were they ever troubled in mind, as many
scrupulous fools are, and yet poor souls, they are wretched, and miserable,
and poor, and blind, and naked of all spiritual indowments. For (besides that
God prefers the penitent Publican, that trusted in his mercy, before the
proud Pharisee, that trusted in his own merits, Luke 18.) what says St.
Austin most excellently. There is no true virtue, where there is no true
Religion, and that conscience which is not directed by the word, even* when it
does best, does ill, because it does it not in faith, obedience and love. Nor
will God accept of any action, unless it flows from a pious and good heart,
sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Yea, civil honesty, severed from true piety,
humility, saving knowledge, sincere love to God, true obedience to his word*
justifying faith, a zeal of Gods glory, and a desire to edify and win others,
God will neither accept nor reward, but account of their moral. virtues but as
shining or glistering sins, because they spring from ignorance, infidelity,
self love, and other carnal respects.

Yea thy best services, as praying, and fasting, and receiving, and giving of
Alms, etc. unless they be done in faith, obedience to the word, and that God
may have glory thereby, are no better in Gods account, then if thou had
slain a man, or cut of a dogs neck, or offered swines blood, or blessed an
Idol, as himself affirms, Isay 66. 3. And many examples prove, namely, Caines
sacrificing, 1 John 3. 12. the Jews fasting, Jsay 58. those reprobates
preaching in Christ's name, and casting out of Devils, Mat. 7. whose outward
works were the same which the godly performed. As for instance, Paul a
Pharisee, was according to the righteousness of the Law unreprovable, yet if
Paul had not gone from Gamaliels feet to Christ's, he had never been saved. Two
things are required in a good work, the meritorious part to get Heaven, and
the satisfactory part to escape Hell: Wherefore trust not to thine own
righteousness, for as yet thou art in thy blood, Ezekiel* 16. 6. And have to
answer not only for thine original guilt, (for we are all by nature as liable
to Adams forfetute, as the heir is liable to his fathers debt) but for every
thought, word, and action of thine from thine infancy, for until thy sins
even drive thee to despair of all other helps, Christ can profit thee nothing
as himself affirms, Mat. 9. 12. 13. Luke 1. 53. Gal. 5. 1. to 7.

And the sole perfection of a Christian, is the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, and the not imputation of his own unrighteousness. Romans 10.
4. For as Christ was a sinner, only by imputation of our sins, so we are
just, only by the imputation of his righteousness. Our good works cannot
justify us* or deserve any thing at all at Gods hands, it is only in Christ
that they are accepted, and only for Christ that they are rewarded. Yea, the
opinion of our own righteousness, is so far from saving us, that it keeps us
from being saved, as is evident by Mark 2. 17. and Luke 1. 53.

Sect. 17.
Whence it is* that the more unrebukable any natural man is, the greater is
the difficulty of his conversion. For does not experience show, that as nothing
is more easily broken then that which is most hard, so notorious offenders, are
nothing so hard to be convinced and converted, as the civilly honest. The
civil ^usticiary is like the young man in the Gospel, that supposed he had
honestly kept all the commandments, who when he was bidden to follow Christ
turned his back upon him. But the loose Libertine resembles Matthew the
Publican, a notorious sinner, who was no sooner called, but he left all and
followed Christ.

Indeed there is small hope of either in the case they are in, because they see
not their need of Christ, neither can they have the least share at all in him,
until with St. Paul, they see themselves the greatest of sinners, find
themselves in a lost condition, and utterly despair of all other helps, as
they may see Mark 2. 17. Luke 1. 53. And indeed this conceited righteousness,
or this opinion of being in case good enough, is the chief and only cause of
all unrighteousness, and many a man had proved good, if he had not so thought
himself. But no soul can be so dangerously sick* as that which is least
sensible of its being sick. Neither is there a poorer wretch upon the face of
the earth then such a I^^odi^ean that brags he is rich and wants nothing,
^evel. 3. 17. only he is pus^ up and knows nothing, 1 Timothy 6. 4. Yea, this
puts him out of all possibility of being bettered, for what we presume to have
attained, we seek not after.

A man must know himself sick, before he will seek to the Physi^ian, Yea,
the sight of our filthiness, is the very first step toward clea^nesse: Until
Paul was humbled to the very ground, even trembling and astonished* he never
asked Jesus of Naz^reth, what shall I do, Acts, 9* 4* 5, 6. Nor is a man fit
to hear the soft voice of* evangelical mercy, till he is wrote upon by the
gusts and flashes of the Law. Nor are they in the least degree qualified for
that* For admit they hear the Law, (whenc^ comes the knowledge of sin, Rom*
7 7.) read and expounded never so clearly, they cannot understand the
spiritualty of it: Because they have a veil or curtain drawn over their
hearts, which is never taken away until men turn to the Lord, at which tune
it is taken away, as the Apostle most excellently discribes. 2 Cor. 3. 14* 15.
16. Romans 12. 2. God must give them repentance, before they can acknowledge the
truth, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Whence it is, that natural men are never a whit, or very
little troubled for their sins, be they never so many and heinous. Yea, after
long custom in sin, their hearts and consciences are so brawned and hardened,
yea, so feared, as with an hot Iron, and cast into such a dead sleep by Satan*
that their consciences become mere Idol consciences, even wanting a month to
speak, because it wants eyes to see. Indeed as dumb Ministers in the world,
go for good Ministers because quiet (...) so ignorant and tongue-tyed
consciences (...) for good ones, with men of the world, though the time will
come, that men shall curse both those ^inisters, and this peace of their
consciences for (...) them so quietly to Hell. Because if each of these had
done his office they could never have miscarried. For forget thy good deeds and
God will remember them, remember thy evil deeds, and he will forget them.

Sect. 18.
Secondly, It is the peculiar office of Gods spirit to convience of sin. As
it is, John 16* 8. 1 Cor. 2. 10. 12. 15. 16. For as none can behold the Sun but
by the benefit of the Sun. So none can know God, nor the things of God, but by
the revelation of God, 1 Cor 12. 3 8. Mat. 16 17. Luke 21. 85. God is the Sun
of our souls, his word as a sun dyall, in which may be seen all the letters,
either by day or candle light. but to know what a clock it is, and how the
time passes, the Sun must shine. So without Gods spirit we cannotby the word
know how it fares with our souls. For whereas sin comes with conception, and
some moral principles by education, grace comes only by inspiration, as
experience teaches. It is said that Melancton (having found the word most
easily to prevail with him) doubted not but his preaching, should do wonders
upon others, but having tried, he sound and confess, that old Adam was too
strong for young Melancton, whence he resolved upon another course, viz. to add
unto his preaching, faithful and servent prayer for them, saying, though our
reasons cannot open their eyes, yet God who brought light out of dark^nesse can
do it, and therefore we pray unto him, with the Prophet for his servant. 2
Kings 6. 17 Lord open their eyes.

And certainly if arguments, or the evidence and demonstration of reason,
drawn from the very word it self* could convince the judgments, and change
the minds of our malicious adversaries, there needed no more to be spoken then
has been spoken in the former treatise, and this to cure their Enmity,
Prejudice, and Misprision toward Religion, and the Religious. Yea, admit they
but minded what has now been said of this argument* what could they have to
object? For i^ the religious (whem they term Puritanes) are so far from
justifying themselves, that their thoughts are chiefly taken up with their own
wants and infirmities, and that they account their v^r^ (...), (...) as filthyr
^ggs? And that their (...) the (...), do indeed through ignorance and bl^^dues
just^fie themselves, and think they are pure and without sin? when they are
not in any degree purged from their filthiness, as has been plenti^ully
proved Let them acknowledge, yea, let all men upright^y and impar^ially
confess, that the reputed Pu^ita^^ (...) no Pu^i^ane, but that their accuse^s,
who rai^e and cry out so against Puritanisme, are every of them both notorious
Puritans, and the right heirs aparant to him ^ho is the Father of lies, John
8. 44. For see how scandalous, how slight, how false and forged thi^ their
accusation is, so are all the residue, as I shall be able easily to evince. For
they are no more guilty of the things they are accused, then Benjamin was o^
Joseph's Cup, when it was put into his Sack.

But it is the spirit of God alone, that can convince men both of their
sinfullnesse and maliciousness. For as mere sense is incapable of the rules of
reason, so reason is no lesfe incapable of the things that are supernatural.
The true knowledge of the nature and state of the soul, must come by his
inspiration that gave the substance. With the spirits help, the means can
never be too weak: without it never strong enough. Wherefore let us importune
God the father, (who only has the key of the heart) for his holy spirit, to
become their teacher, then shall their understandings be opened to discern the
truth clearly, as it fared with those Disciples* Luke 24. 44. 45. and their
hearts changed as St. Paul's was* Acts 9. In the mean time, let us pray for
them, as Christ for his murderers, Father forgive them for they know not wh^^
they do, Luke 23. 34.

And so much concerning your first Misprision Now let us hear what else you
stumble at?

Sect. 19.
Question. You have sufficiently satisfied me touching who are, and who are not
pure in their own eyes; But secondly, they are grieviously accused ^ rash
judging, and sensoriousnesse?

Answer. I confess it, but the truth is, not they, bu^ their accusers are
guilty of this crime also, as it ^a*red between Joseph and his mistress; Who
grieviously complained of him, when he had more reason to complain of her. For
bring both to the trial; and you shall find: that they are the only censurers,
who cry out so against censuring* and that those who are condemned for judging
rashly, do indeed but judge justly, and warrantably according to the rule of
Gods word. Now that the accused are not guilty, will appear by many
particulars, as

First, they are so far from judging men for appearances, or motes, or some
sudden eruptions, that they neither do nor dare judge any one wicked for
this or that single act of gross impiety. For admit they seen man once drunk,
or hear him overlash with his tongue in a passion, or find him convicted of
some foul enormity; they hold not this a suffi cient ground to conclude him a
wicked man, or an Hypocrite, when the maine tenor and course of his life
besides, is a continued current of honesty and goodness. No, they know and are
acquainted with the word, and therefore are better taught then to be so
uncharitable.

Well may they suspend their good opinion in case of some unexpected
misdemeanor, or for lesser evils, either affected, or often repeated, but they
know that every bad act, does not denominate a sinner. One act makes not an
habit, every vice is a sin, but every sin is not a vice. Once being overtaken
with drink, makes not a drunkard, nor one oath a swearer, nor one falsehood a
liar. Yea, a trip in the way, sets a man somewhat the more forward if he do
not fall.

One act can no more make a good heart unrighteous, then a trade of sin can
stand with regeneration, for as there are some acts where in the Hypocrite is
like a Saint* so there are some ag^ine wherein the greatest Saint upon (...)
^ay (...) like an Hypocrite. As which (...) the Saint* have not once done that
(even after conv^^sion and regeneration) whereof they are ashamed Y^a* (...) ^r
a few sinful acts were a (...) an Hypocrite, what would become of all the
(...) ev^n the best recorded in Scripture.

And therefore the wise charity of Christians, like the mercy of God^ can
distinguish betwixt si^nes of infirmity, and the common practice o^si^ne, and
esteem men not by a transient act, but by a perm^nent condition* knowing that
the tenor or accustomed course of a man's life, his whole conversation must
either allow or condemn him before God* not some sudden ^rruptions. For
neither good nor bad at the last day shall ^e judged by every one of his
actions, but by all, not according to his ^^eps, but according to his ways.
Jer. 32. 19

Indeed as chariti^ in them, does not allow o^ ground^e^se ^uspition, so it does
not thrust out di^cretion: They may not judge rashly, but they ought to ju^ge
(...) As they are not so ove^ly as to take mot^s for beams* so neither are
they so partial, as to account beams motes, least thereby they should foster
iniquity. For to be vices friend, is to be ver^^^^es en^mie, and ^o ^^sti^i^
the wicked, is as bad as to condemn the just* Pro. 17. 15.

Sect. 20.
Therefore, though they will not condemn a man for one single act, or s^^dain
accident, yet i^ they see the m^in^ (...) and course of his life to b^ wholely
vicious and sinful, they will and may boldly censure him a wicked man. As for
example. If we know a man to be a common Drunkard* Isay 5. 22. Heb. 2. 15. Joel
1. 5. Or a con^inuall Sweater. Psalm. 10 7. Jer. 23. 10. Exodus 20. 7. (...) 5.
12. O^ ^n (...) companion of Ha^lo^s* Pro. 7. 10. 1 Cor* 6* ^5 Or a^^
^^c^stomary Deceiver, Pro. 1. 13. and 20. 17* and 2^* 6. Or a frequent
Slanderer of his neighb^^r D^ut. 27. 24. Psalm. 101. 5. Or an open Sabbath
b^e^k^r, (for God has given the Sabbath as a ^ig^e between him and his, in
point of Sanctification, Exodus 31. 13* to 18. So that he who cares not to
propha^e the Sabbath, by that sign, is known to be none of Gods people.)

Again, If we hear a man boast of sin and mischi^fe, or defend it. Psalm.
52. 1. If we perceive that a man makes no conscience of prayer, reading the
word, etc. in his fami^ie, Psalm. 14 4. and 79. 6. Jer. 10. 25. If we find one
to be of a reprobate judgment, touching actions and persons, est^eming good
evil, and evil good P^o. 17* 15. and ^9. 27. Isay 5. 20. Or ^h^t (...) (...)
h^^ brother* ^or doing that which i^ good* as ^ai^ did Ab^ll, 1 Joh^ 3. 12. Or
to be an affected Scoffer at religion. Genesis 21. 9. 10. 2 Samuel 6. 16* 20. 21.
22. 23. Psalm. 1. 1. Or to lay plo^^, or consult (...) others against the godly,
Psalm. 83. 2 to 10 Mat. 26. 4. ma^ke the 3 6. Or to be an accus^r of them:
Revel. 12, 10 Levit. 19. 16. Pro. 16. 28. If we hear one ^ejoyce at the secr^t
infirmities of the godly, or open scandals of Hypocrites P^o. 11. 13. for none
do so but Gods enemies, as is plain by 2 Samuel 12. 14. because our brothers
fall, is the Devils victory.

Again, If we hear one carp, and fret against the word* refusing to hear it,
John 6. 66. and 8. 47. 2 Cor. 2. 15. 16 Pro. 29* 1. Or to withstand the
preaching of it: ^ Tim. 3. 8. Acts 13. 10. Or lastly, If we hear a Minister in
his preaching, to disgrace or revile the godly: So making sad the hearts of the
righteous: Or to ^astifie the wicked, so str^ng^hning them in their evil
^ou^ses, by preaching unto them p^^^^, Eze. 13. 22* Pro 24* 24. Upon any of
these grounds, we may boldly censure him a wicked man, and for the present in a
damnable condition.

And this is warranted by the word of God, for besides that they are
sufficiently marked out, and branded by the Holy Ghost for such* in the places
before quored. The word else where gives two infallible ru^^s whereby to know
and judge of a wicked man. The one is by his ^orkes, the other by his words,
the which will be more d^monstrative, if we take this received Axiom along with
us, as a ground whereon to build our ensuing discourse^* Namely, that

Every particular man, is either in his sins, unregenerate in the state of
nature, and so a wicked man, or else he (...) the state of grace a believer,
and so the child of God* For there is not a mean betwixt them, Every soul
says Chrysostom* is either the sp^use of Christ, or the A^^lt^^sse of the
*Devil. We are either a branch sp^^^g from Adams stock* which draws sap from
that cursed ^oote of death, or else we are transplanted into the vine Christ,
and d^aw our sap from him.

Now if we draw sap from this vine Christ, its impossible but we should bear
the f^uits of the spirit: which are love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith* me^keness^, temperance, recknoed up by the
Apostle, Gal. 5. 22. 23. And so on the contrary, if we draw sap from nature,
and bring forth the fruits and works of the flesh, which are manifest, as
Adultery, uncleanesse, Idolatry* witchcraft, hatred, varience, emulations,
wrath, strife, seditions, herisies, invyings, murders, drunk^nness^, revilings
and such like, verse 19 20. 21* Its impossible but we should be the children of
the Devil, for he that commits sin, says our Savior (meaning constantly
and greedily) i^ of the Devil, 1 John 3* 8. Which makes him say to the Jowes,
Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do,
John 8. 44. And again, verse 34* 39. Where the point is further amplified. And
to this St. Paul gives testimony, Romans 6. Saying, Know ye not, that to whom
ye yield your selves, servants to obey* his servants ye are to whom ye obey:
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. verse 16.

Whence it is, that our Savior warning us to beware of wicked men; says, Ye
shall know them by their fruits, Mat. 7. 16. Do ^^n gather grapes of thorns, or
sigs of thistles says he: Even so every good tree, brings forth good fruit,
but a corrupt tree, brings forth evil fruit* verse 17. 18. And in verse the
20. he tells us again, repeating the same words, that by their fruits we shall
know them. Yea, we may know them by their want of fruit: we more then suspect
want of sap in the root of a tr^e, if we find barrennes* in the branches. If
either it have bad fruit, or no fruit, it is but a dead faith. And the true
method of grace is, cease to do evil, learn to ^oe well. Isay 1* 16. 17. for
as grace enters into the heart* sin goes out, like ^^re out a vessel, when
wine is powered in. Or as it fares with Women, that having once conceived cannot
admit of a second conception, until they be delivered of the first. They*
Says St. Paul, that ar^ Christ's have ^ru^ified the flesh, with the affections
and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. But more fully to the point i^ hand, is that 2 Timothy 2.
19. The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal: the Lord knows
who are his [and that we may know likewise who are his, it follows
excellently] Let every one that calls on the name of Christ, depare from
iniquiti^ ^ Words and actions express our hearts to men: thoughts to God.

So that this is one infallible rule, which the word of God has set down
whereby in many cases, one man may know and judge of another: for the tree is
known by his fruit. Mat. 12. 33.

Sect. 21.
2. The second rule is by his words, and this is no l^sse infaliable: for out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Mat 12. 34. A good (...)
says our Savior, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things; He will be as careful, of what comes out of his mouth, as what
enters into it, and as circumspect* to keep his speech free from obs^enety, and
profaneness as his meat from poison He will either ^e silent, or his speech
shall be better then silents* Yea, his tongue usually, as being tou^ht with a
coal from the Altar: ministers grace unto the hearers, and warmes the
affections of the standers by.

Whereas contrarily, An evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart,
brings forth evil things Mat. 12. ^5. Yea, his tongue is so set on fire from
hell: James 3. 6. that your ears willglow* t^ h^^r him. For for the most part
he utters nothi^^ but (...) and filthy language, (...) with o^ths and untruths.
Yea, it is much if oat^s s^riv^ no^ ^or n^mber with words, scoffs with oaths;
and v^ine (...) wi^h both* So that their very sp^e^h ^ewra^^th them, as she
said to Peter, and Sir Thomas Moore to (...) or as Austine of Ciprians style.
For as if it we^^ not misery enough for them to be wicked, except they also
showed it to the world that others might hate them for the same (and certainly
it is both a mercy to us, and a just judgment of God upon them: that their
tongues are as bad a^ their hearts) like serving men, they suddenly tell us
without asking who ownes them: whether God or the Devil, that Satan, and not
the holy spirit bears ^ule in their souls. For where have you a drunkard, or
sw^arer, or liar, or lustful person and the like so wise: but he must tell to
every one that comes in his company, that he is such an one; Even as a f^^le
^^lleth every one ^e meers, that he is a fool, Eccles* 10. 3. And indeed as
oyl^ will not be hid in water: No more can superlative wickednes^^ be kept
close in the heart. For hear such but speak* and you shall find them to be of
the s^rpents broods, ^ither by their swearing, or by their rib^ul^ry* or ^y
their venting some way their enmity and m^li^^, against Cods people and
goodness.

Which (...) how can they blame us for granting wha^ they both (...) and invite
us unto? Or for endeavoring th^^ ^ha^ ^ood, which (if wise) they would v^^ue
more ^hen ^en thousand worlds.

But third^y, (...) t^eir pas^^on they would but hear reason: Besides ou^
warrant from Gods word, and their inviting us so to do: It cannot be otherwise
in the judgment of nature: for the tongue (says Pithagorus) is the bewrayer
of the heart. And a man is by nothing better known says Seneca, then by his
communication. The habit of the mind says Diogines, is best perceived by a
man's talking. And Socrates is peremptory, that he who cannot rule his tongue,
can much less rule his lusts. And another of them, There is the like
correspondence between the heart and tongue, that is between the bell and
clapper. Evil speaking discovers an evil heart: as the striking of the
clapper does a broken bell.

Yea, It were senseless to believe the contrary, for is it possible that the
fountain should be pure, when the streams which flow from it are ^o corrupt?
Can it be imagined, that one should defile his own tongue, that he may defile
another ears? That he should take the fire of his own lust, and by the
utmost of his endeavor fling it in at the windows of every soul that hears
him, to set them on fire also? If his heart were not altogether graceless? Nor
is this all; for least this poison should not hurt, he conserves and sugars his
filthiness in wit: that death may be sure to be swallowed. And that it may
enter, and piarce the deeper, he points it with the sharpness, and
pleasantness of invention and eloquence: so becoming a Devil unto men, by
turning wit into temptation, and perverting that excellent issue of the soul,
to be a factor for the flesh: Yea, to carry errands of beastliness, between
the inventer and the hearer: so becoming a destroyer of souls, while it
foldeth up the sin in sweetness.

Now well may the clusters of grapes, which grow upon a spiritual vine be hid
under the leaves* of temptation sometimes, that they cannot be seen: but its
never known that grapes and garicke grow upon the self same stalk^. Nor will
any man believe, good wine to be in that vessel, from whence vinegar is daily
drawn forth.

True it is, such an one may flatter himself, and boast that he has a good
heart and meaning: what soever men judge of his words. But Satan gulls him most
grossly: for besides what has been spoken, The Holy Ghost witnesses that
there is no fellowship between^ light and darkeness^, Christ and Belial. 2 Cor.
6. 14. 15. That the Arc and Dagon, cannon lodge under the self same roof. 1 Samuel 5. 4. And our Savior Christ tells us plainly, that both good and bad at
the last day, shall be judged by their words, Mat. 12. By thy words thou shall
be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned, verse 37. Yea, how
light soever thou make of them, thou shall give an account at the day of
judgem^nt, for ev^ry idle word thou speak. v^rse 36.

Away then with that more foolish then common boast of a good heart: when the
tongue is foul, and the lif^ filthy. For when smoke comes forth of the
chimny, there must needs be fire on the harth; when the floods of cor^uption
come gus^ing out at thin^ ^yes, hands and mouth, there must needs be a fountain
within thine heart, which maintains them.

True, we know nothing of thy future estate, or touching Gods decree: what
then, It is easy to say whether it be day or night with thee, although we
neither s^e S^n ^or Moon. Thou see not the wind, thine heart, thy brai^es,
thy soul: but the noise and op^r^tion of ^h^ wind do prove it. The panting of
the hear^ does express it, the thoughts and imagin^tions of the br^i^^ does
declare it, and life, senc^, and motion, shows that thou have a soul in thee.
And so much of the first particular.

Sect. 22.
2. Secondly nor do they determine of any ones final estate, be he never so
wicked. Well may some sensual ^gnoramous, or enemy to Religion: who has no
more skill in Scripture, then a beast has in music do (...) calling others
that are less civil, or more vicious ^h^n himself r^probates. But I never
heard a knowing ^h^^s^ian use the Phraise in such a sense, of any (...) person.

Secondly, (...) professor of Religion answer a ^c^^^ing (...) that sets ^is
wi^ and learning upon the ^^nters to argue against the truth, and floute at
(...) that he s^^mes to be of a reprobate judgem^nt, in calling good evil, and
evil good: Isay* 5. 20. Or oth^^s* that oppose and persecute the truth; that
they ^re ^or the present in a reprobate condition: (which may be affirmed of
all the Elect, before their c^nv^rsi^n* ^t being a true rule, whosoever is
co^v^rted shall be saved: but all that shall b^ s^ve^ are not converted.)

Or lastly, they may happen to t^ll such as are ignorant of the principles of
Religion, or such as are merely civi^l: that they are yet in their natural
condition, and enemies to God. And that they are no way fit to ^ye* before they
are able to y^eld a r^ason of the hope that is in them: and can prove a
manifest change in themselves, which is a truth undeniable, for except we be
borne again, we can never enter into the Kingdom of God, John 1. 13. and 3.
3. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 23. Romans 8. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 50. Gal. 6. 8. 1 John 2. 29. and 3.
9. and 5. 4. 5. 19. Yea, these are not only truths, but ^uch profitable truths,
and wholesome Items, such faithful, friendly and soul saving offices, that
had they eyes to see it, and hearts to make use of it, they would more love us
for this our love and faithfulness; then Jonathan did David, for his
fortitude. And heartily bless God, that ever they met with such plain dealing
people.

I know (and that by experience) our e^emies are either so ignorant, that they
cannot distinguish between these expressions and the former. Or so malicious,
that upon all occasions they will wrest our meaning so, as may make most to our
reproach. I know also, that it is a daily slander cast upon the religious* and
believed through a combination, and ^onfederac^^ of their envy and ignoranc^,
that we do judge them reprobates, and damn them to the very pi^ of Hell. And
that we are like those passion^te spirits Luke 9. 54. 55. who seeing the
Samaritanes, less^ cou^tious to our Savior then they expected: would have fire
from Heaven in all have to consume them. But it i^ altogether false, and they
who have thus affirmed are bound to repent of it. For first we think less
^^ale, more ^^arity and discretion fa^ better: and do acknowledge, that his
detestation is too deep, who will burn his linen because it is soul^.

Secondly, there is so little truth in the other p^r^ of this calumny that I
could never yet hear of ^ne ^a^* that (being a professor of religion* or any
whit verst in the Scripture) durst in the least measure undertake to determine
of any ones fin^lle estate. Yea take one that is the mo^^ rashly sensorious and
ridged, the most strict, or indiscreet Novice in Christianity that ever was:
And he will confess, that what the most vile are, he ha^h been: and what
himself is, the other may be before to morrow. As who can be acquainted with
the histories of David, Solom^^, (...) Peter, Paul, Mary Magdalen, the T^i^f^*
etc. And not acknowledge; that the streams of ^^ue ^^p^ntance* fl^wing from
Faith in Christ: will w^sh clean, and qu^te remove the foulest sins* w^^th^^
Th^ft, w^o ^ed^me, pride, murder, persecu^ion of the ^^uth, s^r^^ry, idolatry
and the like. Yea, they know from the word, that even the sin against ^he
holy Ghost were not unpardonable, if the party could but repent* And that Gods
mercy is often such, that where sin most abounds, there grace may as much
abound. As in St. Paul, Mary Magdalen, etc. Luther was a Monk^: St. Austin a
Mani^hee Yea, one fright changed Sa^l, a bloody pers^cuter, into Paul a most
famous Preacher.

And not seldom do they prove the rarest Christians, who have longest
continued in Satan's service: that they may with double industry, redeem the
time they have lost, and the evil they have committed. As it is often
observable in Scripture, that the children of women long barren, proved most
famous and excellent. As Sara brought forth Isaac, Rachel Joseph, Hannah
Samuel, Manoa Sampson, and Elizabeth John the baptist. Not that any should
presume to sin, or continue in sin, that grace may abound: For we read not of
a pardon for such a sin.

Briefly to shut up, and stop the mouth of this slander: Let the malicious
know, that as it is with trees whereof some are fruitful in the beginning of*
Summer, some a little after, some iu the midst, and some at the latter end
thereof: So it is with Gods Elect, and only they are counted barren, and
unfruitful by us, which bear no fruit at all: neither in beginning, middle or
end. Or as it fares with women that are a long time barren. who notwithstanding
may afterward prove fruitful, and happy in child bearing. Though I could say
more to make thee ashamed, for so slandering the servants of God, if it were
profitable for thee to hear it: But I fear least when I have rescued them,
thou should cut thy own throat with the same weapon. And yet I know no
warrant I have, to bawke any particle of divine truth: Wherefore hear it, and
in case it do prove thy bane thank thy self, I am guiltl^sse. The case is
this, Thou think we judge every notorious sinner, or malicious Persecuter a
very reprobate, though he be but in the midst of his way: But this is so far
from truth, that we can call God to witness, we dare not pronounce definitive
sentence, upon the wickedest man ali^e: though we even see his departure to be
never so sudden, or desparate, knowing that the mercy of God may come,
between the bridge and the brook, betwixt the knife and the throat. And that
repentance may be suggested to the heart, in a moment, in that very instant.
But this only may be, there is no promise for it. Many threatenings against it,
like that Proverbs 1. 24. to 32. little likely hood of it. And certainly such
an one, leaves behind him to his friends but small hope and comfort of his
salvation. And so much of the second particular.

Sect. 23.
3. Thirdly, Neither can it be proved, that any one of them dares judge the
worse of another for: what he has been* provided he is now a convert* For they
well know and consider, that the sins which went before our conversion, can
nothing prejudice us having repented. For true repentance, and faith in Christ:
wipes and washes away all the stain and guilt of them, even out of the sight
of God, much more should it do so, out of the sight of men.

True they are the greatest of ^inners in their own ^pprehension, or of sinners
the chief as St. Paul styles himself, but others ought not so to judge of
them. For as holy Barnard expresses it, a sinner upon his repentance, is a
sinner and no sinner: A sinner in his own apprehension, none in Gods account.
For which see a book case or two, Luke 15. 24. 32. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Acts 26. 10.
11. 12. Where we hear the Prodigals father, speaking as sparingly, and gen^^y,
and lovingly to him as is possible: but not a word of his gross demeanors,
while the repenting sinner himself, thinks he cannot have terms odious
enough, wherewithal to aggravate his offenses. And the self same difference
of expression, you have between what the Holy Ghost uses of St. Paul, and what
St. Paul uses of himself. And surely those sins are not ours, whereof we
have truly repented: The skin that is once washed, is as clean from soil as
if it had never been foul.

And indeed, if the man be new, why should the old names of his sins remain,
and be cast in his teeth? In a man's conversion, Old things are passed away, and
all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. A new life, and a new course should
not be disgraced* nor discouraged with the odious rehearsals of a man's old
sins. Neither does the mercy of our God measure us by what we were, but by
what he has new made us. Otherwise it would be wide with the best, for should
the eye of God look b^cke to our former estates, he should see Abraham an
Idolater, Paul a Persecutor, Manasses a Nigromancer, Mary Magdalen a Curtizan*
and the best vile enough to be ashamed of himself. Now if God have remitted
why should we retain? why should not we pardon where he does?

And yet how common is it with our malicious enemies (when they can find
nothing else to lay to our charge) to cast in our teeth our former failin gs?
resembling the Prodigalls elder brother, Luke 15. 28. 29, 30. whose evil eye,
envyous tongus, churlish and malicious ^arriage, paints them out to the life.
Though no great matter* for if the world condem^e us, and God do acquit us:
sin may grieve and trouble us, but the Devil himself shall never hur t us.

Sect. 24.
And so you have the reputed Puritans practice in point of judging, and
sensoriousnesse, with the rules they observe therein; and the same proved to be
just and warrantable from the word. Now see how rash, and partial their
malicious enemies and accusers are in judging of them: and how diametrially
opposite they are, to the wise judgment of Christians. As bring them to the
trial, who censure the religious to be the only censurers:

It will plainly appear, that they observe not any one of these rules from
Gods word, for

1. First, in stead of judging men according to to their constant and common
practice: If they but hear of a professor of religion, for otherwise they have
no quarrel against him* that through humane frailty, or some strong
temptation* does overshoot himself, or is overcom^ in a fault, at unawares,
they are so far from restoring such an one in the spirit of meekness, or
considering it may ^rove their own or any other man's case: which is the
Apostles caveat, Gal. 6. 1. That for this one, bare, single act, they will most
unjustly, and uncharitably, judge him to be an Hypocrite, and a Dissembler.
Yea damn him to the very pit of Hell. An assertion that deserves the rod: for
to things impossible, the law compels no man: Sa^es my Lord Cook in his
reports. But surely they expect, we should cease to be men so ^oone as we
become ^eligious* And that if Christ have once chosen us to be his servants,
and given us his spirit and grace: we should thenceforth be of a pure, and
unmixt nature. For were they of a right judgment, they would at least know:
that this Hagar, or in mate sin (though she have many a How) will not be
^u^ned quite out of doors. And that it is so bred in the bone, that it will
never out of the flesh: till our bones be ready with Joseph's bones to be
carried hence. For in many things we sin all; says St. James, James 3. 2.
Yea in all things, we all let fall many sins: as our own hearts out of
minutely experience can tell us. For though I dare not say, that this or that
action is sin: Yet I dare say there is sin in the action, be it what it
will: For though we are perfectly justified by the righteousness of Christ, and
have all graces (in their measure) wrought in us, in the very act of our own
conversion: yet our understandings are but in part enlightened, our wills and
affections but in part sanctified by the spirit. Neither is it for us to expect
a full stature, i^ the Cradle of our conversion: For as nature, so grace rises
by many degrees to perfection.

I grant there is a perfection of parts, and a perfec^^on of degrees: and that
the grace that is infused into us at the first is perfect in regard of the
parts; As a Child is a perfect man, in all the parts of a man, but not perfect
in regard of degrees, or in the quantity of every part: for we grow up in
grace, as a Child does in stature, until we attain to glory, which is grace
perfected. God deals in spiritual proceedings as in natural, ad extreama,
per medium: to extremes by the mean. Non nascimur senes: we are not borne old
men, but first Infants, then striplings, after that men. Yea the Infant in the
Mothers womb, first lives (as Aristotle will have it) the life of a Plant,
then of a sensitive creature, and then last of all of a man. And did not he,
who was God from eternity, and might have been perfect man in an instant: by
many degrees rise to perfection, both of his manhood; and the execution of his
mediatorship, to ^each us the necessity of leisure in spi^ituall proceedings?
Grace in its growth is like the change of a man's hair, from black to gray: or
the growth of a Tree, which is not wrought in a month, or a year, but in many
years we not perceiving how.

It is not with the Trees of righteousness, as it was with the Trees of
Paradise: which were created all perfect, and full of fruit^ the first day. But
as in nature there is first a seed, then a Plant, then a Tree, then fruit (as
a mighty Oak rises of a small Akorne) so in grace: We are conceived of
immortal seed, borne of the spirit, bring forth the buds and blossoms of
grace: and so go on to perfection; yearly increasing in the fruits of
obedience* We get not at one jumpe into heav^n, nor at one stroke kill we the
enemy.

Many are the vices, and imperfections: wherewith our souls (even from our
Cradles,) have been tapestred: and strive we never so to be rid of them, they
will still be hankering about us, for harbor and abode. Well may we overcome
those cursed Canamites so: as they cannot rule, and rain in us as in former
times: but we shall never utterly expel them, from dwelling amongst us. For
do what we can, yet still they will be as thorns in our sides, to vex and
grieve us.

The Regenerate man is not wholly spirit, as the Carnal man is wholly flesh: The
flesh will be lusting against the Spirit, as the spirit against the flesh: the
one will be tempting us unto sin, as the other is ever stirring us up to holy
obedience. The work of grace* though it does not suffer Christians to live as
they list; yet it does not enable them to live as they would. It is not so
broad as to allow of corruption: nor so narrow but it will permit of corruption.

The best Christians in this their state of imperfection; are like gold that is
a little too light: which ne^ds some grains of allowance to make it pass. We
must grant the best their allowance, and suply out of our love and mercy, what
we see wanting in them.

You have heard of the patience of Job, says St. James: and we have heard
likewise of his fits of impatiency too: but it pleased God mercifully to over
look that: whom we might do well to imitate. And indeed we may as well expect
that a Physician should never be sick, especially of a mortal disease: as that
the holiest, and greatest professor of Divinity, should live without falling
into sin, yea the greatest sin, if God in mercy hinder not. Neither does God
expect other obedience from his, then evangelicall. Indeed as the Angels are
pure spirits, so also God requires puer worship, and spiritual service of them.
But in his Children* he does not so much behold what we do, as accept of what
we would do. For (like a loving Father, to his tender Child) he accepts
affecting, for efecting; willing, for working; desires, for deeds, purposes,
for performances, pence, for pounds.

True the unbeleever, is under the strict rigor of the law, and bound to keep
it, both actually, and spiritually: but the believer has Christ to free him,
both from that rigor and penalty of it: in whom his failings are pardoned, his
affections, purposes, desires and endeavors accepted, as if he had performed
total obedience. The Lord Christ that works in us, both the will and the
work, will accept the will for the work. and that which is wanting in us, he
will supply with his own righteousness.

An honest purpose bears out many errors in the eye of mercy, King Asa had
diverse (no small) faults, yet with one breath does God report both these: The
high places were not removed, And nevertheless A^as heart was perfect. How
pleasing a thing is sincerity of heart, that in favor thereof, our just God
digests many an error. He will not see weaknesses, where he sees truth. There
is no cond^mnation (says St. Paul) to them that walk not after the flesh,
Romans 8 1. He does not say that have no flesh in them, but which walk not
after the flesh. It is the main course of our life, that must either a^^ow, or
condemn us; not some sudden, and particular eruptions. And pity it were that
the best man should be judged by ^very of his actions and not by all.

But how unlike unto God are these men: for let a professor of religion, but
once slip in all his life (As a horse may stumble that has four feet) even for
this single slip; all his graces, and good parts (be they never so eminent and
many: and he never so deserving) shall be imputed to hypocrisy, and himself
made the object of all their malice.

When perhaps themselves not only commit the same sins, or far greater:
but live in them, without fear, or remorse, or the least desire of amendment,
being much like, (but far worse then) Judah, who condemned his daughter in
law Tamar, to be burnt for being with child: but never considered his own
greater crime, first in detaining her from m^rriage, secondly in seducing her
with bribes to pl^y the whore, and lastly in acting that foul sin with her.
Genesis 38. 24. to 27. Or the Scribes and Pharisees, who used to lay heavy
burdens upon other men's shoulders, when themselves would not move them, with
one of their fingers. Matthew. 23. 4: Nor do they rest here, for

Sect. 25.
2. Secondly, they will judge one an hypocrite, for the least failing, or
infirmity they can espy in him: although the tenore, and maine course of his
life besides, be a constant current of holiness, and censure the smallest
offense, which a Godly man but once commits, more deeply: then the grossest
crimes themselves repeat every day. Other men's Gnats with them, are harder to
swallow, then their own Camels.

Its worth the observing, how quick-sighted these rash spirits are, in other
men's faults, and how blind to their own. If a moate be in their brothers
eye; their eye is still upon that moate, and so much of every act shall be
taken, as will serve for lime-twigs to take us* the rest which cannot but be
well construed, shall ly useless and unnoted. Yea even the least oversight,
or indiscretion in a professor, prevails more with them, to make them speak
evil of him, then much good can do to make them speak well of him. Because
natural men, are more apt to dispraise faults in others, then to commend
things well done; and in themselves, to think more of one good deed, then of a
hundred bad ones.

And whereas the sincere, and upright will pardon many things in others, which
they will not tolerate in themselves, these on the contrary, will make the
same things punishable in us, which they hold alowable in themselves: as if
they would compel us to go to heaven, while themselves are content to take
the other way.

Now these men, who can sooner, and more clearly discern, a moate in another
Eye, then a beam in their own: are just like the Pharisees. Who could see
more unlawfulness, in the disciples plucking a few ears of Corn, and the
Palsy man's ^arrying his bed upon the Sabath day, then in their own devouring
of widows houses, and could better afford themselves, to be the greatest of
sinners* then our savior to be in company with sinners. Yea to murder Christ,
then others to believe in him. Ioh. 7. 48.

Indeed they seem to be transcendantly Charitable, even lovi^g, and careing
for their neighbors more then themselves, resembling some husbands, who care
more for their wives honesty then their own. But the true genuine reason is,
these ridged censurers, as they can see another, but not themselves without a
glass; so they look to others, not to themselves, and they have much the more
quiet for so doing, an evil conscience, being like a bad wife, that will
either be gadding abroad, or scolding at home.

Sect. 26.
But could I prevail with these men, I would wish them to be sure that what
they hear of such a professor be true; because, First report, and that from
the Devils servants: is not a witness of sufficient credit* to make them pass
sentence upon a servant of God.

Indeed if thou will be led by report, no marvel that thou condemnest them
to the pit of hell; for thou shall be told, that such a puritan will not sell
a pennie-worth of Aqua-vite, upon a sabbath to save a man's life.

That another will refuse to receive money npon a bond, or morgage to day, being
the Lords day; that he may take the forfeiture, or a good round composition to
morrow. That another has undone such a man by extortion, and suits, and being
desired to let him out of prison, makes answer No: he shall rot there, for he
is a wicked man, and it is Gods will I should punish him. In fine thou shall be
told, that all professors will ly, and Cozen, though they will not swear, and
judge all to be damned reprobates, who are not of their own sect, with a
multitude of the like, Every one of which reports is as true, as that Naboth
was* a blasphemer of God and the King. Jeremiah an enemy to the State. Paul a
polluter of the Temple. Steeven a destroyer of the law; all the Disciples
deceivers* and Christ himself a wine bibber, a Sabath breaker, a seducer of
the people, a Beelzebub, etc. Which slanders were generally reported, and
confidently believed in their several times: as the like are at this present.
Wherefore, go not by hearsay, except thou love lies more then the truth.

Yea in this case, if thou did but know what wicked, and malicious hearts
some have against the Godly; and how full they are of the Serpents venom, as
being Satan's seed; and partaking of his nature; thou would acknowledge,
that report joined with the relaters own oath that he saw it, and knows the
same to be true: is too weak a ground whereon to build so heavy a sentence, as
the imputation of an hypocrite. As I could instance from experience, did not
the scripture afford examples thereof, as in the case of Naboth, Steven, our
Savior Christ. etc. But

Sect. 27.
2. Secondly, (For I will yet go farther with thee) Suppose thou art an eye
and an ear witness, of one man's being drunk, of another swearing, or lying,
of a third convicted of adultry, and the like: Each of them making an holy
profession, and show of godliness, yet this is not a sufficient ground for
thee to conclude they are Hypocrites: for to conclude any man an Hypocrite, for
one or two single acts of impiety, when the tenor and maine course of his life,
is a current of honesty and goodness, is against the rules, both of Divinity,
Physic, Experience and Philosophy,

Yea if one, or a few sinful acts, were a demonstrance of an Hypocrite, what
would become of those Champions, and Worthies, recorded in holy writ, where we
read that Noah was drunk, that Lot committed incest, that Abraham told lies,
that Joseph swore profanely, that Jacob used indirect means to get the
blessing, that Aaron mutined against Moses, and made a molten Calfe for the
people to worship, that David committed both adultry, and mu^ther, that Peter
denied and forswore his master and the like of many other, the dear Saints,
and servants of God.

My m^ttter leads me to produce these instances the better to aswage their
malice, and stop their mouths, who are so rash and uncharitable in judgeing
their brethren in the like cases. Nor should I deal uprightly, if I passed them
over.

But I grieve to think, what a desparate, woeful, and contrary use many of
them will make of it, for as sundry of St. Paul's hearers, (Spider like,)
wrested his Epistles, and other Scripture unto their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.
15. 16. So these being of a serpentine nature, (and Satan by his policy
working upon their depraved judgments, and corrupt hearts,) when they hea^e of
the slips and falls of these holy men* will ^o^thwi^h deco^kt the mercy of God
into poison, and appl^ them as presi^ents for imitation: yea as warrants for
their continuing in their evil courses. For al^hough evil was never made to
be imitated, but goodness: yet they will follow them in what they did amiss,
imitate none of their virtues, nor once take notice of their repentance. And
although God never intended one tittle of his word for a temptation, yet what
is recorded therein, of the Saints falls, and his unspeakable mercy* in
pardoning the foulest sins, has proved by accident the loss of many thousan^
souls,

But let such know, that there cannot be a more gross, and sottish delusion,
for what indeed is an argument of ^eare, they make an argument of presumption
in sinning: and what they hope shall excuse them, does but more properly
condemn them, because they had that warning before them.

What Pilote that were in his right wits* when he sees Seamarkes, purposely
set to give warning of Rocks, Sands and Shelves where on others have made
shipwreck, will take occasion thereby to run his Ship upon them: So what wise
man, that tenders the safety of his own soul, when he hears these examples,
which are recorded for our warning will not make them as so many monitors to
warn him to take ^eed. For if they being so godly, had their slips and falls,
let him that thinks he stands, take heed least ^e fall.

Nor will any that have grace, make their sins, and the mercy of God in
pardoning them, any encouragement to go on more securely in a sinful course,
but rather a caveat, and a spurr, to work out their salvations with fear and
trembling, as the Apostle exhorts. Phil. 2. 12. And whosoever does otherwise,
is like with that foolish builder, Lu. 14 28. to 31. to come short of his
reckoning. For their falls are written to raise us up when we are down, nor to
cast us down when we are up: And appointed for our consolation afterward, not
for one presumption before. They sinned that thou might not presume, they
were pardoned that thou might not despair.

Sect. 28.
Besides there is a mighty difference, between the same sins in thee, and in
them whom thou so uncharitably censurest: Namely between entertaining an evil
once and often, between falling into sin, and wallowing in it like a filthy
swine, or continuing therein a long time. Between an action and an occupation:
between sins of infirmity, and the common practice of sin: Between that
which we strive against and grieve for, and that wherein our whole delight is.
Between hating what we do, and our selves for doing it, together with grief
and sorrow afterward: And being glad of it, rejoicing in it, boasting of it,
yea pleading for it: and applauding our selves for our wickedness. Between sin
prevailing as a Tyrant, and sin raining as a lawful Sovereign. Against the
intention, and with full resolution. Between being hunted by sin and Satan,
until we be overborne by the violence, and strength of his temptations, and
our own corruptions; and so led captive against our wills and besides our
purpose, and contrary to our resolution: and yielding full consent, yea hunting
after sin, and the occasions thereof: Yea, drawing sin unto us as with
cart-ropes, and committing it even with greediness. Between being better, and
more careful afterward, as Peter after his denial and being hardened through
the custom of sin, growing worse and worse; because judgment is deferred
and thou have hitherto escaped punishment. Between yielding to one sin, and
entertaining all that offer themselves: So adding sin unto sin, and heaping
up wrath against the day of wrath. Between being surprised on the sudden,
when Satan has us at some extraordinary advantage of time, place, company,
etc. and committing it upon deliberation, advisedly, and of set purpose: Yea
studdying, plotting, and devising how to make others join with us in the same
sin. Between rising up again by true and unfeigned repentance, being sensible
of our own weakness* bewailing the same, carefully looking to our feet,
striving to ^un^^ more swiftly in the way of righteousness, flying ^^to God by
fervent prayer, desiring the assistance of his spirit whereby we may be able to
mortefie our flesh, and the corruptions thereof, never resting until we have
thoroughly washed our poluted souls, with the blood of Christ applied unto us
by a lively faith: and wilful impenitencie, joined with hardness of heart:
Even blessing thy self in thine own heart, saying J shall have peace although
J walk according to the stubbornenesse of mine own heart. Yea the difference
is such, that the Holy Ghost in favor of the sinceere and upright: will not
vouchsafe to the one the name of sin. As see 1 John 3. 9. Who so is borne of
God sins not, (that is with full consent of will) and what says the Law it
self? If violence be offered to a virgin, if she cry ^ut she shall not dye:
but if she cry not out she shall be punished with death. Deuteronomy* 22. 25. 26. 27.

Sect. 29.
Which being so, may make thee of another mind: that is to think much better
of them whom thou condemnest, and far worse of thy self, 1. Better of them,
for no mortal creature can be so vigilant, or Argus eyed: but sometimes he may
be surprised by an enemy. Sometimes grace is asleep in the holiest, and
wariest breasts, while they are miscarried by their passions to their cost. To
be always, and unchangeably good: is proper only to the glorified spirits in
Heaven. For in the Church militant here below a man may be a good Archer,
though he do not always hit the mark. Yea, it has ever been held, that a
few times hitting, countervailes often times missing.

2. Worse of thy self. For have they committed such and such sins, and so
broken their promise and vow made unto God in baptism? It was full sore
against their wills, but thou never had the least desire to perform thine:
Yea, it has ever been thy whole delight to break the same. And certainly he
is an honester man, that owing a great sum of money and promising payment
thereof, pays what he is able though he fall never so short of it: then he who
owing the like sum, and making the like promise, is so far from paying what he
should* that he squanders away what he has, and never intends to pay a
farthing.

Are their sins in them, great sins, as great in them as in thee, what then?
There is sin in the regenerate, there is nothing but sin in the
unregenerate. Even the Spouse in the Caticles justly complains of her
blackness, yet she is fair among other women. Cant. 5. Though the Publican
was not simply, and sufficienrly justified: yet he was rather justified then
the Pharisee. Our good actions cannot justify us, because in them the flesh
lusts against the spirit: Nor yet can our ill actions condemn us, because in
them the spirit lusts against the flesh.

We are all bound to keep the Law, and might have kept it perfectly had it not
been our own fault. But since the Fall we cannot keep one tittle of it: so
sin we mu^t of necessity, and the wages of every sin is death by that law:
yet no necessity of dying the death, except we love death more then life. For
God in his infinite wisdom and goodness, has not only found out a way to
satisfy his justice, and the law* but given his only begotten son to dye for
us, and to redeem us, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but
have everlasting life. John 3. 16. A mercy offered and a way found out: that
may astonish all the sons of men on earth, and Angels in Heaven.

But are we believers or unbeleevers? this is the maine of all: for

First, God esteems of faith above all other graces, deeds, or acts of ours;
John 6. 28. 29.

Secondly, If we are believers, we have Christ for our sur ety, and he has
redeemed and delivered us from the rigor and curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. and
5. 1. Romans 7. 6. and 10. 4. Neither are we any longer under the law but under
grace. Rom 6. 14. and shall be judged by the perfect law of liberty, Gal. 5* 1.
James ^. 25. Because Christ has sufficiently satisfied his fathers justice,
for all the sins of the faithful: and paid our debt even to the utmost
farthing, Isay 53. 4. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Heb. 9. 26. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Romans 3. 25. 26
1 John 1. 7 9. Yea if we lay hold on him by a lively faith, our sins are his
sins, and his righteousuesse our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. Psalm. 4. 1.

Not that we may sin the more freely: for even to believers the Law is given,
that grace may be required: and grace is given that the law may be fulfilled,
by us evangelically, for us by Christ (whose righteousness is ours) perfectly.
The Law is a glass to show us our spots, the Gospel a fountain to wash them
away. We look upon the Law to keep us from presumption, and upon the Gospel
to keep us from despair.

True every sin a believer commits deserves damnation, but no sin shall
condemn but the lying and continuing in it. Secondly, so our failings be not
wilful, though they be manyand great, yet they cannot hinder our interest in
the promises of God. For God that works in us both the will and the work:
Will accept the will for the work, and that which is wanting in us, Christ
will supply with his own righteousness. He respects not what we^ can do,
so much as what we would do^: and that which we would perform and cannot, he
esteemeeth as though it were performed.

Sect. 30.
Hear this all you that believe, and cry out Oh the depth! But let all
unbeleevers (such as censure the Saints as before is showed) hang down their
heads, and know to their sorrow: That except they become new creature^, Christ
shall profit them nothing* Gal. 5. 2. For being out of Christ they are bo^nd to
ke^p the whole law. Gal. 5. 3. Or stand liable to suffer the penalty thereof
for not keeping it. For though this be the condition of the New Covenant,
Believe and thou shall be saved: yet all that they have to trust unto is, Do
this and live, Romans 10 5. And cursed is every man, that continues not in all
things which are written in the book of the law to do them. Gal. 3. 10. And I
wish they would seriously think of it.

Indeed put ye off, concerning the former conversation the old man, which is
corrupted through the decieveable l^sts, and be renewed in the spirit of your
minds, and put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness: Ephesians. 4. 22. 23. 24. and then all the former promises, and
priveledges will belong unto you* but not before. And so much to make thee
wiser, now to make thee better.

Secondly, It may cause thee to sink down with shame to consider, that thou
have taken encouragement from the sins of Gods people, to go on more
securely in thy evil courses. They sinned, and God pardoned their sins, not
to make others presume to do the like: but to keep others from presuming on
their own strength, or from dispairing in case they should through human
frailty fall into the like.

Neither did God show mercy to them, that himself might be more dishonored, but
to gain thereby more glory to himself. As for example, God could have sent
Nathan sooner to David, and checked him in his first project of sinning: So had
Bathsheba been chaste, Vriah alive, and himself guiltl esse of murder: But
that almighty wisdom, knew how to win more glory by the permission, then by
the prevention. By the permission of one sin* to prevent milio^s; how many
thousands had presumed on their own strength, if such a Champion had not
fallen? How many thousand, had dispaired in the consideration of their own
misdeeds, and weaknesses: if such sins had not found remission? It is happy
for all after times, that we have such presidents: so holy sinners, so sinful
penitents, there falls have taught us by whom to stand.

Sect. 31.
But to stop thy mouth (for I have little hope to convince thy judgment) I
would seriously know? Whether thou will conclude that Noah, Lot, Abraham,
Jacob, Joseph, Aaron, David, and Peter were all Hypocrites: which by
consequence thou do, if perceiving a man to fall once, or twice into some
gross sin, thou presently condemnest him for an Hypocrite. Yea herein thou
do closely maintain those old and foul herisies of the Catherines,
Pelagi^ns, Donatists, Novations, Carpocrations, Jovinians Adamites, the
Bagadors in Almaine, Ebian, Giselburtus and their followers: who fondly held
that Gods people were regenerate into a pure and Angelical estate: having their
wills as free as Adam before his fall. Yea, that they were as innocent and as
free from original, and actual sin as Christ himself, (the opinion of our
brain sick Antinomi^ns, and Familists. Which proves thee a Puritan in thy
judgment, though in thy Practice thou art an Athiest. Whereas those whom thou
call Puritans, abominate all opinion of self purity and righteousness; as
well knowing that nothing can be more ridiculous, nor repugnant to wholesome
doctrine, the mercy of God, and a man's own salvation. Wherefore thou shall do
well, to be more sparing in thy censures, and more wary whom thou condemnest
of hypocrisy.

And then being upon a sure ground, that thou have light upon one that is so
indeed, favor him not, but use him as sometimes Jnnes of Court men, do a
Cheat, or a Bayliffe, or worse if thou can, for thou can not use him worse
then he deserves: For though Hypocrisy comes nearest to virtue, in her outward
habit, and deporment: yet she is the worst of vices. For as the best things
corrupted are the worst, so dissembled piety, and fained sanctity, is double
iniquity, and far worse then open impiety, as St. Austine speaks. And
therefore Hypocrites, shall have a double portion of vengeance, the lowest and
deepest place in Hell, as our Savior intimates. Mat. 23. 14.

Thirdly, take heed that in calling another Hypocrite, thou condemnest not thy
self: for so thou do, if thou art guilty of the same crimes which thou
layest to his charge, Romans 2. 1. 3. And with what judgment thou iudgest, thou
shall be judged, and with what measure thou meetest, it shall be measured to
thee again, Mat. 7. 2. Wherefore thou Hypocrite First cast out the beam out
of thine own eye, and then thou shall see clearly, to cast out the moate out
of thy br^thers eye. Mat. 7. 5.

When thou see thy brother slip, first reflect upon thy self, and say with
Plato am not I such an one? or with Austen may not I do the like? for he that
will cast a stone at an offender, must be free himself: before Samuel does
charge Isra^l with their sin, he clears his own innocence. 1 Samuel 12. And
were it not strange, that the witch should tell the jugler he has a bad
conscience. Or that the hypocrite should rail at the Player, or the Usurer
challenge the thief. Or if so, will they not retort this answer, Physician
heal thy self* Luke 4. 23.

And so much touching the second mistake of these shallow brains, in judging
their neighbors.

Sect. 32.
3. Thirdly, these rash spirits out of a blind and uncharitable pride, are so
desparately censorious, that they will not only count their brother an
hypocrite for infirmities; so resembling Jobs friends: but in case they observe
some glorious professor, to f^ll into any notorious scandal, as David did into
Adultry, and murder, or prove himself an hypocrite, by utterly falling away,
as Demas, that turned back to the embracing of this present world: instantly
they conceive a hard opinion of all the rest: and are so forestalled with
prejudice against the religious, that they resolve never to ^ee religious so
long as they live: for what say they? these are your professors, these your
Puritans* that under a color of religion, are so ^alse in their words, and so
unjust and unmercifull in their dealing, that whosoever puts any trust in them,
is sure to be deceived* God bless me from their religion etc.

So that he does not only condemn the persons of all good men, for the faults
of a few that are bad, ^ut their religion too: wherein God himself, and ^is
word suffers.

1. But O ye sottish sensuallists, are you so ignorant, as to think it any new
thing? Has it been otherwise in any Age, or state of the Church? Was Paradise
it self without a Serpent? When there was but four persons in the world that
offered sacrifice, was not one of them a murtherous Cain? Of eight souls in
the Arc, (a figure of the Church) was not one an impious Cham? Was the house
of Ely, without Hophny, and Phineas sons of Belial? Was not Saul among the
Prophets? And Judas among the Apostles? Were there not five foolish Virgins,
as well as five wise? Was there not one Guest at the Lords Table, who had not on
his wedding garment? Is not the church compared in the scripture to a field of
wheat mingled with Tares? To a draw net cast into the Sea, which gathers of
all kind of Fishes good and bad? etc. How then can it be expected that the
Visible Church now, should be without hypocrites in it? who pretend to worship
God, when they intend nothing less.

2. Again, is it any more then the holy Ghost has abundantly foretold, and
forewarned us of? to the end we might not be offended at the same. Gal. 2. 4.
Matthew 7 15. and 24. 24. 2 Cor. 11. 13. Rev. 2. 2. Romans 16 18. Titus 1. 11. 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. 5* Yea our savior shows, that there should be such
hypocrites, and so many of them, that if it were possible, they should turn
the very elect out of the way: as now they have done thee.

Sect. 33.
3. But admit the scriptures were silent herein: What is the Thief, to the
honest man? or what is the hypocrite to the true religion which he professes?
Because such a party has offended, thou will slander his religion, and all
that profess it. This argues that thou do it in mere spite, and malice
against God, against the children of God, and against religion it self, to make
it loathed and abandoned: even as those hardened Jews did, who spoke evil of the
way of truth before the multitude, to the end they should not receive the
doctrine which Paul preached. Act. 19. 9.

Or if it be not so, then where as now thou resemblest Orchanus, (who caused
his daughter to be buried alive, because Apollo had ravished her) hence
forward thou will cast the reflex of thy malice, upon those few only who are
indeed hypocrites, and not upon righteous men with him: who hate his conditions
honestly, as much as thou do him maliciously. Upon such a man's person, and
not upon his profession: for it is not because they are religious, but because
they are not religious enough, that men play the hypocrites. Their profession,
and purity, is not the cause of their wickedness; but their wickedness the
cause of such their counterfeiting profession: For the more deformed any act
is, the fairer vizard it still seeks, and the worse any thing is, the better
show it desires to make.

It is a usual thing for Rebels, to make their Proclamations in the name of
the King: And for Pirates when they intend to rob Merchants, to hang out the
flags of other nations, both to scandal them, and conceal themselves.

The Infidels in the Primitive Church, would raise mutinies, and up*roares, and
then, Father them upon the Christians. The Powder Traitors decreed to blow up
the State, and then lay it upon the Puritans, And good reason have they so to
Cloak their Villainy: for hereby the thief passes unsuspected, while the honest
man is hanged in his steed. For the Devil so blinds wicked men, that if an
Atheist can but steal Christ's livery from one of his servants, and take a purse
in it: they will raise Hue and Cry, to attach all that wear the same Cloth;
without any knowledge of the person that wears it, Yea, so far as they dare:
their tongues shall be open, against the master, whose livery it is.

But how just and equal this is, let any wise man determine. Thou have heard
of, or seen some Wolf, put on sheeps clothing, to the end he might do the
more mischief: therefore thou will ever after judge all sheep to be wolves.
What can be more sottish, and unjust? for to reason thus; such and such a
professor of religion is naught, therefore all professors are so, is all one,
as if thou should say such and such a Gentleman has the pox, therefore all
Gentlemen have it.

Yea thou may as well, and as justly condemn all societies and callings; as
all the whole quire of Angels, because Lucifer was an Angel. The whole
fellowship of the Prophets, because Balaam was a Prophet. The whole company of
the Apostles, because Judas was an Apostle. All Philips converts, because there
was one Simon Magus among them. All the Christians in the Primitive Church,
because there was one Nicholas an heritick of them. Then which, nothing could
be more ridiculous, or divelish.

Will any wise man condemn the Protestant religion, because there are diverse
Drunkards, Thieves, and murderers, who profess themselves Protestants? Will
any judicious person condemn the Art of Physic, because some Mountebancks
will needs practice it, Or the Art of Navigation, because some that profess it
have made shipwreck? Will any man that is in his right senses, conclude a great
heap of Gold and Silver, to be base mettle, and counterfair come; because he
finds one bad piece in it? Or cast away a Ba^ne full of good Grain, because
it is mingled with some offall? I think not.

Why will thou then be so devilish, as to force a Rape on virtue, and
adulterate the chaste bosom, of spotless simplicity, and sincerity: in calling
all professors of religion, and practizers of piety hypocrites, and puritanes:
because thou hear of some few that are so.

Sect. 34.
4. But to come nearer, in showing thee thy folly, and madness: suppose other
men should be of thy wicked mind, and so fore stall themselves with prejudice
as thou do. What would become of religion and piety? Or if this had been
their argument in former times, how many should have stumbled, and fal^e off
from the true religion: When David fell into his Adultery and murder. How many
at Christianty, when Judas one of Christ's Apostles, played the Thief, betrayed
his master, and hanged himself: the Gospel being then but a planting. How many
at Peter's denying, and forswearing his Master? And so at the like in every age
of the Church? Would not the issue be this, God and reigion should be utterly
forsaken, and the whole World become subjects to Satan, and Citizens of Hell.

Wherefore while thou have time, take heed, and know that the Devil first puts
out wicked men's eyes, and then lays blocks in their way, to make them stumble
and fall: that so they may dash themselves in pieces.

Or rather, God himself in justice, suffers these scandals to be given, or
these stumbling blocks to be laid: that thou, (and such others as thou art)
may stumble at them, to thy destruction, and break thy souls neck, as it is
Ezekiel. 3. 20. For when God sees that nothing will better men, but to Hell they
will go; and damned they will be, let his ministers and people, mercies, and
judgments do what they can: he enters into a resolution to make sure work with
them: as If the Lord should speak on this m^nner; I have giventh m my word and
Gospel, it has been preached among them plenti^ully, and powerfully; I have
sent my ministers, whom I made fishers of men: with their nets, and baits to
catch them; but by no means will they be taken in their nets, or bite at their
baits, or be caught by their hooks. Neither will they be drawn to Heaven by
the holy examples of my saints, and servants. For notwithstanding all means,
they have been no whit better, but rather the worse; more stubborn, more
rebe^lious, more malicious: wherefore now. I will lay a stumbling block before
them; I will suffer some noted professor of religion, to fall into some gross
scandalous sin; and that scandal of his, will prove such a stumbling block,
trap, or gin, (for so the word scandal imp^ies in the Original) that they
shall greedily, and eagerly run upon it, and be snared, and held fast for ever
getting out again. For which see sundry Book cases as 1 Kings 22. 20. 21. 22.
Matthew. 18. 7. 2. Pet. 2. 12. Isay. 8. 14. 15.

Nay who knows, but such a professor at whose life thou stumblest, may be
tempted by Satan, and suffered by God to fall; rather for the ruin of thy
soul, and others of thy condition, then his own. As when the wrath of the
Lord was kindled against Israel, he moved David to number the people. 2 Samuel
24. 1. And Satan provoked him thereunto 1. Chron. 21. 1. more to take vengeance
of the people, (of whom seventie thonsand died by the plague) then of the King
himself. God may suffer one whom he deatly loves, to fall into some foul
sin, for his greater benefit: to make him more humble, and wary afterward. It
was Peter's case: whereas thou art hardened by his fall, and made to protest
against thine own conversion.

Bur admit this be not altogether thy case, yet it is a manifest sign, that
thou art for the present an hypocrite, and one of Gods enemies. As who but Gods
enemies stumbled at David's fall, because thou have made the enemies of God to
blaspheme, says the Prophet Nathan. 2 Samuel 12. 14. And indeed all that are
friends to God and religion, will be sorry, and grieve when such offenses are
given.

Again had thou any grace in thine heart, and were not blinded by Satan: thou
would pick good out of their evil practices: these offenses would make thee
the more strive, and pray for grace, that thou may be able to stand though
others fall. What says David? They have destroyed thy Law, therefore love I
thy Commandments above Gold, yea, above most fine Gold, therefore I esteem
all thy precepts most just, and hate every false way. Psalm. 119. 126. 127. 128.
Other men's apostasy, could not make him forsake his God, and abandon his
religion. Nor will any but hypocrites, be discouraged, and beaten off by others
falling.

Sect. 35.
4. Fourthly, these envyous Cains will judge men hypocrites for some disaster,
or affliction that befalls them. Job 13. and 20. 5. Resembling those sottish
Barbarians Act. 28. 3. 4. Who seeing the Viper on Paul's hand, said no doubt but
this man is a murderer* whom though he have escaped the sea, yet vengeance
suffers him not to live. Where note by the way their constancy, and
soliddity: before this accident fell out Paul was a God, now he is cursed of
God. When sensual men pass their vardits upon the godly, they are always in
extremes.

It is incident to Nature to be superstitious, and superstition for the most
part judges of the Goodness of the action, by the Goodness of the success;
the cause by the effect: whereas contrarily they should judge of the goodness
of the success, by the goodness of the action, or the intention of that good:
tho effect by the cause.

Again if they but hear of one that is troubled in mind for his sins (as
commonly all are at their first conversion) O then they are greater sinners
then other men: they have done or committed some strange thing, and God has
found them out. Not being wise enough to consider, that God usually works joy
out of fear, light out of darkness and brings us to the kingdom of Heaven,
by the gates of Hell. For as when the wicked cry peace peace, Heaven Heaven,
hell and perdition are at hand: So when these in their distress of mind cr^
Hell Hell, damnation damnation: Heaven and salvation are at hand. And I wish
our confident ones would take notice, that they who never doubted of their
salvation, their salvation is much to be doubted of. And that Satan has none
so sure, as those whom he never yet asaulted. For as while Jacob continued
under Laban^ tyranny, and would be made his drudge all was well: but when once
he begins to fly, he makes after him with all his might: So the Devil, when
any one parts from him to Christ, then he is as a Bear robbed of his whelps:
and never does he more torment those whom he does possess, then when he
knows that he must depart. But let such dunces (as doubt whether all outward,
and inward afflictions happen not alike to all: as well to the just as to the
wicked, to the good and pure, as to the poluted: to him that swears as to him
that fears an oath) to clear their sight, read Luke 13. 1. to 6. Eccles. 9.
1. 2.

Sect. 36.
5. Fifthly, sometimes for want of other exceptions, they will censure us for
some bodily blemish, or natural defect which rather reflects upon the Creator,
then the Creature. Wherein they imitate those ill taught Children, 2 Kings 2.
23. who having learnt it from their parents, twitted Elisha with his bald head:
forgettiug how God had crowned that head with virtue and honor. Or Peninnah,
who continually upbraided Hannah with her barrenness especially when she went
up to the house of the Lord, that so she might both vex her spirit, and hinder
her devotion. A small fault you will grant, God having made her barren for his
own glory, and her greater good. 1 Samuel 1. 6. 7.

6. Sixthly, They will judge the godly Puritanes, meaning Hypocrites: for things
indifferent (I call them indifferent, because they call them so.) As if they
use a different posture to them, do sit at the Lords table: or a different
gesture, as in case they will not bow to the Altar: or be uncovered at the name
of Jesus: or a different Vesture, put not on a white Surplice: or differ from
their customs, omit to cross the forehead in baptism: to observe an Holy day
especially Christmas day as strictly, or more solemnly then the Sabbath, or
Lords day; though God has said, Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy
w^rke: But the seventh day i^ the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall
do no work, Exodus 20. 9. to 12. And many the like Ceremonies, and
Superstitious customs. Which not to observe is a great quarrel: Though our
Saviors words are* In vain do they worship me teaching for doctrines the
comm^ndemrnts of men. Mat. 15. 9.

Yea* when one to save a years time and labor, in reducing the Bible to heads
or common places: divided every verse in it, as made best for his purpose: a
Malignant Scoller hearing of it, told him that he was the wickedest man that
every lived, and that if there were one place in hell deeper then other it
should be his portion.

You will think it a strange censure, from a Master of Arts, But the Apostle
tells you, that as natural men do not like to retain God in their knowledge,
so God gives them over to a reprobate mind: And because when they knew God,
they did not glorify him as God, neither were thankful, they became vain in
their imaginations* and their foolish hearts were so darkened? that professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools, Romans 1. 21. 22. 28.

But how like the Pharisees are these men (though poor souls they think
themselves of all men, freest from being of there sect) who condemned our
Savior for using the company of sinners, though it were to convert and save
them. And his Disciples for plucking a few ears of corn, though to assuage
their hunger. And the Palsy man's carrying of his bed upon the Sabbath, though
it made much for the glory of God, and edification of others.

I might likewise add to these; other cases of like nature, and wherein they
resemble the Pharisees, that censured Christ and his Apostles, for not washing*
their hands as often as they did eat bread. Mat. 15. 2. And Martha, who censured
Mary for not helping her at the feast where her Savior was a guest: whose
answer in Maryes defense may inform all rash censurers: that neither in things
lawful, or indifferent, are others bound to our examples: for as Mary did not
censure Martha, for her rising from Christ's feet to prepare meat to feed his
body, so neither should Martha have censured Mary, for sitting at Christ feet
to feed her soul. But I must pass over many things, for you can hardly name
that indifferent thing, which they will not censure in a holy man. He cannot in
his discourse use either a Hyperbole, or a poetical fiction, or a Parable, or
an Ironiah, or a harmless Jest, but he is a most monstrous Liar. Yea, if he
use but a simillitude for ornament, or illustration sake, borrowed from nature
or history: they will say he affirms the matter thereof positively to be true.
If they would sound him in any matter of consequence, as (Saul by his servants
did David,) he cannot answer warily, be it never so truly; but they will say he
equivocates.

Sect. 37.
7. Seventhly, (rather then not censure the religious) they will accuse them
for their virtues, As how common and familiar is it with them to judge our
religion puritanisme, our conscience of sin Hypocrisy, our profession
dissimmulation, our prudence policy, our zeal of Gods glory to be pride and
contention, out obedience to Gods laws rebellion to Princes, etc. Yea, what
can we do, or leave undone but they will strangely censure us.

First, what evil can we refuse to do, if we refuse to swear as they do,
then we make great conscience of swearing but none of lying, therefore are not
to be believed. They believe not others without an oath, because they know how
little themselves are worthy of beelefe, and others believe not them with an
oath, because they are already perjured in breaking their first vow, for if we
break our faith with God, how should men trust us?

Again, If a man be careful of his society, they will tax and floute him with
stand farther off, for J am holyer then thou. They call piety pride for not
going with them to the Tavern, as indeed there is no goodness in man, but
such will ascribe it to vain glory: even the beastly Sodemites, thought Lot a
proud and emperious fellow, because he was not of their strain, Genesis 19 9.

Again, if a man's conscience be tender, and he makes scruple of small
matters: then he is more nice then wise: yea he is an Hypocrite that strains
at a Gnat, and swallows a Camel, that stumbles at strawes, and leaps over
blocks.

But if you mark it, they are miserably mistaken, for to themselves only (who
make no difference between Gods laws, and men's traditions) is all this
applyable. As who are they that both pass this censure and best deserve it?
but the carnal and superstitious; who honor the Prelates, more then they
honor God: and stand more upon their Ecclesiastical Cannons, then his divine
Commands, and fear more their high Commission, then they fear Hell.

Apparent hypocrites, that look to small things as the Cross, surplice, Holy
days etc. Which are but the commandments of men, and overlook the great things
of Gods law; as the Sabbath, the second commandment, the due administration of
the word and Sacraments etc.

Yea, where have you a Protestant at large? Or a Malignant to religion: that is
not a mere formalist? Very Zealous for discipline, and as Zealesse for sound
doctrine: All for Ceremony and circumstance, nothing for substance. Yea, the
very sum of such men's religion is, either to be verbal and superficial
only: as what is their religion? To say their creed is all their faith: To pay
what they must needs all their equity: to give fair words, and some times a
farthing to a beggar, all their bounty: to take their own, all their mercy:
to carry a formal profession, all their piety: to cry God mercy, all their
penitence: to come to Church, and observe the ceremonies, all their conscience.
For hear they never so many Sermons, they can go as merryly away with all kind
of prophanes at their heels: as Horses with an empty Coach.

Or secondly, In their obedience to be altogether partial: making conscience
of great matters, with neglect of lesser duties: Or scrupling small matters,
with neglect of the main. As

First, How many whose consciences will not suffer them to rob by the high way,
or break upa man's house in the night (no such monstrous Camels they dare not
swallow) but in buying and ^elling to overreach a neighbor a shilling or two,
a penny or two, their throats are not so narrow, but these Gnats will go down
easily enough.

How many scorn to bear false witness in an open Court of justice? to be
guilty of Pillory, perjury, etc. Yea these be foul things, but to mince the
matter, and swear partially for a friend: concealing part of that truth which
they are bound to utter: Or so much as might clear the accused: which by
consequence makes them guilty of perjury, this they think nothing.

Yea, if the case be their own, they can afford to deliver flat untruths: as
out of my small experience of the consciences of your Civil honest men and
women: I have known no less then ten forswear themselves point blanke in
diverse particulars* when examined in Chancery, and other Courts.

Yea, they think it no small wisdom, rather to trust God with their souls:
then men with their estates. the answer of one merchant, that was wiser then my
self by many thousand pounds.

I deny not but many of them, are very punctual in keeping their words: yea
have but their bare promise, you may as much build upon it as upon my Lord
Majors Band* much more are their oaths to be taken: And yet they make no more
conscience of sin, as it is sin: then Herod did of breaking his promise
touching John Baptists head.

Sect. 38.
Secondly, how common is it with them to strain and ^^umble at small sins, and
pass over great ones? like Saul, who made great conscience of eating the flesh
of Sh^^p, and Oxen with the blood: but none at all of sucking and shedding the
blood of fourscore and five of the Lords Priests. Or Herod, who much scrupled
the breaking of an unlawful oath: but never stood upon cutting a holy Prophets
throat. Or lastly those hypocrites the Scribes and Pharisees: who were very
punctual in tything of mint, and annis, and cummin: but neglected the
weightier matters of the Law, as judgment, and mercy, and fidelity without any
trouble to their consciences.

As for instance, They will plead much for order and decency, when none live
more disorderly: pretended lovers of peace they are, but professed haters of
truth: not to be uncovered at the Name of Jesus, they hold worse then to swear
by the Name of God. They are more severe against the breach of a holy day
(especially Christmas day) then of the Sabbath. They make great conscience of
keepeing holy days, but none of keeping those days holy. Yea, they will
commit more uncleanness, and be drunk oftener upon such days, then any in the
Calender except the Lords day. You cannot hyre them to eat flesh upon a Good
Friday, nor to abstain from Adultery upon another day. The precept for keeping
of Lent, they more strictly observe: then any in the Decalogue. But how? They
fast from flesh, but feed upon more delicious and provoking meats: Or if they
abstain from all meat (thereby to merit) they fast not from one sin the
more. Yea, your Gallants (who esteem the truth of religion, a disparagement to
their greatness, and are almost ashamed to say grace to their meat) so affect
a form of Religion: that going all the year besides in Scarlet: yet will for
the holy time of Lent put on a black out side, though their souls remain
crimson. In all which they resemble the Papists, who forbear allowed Matrimony,
and admit forbidden Adultery: Yea, while they vow contenency, they resolve to
deflower Verginity. Neither should it be better here, then it is at Rome,
(where the Jews, enemies to the Name of Christ, do live in peace; but the
faithful Christians are burned. And where, in time of Lent, the Shambles are
shut; and the Stues are open) might these formal hypocrites have their wills.

And therefore these are the men that strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel.
Matthew. 23, 24. And not the religious, who both in small and great matters,
walk according to rule: And have great and weighty reasons for their making
scruple of the light^est, and smalest sins. As

Sect. 39.
First, Be the sin never so small, yet God has forbidden it, and Christ
suffered for it as well as the greatest. An evil thought, or a vain word, can
no more be justified then a wicked action. The Law is spiritual, and binds the
heart from affecting, no less then the hand from acting. Yea, it injoines us
to shun the very occasions, or least appearances, or first motions of sin:
as well as actual sin it self. Besides the committing of the least single
sin, is the breach of the whole Law: Ja: 2. 10. and an offense to that God,
who is almighty, in power, and infinite in love: which is ground sufficient to
any that truly fear God: who do not so much scan the weight of the thing, as
the authority and goodness of the commander.

And certainly if the smallest curse of God, be too great to suffer: the
smallest sin against God, is too great to do. Neither can it stand with
repentance, to favor our selves in any one sin, though never so small: for
sound repentance turns the back upon all sins. And says unto God, as once
Ruth to Naomi, Ruth 3. All that thou biddest me, I will do, be it great or
small in the worlds account.

Now God commands us (and I pray mark it) to be pure, 1 Timothy, 5. keep thy self
pure says St. Paul to Timothy verse, 22. And blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God. Matthew. 5. 8. which implies No purity, no blessedness. And
likewise to be holy, yea shall be a holy people unto me says God. Exodus 22.
31. and without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12, 14. Yea we are
commanded to be holy in all manner of conversation; even as Christ was holy. 1
Pet. 15. And Paul writing to the converted Corinths, uses these words: The
Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. 1 Cor. 3. 17, And again, Seeing we
have these premises dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit: and grow up unto full holiness in the fear
of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Thirdly, We are commanded to be perfect, and that as God is perfect: ye
shall be perfect as your Father which is in heaven is perfect, says our
savior. Matthew. 5. 48. And St. Peter, Beloved, be diligent, that ye may be
found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless: 2 Pet. 3. 14. with many
the like. And how can we endeavor after, or indeed desire this holiness,
purity, and perfection in the least, if we make not conscience of al sin, and
of every duty? yet thou like a wicked, and profane wretch as thou art: do
jeere and scoff at those, that make conscience of small sins, and are
scrupulous of doing what thou do, and would have them to do. But little
do thou know or consider who sets thee on work: and what this thy flouting at
purity and holiness will one day cost thee; In the mean time know, that such
have no good consciences, who dare gratify Satan in committing the least sin,
or neglect God in the smallest precept.

I grant there is a first, and a second: a great, and another commandment.
Matthew 22. 38. 39. But that second or other, is like unto it. verse. 39.
Therefore sacrifice, must not turn mercy out of doors, as Sarah did Hagar: Nor
the flame of zeal, consume the moisture of ^harity, as the fire from heaven
drank up the water put to Eliahs sacrifice. But our Saviors rule, is both
plain, and home to the point in hand: these things ought ye to have done
(speaking of the greater matters of the law) and not to have left the other
undone: viz. the smaller matters, as tything of mint, and annyse, and cummyn.
Matthew. 23. verse 23* But,

Sect. 40.
Secondly, Gods people make conscience of the least sin, because small sins,
like little wedges make way unto greater: or as little thieves being let in at
a window, will set open large doors, for greater thieves to come in at. Yea
from very small evils, not let at the beginning: spring oftentimes great and
mighty mischiefs; as for example, pilfering a few plums to please the pallat,
makes way for a lie, a lie makes way for an oath, and an oath having past both
undiscovered and unpunished, makes way for downright perjury. And so in other
cases, asw ho would have thought that David's wanton look, should have begot
murder, which (together with his adultery) would have been prevented, had he
but with Job, made a covenant with his eyes. Whereas admit the serpents head,
his body will ask no leave. Yea if the tempter but gets in his claw, by our
willing toleration and continuance of one lust: it shall be hard but he will
thereby procure room for greater evils to enter. Neither can thy soul or mine
be in safety, without a resolute defiance of every sin: for yield to one, and
ye invite many; relieve one, and all the rest will crowd in for alms.

Neither is it any praise to be sparing of a vicious delight, for the very last
is deadly: the least sin serving in some measure, to harden our hearts,
defile our consciences, and blind our minds, as well as greater*

Sect. 41.
Thirdly, They scruple whatsoever is sinful: because no sin can be light or
small in him, whom God has so much obliged and honored, as of a bondslave to
Satan, and firebrand of hell; to adopt him his son, and assure him of an
immortal kingdom: for such know, that sin is Gods mortal enemy: whence he
argues thus; The great and holy God will not digest, that any shall make
leagues of amity with the meanest of his enemies: much less that his own
endeered child, for whom he has done so much, should make the temple of the
holy Ghost, an habitation for that guest he hates so deadly. And the holiness of
the person, adds much to the unholin^s of the act. Eminency of profession,
doubles both the offense, and the judgment. As how hainously did the Lord
take, that seeming small sin in Hezekiah: when he did but show the Babilonish
Ambassadors all his treasures, and what punishment did he threaten for the
same: which was accordingly accomplished: 2 Kings 20. 15. 17. 18. What sin
would a man think could be smaller then that of the Prophet? when he but turned
into the other Prophets house to eat bread: being hungry, and also presuming
that he had a warrant from God so to do. 1 Kings 13. yet he lost his life for
it. And we see how Vzza, for only putting his hand to the Arc to stay it,
when the oxen did shake it, a small sin will a carnal heart say; And yet the
Lord for this small sin, in great wroth smore him that he dyed in the same
place. 2 Samuel 6. 7. The Philistims handled it far more rudely, and
irreverently: and yet most of them escaped with far less punishment, if any at
all. 1 Samuel 5. 1. 2, Yea, read we not of more then fifty thousand Bethshemites,
stroke dead in the place? For only looking into the Ark. 1 Samuel 6. 19. to teach
us, that no sin is light or small so long as it is forbidden.

The Church is to God, as a House, a Garden, a Spouse: And we know that men
who will abide dirt in the streets, will not endure it in their Houses: they
that will suffer weeds in the field, will not permit them in their Gardens: men
that can bear with wanton carriages in a Strumpet; will not endure an unchaste
look in their Spouse: No marvel then, if God will not endure small sins in
his beloved: and deal more severely with them then with others* Therefore it
behooves all that have an interest in him, to be careful what they do: and not
to offend him wilfully, by the least provocation. But

Sect. 42.
Fourthly, They make conscience of small sins; because the wages of sin (be
it small or great) is death. Rom 6. 23.

Nor is any sin small, but comparatively, Luke 11. 42. That distinction which
the Papists use, of mortal, and venial sins: never took its ground from
Gods word. Or admit the act be small, yet the Cercomstances may make it
deadly. And by how much easier the Law, by so much sorer the punishment, for
breaking that Law. Quo levius mandatum, eo gravius delictum: says Austine. In
difficult precepts; the obedience is more acceptable: but in light commands,
the omission is more Damnable: says Barnard.

We may say of this or that sin, as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one? Or
as Ananias might have said of his sin, I did it but once: but that one little
sin, be it what it will: will everlastingly damn us, if we sue not out a
pardon for it, in the blood of Christ.

Besides, how were the Angels in Heaven punished for one fault? Adam for one
Apple: Moses for one unbeleefe? Ely for his indulgence only? Ananias sold a
possession for the Churches relief: he only told a lie, nimed a little, he
thought the Holy Ghost had no need of it, or could not miss it: but that lie
that little cost him dear.

Alas one flaw in a Diamond, takes away the luster and the price. One piece
of Ward Land, makes the Heir liable to the King. And one sin will keep
possession for Satan as well as twenty.

2 What is a Mountain of Earth, but an acumulation of many little dusts? Or
what is a Flood, but a concurrence of many little drops; One hair does not
hang a man, many hairs twisted together will* even our lusts, are able to
serve us like Absalom, and halter us at the next bough. Many threads make a
Cord: many Cords a Cable: and Cables hold huge Vessels.

If actual sin be a sword, every little lust is a sharp thorn: And a little
prick with a thorn neglected, may fester to an agangreen. A little Pin,
especially being poisoned; may prove mortal, as well as a great weapon. And
what matters it, whether a man receive his death from a Pistol, or a great
Ordnance? Yea, oftentimes, a wind that comes in at a crany, or ^revice, or some
narrow passage, does a man more hurt then an open storm.

Sect. 43.
Fifthly, It has been ever Gods wont; by small precepts to prove men's
dispositions: as he proved Adam in the prohibited fruit: and the evil servant
with one talent. Yea, had not the rest well improved their talents, they had
been taken away instead of being doubled. But God first credits (...) with
less things, as men prove vessels with water, before they trust them with
Wine. And small precepts from God, are both as strong bands, and least things
as great trials of a good conscience, as the greatest Obedience is as well
tied, and tried: and disobedience as well punished in a little as in much.

Many think they may ly a little for advantage, or answer when told of it; Oh
this is a very sm^ll matter: but the truth is these little ones, these small
matters; are great evidences of evil, and large consciences, For what says
our Savior? He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in
much: and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16. 10.
As we see in Judas, who being a thief, and unfaithful to Christ in the
matter of money, proved also unfaithful to him in the matter of Life it self.

The Centinell that will pass a Spy, dares betray the Host: Sampson might
easily have considered so much in his Harlot; if lust had not bewitched him;
She that will sell her body to me; will as well sell me to others, She will
be false, if she will be a Strumpet.

To serve God in some things, less repugnant to our corrupt nature: and in
other duties to be recusants, is a heteroclite, or a defective obedience. But
the true Catholic has a catholic care: and makes conscience of all that
God commands. Totus, tota, totum. The whole man, the whole law, the whole time
of his life as one wittily. He sets not the two tables at varience: both which,
as they were of one quorry: so they looked equally to the law maker: as the two
Cherubins to the mercy seat. Neither is he to be trusted in any thing, that
makes nota conscience of every thing.

Sect. 44.
Sixthly. Another reason might be drawn from the Tempter: For as God so Satan
also, First, tryes us by, or rather tempts us to commit small sins: that
after he may prevail for greater. That subtle Serpent, and Sophister:
presents his alurements first by darting a temptation into our minds; after he
makes offer thereof by ^ome instrument, to those cinque ports the senses:
before the action, or execution will be condiscended unto. And by casting our
water, feeling our pulse, and observing our disposition: he knows where our
infirmity lies: and therefore corrupts our lust, to corrupt us. Nor were the
Fens of Laerna, ever so dangerous: or that Monster Hydra to the inhabitants:
the^ this mother Concupiscence is to the government within us. For as out of
the bows of a tree, are taken wedges to cleave it in pieces: so intra nos est,
quod contra nos est. Out of our own lusts, Satan works Engines to destroy us.

But the former reasons are sufficient, both to vindicate the accused, and to
shame their accusers: Yea, to induce all that fear God, to fear any sin
that he forbids, be it never so small.

And indeed he is foully to be suspected, that allows himself in the least
sin: for he that will corrupt his conscience for a penny, what would he do
for a pound? he that will misreckon or tell a lie to save his purse, what would
he do if his life lay upon it? Certainly, he will never grapple with a Giant,
who is beaten by every Dwarf: nor get ground of his stronger corruptions, that
watches, and wrestleth not against the first, and weakest motions of sin.

Whence every gracious heart, is in some measure scrupilous like David: whose
heart smote him, for cutting off Saul's coat, when Saul himself thought he
merited, for not cutting his throat. And they that truly fear sin, (merely
because it is sin) resemble Marcus: who to save his life, would not give a
poor half penny, toward the re edifying of an Jdolatrous Temple: saying it
was as great wickedness, to confer one half penny in case of impiety, as if a
man should bestow the whole.

A good conscience, is a tender conscience: and a tender conscience, is like
the apple of the eye: for as the least hair or dust grieves and offends that
which the skin of the eyelid would not complain of: So a good and tender
conscience, is disquieted not only with beams, but motes, even such as the
world accounts trifles. It strains not only at Camels, but Gnats also. As he
that fears poison, fears as well a drop as a draught. Or in case any sin
has been admitted by him through humane frailty: it shall neither roost, nor
rest in his heart. As when any unclean thing, be it the drop of a candle, has
fallen by chance into a Butt of Spanish wine, it will never leave working,
until it be all out again. Pure religion, and undefiled before God, Says St.
James, is to keep a man's self unspotted of the World. James 1. 27. It hates
not only wallowing with the Sow in the mire, but is shie of very spots; And
hates not only the flesh, but the garment: not the garment only, which is
grossly besmeared: but even that which is but spotted with the flesh, as St.
Jude notes Jude 23. And this you may commonly observe, there is a good
likelihood of that man, which is any way scrupilous of his ways: but he which
makes no bones of his actions, is apparently hopeless.

Yea, there cannot be a greater, or more certain evidence of our sincerity
(which is the life and soul of all grace) then the making conscience of small
things: being joined with an answerable care of greater matters, For this does
notably approve our obedience to be sound, and free from deceit. In greater
matters if we should not stand out; all the world would cry shame of us: Yea,
the Laws of men might take hold of us, and here it would be hard to say,
whether the love, or shame, or fear of men* whether the love of gain, or
glory, or the conscience of Gods commandment urged us: But in less matters
wherein there is neither credit, nor profit, nor peace to be had or gained, but
rather loss, hatred, and disgrace: for the world will rather cry shame of us
if we do stand out, and show our selves singular, here it is evident that good
conscience sets one work, and that obedience to Gods word, carries the
greatest stroke, and sway with us.

Sect. 45.
And to speak rightly, a good conscience, and sticking close to the word: is
the only thing that raises their spleen: as it fared with Ananias the high
Priest touching Paul. Acts 23. Who no sooner heard him speak of keeping a good
conscience, and serving God, but he smote him on the mouth, verse. 1. 2. For had
we consciences (like them) made of Cheverill, that would stretch every way: all
their malice, and censuring would presently cease. And what is said by the Holy
Ghost of Cains envy, we may as truly say of their censuring: Men of the world
censure the religious, because their own works are evil, and their brothers
good) 1 John 3. 12. as you may observe from an hundred instances and examples
aleadged, and to be aleadged in this conference.

Neither do they speak of us, as their hearts think: for the same men that call
the conscionable Puritans* and hypocrites, and that hate them to the death:
will upon better consideration, rather marry their daughter to such an one,
then to another of their own religion, rather make such an one their executor
when they die, then any of their own swearing companions. And when they ly sick,
O pray for me: (As Pharaoh to Moses, And Saul to David, and Simon Magus, to
Simon Peter) you that I have so derided: rather then any of my scoffing
companions. Nor can the most cauterized conscience deny, but he desires with
Balaam, to have his last end like a believers, and his soul go where such a
despised puritans soul goes: rather then with any man's that has lived so
carelessely as himself, and scoff at others for being more conscionable.

But that a good conscience, may bear us out against all the cross gales of
their malicious censuring: take another evidence of sincerity to the former:
which can never fail, namely, when we are as conscientious alone, and in
private, as if all the world saw us: and when we keep a narrower watch over our
very thoughts, then any other can do of our actions: and no man's censure
troubles us, more then our own.

And yet if we do not so we are very fools: for we can do nothing without a
million of witnesses; the Conscience being as a thousand witnesses and God as a
thousand consciences.

Sect. 46.
Ob. But Puritans are scrupulous not only in things forbidden but of things
indifferent and not forbidden?

Answ. Not if they are so persuaded, and their consciences satisfied touching
their indifferency: Neither are they so simple as natural men; who think
themselves as fast (if not faster) tied by a cannon, as by a Commandment. As
the fool thinks himself as fast bound with a rush, as with a Rope.

But when things are of a doubtful, and questionable nature: they hold it good
to take the surest side, and which draws nearest to probability: And without
peradventure, it is good to forbear the doing of that, which we are not sure
is lawful to be done.

Many things are so questionable, that much may be said on either side: but if
I choose that side on which I am sure I shall not sin, I deserve to be
excused rather then censured. If I use them, it is possible I may sin: it may
be they are not sinful, yet I am not so sure of it, that I shall not sin
if I use them, as I am sure I shall not sin, nor break any of Gods
commandments if I do not use them.

Even actions of indifferency, when once they are felt to trench upon the
conscience: lay deep obligations upon the soul, even whiles they are most
slighted by carnal hearts, there being no less difference in consciences,
then stomachs: of which some will digest the hardest meats, and turn over
substances not in their nature edible; whiles others surfeit of the lightest
food, and complain even of dainties.

Quest. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14* ^3. A recusant in going
to Church against his conscience, rather to satisfy the Law, then to sanctify
his soul; is guilty before God: because not done in faith: what is then to be
done?

Answ. It is not enough that conscience must lead us, but truth must lead our
consciences: there is no necessity of sinning.

Ob. How then is it said, Of two evils the less is to be chosen?

Answ. This is true in Penal evils, not in criminals, in corporal things,
not in spiritual. There is no necessity, that should compel a man to sin,
he ought rather to die.

Ob. But I have sworn to do that, which is unlawful to be done: so that I
must either break my Oath, or do worse, which is to sin one way.

Answ. You sinned in making such an Oath, and are bound to bewail and repent
of it: but you shall not sin in breaking that Oath. As David, in breaking of
his vow concerning Nabal was not unjust* And if Herod had done so touching John
Baptist, he had been more righteous.

Yea, when any thing is granted generally, therein is employed this exception
(if it be not against right and justice:) Therefore Solomon brake his promise
to his Mother touching Adonijah 1 Kings 2. 20. 23. And the wise men, their
promise to Herod of returning Matthew. 2. 9. 12. and that without the least crime.

Indeed if the Law written do cease, we must observe that which is allowed by
the practice, and custom of the Godly, and religious: and if in any thing this
shall be defective, then that which is nearest, and most agreeable to that: but
if it may be drawn from the written word, either directly or by consequence* it
is the more warrantable and satisfactory. Always provided, that we expound
scripture by scripture, which is the best and surest way of expounding,

But our scoffing adversaries, desire not so much satisfaction from us, as
colorable pretenses of exception against us: which makes them give out, that
we scruple small matters, either out of pride and hypocrisy: or we are more
tender then they, out of ignorance and simplycity. As I have heard every one in
a religious family, condemned for fools and shallow brains: because they
would notly, nor dissemble but speak the naked truth. And no marvel; for first
the wisdom of God, is foolishnes with the world as the wisdom of the World, is
foolishness with God. 1 Cor. 1, 18. 23. and 2. 14. and 3. 19. second A Fool
(that is the natural man) is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that
can render a reason. Proverb. 26. 16.

Neither is it strange, that they and the Godly so differ in judgment and
practice: since they walk by rules, that are directly oppsite: for the
natural man either squares his life by other men's lives, without respect to
Christ's life: like some foolish Sexton* that sets his Clock by others Clocks*
without ever looking to the Sun. Or else he leaves the most safe, and unerring
guide of Gods word, to follow the deceivable guide of his own carnal reason:
like an ignorant Pilot, that sails without a Compass, wherein his danger is
as great, as otherwise his safety would be:

And so much touching evil omitted.

Sect. 47.
Secondly, what good thing can we do, without being censured by them. I wept,
says holy David, and my soul fasted: but that was to my reproach: I put on
sackcloth also, and I became a proverb unto them: Psalm. 69. 10. 11. see more 1 Samuel 1. 7. 10. to 15. and 17. 28. Job. 4. 6. And when he undertook Golia,
that he might bring honor to God, and take away the shame from Israel: it is
only in the pride and malice of his heart. 1 Samuel 17, So if Mary anoint our
saviors feet with the precious ointment: she is accused of profusenes. If
Daniel pray to his God, it is in contempt of authority, Dan. 6. If Christ cast
out Devils, it is but through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. If his Apostles
preach the Gospel, it is but a new Doctrine to pervert the people. If Paul
preach not himself, nor in the enticing words of man's wisdom, he is but a
babbler. When Luther dealt against the Pope, by and by, they cry out, he could
not come to that preferment he desired: which was the Prelates plea, when any
Zealous Minister spoke against Pluralities, superstitious Ceremonies, and other
vices and abuses in the Clergy. Yea, though they lost their livings, it was
but to augment their maintenance by lying in a Prison.

Thirdly, and lastly, you cannot admonish them of their swearing, drinking,
sabbath breaking etc. without being called Puritan: which in their language is
an hypocrite or disembler: yea worse, as being of a larger extent as I shall
after show: I grant most that use the Name, know not what it signifies; yea ask
what themselves mean by it, they are not able to tell you.

And no marvel, they should take admonition the chief office of friendship so
ill: for poor souls they think we take too much upon us: as Korah, and his
company twitted Moses Numb. 16. 3. Neither know they how strictly God commands,
and requires it, Levit. 19. 17. Heb. 3. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 25. These. 3. 13. Ezekiel. 3.
18* to 22. 2 Pet. 2. 7. 8. Whence, as the chief Priests answered Judas, What is
that to us? so these profane persons, will blaspheme God, tear Christ in
pieces, and more then betray, even shed his innocent blood; digging into his
side with oaths, and say when told of it, what is that to us? They might as
well say, what is Christ to us? what is heaven to us, or what is salvation to
us? For to us the one cannot be, without the other: we shall never inherit part
of his glory in Heaven, if we do not take his glories part upon Earth. And
with God it is much about one, whether we be a doer of evil, or no hinderer.
For if we must not see our Neighbors Ox, nor his sheep go astray, or fall into
a pit, but we must reduce him* and help him out of it. Deuteronomy. 22. 1* We are much
more bound, to keep our neighobur himself from droping into the bottomless pit
of hell. And what know we, but we may win our Brother, and so save his soul?
Mat. 18. 15. like Eugenia who being the natural daughter of Philippus: became
spiritually the mother of her own Father, and begat him a new to the grace of
Christ, he being an Infidel before, as Eusebius notes. And no man but stands in
need e of admonition: for graces like good herbs, will not grow of themselves:
where as vices like weeds need no sowing.

Or in case we prevail nothing, yet we are discharged. 1 Cor. 5. 2. and he
who requires it at our hands, will return the same into our own bosoms Jsa.
49. 4. 5. Pro. 11. 18. and 25. 22. And yet we are blamed for so doing, and
thought contentious. They may as well tell me, if it had been said to Adam*
before he eat the forbidden fruit* to Judas before he betrayed his Master, to
Jezabel before she plotted Naboths death, etc. Take heed what you do: that this
had been a^ ill office, and that in following such council, they should have
had cause to repent themselves. But Oh the many and foolish misprisions, of
carnal minds.

As how are they mistaken in their opinion of peace, (like Ahab, who thought
Eliah a turbulent, troubler of all Israel: because he did as God commanded him,
and would not flatter them in their sins, to their utter destruction) for
true peace is, to have peace with God, War with their and ou^ lusts, Romans 5. 1.
and 7. 22. 23. Where as they would have us, to be at peace, and in league with
their sins: at war with God and our consciences.

Yea it no way deserves the name of peace, except we be at enmity with the
serpent, and all his works of darkness, Peace must be followed with holiness,
Hebrew. 12. 14. Wherefore Zachariah joyneth Faith, Peace and truth together:
Zach. 8. 16. And St. Paul peace and righteousness, peace and edification,
peace and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. 19. etc. Yea, St. Paul's usual
style in all his Epistles is, Grace and peace: as if only where grace is,
there peace is: as where the fire is, there heat is.

Sect. 48.
Again, how extremely will they condemn that preaching, which awakens men's
consciences, works upon their affections, and saves their souls: And applaud
such Corinthian preachers, as tickle the ear only, and please the sense? As let
some Boanerges, thunder out the judgments of God against sinners, and threaten
their destruction if they amend not their lives: as Jonah when in three days
he converted that great City Nineve: Or discover their most secret thoughts, as
Christ did to the Woman of Samaria, John. 4. Or drive an application home to
their consciences, touching some one sin of theirs, as John Baptist dealt
with Herod: Or as Peter with the Jews, when he converted 3000. at one sermon*
Acts 2. 41. and 5000. at another, Acts 4. 4. Then not only the wit-foundred
Drunkard, and cauterised blasphemer; but the civil honest man will strangely
censure him, and most bitterly enveigh against him: for preaching nothing but
Law and damnation: saying he is factious, and Scismaticall, a Busy body, a
fire flinger, one that railed upon the Parish, spoke Daggers points, and aimed
at somebody. Neither are such sermons to be heard, for they only drive men to
despair.

Yea its much if they do not conspire together to do him a mischief: as more
then forty Jews did against Paul. Acts 23. 12. 13.

I deny not, but a Minister may be bitter without discretion, if he have not
due regard to circumstances: namely the manner how, and the persons to whom he
preaches. For to kill a fly on the forehead with a beetle, and in stead of
sweeping the house, to pull it quite down, would become none but a mad man.
Herbs cold or hot beyond a certain degree, are mortal. Wherefore Both good
and well, must in our actions meet:
Wicked is not mnch worse, then indiscreet.


Zeal without discretion, is as an offering without an eye; which was by God
forbidden, Levit. 22. 22. Discretion without zeal, is as a sacrifice without
fat, which was likewise forbidden, Levit. 7. 25. Zeal without knowledge, is a
sire without a Chimny: Knowledge without obedience, is an eye without a foot:
religion without conscience, is a body with out a heart: Conscience without
zeal, is a heart without spirits. In fine, the fire of the spirit, the mother
of all true zeal: has light in it, as well as heat.

Wherefore, a good Pastor will avoid both extremes: not deliver Law without
Gospel, nor Gospel without Law: but a sweet composition of severity and mercy;
wherein Law and Gospel shall meet, as Moses and Christ met upon the Mount.

Neither know I, whether mercy belongs more to the humble, and broken hearted
to refresh and comfort them: or justice to the presumptious, to humble and
terrify them. Seeing some like Peter, are called with a calm voice: others
like Paul, with a thunderclap. And cold sides have no less need to be spurred
up: then ^ot mouths to be held in with bits, ^s Plato spoke o^ his two
scholars, Zenocrates, and Aristotle. And yet of the two, I hold that which is
least pleasing to the sense, is most wholesome to the conscience. For this we
see by experience, that cold Preachers, make cold sinners: and that if
desparation like Saul, destroys his thousand: Presumption like David, kills
his ten thousand.

But what is this to our matter in hand? when it is generally these men's
condition, to hate that preaching whereby alone men become Christians. Neither
need you marvel that wise men should be such fools: since the wisdom of the
flesh, is enmity against God. Romans 8. 7. 8. that is more then barely an
enemy. Besides they will not receive the truth in love, therefore are given up
to believe lies, whence it comes to pass that they are flint unto God, wax to
the world, the flesh, and the Devil. Wisdom says our Savior* is justified
of her children: that is the faithful. Mat. 11. 19. Intimating, that such
wisdom as is justified by wicked men, is not wisdom indeed.

Again, how many of them, are like those of the Synagogue? Acts 6. 9. 15. who
hearing Steven deliver truths which they understood not, cried out that he
spoke blasphemy, and preached error. Concluding as the Jews did of Paul (when
by application he touched their coppie hold) Away with such a fellow from the
earth, for it is not meet that he should live. Acts 22. 22.

Sect. 49.
Again, in matters of the Common Wealth, if godly, and religious Magistrates:
in obedience to the word, and discharge of their oaths and consciences; be any
whit ^evere in punishing malefactors, they are cruel and hard hearted, as the
Queen could say of the House of Commons when they prosecuted Strafford: a most
cruel murderer* traitor, monster: Oh what hard hearted men are these. When
her self is not hard hearted, in being the death of thousands* Yea, if God in
his mercy prevent not, the utter ruin of three whole Kingdoms.

Or secondly, if they execute the statute against Papists: those false
Gibeonites, that so much (though falsely) pretend their old shows, the
antiquity of their Church: even in this also they are cruel, and hard
hearted. But compare the peace they enjoy under us, with the tyranny they
excercised over us, in burning our* Fathers at the stakes* in teaching and
endeavoring to butcher our Princes: their many conspiracies against our whole
realm, especially that 88. for a year: and 5. of November for a day, such an
intended destruction, and such an intervenient desolation, as that day and
year shall be for ever, both famous and infamous for. And could they now but
get the upper hand, neither the living Protestants should walk, nor the dead
Protestants sleep in quiet for them. Yet these men are not cruel, in the eyes
of profane and sensual Christians.

Or thirdly, if they endeavor a through reformation, they are factions, and
rebellious, enemies to the state, and troublers of Jsrael: as Ahab counted
Eliah; and they would gladly such were cut off, because they trouble them. And
this is received as a solid argument, by all the Gospels enemies.

But why is it, the best of natural men, think that honesty and religion
consists only in quietness, and living peaceably amongst their neighbors? and
that their is no wisdom but in a dull indifferency. Nothing praise worthy
but discretion and moderation. And therefore, as if their religion had taken
cold, they love an easy ignorance, a quiet profaneness, or a well settled
superstition: more then a dilligent knowledge, or a zealous devotion. Whence
they are so dully patient in dishonor done to God, and so grieviously offended
with others that endeavor to promote his glory and worship. And would not
these men* have been as much offended with Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, Jehoshaphat,
Constantine the Emperor, King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth if they had lived in
their days? Yes, for they did but the same things. Yea, undoubtedly if*
Zephaniah, (who would not content himself, for all the reformation which good
Josiah made: until the Chemarim Priests, and all the relics and remainders
of Baal were removed. Zeph. 1. 4.) had lived in our land, he had been counted
as others are, an unreasonable man, made for nothing but to trouble the state,
by stirring up of contention. Yea, if they had lived in our Saviors days*
they would have been offended with him, when he whipped the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple for disturbing the Church. Matthew* 21. 12.

But as Beza was no disturber of the Church, nor enemy to the state, when he
writ an Epistle to Queen Elizabeth for the quite abandoning of all the high
places; and a plenary reformation of Church Discipline, though Bancraft stormed
at him for so doing, because he touched the coppie hold of his belly: But a
faithful Ambassador of Christ Jesus* as the good Queen esteemed him: no more
are those Worthy Senators amongst us, that venture their lives and all they
have, to do God and their country service.

Sect. 50.
Objection. I but say they, by sparing some Delinquents, and yielding to some
indifferent things; not in Gods worship, but about Discipline and other
trivial things, there had been an accommodation between King and Parliament:
so we had had a blessed peace, and the blood of thousands had been unspilt. But
never consult with Gods word about the matter: yea God is not in all their
thoughts, for else they would know first, that natural men, and opposers of
reformation are no more fit to judge what things are indifferent, then blind
men are fit to judge of colors.

Secondly, that there is a civil, and a religious peace: the first whereof we
would gladly accept of, as in a treaty of pacification both parties must yield
somewhat, but nothing is to be yielded to, that may prejudice the truth.

Thirdly, that as our laws are, or ought to be grounded upon, and agreeable
to the law of God, set down. Levit. 19. 15. Deuteronomy. 19. 19. 20. 21. So
Magistrates ought, and therefore are sworn; to judge men and cases according
to the law written, without favor or partiality. Imitating Zeleucus King of
the Locrians, who rather then the law should be violated in favor of his sons
two eyes: would loose one of his own. Or that godly, and impartial Bishop who
excommunicated Marcian his own son, having committed whoredom. Nor can we
pleasure a brother or son (if an obstinate offender) more then in yielding him
up to the law: for this is the most probable way and means, to save his soul.
1 Cor. 5. 5.

2. Nor the Kingdom, as for instance the Homicide through a killing favor is
pardoned, and granted his life: God draws his sword, and by his plague spils a
thousand lives for it. As the land cannot be purged of blood, but by the blood
of him that sheds it. Numb. 35. 33.

3. Nor a man's self, for Saul's sparing of Agag and the best things, being
contrary to Gods commandment, though of it self a pitiful and merciful
act: is compared to witchcraft and idolatry, and caused the Lord to cast him
off. 1 Samuel 15. 23.

4. Above all, he shall pleasure the godly party of the Kingdom: for as a man
roots up the weeds in his garden, that the good herbs may grow the better.
Luke 13. 7. So the death of the Wolves, is the safety of the sheep, and other
tame beasts. Their corruptions, are our generations, their desolations our
consolations, their impairings our repairings: Judgments upon them, are
creations, recreations to us: as the execution of Haman, was the consolation of
Israel: Saul was afraid of Goliath strutting in his harnis: but when he saw him
dead at the feet of David, his joy was now greater then before his fear.

It is the ruin of Enmity, that is the resurrection of peace, and unless
severity be showed to our adversaries, security cannot dwell in our streets.
And therefore it is wisdom in governors, to take sin at the first bound:
and so to revenge it, that their punishments may be preventions. Neither can
there be mercy in injustice. So that a Delinquent at the galowes, is none of
the worst sights in a country.

I know it is a truth, which cannot be beaten into their brains: but there
cannot be a more pleasing sacrifice to God, then the blood of malefactors shed
by the hands of authority: as appears in that case of Phineas, in killing
Zimry and Cozby. Numb. 25. 7. to 14. For the shedding of their blood, was the
acceptablest sacrifice, that ever he offered. For both all Israel is freed from
the plague, and all his posterity have the Priest hood intailed to them, so
long as the Jews are a people. And by that Exodus 32. where for making the
Golden Calfe, all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together: and at the
command of Moses, went through the host, and slew every man his son, and
brother, and every man his neighbor* until they had slain three thousand
men* which was a most acceptable service to God, for the blood of these
Idolatrous Jsraelites, cleared that tribe, from the blood of the innocent
Sichamites.

Foolish men would be ready to say, this was a cruel act: but wise Christians
that ask counsel of God know: that the mild justice, is no less perilous to
the Common Wealth, then the most cruel. And that governors make themselves
guilty of those sins, they punish not. Whence Moses (he that was so good, and
loving, that he would rather perish himself, then Jsrael should) not only
pronounces this sentence of death, on so many thousands, but rejoices
thereat, and blesses the Executioners,

And what but his charity and mercy, as well as his justice, made him thus
cruel? for all Israel might have cursed him, if some had not smarted by him.
But he was a good Physician of the Common wealth, and saw that Israel could not
live, unless it bled in the common vein: he therefore lets out this corrupt
blood to save the whole body.

And what think we is the reason, our land has lain bleeding, and
languishing so long as it has: Notwithstanding our much fasting and
humiliation? this we may build upon: when we yield to God touching his
commandement^, ^e will yield to u^ touching our petitions*

Sect. 51.
And so much of the kinds, and several cases* how and wherein natural men
censure the religious. I could give you many other instances, but the sum of
all is; let the religious do that which is good for substance, and also well
in respect of circumstances; they are but exquisite in hiding their defects;
and showing the best of themselves. What they do, is only in hypocrisy, and
to be seen of men. If they cannot wrest good into evil, by misconstruing it
they will remit the same unto dissimulation.

I come now to the reasons, and causes why they thus censure them.

Question. Have they any reason for their so doing.

Answer. Not properly, for as the Prophet very often complains; they are mine
enemies without a cause. And they hate me without a cause. etc. Psalm. 35. 7.
and 69. 4, though they pretended many causes: So in this case, they have no
just cause, nor reason to censure us as they do: for no evil deed can have a
good reason. Yet they censure us not without many by*reasons, and self ends. As

1. First, their ignorance is a maine cause of it, natural men in heavenly
things, resemble shellfish: that have no smell: or the Camelion, that has no
taste, at least they see no more, then the bark, or outside of spiritual
performances. 2 Samuel 6. 16. And the flesh (Satan's ready instrument) will be
ever suggesting to them strange surmises touching what the religious either say
or do. As is evident by what is recorded of Michael, 2 Samuel 6. 16. Of
Nicodemus, John 3. 4. Of F^stus, Acts 26. 24. And lastly of Paul before his
conversion. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Who was no sooner enlightened, with the saving
knowledge of the truth: but he preached that faith, which before he condemned
and persecuted.

And for testimonies to confirm it, these are pregnant. John 15. 21. and 16 2.
3. Mat. 16. 23. and 22. 29. Luke 19. 42. 1 Cor. 2. 8. Psalm. 2. 2.

Though experience may save that labor: for how severely will these ignorant
persons, censure not only things indifferent, but the most approved good
duties? While they will patiently pass by, the most heinous crimes. An
infallible sign of a man not borne anew.

And still the more sottish, the more censorious, For where is least brain,
there is most tongue and lowdest. And as ignorance gives disparagement, a
louder tongue then knowledge does: so always they that know least, will
censure most, and most deeply. It is from the weakest judgments, that the
heaviest judgment comes,

Sect. 52.
2. Secondly, Sometimes on the other side, they will censure them in policy:
that while the standers by, are taken up with jeering at our supposed
simplicity; they may not mind their past, and intended real villainy. Therein
imitating a Thief, who being pursued in a crowd; will be forwardest in crying
stop thief, that so he may neither be attached, nor suspected. The case of
Athaliah, 2 Kings 11, 14.

Sect. 53.
3. Thirdly, another reason may be this: Who so has any thing fixed, ^ither in
their persons, or conditions which causes contempt: As they are commonly very
bold, so they have a kind of spur in them, and are most industriously stirred
up to watch, observe, and censure the weaknesses of others: that so they may
have somewhat again to repay. See the case of Shemi touching David, 2 Samuel 16.
7. of the High Priests, Scribes and Pharisee^ touching our Savior, Luke 5. 21.
Mat. 9. 3. 34. and 12. 1. 2. and 16. 17. and 21. 2. 14. 15. 16. 24. 45. 46. and
22. 15. 16. 17. and 27. 41. 42. And lastly of Judas touching Mary, John 12. 4.
5.

Sect. 54.
4. Fourthly, In such as are not regenerate; nor were ever disciplined in the
School of Christ. The ignoblenes of their dispositions, and breeding, may be a
sufficient ground. For baseness, what it cannot attain to, it will vilicate
and deprave. As no wonder if a Carter censure a Scholar, or a Clown a
Courtier; so none can think it strange, that brutish sensuallists, should
censure the saints for sullen, shallow, censorious, proud, dissembling, etc.
That they should mistake the way to Heaven, for the most melancholy walk,
when all that are borne of God, and taught by his spirit, know them, the most
merry, wise, charitable, humble, and plain dealing people.

Indeed time and experience, will alter their judgments, be they never so
brutish and base: as it universally fared with the old world. Genesis 6. and 7.
chapters. Who for 120. years together, harbored many base thoughts of Noah:
thinking him half mad, to bestow so much labor and cost in building so vast a
Vessel as the Arc was: but in process of time, when they stood upon the top^
of the mountains, expecting* within a minute to be drowned in those waters:
they beheld him secure, to their greater vexation: and acknowledge themselves
stark mad, for not timely believing him.

Sect. 55.
5. Fifthly, Guiltiness is another maine reason: for commonly, suspicion
proceeds from a self defect: and a bad construction from a bad mind.

Deceitful, ever will mistrustfull be:
But no mistrust, is found in honesty.
I confess, I read of one singular example. 1 Samuel 1. where Hanna being about
a good work, praying earnestly, and pouring out her soul unto the Lord: Ely a
good man judged her to be drunken: when she had neither drunk wine nor strong
drink. verse. 15. but the like is seldom seen.

Whereas natural men, mostly measure others by their own bushel: and so form
their opinions, and censures of us according to the mold of wicked nesse, that
is in their own hearts: and doing all their own good in hypocrisy* they
cannot think us better then themselves.

And yet it is a rule, which seldom fails: That as Cham was worse then Noah,
whom he derided: and Jshmael worse then Isaac, whom he mocked: and Saul worse
then David, whom he persecuted, and Iezabel worse then Naboth, whom she defamed
and murdered, and Herod worse then John Baptist, whom he beheaded. So they
which are wont to censure others; have greater faults themselves, and cause to
be censured of others: which faults they cannot tell how to cover, but by
disgracing of others. And the censured in Scripture, are always more precious
in Gods sight, then the censurer: as in the Pharisee, and Publican. Luke. 18.
and in those Barbarians, and Paul, Acts. 28 3, 4.

Sect. 56.
6. Pride is no small cause: for a proud man, is wont to admire his own
actions: but to abate the value, and derogate from the esteem of others; Every
whit as basely to villifie other men's doings, as he over highly prizeth his
own. I (says the proud Pharisee) am not as this Publican. Luke. 18. 11.
Neither was he, if you mark it: For the Publican condemning himself, was
justified and saved: he justifying himself, was everlastingly condemned.

Again, they know, their glory and credit with the world, is greatly eclipsed,
by such as excel in virtue. Their vicious lives are plainly reprooved, and
their persons, most grieviously shamed, by the holy conversation of good men.
And this makes them smut the face that is fairer: blemish honest men's fame by
their censuring, and aspertions: that they may mittigate their own shame, with
others discredit, like Potiphars wife, they pretend we are guilty: that
themselves may be taken for innocent.

Sect. 57.
7. Seventhly, Another cause is prejudice: for this like a painted pair of
Spectacles, casts a false coler upon the best actions. As we see in Ahab and
Jezabel, touching Eliah, and Micaiah. But of this I have spoken largely, in the
former treatise.

Sect. 58.
8. Eighthly, the next cause is Misprision: They suppose we are not as we seem,
ergo we are Puritans, Hypocrites, etc. A reason of great for^e, with states men
and Politicians: Herod thinks Christ comes to dethrone him: therefore to make
sure work, he murders all the males in Bethlem. Cambyses dreams overnight,
that his brother should be King of Persia: therefore he puts him to death the
next morning. Saul supposes David a traitor, therefore know ye not, that the
son of Iesse has conspired against me. But it were as good an argument, to
reason thus: All the Apostles were imposters, and the Gospel it self a fable:
for so thought the Scribes and Pharisees. A man shall do God good service, in
persecuting of his faithful servants: for so thought the Prelates, as
themselves have confessed upon their examination. Or lastly, there is no God, for
so the fool has said in his heart. Psalm. 14. 1. and 53. 1.

Sect. 59.
9. Ninthly, They envy the godly, either first, because they do better, as
Cain did Abel, or secondly, because they fare better, as Esau did Jacob, or
thirdly, because they are better esteemed, as Saul did David. And this is
another cause, for ill will, never speaks well: and envy is sick, if her
neighbor be well. The ones success, is the others vexation, the envious
emulate, what they cannot imitate. Whence arises all their censuring, and
misconstruing; their persons, actions, and intentions. For whom they cannot
reach by Jmitation, they will endeavor to do by detraction: and because they
cannot seduce us, they will if they can traduce us* if we will not partake with
them in their sins, we shall in their sham^: if Joseph will not be lewd with
his mistress, he shall be thought as guilty, and suff^^ ^s much as if he were.

Sect. 60.
10. Tenthly, sometimes they censure us out of self-love: either that they may
gain, or at least not loose of their honors, pleasures, profits: Saul's
flatterers will sooth him up in his evil surmises aagainst David: saying the
son of Iesse has conspired against thee: that they may have Fields, and
Vinyards given them: be made Captains over thousands, and Captains over
hundreds. And this tempted Balaam against his conscience, even to curse, where
he should bless: He saw how his cursing, and cursed counsel might please
Balack, and bless himself with a gainefull, and gallant promotion. And the
like in Demetrius, for as Paul substracts, from Demetrius his profit, so
Demetrius detracts from Paul's credit.

Which was many a man's case, within these few years: for some have clymed up to
preferment, by enveying against the Puritans: and others been ruined, and
disgraced, by preaching against the Prelates.

Sect. 61.
11. Eleventhly, By depraving all good men* themselves, (though Swearers,
Drunkards, Whormongers) shall be judged indifferent honest men: for were all
the world ugly, deformity would be no monster. Yea, a base person, may come to
preferment; if none be thought better then himself. He that has but one Eye,
may be King amongst the blind. Whereupon, to have themselves thought as good
as any other: they will not have any thought good, that dwells near them.

Sect. 62.
12. Twelfthly, Their passions and affections make them so exceeding partial:
that they will more deeply censure our fearing of God, then their own
blaspheming him: and hold it a more haious crime for us to be sober, then for
themselves to be Drunk.

You may think it a bigg word, for want of acquaintance with such: But
Drunkards and swearers know I speak truth. And I the more confidently believe
my own ears* when I consider the Sodomites quarrel with Lot: and many the like
in scripture. As how did the passion of Anger, rob Haman of his reason: when
he thought Mordicaies not bowing the knee to him, a more heinous offense, then
his own murdering of thousands. And Jezabels, who thought it a greater sin in
Eliah, to kill Baals priests: then in her self, to slay all the Prophets of
the Lord.

But no wonder, for as the Eye only looks to things without. And as they that
are vertiginus, think all things turn round, all err; when the error is only
in their own brains: so fares it with sensual men, transported by passion, and
given up to their lusts. They put their own faults, in that part of the Wallet
which is behind them: but ours, in the other part, or end which is before them.
Indeed self examination, would make their judgments more charitable.

Sect. 63.
13. Thirteenthly, The persons censuring, and censured; are as contrary in
their natures, as are Heaven and Hell: Light and Darkness, God and the Devil,
the one being Satan's seed, and born after the Flesh: the other being Christ's
members, and born* after the spirit. John 3. 8. to 15. And this makes the one
hate, what the other loves. A wicked man says Solomon, is abomination to the
just, and he that is upright in his way, is abomination to the wicked. Proverb.
29. 27. even ou^ ways, which God commands us to walk in, as well as our
persons are abomination to them.

Yea, we see by experience, that there is a cursed Zeal in these men to
malign the Good Zeal of all men. And that usually* they are pleased best,
with that which angers God most: No marvel then if they censure such as he
loves best.

Sect. 64.
14. Fourteenthly, They delight in censuring u^: because Satan (who is their
God, 2 Cor 4 4. and their Prince, John 14 30. and works in them his pleasure,
Ephesians. 2. 2. 2 Timo. 2. 26.) is ever prompting them thereunto, Acts 5 3. Rev.
12. 10. For it is Satan, that speaks in and by them, as once he did by the
Serpent: It is his mind in their mouth, his heart in their lips. Matthew. 16. 23.

And they being his Sons, Servants, and Subjects: thirst to do him what honor,
and service they can. Nor can they pleasure him more: it being the hopefullest
way, to discourage men in the way to Heaven; quench the good motions of Gods
spirit, kill the buds, and beginnings of grace, draw them back to the World,
and so by consequence damn their souls that can be, to see that whatsoever
they do, or speak: base constructions are made thereof. Whereas if they
meddled not with repentance: nor troubled themselves about religion: the world
no^ the devil would not meddle with them, nor once trouble or molest them.

Besides their censures, and false aspersions: cause jealousies where there are
none, increases those that are, mightily disables some from discerning the
truth, and much hinders others from believing it.

Sect. 65.
15. Fifteenthly, Zoylus like they censure, and speak evil of us: because they
cannot otherwise hurt us.

They dare not smite us on the mouth, as the High priest served Paul: therefore
they smite us with the mouth: as Zedekiah the false prophet served Michayah:
which is as bad or worse. For deal they not with the godly, as the daughters of
Heth did by Rebecca? Genesis 27. who made her weary of her life: and forced her to
cry out in the bitterness of her soul, What avails it me to live? verse 46.
In which they imitate their Father the Devil: who when his hands are bound,
vomits out a flood of reproaches with his tongue Rev. 12. 15.

I confess they were wont, Maximinus like: to speak evil of us; that so they
might persecute us with the more show of reason: accuse us to the Prelates, as
the Jews did Paul to Agrippa: charging us with many things, but proving nothing
neither could they well undo us, if first they did not falsely accuse us: as it
fared with Jezabel touching Naboth, and the wife of Potiphar touching Joseph.

Though a little information would serve: for malice regards not how true any
accusation is, but how spiteful. And these prelates, were so far from
discerning, or desiring to discern truth from slander, that to the grief of
many good hearts; no music could be so sweet to their ears: as to hear well
of themselves, ill of the religious. And they were as ready to yield their aid,
as the other to ask it: being men of the High priests humor* who seeing none
offer themselves, set on work certain vile persons, to accuse Christ of heinous
evils: that so thev might crucyfie him by a Law: Yea our reverend Bishops and
their bandogs dealt with a poor Minister, or Christian: just as the soldiers
did by our Savior: First blind him, then strike him, and last; ask him, who
was it that smote thee? and he might answer the best of the three; It was thou
O mine Enemy, thou wast an Achittophel in the one, a Doeg, in the other, a
Belial in both.

Sect. 66.
16. Sixteenthly, They censure, and in censuring slander us: that they may
incite, and stir up others to do the like: Resembling those ancient enemies
of the Gospel, who clad the Martyrs in the skins o^ wild Beasts: to animate the
Dogs to tear them.

It is the nature of ignorant and ill bred people, who walk after the flesh, in
the lust of uncleanesse: whom St. Peter calls bruit beasts, led with
sensuality, and made to be taken and destroyed: to speak evil of the things
which they understand not 2 Pet. 2. 12. And what one does is a Law to the rest.
As if one in their company, but mentions the word Puritan, or tells them how
scrupulous and precise, such an one is: all the rest will strive who shall be
forwardest in spitting out his spleen, against all the Godly. As what a number
of sharp and deadly Arrows, will each of them shoot: both at the good and
goodness.

Nor are they so satisfied: but every one runs away with the cry: and barks out
the term, against every honest man he meets, whence it is, that we are
censured, and laughed to scorn by the greatest number: that we are made the
common Butt, of every ones malice: and the subject of all their discourse.

Which yet is no disparagement to us: for these are a generation of men; that
(for matter of religion) can scarcely discern between their right hand and
their left: as it fared with those sixscore thousand Ninevites. Jonah 4. 11? I
might heap up instances to prove, how strongly, and strangely example
prevails, to the committing of evil with ignorant persons: who are Cesterns
to sin, Sives to grace. As in the Sodomites; Genesis 19. 4. to 12. In Korah and
his hundred and fifty followers: in Demetrius and his fellows Acts 19 etc.

But it is too well known, how many do censure, and blaspheme the Godly:
because they hear others do so.

Nor is it the common peoples case alone: who inquire no farther but believe at
first: for then I should no whit wonder. But even our grave Bishops, and
Fathers of the Church: did not long since go thus by hearsay, and persecute
the conscionable, because drunkards and deboi^hed persons did so: censuring
them in their high Commission, and other Courts ecclesiastical; as the other
did on their Ale-benches.

It may seem above belief and yet it was so: only those barking Currs, did
these great Masties wake, Whom we may liken, to Noysom Flies: which sting while
they live, and stink when they are dead: though blessed be God, we are now rid
of them.

I need not tell you, how many of their Lordships and their Creatures: have
come to their great preferments? by being bitter Malignants against the best
men: for no knowing man, can thereof be ignorant.

Sect. 67.
Thus I might go on in giving you other reasons of their censuring us: as one
in regard of Satan, who loses so many of his subjects, or Captives as turn
believers: for every repentant sinner, is as a prisoner broke loose from his
chains of darkness.

And another in regard of the World, which loses a limb or member: When a
convert will no longer accompany them in their wicked customs. And show you,
that it fares with all believers; as it did with Paul: who so long as he joined
with the high priests, and Elders: to make havoc of the Church, was no whit
molested by them: but when he became a convert and preached in the name of
Jesus: none so censured and persecuted as he. But the evidence of sixteen, may
serve sufficiently: to satisfy any sensible jury. I come therefore to apply
it; wherein I will be very brief; lest I be most of all censured, for speaking
so much against censuring. And

First, If it be the manner of all sensualists: to censure the religious
hypocrites, for one single act of impiety: yea for common infirmities: yea for
sins before conversion; yea for some strange disaster, or affliction that
befalls them; either in body, or mind: yea for things indifferent: yea for their
very virtues and graces; or the best actions that can be performed: yea
condemn all the generation of Gods children, for the faults of a few that seem
bad: yea generally censures them for the greatest censurers; And that on the
other side, the religious; who are so cried out upon for rash judging and
censoriousnes; do not, not dare not judge their brother in any of these cases;
but accordingto the tenor, and main course of a man's life; which is agreeable
to, and warranted by Gods word as I have sufficiently proved; then let none be
so sotish as to believe this, or any other slander; which they daily belch out
against the Godly.

But let them seriously consider the reasons why they do so? as that they are
as blind as beatles, in matters of religion. Or else they do it in policy, or
out of some natural aptitude, or out of baseness, or out of guiltiness, or
out of pride or out of prejudice, or out of misprision, or out of envy, or out
of self love, or that they may be upon even ground with the godly, or out of
partiallity: or out of a contrariety of disposition: the one being the
serpents, the other the Woman's seed, or because satan who is their god and king
will have them do it, or because they cannot do them more mischief, their
hands being manacled by the law, or that they may incite, and stir up others to
do the like, or because the World loses a limb or member: and satan a
subject or prisoner, in every one that repents. And this will take away all
strangeness: yea it will make them think so much the better of good men, for
their evil speaking of them, as Tertullian did of Christianity, because Nero
persecuted it. Which is an argument undeniable: for the truths adversaries, are
wont to speak good of evil, and evil of good: to put darkness for light, and
light for darkness: bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter as the Holy Ghost
speaks. Isa* 5. 20.

Yea, let the consideration of these particulars; move men to vindicate the
religious, when they are called to it: as every one is that hears them so
censured. For as Chrysostom speaks, if any man should see the city of Rome
subverted by enemies, and neglects the defense of it: he does seem to have
betrayed it, because he freed it not when he might: so when thou see the
truth impugned, and indangegered of wicked men, and may defend it: if thou
do not sa^egard it, thou betrayest it. Or as another, if innocence endangered
by a slanderous tongue cry (like a ravished Virgin. Deuteronomy. 22. 25. 27.) for my
aid I betray it, if I relieve it not.

I know their cunning sophistry is such, and their colorable pretenses so
many: having such a subtle prompter as satan is: that they are able to
forestall the simple, with strange conceits, and base thoughts of the best men:
for it has always been their manner, witness Hamans words to Ahasuerous:
and those other of Rehum* Shimshay, and their companions to Artaxerxes, Ezra 4.
And the like of the Princes, and Rulers to Zedekiah, Jer. 38* 4.

But certainly, if men would weigh things as they are: and as I have made good:
they would be foreced to confess; that it fares with our malicious enemies, as
it did with Pentheus, in Eripedes: who supposed he saw two suns, two Thebes*
every thing double: when his brain alone was troubled.

Neither would they (as they do) imitate the Trydentine counsel: who
condemned the Protestants for heriticks, and yet would never hear what they
could say for themselves: had they either reason or conscience.

It was the bloody practice, of the French Prelates: against the Waldenses:
whom they accused to Lewis the 12. of many soul* but forged crimes: barring
them all access to the King, whereby they might clear themselves: till at
length the King, (considering, that repentance usually attended upon rash
judgment) told those foxes: that if he were to condemn the Devil; he would
give him an hearing. Where upon he sent his confessors, and Secretary of State
to try the matter: who returning to the King, cleared their innocence; and
commended so their piety and integrity: that the King affirmed by his ordinary
oath that they were better then himself, or the Prelates that accused them.
And did not our Prelates deal just so with the Puritans, in their reports to
the King? were they not always, as a black cloud between his Majesty's pious
subjects, and the Princes favor? and might they not be fitly compared, to the
watching Dragon: that kept the golden Fleece? Yes, their own consciences bear
me witness: only I wish his Majesty, and so many as side with the Prelates,
would as truly imitate that French King, as they did that Dragon.

Sect. 68.
2. Secondly, if any that hear me, have been thus rashly censorious, in making
ill constructions of all that the religious do: and find that these, or some
of them: have been the genuine reasons of their so doing, Let them with
Ephraim, Jer. 31* 19 strike themselves upon the thigh: Or with that Publican.
Luke 18. 13. smite their bre^st: And with amasement, and indignation say: what
have I done? I have deeply censured and condemned, the generation of the just I
have often raised an ill report of them, as those false hearted spies, did of
the Land of Canaan. Numb. 13. 32. 33. And that scandal passing through many
mouths* has multiplied like a snow ball: which at best has left such a scarr
of suspicion upon their names and credits: that even death it self, will not
be able to cure. Whereas the Scripture says, Cursed be he that smiteh his
neighbor secretly, Deuteronomy. 27. 24. And him that prively slandereth his
Neighbor, will J destroy. Psalm. 101. 5.

And as I have thus depraved some: having more malice then matter against them;
so I have corrupted others: and forestalled their judgments with prejudice:
which may prove the bane of many a soul. Woe is me what shall I do: least God
tear me in pieces, and there be none to deliver. I have been long enough
isntrumental to Satan: I will now, and hereafter by Gods grace, serve my
Savior: who is a master without compare: O that my God would give me a heart,
and answerable ability: to be as faithful a friend to Religion, as I have
been a bitter enemy.

Let this I say be thy confession, this thy resolution: otherwise know for a
surety: that while thou scoffest at his children, God laughs at thee. Pro. 1.
26. And that it will be bitterness in the end: For what evil is done to them,
Christ takes as done to him. Acts 9 4. And who so thinks holiness a crime, or
religion a disgrace, is so far from being of his spirit, that was a man after
Gods own heart: that there cannot be a greater argument of a foul soul; held
by satan in a snare, and taken captive of him at his will.

Neither let satan, nor thy seduced and deceit^ull heart deceive thee: in
thinking thou have any share in Christ, or the least spark of grace: for
though a man may through his hypocrisy, condemn that evil in another; which
he alowes in himself: yet he cannot condemn the good, which himself is endued
withal. For good cannot but rejoice, and delight in her like.

Sect. 69.
3. Thirdly, for a word of advice to the godly: If all natural men are so apt
to censure the religious; cause or no cause: And that they have so many reasons
to induce them to it: Let us for our Makers, and for our blessed Redeemers
sake, take heed what we do: least we shame our profession, and make the way of
truth evil spoken off. 2 Pet. 2. 2. Not that I expect, their mouths should be
stopped; for faults they would find in Christ himself, did he live amongst them:
neither can God please them, as you may see by their continual murmuring at
the several passages of his providence. Being like the Jsraelites: who were
never content, for when they had water, they murmur for bread: when they had
bread, they complain for flesh: as if they had boarded with God, and he were
to provide them diet: and they good men honestly paid for what they took. Only
let them have no just occasion to censure and speak evil of us: for though
all true christians pass under their sharp censures, and bitter reproaches:
yet I cannot yield him a true servant of Christ that deserves it.

Wherefore if we belong to Gods family, let us show what house we come off:
not only by our Livery, but by our living. The sons of God must be pure,
blameless, and without rebuke, Phil. 2. 15. And in the primative times, a
Christian was known from another man, only by the holiness, and uprightness
of his life and conversation: as Tertullian reports.

And great reason there is for it: for first malice is very quick sighted, to
spy faults, secondly, the Saints (like a Beacon upon an hill) have all eyes
upon them. Thirdly, virtue or vice in them shall be sure to be margend with a
pointing finger. Fourthly, in purest things, the smallest spot is sooner seen:
then greater stains in baser stuff: every little mote is seen, in a clear
glass, which will not be di^cerned in an earthen pitcher. A small spot, or
wart, or freckle in the face* is a greater blemish, sooner seen, and more
noted, then an ugly skar, or botch in any other part of the body. Fifthly, the
smallest spot in a religious man face: shall excuse all the sores and ulcers in
their bodies. Sixthly, in case they see our lives contrary to our profession:
they will even protest against our religion; saying, if we did speak as we
think* we would do as as we speak; if our religion were true and good, such
as profess it, would live thereafter. Seventhly, in case thy practice, is not
suitable to thy profession; woe unto thee: for outward profession, where there
is want of inward truth, and real practice: does but help to draw on and
aggravate judgment, The Scribes and Pharisees had not heard of so many woes,
but for their glorious pretenses* Yea, had the Fig tree in the Gospel, been
utterly bare, and leave-lesse: it had in all probabillitie, escaped the curse.
Hear this ye vain Hypocrites, that care only to be thought good: your fair
outside, shall be sure to help you to a curse. And it were better for you
with Philosophers, to have honesty without religion, then with wicked
Christians, to have religion without honesty.

4 Fourthly, If any weak Christian, desires to make a further improvement of
what has been spoken: let him read those 16. reasons of Affliction, and 16.
reasons of Patience: heretofore published upon the like occasion. And so much
of your second Misprision, touching censoriousnesse: does any thing else
stagger you?

Sect. 70.
Quest. The next, and the maine thing J stumble at, is: they are deeply charged
of dissimulation, viz. that they either say, and do not, profess, and
practice not: Or which is worse, do under pretense of religion cozen the world.

Answer. It is (as you have already heard) an old and cunning trick; of the
truths adversaries: to commit villainy, and then charge it upon the most
innocent. Athaliah you know, having slain all the Kings seed; accuses
Iehojada of treason. And Tertullus (mistaking the antidote for the Poison)
accuses Paul, for a pestilent fellow: when Paul had more reason to accuse him.
So now the Gospels enemies, grieviously accuse the true professors thereof: for
playing the hypocrites. But hear all, as well for the defendant, as the
Plaintiff: and you will confess, that they lay the saddle on the wrong horse:
And that there are no such Hypocrites under heaven; as these that cry out so
much against hypocrisy:

Now that what shall be delivered, may the better be understood, it is
requisite to premise four things.

Sect. 71.
1. First, That there are many titular Christians: who stand more upon the
outward appearance of goodness, then the inward essence: such as seem, and
are not, say, and do not, profess, and practice not: that like the
Nightingall, or bird Taurus, are all voice, no body. Resembling some goodly
Cedar, or Ciprus tree: which are fertile only in leaves. Or the Fearne, that
has a broad top, but a narrow root. Or the River Volgoe: which is a bright
stream, but without fish. Or that unwelcome guest the Wind; for as wind will
counterfeit every disease of the body, viz. the stone, Gout and the like; so
these formal outside christians; will counterfeit every grace of the soul, as
faith, zeal, and the like.

Yea, to the eye of the world, they resemble Muscovia glass: which (though it
be of small worth) is as clear as Crystal, as transparant as Air: for these
hypocrites not only pass for true Christians, until God does detect them: as
it fared with Judas amongst the Apostles; Ananias, Saphira, and Nicholas the
Deacon, amongst them of the primative Church: but they will seem to outstrip
them in goodness, as Snow does Salt, and sugar in whiteness.

And well they may: when all their profession, and principal care is: only to
hide their defects: as Julius Caesar wore a garland of Bays; only to hide his
baldness. For as the Painter, makes chocie of the most open place, and middle
part of every* wall: there to erect a fair picture, labored with all his
skill and sufficiency: but fills up the void, and seldom seen places,
with antique bosquage, and crotesco works* which have no grace at all, but in
the variety and strangeness of them: so deals the glozing Hypocrite.

Nor can you blame his discretion therein, what ever you do his honesty: for
Each cunning sin being clad in virtues shape.
Flies much reproof, and many storms does escape.


Sect. 72.
2. Secondly, That there are others, and not a few: who are not only great
talkers of religion, but great frequenters of holy exercises; yet altogether
neglect to practice the same. Ezekiel. 33. 30. 31. That like sick stomachs, much
do swallow down: but little do digest. Resembling certain Sea fish; that
gape so wide, as if they would devour the whole Ocean: but rip them up, and
search their intralls: and no water can be found in their bellies. Both of
which have a form of godliness, and are the worse for it: for that they draew
near unto God with their mouths, and honor him with their lips; when their
hearts are far from him, and are therefore styled hypocrites, both by Isay
chap. 29. 13. and our Savior Christ. Mat. 15. 7* 8.

And well they deserve to be so styled: for Ostentation leads them more then
conscience: and there is as much difference, between true professors and these
men; as there was between David and Michal^ puppet.

Sect. 73.
3. Thirdly, It is by both sides granted: that there are far worse then these:
even such as make religion a stalking horse to villainy; or a Cloak to Cosen the
wors^: such as shroud an Egyptian heart, under the habit of ^n Jsraelite, whose
life and profession is a continual i^congruity, and whose works are antipodes
to their words, their profession being Honey, while their practice is Poison:
as Barnard spoke of his Arn^ldus, even such as speak like Angels, live like
Feinds: have Jacobs voice, Esaus hands: that like Ethiopians, are white in
teeth only; every way else Coal black: Being Christians in skin, Athiests at
Koare.

Which grosser sort of hypocrites, may be compared to Swans: that under curious
white feathers, have black skins; or to Mandrake apples; that are comely in
show: but poysonfull in opperation. Or to a turning picture, which being
looked upon one way, shows a beautiful face; if on the other, some ugly Feind
or Monster. Or an Egyptian Temple, which is rarely beautified with Gold,
silver, Ivory etc. When within is only Cats, Crocodiles, and Serpents. To some
wicked Alehouse; which has, Fear God, be sober, Watch and Pray, etc. painted
upon the Walls: when there is nothing but swearing, and drunkenness in the
same. To a Pirate, in a merchants ship. To a filthy Strumpet with a painted
face. To some spruce Courtier, with a box of Pills in his Pocket for the French
disease. To the Armenian Dragons: Which have cold and squaled bodies: yet cast
sire out of their months. To the Serpent requious, that has scales as
glorious as the Sun: but breath as infectious as the Aconite. Or lastly, to
the Devil in Samuels likeness; as being nothing else, but vice pranked up in
virtues apparel.

Sect. 74.
4. Fourthly and lastly, As we all grant that there are such hypocrites: who
have a form of Godliness, and deny the power of it: that seem religious, are
vicious; or not at all virtuous. So we willingly acknowledge them, the most
selestique miscreants, that ever hell was beholding to. For the hypocrite,
shames religion by professing it and makes the way of truth evil spoken of. As
2 Pet. 2. 2. Yea for his sake, the name of goodness is blasphemed all the day
long; and an ill report raised upon them, that serve God in truth, So that for
the deceivers fault, the true man is beaten. And what the Israelites once spoke
to Moses, Exodus 5. 21. We may more justly apply to the hypocrite: Ye have made
our Savior to stink, in the eyes of all the people: and put a sword into the
hands of profane men, to slay us* As wosull experience shows; For by reason of
such* how do the Devil and his ^imbs triumph? over them that serve God in
truth? Yea the Saints are not only reproached, the truth disgraced, and
religion it self scandalized: but this gives occasion to others to blaspheme
God, and to doubt whether all divinity, be not mere policy; and ^he scriptures
a fable. As of old* the people abhorred the service of God; and became
despisers of his worship: because those profane sons of Ely, were so wicked
and scandalous. 1 Samuel 2. So between hypocrites, and the openly profane: (home
bred enemies, and foreign foes; both Heirs apparent to Satan) the righteous
suffer: like Jeremiah between the Princes and false Prophets.

I confess the mischief an hypocrite does, to those that are within: is
nothing to what he does to himself, and them that are without: For first, his
scandalous life so hardens carnal men; that it makes many of them protest
against their own conversion. Yea his ill life single; pulls down more: then
many good tongues are able to build up.

Secondly, though he grievously wrongs both the good and bad* yet none so much
as himself. For besides, that when hypocrites have acted their parts of
dissimulation here: they shall be bid, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.
Which is the portion of all wicked men. Matthew. 25. 41. They above all other
sinners; shall have a double weight, or portion of vengeance: the lowest, and
deepest place in Hell. As is plain Matthew. 23. Where our savior, not only
pronounces. Woe to you hypocrites: but repeats it eight times in one Chapter:
saying, Woe, Woe, Woe, to you hypocrites: for you shall receive greater
damnation. verse. 14. The hypocrite, strives to load Christ with man^ sins:
therefore Christ loads him with many woes and curses. Though the maine ground
is, from the nature of this sin. For nothing more greatens any sin, then
simulation of holiness. Nor is any mischief so divelish, as that which is
cloaked with piety. The better vice shows, the worse it is, and the worse it
is: the better it desires to show. Yea the better color is put upon any vice,
the more odious it is: both in the sight of God and man. For as every
similitude adds to an evil; so the best adds most evil. The face of goodness,
without a body: is the worst wickedness. Cloth an Ape in Tissue: and both the
beauty of the Robe, and the resemblance which he carries of a man; does but
add more scorn to the beast. And without contradiction; an ill man is the
worst of all creatures, save the Devil himself: an ill Christian, the worst of
all men and an ill professor the worst of all Christians. Professed Curtizans,
if they be any way good: it is because they are openly bad. And it shall be
easier for thieves, and Adulterers, at the day of judgment, then for
hypocrites. Mat. 21. 31.

Wherefore if thou be unsound within: soil not the glorious Robe of truth,
by putting it upon thy beastlines. To bid thee repent, and strive for
Sincerity; were to small purpose: for (which is strange) in all the Scriptures,
we never read of an hypocrites repentance. And a notable reason may be given:
Wickedness does most rankle the heart, when it is kept in and dissembled.

And thus far our opinions jumpe.

Sect. 75.
But touching the next query, our judgments are as diametrially opposite; as
the two poles. For who are these verbal, orrall, occular professors? Those who
are called puritans, or those that term and repute them so? this is the main
question, and it would be thoroughly examined. We say they are the only men,
guilty of this crime: they say the like of us; but the trial is all: and how
shall we try it? surely by bringing each side, and every of their actions to
the rule. And first to bring them to the trial; who call all professors of
Religion puritans; and rail against them, under pretense; that they are not as
they seem. If he be an hypocrite, who is much in profession, and nothing, or
clean contrary in his practice; then there are none greater hypocrites; then
Protestants at large. viz. Prelaticall, and Scandalous Ministers Civil. and
Moral Men. Profane, and Ignorant Persons. Cunning Politicians.
who join all together, in crying down, and barking against profession.

I know the assertion will seem strange; Yea the grossest hypocrite of them
all, will presume that he can Herod like, wash his hands of this sin. And with
David, touching Nathans parable which made him pass sentence against himself;
think that this foul evil, does no way concern him; Or as Ahab, thought of the
Prophets parable; when his own mouth condemned him for letting Benhadad go
free. 1 Kings 20. 39. to 43. But I shall make it appear, that there are no
greater hypocrites, nor Puritans under Heaven; then they who rail, and cry out
so much; against hypocrisy, and Puritanisme. It faring with them, as it did
with Sabillus the Sicilian; who slew the tyrant Cleander, and was after found
to be a worse Tyrant then he, Or as it did, with that Pharisee in the Gospel;
who brake his neighbors head; when he should with the Publican, have smote his
own breast, Oh that men would observe what I shall say, but as much as it
concerns them; that they would well consider how Satan gulls them; and how
grossly they gull themselves.

But this is the gift of God alone; for to plant, and water is nothing; except
it receive blessing from above, I will therefore do my utmost, and leave the
rest to him that can do what he will, and will do what is best.

Sect. 76.
1. And first, let me examine such of the Ministry; who altogether in their
sermons enveigh against puritans; for being one in their profession, and show
to the world; and another, yea clean contrary in their life and practice,
their consciences shall give evidence against them; if they be not cauterized,
with continual, handling of holy things without feeling: That whereas they
call themselves by the general name of Christians, by the special, and
particular name of Christ's Ministers, and Ambassadors: pretending they
represent his person, spend their whole times in reading, and preaching Gods
word, receiving, and administering the Sacraments: in praying, and visiting the
sick; get their whole livings, under a show of service done to Christ: Yea
their very garments forsooth, must pretend holiness and purity; then which
there can be no greater profession: yet these men, these great pretenders, are
the least of any obedient to his laws. Yea none greater enemies to Christ, and
his kingdom then they, for either in their preaching; they do what they can
to draw from Christ to the world, his mortal enemy: by discouraging the good,
and encouraging the evil: by turning the truth of God, into ^ly. as it is Romans
1. 25. A thing more frequent with Prelaticall preachers, then most men have wit
to observe. I wish their admirers would read their several Characters, in a
late abstract: and be better informed: or that such unpreaching ministers, were
marked in their foreheads: that their people might the better know, and take
heed of them.

I confess it is strange, that these Gehazies: who receive in so much truth at
their ears, should not have one word of truth in their mouths. Yea to an
ordinary capacity, it sounds above belief: that they who are Gods mouth to the
people, should be so wicked; and false; as out of the mouth of God, to give
not the judgment of God; but of their own wicked hearts, stifned with the
serpents enmity.

But consider the reason, and the case is plain: The hypocrite is a secret
Athiest, saying in his heart there is no God. Psalm. 14. 1 and without
controversy, Thou art an Athiest: for if thou did believe there is a God;
thou durst not be so bold, as to withstand him to his face: and with his word
to wound his own people.

Or secondly, if they do preach the truth, yet by their lives they confute
their own doctrine: as their Rhetoric may be prittie, and their Lodgick,
witty; when their practice is naughty. Yea, are there not many hundreds in
this land? (some whereof the Parliament have sound out, and cast out) like
Balaam? then whom never Prophet spoke better, nor reprobate did worse. It
faring with them as with one of a surfetted stomach: the more good meat he
eats; the more he increases his corruption. Or as it is with the milk of a
Tygresse: the more Salt is thrown into it, the fresher it is.

As look into thy self; do thou not in thy practice the works of the
Devil: in swearing, drinking, whoring, slandering the godly; and accusing them
to the Prelates? in scoffing at the religious? in persecuting those Ministers,
and people whom ^hy conscience tells thee are more faithful, and righteous
then thy self? so crucifying Christ again (...) his members, and in all this,
cause others to do the same; by thine evil example Thou can not be so
impudent, as to deny it, though I expect neither thy acknowledgement, nor
amendment.

Which being so* what more pa^pable hypocrisy and Puritanisme then this? When
one shall teach the words of God, and do the works o^ the Devil, their
doctrine condemning their own lives, or their lives confuting their own
doctrine, Like some foolish minstrill, who sings one tune with* his mouth; and
harpes another with his hand. Of which sect was Diogenes, Sinopensis: in
opinion a Stoicke, in conversion an Epicure, a fool in both.

And certainly most unmeet it is, that such fools should be set as watchmen
over Gods heritage: for if any man cannot rule his own house, says the
Apostle: how should he care for the church of God? 1 Timothy 3. 5. And if he
cannot rule himself, how should he rule his own house?

Again, there are a third sort, of these prelaticall preachers* who might be
rancked with the grossest of hypocrites: namely Pluralists, and Non
residentaries: who under a color of wearing the Ephod, feed themselves fat
with the blood of souls. But I have sufficiently spoken to them in the
forementioned Abstract. Only this by the way, That men should be Pastors over,
and live of the flock: that they do not feed, or scarcely see: or be
maintained from the Altar, at which they do not serve: is a thing that can
hardly in my judgment, receive a just defense.

Sect. 77.
2. But secondly, to bring the openly profane, and loose Libertines to this
trial: who above all cry, out upon Puritans, and Professors: If he be a
notorious Puritan. id. est. an Hypocrite: whose profession, and practice; is
clean contrary: then thou art a notorious Hypocrite, in bearing the name of a
Christian, and boasting that thou art one: but doing the works of the Devil,
and that more exactly then a very infidel. In adoring Christ, so often as thou
comme^t to Church: as it were with an Ave Rex in thy mouth: but spitting oaths
in his face: so soon as thou come out: and in crucifying him afresh, with
thy graceless actions, in being all the week a drunken, beastly, blaspheming
wretch, and on the sabbath; especially for four hours: as devout in the
Church as the best. For in praying with Gods people* thou call God father:
whom thou neither fea^est* nor love, nor trustest in. Thou prayest that his
nam^ may be hallowed; when indeed thou do nothing less* that his kingdom
may come, and his will be done on earth as it is in heaven: when thou hate
nothing more, then to be governed by his laws, and ruled by his scepter. That
he will forgive thee thy trespasses, as thou forgivest them that trespass
against thee* when thou will stab a man for the lie, or a cross word: and not
so much as pardon one that is better, or would have thee better: for others
must swear as thou do, drink and talk obscenely as thou do, etc. or thou will be offended with them. That he will not lead thee into temptation, but
deliver thee* from evil: when thou usest all opportunities to be tempted, and
to tempt others to evil, etc. Again in singing with the Assembly: thou usest
these and the like expressions of the Psalmist. I love thee deerly O Lord my
strength. Psalm. 18. 1. I will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise
shall be in my mouth continually. Psalm. 34 1. Evening and morning, and at noone
will J pray and make a noise. Psalm. 22. 17. J will set no wicked thing before
mine eyes: I hate the works of them that fall away: it shall not cleave unto
me. Psalm. 101. 3. etc. In all which thou do lie, and dissemble most
egregiously: for do thou love God deerly? no, thou hate him in thy heart,
as thy works show plainly* Do thou praise God, and that continually? no,
thou blasphemest him every hour, and reprochest his children and servants; and
in them him, in every place where thou come. Do thou prayevery day
thrice? Yes, if curses, and oaths, and scoffs be praying: then thou prayest
fifty times a day, yea thou prayest continually* Do thou set no wicked thing
before thine eyes? and do thou hate the works of them that fall away? no,
thou lie falsely: thy whole felicity is in wickedness: and thou not only
hate that which is good: but all that is, or are good, or has the appearance.

But in this case assure thy self: that God infinitely more scorns that one
in praying, and singing in his house, upon his day, and among his people:
should offer up a petition, or protestation to him: who cares not whether he
have his petition granted, and his vows performed or not: yea, that labors
all he can to hinder the same: and as much scorns, that any should repeat his
commandments: that cares not to do them, but the clean contrary: and that
the same tongue which says, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain: should presently take the same name in vain; and so be contrary to
it self, and give the ly to it self: then a temporal King would scorn to be
so derided, and abused by any base and unworthy fellow in his own presence;
and before his people. And yet thou know, that the worst of deaths would be
the reward of such contumacie.

Here also I might take occasion, to show thee, how desparate thy condition is
above all other men's, above the Heathen man, who knows not God as thou do:
Above the Athiest, who believes not that there is a God; as thou would be
thought to do: above the close Hypocrite, who thinks to deceive God and the
world; which thou boasts thou do not. And make it appear, that every one
of them is more righteous then thy self: if they wou^d pay me to plead their
causes. As I would urge in defense of my Clyent the Hypocrite: that he in the
dissembling of vice, and faining of Godliness: though he do hurt to himself,
yet he often does good to others* by his example: causing them to do that in
truth, which he does only in hypocrisy. As often times Stage players, by their
fained mourning, wring forth true tears out of the spectators eyes: whereas
thou by thy show, and publication of thy vicious, and filthy practices: do
more hurt by thy example, then by the sin it self. More I could say for him,
and as much for the rest: who do not so manifestly against their consciences,
as thou do, who art convinced of a deity: but I list not to be tedious*
Wherefore

Sect* 78.
3. In the third place, to bring the Politician: another opponent to this
trial. If he be an hypocritical puritan: who^e profession and practice is
contrary: then he is also a gross hypocrite: For though this beast, like that
other beast, Rev. 13. 11. be a ver^ dragon in condition: yet he has horns like
the Lamb, when they may stand him in stead: for be his actions never so
divelish, he can speak as well as the best: and how should men be hypocrites, if
they had not good tongues?

Perhaps he is not so much noted for hypocrisy, as others that make less use
of dissembling: but his own conscience tells him* that he hates Religion in
his heart: at least that Lisander like, he makes no conscience or reckoning of
it, but when it may prove profitable: but though he will not admit it in him*
yet to further his own ends, he will sometimes put it on, and adorn himself
therewith. Religion shall serve him as a canopy, to shroud the putrefaction of
his divelish plots; being like one that looks a squint, for while he seems to
cast his eye on goodness: his sight is fixed on wickedness, and may fitly be
resembled to those women devils, who employ holy and sacred words about
witchcraft, and magical effects.

Yea, it is grown the highest maxim, in mundane policy, to seem (not be)
religious. And there is scarce a man, who (sometimes to serve his own turn)
will not seem devout: resembling that Roman Wolf; who uses to talk of
Religion* and piety; when he means policy*

But principally, and more specially: there are two sorts of Politicians* who
do play the hypocrites, and abuse religion for their own ends. viz. Covetuous
persons, and Cruel men.

Sect. 79.
As for the first of these, how many Courtiers, Lawyers, Gentlemen, and
Tradesmen are there? who make Religion serve them as a stalking horse, or
mantle* that under pretense of it, they may deceive the world; both unseen, and
unsuspected? like Judas, who pretended a religious care of the poor, when he
would have the precious ointment spared: when he intended nothing but to fill
his own bag: as the holy Ghost witnesses, John 12. 5. 6. Or Gehazi, who
pretended the children of the Prophets, when he aimed only at his own benefit.
Or the Scribes and Pharisees, who devoured widows houses, under a color of
long prayers: Matthew. 23. 14. Or Vespasian the Emperor; who erecting places to
receive the urine, pretended the Cities wholesomnesse, and sweetness: when he
only aimed at the sweetness of gain, in the augmenting of his tribute, as
Suetonius observes.

Whose public spirit, is now grown so common: that every man, of every
profession; can say as much: Not a Soldier either in the Kings, or*
Parliaments Army: but will say that he fights for religion, laws, and
liberties: when God knows, and many of their own consciences know; that no
motive is so powerful with them; as the name of commodity: as neither sighting
for God, Religion, nor Country; but gold, the hope of which, makes them
prodigal of their skin and blood.

Yea, let a common thief by the high way, but light into true meaning company:
he will talk of sincere dealing, and uprightnes, against robbery, and
oppression, and have many semblances of Religion, till he spies his
opportunity, and then his hands shall manifest, that his heart and tongue did
but dissemble.

Sect. 80.
Secondly, touching cruel, and bloody minded men* How ^suall is it with our
Lordly Prelates, and State Politicians, to imitate Iehu: who pretended zeal
for the Lord of Hosts, when his project was for the Kingdom. Yea, how many of
them will pretend with Herod, religiously to worship Christ: when they intend
wolvishly to worry him. It is no hard matter to find a Judas in the Church: or
a Joab in the State: that will seem to kiss Christ in his Ordinances, while
they seek only to betray and murder him. Yea, I wish, there were not
Commanders in both Armies, that resemble Galba: who assembled togetter the
people of 3. Towns in Spain, under color to treat of something for their
wealth: and having so done, caused 7000. suddenly to be murdered: amongst whom
was the flower of all their youth: as Valerius relates. For as in former ages,
so now: every Machiavilian Atheist, will sometimes make a show of Religion, and
honesty: though in their hearts they laugh at it; Even Iezabel, that her
divelish plot may take the better, proclaims a fast before the murder. And
Saul plotting to take away David's life, by the hands of the Philistines: says
to him, Be a valiant Son to me, and fight the Lords battayls. So Simeon and
Levi cloak their purposed massacre of the Sechamites, with the conscience of
Circumcision. And Absalom his treason, with the religion of his vow: yet these
forsooth, are neither puritanes, nor hypocrites in the apprehension of our
blind sensualists: because their spleen is only against the religious;
against whom they never leave barking out these names.

Yea, admit one shall upon every occasion, and in every company, be a several
man, and of a several Religion, to day a papist* to morrow a precisian, and
between whiles a Protestant at large; as shall best fit the affairs he is to
negotiate, though his constant religion be according to the statute: as many
such there be, both in Church and State, resembling an Actor on the stage, who
sometimes plays the part of Agamemnon, sometimes of Achilles, sometimes of
their enemy Hector, sometimes taking one man's person upon them, sometimes
another. Or Water foul, that for food and relief, go on the land with beasts:
and swim in the water with fishes: and fly in the air with birds. Or Protius,
who changed color upon every remove. Or the Camelion, that can turn to all
colors but white; the symbol of purity, can be any thing but innocent. Or
Stython, Caneus, and Tyresias, who as they listed, would be either men or
women. Or the Nazarens, who were with the lews circumcised, and baptized with
the Christians: and so, as Jerome writes, were neither Jews, nor Christians;
yet these are no hypocrites, etc.

But the truth is* the world affords not arranter hypocrites, then those she
most acquits of hypocrisy, of whom these are chief. For as Christ to deceive
the devil, took man upon him: so these to deceive men, take the Devil upon
them; like that Dominick Friar who poisoned Henry the seventh, County of
Luysenborgh, with the Sacrament. No^ does the Devil ever so deceive; as when
he appears like an Angel of light. 2. Cor. 11. 14. Our state Politicians; are
like those Serpents spoken of by Solinus: that wound as many, as they wind into
their embraces. Nor do these Serpents ever sting so deadly, as when they bite
without any hissing The skill is to know, and beware of them; For these Wolves
come evermore in sheeps clothing. And the more foul their intent or project
is, the fairer shall their pretense be.

Sect. 81.
Now the best way, not to be deceived is: to try before you trust them. And
seeing men's hearts, and tongues, are not ever relatives: believe not words
alone; for words of themselves, are no good trial of profession. The worst men
may speak well, and actions have only the power to discry Hypocrites.

Yea when all a man's religion lies in his tongue: and his hands either do
nothing, or ill: his profession is but wind as his words. Yea the noise which
their tongues make, in a formality of profession: shall in the silence of their
hands, but condemn them for hypocrites. And no better argument, of an empty
barrel then loudnes.

2. Neither let outward shows overcome thee: for an hypocrite is a thing fair
to the eye, pleasing to the ear, harsh to the understanding: resembling
Alcibiades Tables; which were fair without, foul within. And nothing more
common then for men to pluck a fair glove, upon a foul hand: and under diverse
suits to wear the same skin.

Yea over fair shows, are a just argument of unsoundnes: for no natural face,
ha^h so fair a white, and clear a red; as that which is painted. And while
we see men notoriously zealous in some things, and remiss in others: we may
be charitably suspicious: many a sorry Tapp house, white limes, and glasses the
front toward the street: and setts out a costly painted sign; when there is
nothing in the inward parts; but sticks, and clay, and ruins, and cold earthen
flowers, and sluttery.

3. Touching practice: the best way is, not to judge of men by this or that
single action as ignorant worldlings do; but by all together* as wise
Christians do. Observe what they are abroad, and what at home (for many of
them are Angels abroad, Devils at home; at least in their own breasts: and
worse when Angels, then when Devils) compare the several circumstances, of
their words and actions private and public, past and present: considering,
that whiles the mettle is the same; the form of each Cup may be diverse. And so
doing, thou shall be able to answer such an one, as Alexander did Antipater;
Thou wearest a white garment, but it is lined with purple: thou art no more the
man thou seem, then the fouler (who under the shape and likeness of an Ox;
lies in wait for Partridges: that so he may take and kill them) is that
simple creature, which he would be thought to be. And having once discovered
him: have no more to do with him. Yea accept not of the greatest courtesy from
him: for they that are such; serve not the Lord Jesus Christ; nor seek not thy
good, but their own profit; and with fair spe^ch, and flattering gifts; deceive
the hearts of the simple. Rom* 16. 18. The Bird that accepts of the Fowlers
meat. buys it full deetly, with the loss of her own life. And Rat catchers
use to mingle good Bread, with Poison: that they may more easily deceive.

Wherefore when thou meetest with these Greeks, play thou the Trojan: who
says, I much do fear the Greeks, when they bring gifts. Take their meaning
from a similitude: In leaping we use to go back, that we may leap the further:
and in striking, we lift up our hand the higher: that our stroke may be the
greater; which is the guise of all Hypocrites, and Politicians. And so much
touching this sort.

Sect. 82.
4. Fourthly, To bring all ignorant persons (I mean ignorance of the best
things) to this trial: who no less rail against Puritans then the wisest. If
he be a Puritan, and an hypocrite: whose profession, and practice is contrary
then are they also notorious hypocrites and Puritans. For first if you mark
them, they not only profess religion in ordinary; but in apearance they are
extreme devout (I mean by their devotion superstition) for as they call
themselves Christians, and true Protestants: and Baptize their children as the
children of believers which cannot well be justified; so they duly frequent
the house of God, both Sundays and Holy days (I do not mean beggars; or the
common sort of poor people; for they as if they had no souls, are without God
in the world; and scarce hear a Sermon in 7. years; though these also have God*
and Christ in their mouths more then any; and are the surest to go to Heaven;
because they have their Hell here. Yea, the summa totalis of their belief is;
that all rich men shall go to Dives; all poor people rest with Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom) yea, if there be prayers read in their parish Church every
morning at 5. of the Clock; your ignorant, formal, titular, statute,
neighbourly, and well meaning Christians; will not go to the Alehouse, before
they have been in Gods house. And then are they so blessed; that God wrongs
them, if they speed not the better for it all that day, especially if they have
a lucky hansel, so soon as they come home; the obligation is both sealed and
delivered. For thus heathnish, and blindly superstitious are most men,
notwithstanding our so much mean of grace.

But admit they love their profit, more then praying to God; saying of such as
go to Church on the week days; as Pharaoh did of the Israelites; they are
Idle: and as Judas of the Ointment, what wast of time i^ this? Yet upon the
Sabbath (especially in the forenoone) they never fail going to Church;
accompained with a great part of their Families: where they are no sooner come;
but having first bowed, and cringed to the Communion Table, done reverence to
the minister, and the rest of their rich neighbors: you shall see them down
upon their knees; and hear them say over all their Prayers: be the minister
speaking from God to them, or the people jointly praising God, or praying to
him. Which being solemnly ended; they join with the Congregation in praying,
singing, and hearing; and therein seem more devout, in lifting up their eyes,
elevating of their voices, sighing etc. then ordinary. And when they hear the
name of Jesus read, be it but the son of Sirach; they doff their Hats, and
scrape such a leg; as shall disturb the whole Parrish. When the Gospel is
read, they stand up all the while (but sit when they pray) and so when the
Creed is pronounced or rehearsed* which denotes, that they will be ready to
justify, stand to, and maintain those cansins of their faith; against all
opposers.

And then with the like zealous confidence; they pro^^sse in words: that they
believe in God, etc. when they a^^ as ignorant what God is; as the child in the
womb. The sacrament of the Lords supp^r they so adore: that the only receiving
o^ it upon their k^ees, upon g^od Friday, or Eas^er day, and in their best
^^oaths* m^k^s them as holy as David, though they d^^f^r no^ ^^om beasts, more
th^n in speaking. Ano^^er while they sing in the words of the Psalmist: unto
thee O Lord do ^ li^t up my soul, Psalm, 25. 1. when their souls, a^e no sitter
to mount ^p in meditation (...) heavenly things: then a Cow is ^i^ to fly.
Again they cry out, As the Heart br ^y^th for the Rivers of wa^^r, so p^^^eth
my soul^ after th^e O God. Psalm. 4^. 1. The word is more sweet unto my mouth;
th^n the ho^y and the honey comb. etc. Psalm. 119. when they mo^e regard, the
g^tting of five shillings in money; then the Joy of the holy Ghost, or the peace
of Conscience: and more prize the f^lling of their Ba^^s and B^llies; then the
bread and water of life or; the light of Gods countenance.

S^ct. 83.
Again if Authority commands a Fast to be kept: they will obse^ve it with the
rest of their neighbors: yea like those hypo^^it^call Jews, Isay. 58. 5. they
will hang down th^^ heads like b^lr^s^es; when yet their hearts stand upright
enough. And ^ast they will from meat by all means (which is but the shell o^
out s^de) but not from sin, the Kernel or soul of fasting. Yea they will
hold out that whole day, that they may be able afterward to brag: how many
sermons they heard, and how many hours each Minister was in praying. Yea so
pious are they, that they da^e not pass through Paul's with their hatts on: or
out o^ it before they have kneeled down to a pillar; though they be in have,
and their company wai^e the while.

I need not tell you how zealous* this blind and superstitious swarm are: for
the Book of Common prayer, The Apocrypha, the Cross, Surplice, the Ring,
rails, etc. Holy days, proc^ssion, and the like rites and superstitious
Customs: for experience shows; that they will loose their Laws, Liberties,
religion, and dearest blood, rather then their goddess Diana shall not still
be worshipped, and had in honor.

Again observe them at home: they can upon occasion ^epeat so much of the
sermon as concerns their wives, children, and ^ervants: if it make for their
own ends; what was spoken against Idleness^, Wastfulnes, Stubbornness, Lying,
and the like: though all the ^est of the sermon, goes in at one ear, and out
at the other: so pointing to them the right way of living well; while by their
practice, they lead them the clean contrary. As that Actor in the Co^edy, said
with his mouth O Coelum: but with his finger pointed to the Earth. Yea they
give their Children such ill ^xample; that not seldom of parents to their
bodies, they become murderers of their souls, as Barnard observes. For
notwithstanding all this their profes^ion, no generation of men, are more
notoriously dis^olute for they are as profane as very Turks; notorious
Drunkards, Common Adulterers, Quotidian swearers and Cursers, Malicious
scoffers at religion, and accusers of the Godly; and indeed what not? For no
place but hell it self, can yield worse creatures then these. And yet no
people under Heaven, think better of themselves: For as Micah could dotingly
say; Now I know, that the Lord will be good unto me; seeing I have a Levite to
my Priest. Judges 17. 13. Or as those, hypocrites, J^r. 7. 4. enjoying the
Oracles of God; and having received the cognizance of Circumcision: could
boastingly cry out, the Temple of the Lord; the Temple of the Lord; when they
even hated the Lord of that Temple: so these thinking themselves sanctified, by
some outward works and privileges. Isay. 66. 3. 4. will boast; that they were
borne of Christian parents, have been washed with holy water; and are daily fed
with the spiritual Ma^na, of the word and sacraments, etc. though in effect,
they renounce their Christendom; and are become professed enemies, to the Cross
of Christ, and persecuters of his members.

Sect. 84.
True, as the pretended Mother, that stole away the live child, 1 Kings, 3. 16.
to 28. professed before King Solomon; as great love to it, and pleaded as hard
for it, as the natural mother could do: and yet so little did she care for it,
that she was content to have it divided: which showed plainly, that love of
strife, and envy to the true mother, prevailed more with her, then true
affection to the thing striven for: so these men pretend as great love to the
true religion, as her best and truest friends: but when it comes to the trial,
she has no greater enemies* For, for matter of Religion, they are much like
the Romans; whom a sensualist would suspect to be very religious, and
conscionable; for they allowed of the service of all gods, and to that end,
built a Temple to all gods, calling it Pantheon: yet it was evident they were
not, because they would never admit of the true God, to wit Jehovah. So these
men (and indeed all the former) are very religious: for they will conform to
any religion the State shall establish, were it popery it self* resembling
shel-fish, that increase when the moon increases; and decrease as it does.
Where note by the way, that only dead fish are carried away with the stream.
As when superstition and idolatty were re-advanced in England, by Queen M^ry:
what was men's greatest care, but to serve the times? were not nineteen, or
rather ninety nine parts of the land, ready to say, as once Hushai to Absalom?
Nay but whom this people, and all the men of Israel chose; her^ will I be, and
of her religion will I be of. 2 Samuel 16. 18. Or as Naomi to Ruth; Thy people
shall be my people, and thy God, my God. R^th 1. 16 And indeed, men that scoff
at the power of godliness are for any religion, so they may enjoy their
immunities, Let them have the favor of great ones, and gain well by it; any
religion shall serve their turn: for you shall never know them to suffer for a
good conscience. No they will rather worship a calf with the Israelit^s: Exodus
32. 4. Or a golden Image, with the Caldeans. Dan. 3. 7. Or a filthy strumpet,
with the people of Rome: w^o worshipped dame Flora, a common harlot, for a
goddess; because she made them her hair, of a great sum of money, which she
had got by common bawdery. Yea, if the devil himself should but say unto these
men as he did once to our Savior, Matthew. 4. 9. all this will J give thee, they
would straightwaies fall down and worship him.

Nor can you wonder at this their indifferency: for notwithstanding they have
enjoyed the means, this 20. 30. or 40* years: they are still as ignorant of
God, of themselves, and all saving truths, as the very heathen: if ye doubt it,
do but ask them a reason of their faith: their own tongues will tell you, I
speak but the truth.

And the reason is this, they perform holy duties in formality only, and out
of custom, without reverence and feeling: Ez^k. 33. 31. which by little and
little, does cauterize their consciences, and blind their minds.

Sect. 85.
I confess many of them are honest infidels* harmless beasts; or if you will,
good negative christians, or second table men, for matter of act: they are
loyal subjects, live civilly amongst their neighbors, pa^ every man his own:
are neither drunkards nor adulterers: but deny the power of Godliness, and are
reprobate to every good work: for (to let pass other things) scarce one in
forty of them, will allow God upon his own day, above four hours: Or that duly
prays in his family: yea, this is a superfluous expense of time* and a means to
hinder each one in their several stations: For as touching that of the
Prophet, Pour out thy fury, upon them that know thee not, and upon the families
which call not on thy Name: Jer. 10. 25. it is a hard scripture, and out of
their reading: yea, of these civil honest men, scarce one of an hundred that
fears an oath, or makes conscience of a lie: for at least they will ^wear by
their faith and troth: I do not say they will forswear themselves for an
advanvantage: but I that scarce know what a trial in law is, have not a little
suffered b^ their wicked answers in Chancery. And as for lying, and commanding
others to ly, what more usual? then to bid a wife or servant, if such an one
ask for me, say I am not within: which none dare do that fear God, or that have
any truth of Religion in them. Indeed others often pay them in their own coin,
with shame to boot: as once Cato served Nasica. And sometimes God reckons with
them for all their lies together: for it often falls out, that a servants
denying his master to be at home, brings him within compass of the statute for
banquerupts; a just punishment for such as will be wise without God, and good
without grace,

Sect. 86.
Again, I know these civil men pass for as good Christians as the best, with
men of the world: Yea, with the reverend Prelates, and their creatures; for they
count men religious, as they are conformable to their Canons: And all the
Congregation is alike holy, and holy enough to natural men: as Korah, and his
profane consorts told Moses and Aaron; when they rose up against them. Numb.
^6. 1. 2, 3.

But as Isaac, if he had not been blind, would not have blessed Jacob, for
Esau: nor Jacob taken Leah for Rachel, if it had not been in the dark: so
these, if they were not ignorant of the Scriptures, would not take mere civil
men for true Christians: but as empty pots, and boxes, in Apothecaries shops,
having written upon them fair titles, of the best drugges and electuaries, do
deceive ignorant comers in: so these though their hearts be base and vile
empty pots, yet as they are overlayed with the silver dross of glozing words,
and glorious shows, do deceive simple Christians: who only judge according to
the outward appearance. Yea, perhaps they may deceive wise and able Christians,
for a while: since the lamps of these foolish virgins* blaze no less, then the
wise ones. Matthew. 25. And tree^, that have only leaves: may make as great a
flourish, as others that bear abundance of fruit.

True, wise men having heard them speak, and observed their practice, will soon
see what christians they are: at least Christ (that knows their hearts, and
cannot be deceived with shows) will one day cull them out, and let them know,
what it is to come into his presence, and sit at his table without the wedding
garment of faith and love. Matthew. 22. 11. At which time, it will be too late to
expostulate. Or if so, their own consciences shall stop their mouths; much
after this manner: Thou thankest God with that Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. That thou
have been no extortione^ thou have paid thy tithes, given every man his own,
etc. but what will satan and conscience say: is this enough to make thee a true
christian? no, thou payedst men their dues, but did thou pay God his dues,
the due of praying, hearing, believing, reading, confaring, and meditating in
his word, of sanctifying his sabbaths, loving his children, promoting his
glory, and gaining of other^ to embrace the Gospel: did thou repent and
believe the gospel, precepts, and menaces, as well as promises? did thou
declare thy faith by thy works? did thou fear an oath? hate a lie: etc. no,
not one of these things ever troubled thy mind: yea, thou did ever hate zeal
and devotion so inveterately, that thou could in no case away with it in
others. What difference then between thee, and an honest Infidel? Is not
unhonest religion, as good as irreligious honesty? Alas, honesty without piety,
is but as a body without a head: yea, without a soul, even a rotten and
stinking carrion; and not a sweet smelling sacrifice in Gods nostrils.

Diverse will say of moral men, if they go not to heaven; Lord have mercy upon
us: yet Christ says, except your righteous^esse exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees: you shall not come there: Matthew. 5. 20. Yea, he
plainly affirms, that publicanes and harlots, shall get into heaven sooner:
because the other believed not: neither are they so apt to justify themselves,
as the civilly righteous. Matthew. 21. 31.

Many arguments might be brought to aggravate the wickedness of a negative
christian; but nothing can be spoken to his comfort; for the best of such
christians, shall without sound repentance, and true says in Christ, go to
hell, as the Scripture every where shows. It is not only the robbing of
Christ, or imprisoning him: but the not giving to him, the not visiting of him,
shall condemn us, Matthew. 25. 42. 43. The servant that increases not his
talent, (though he does not diminish it) shall be bound hand and foot, and cast
into utter darkness Matthew. ^5. 30. And what says our Savior? Every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire.
Matthew. 3. 10. Neither was it sufficient that the Fig Tree which he saw Matthew.
11. made as great a show with leaves, as any other: but he cursed it, for being
fruitless. Much more does that earth deserve rather a curse, then a blessing:
which having been watered with the dew of heaven brings forth nothing but
thorns and briars, to scratch and tear the husband man that manures it. Heb.
6. 7. 8.

Sect. 87.
And so much to prove, that all natural men (viz. Prelatical and scandalous
Ministers, profane, and loose libertines; Cunning Politicians, ignorant
persons, and civil honest men. Who profess the same religion with us, and who
unanimously call the religious Puritans, and hypocrites) are really and indeed
most gross hypocrites and puritans. I might likewise show, that our open
Antagonists the Papists; even while they curse, and rail so; upon the truly
religious for Puritans, and hypocrites: are of all others the most notorious
ones: for besides their works of merit and congruity: how contrary, yea how
diametrially opposite, is their profession and practice? but to speak to them,
were to knock at a deaf, or dead man's door. Only let the ingenuous stander by,
hear what Mr. Fox, in the beginning o^ Luthers story: speaks of the Church of
Rome in general. His words are these, under pretense says he, of Peter's
Chair; they exercise a Majesty above Emperors and Kings: under the Vizard of
vowed Chastity, raigns adultery: under the Cloak of professed Poverty, they
possess the goods of the temporality: under the title of being dead to the
world, they not only reign in the world, but also rule the world: under the
color of the keys of heaven, to hang under their girdle: they bring all the
Estates of the world under their girdle; and creep not only into the purses of
men, but into their consciences also: they hea^ their confessions, they know
all their secrets, they dispense as they are disposed, and loose whom, and
what, and where they list.

And wherein did our Lordly Prelates, (who have always made Gods people under
the color of puritans, the only object of their cr uelty) come short of the
Papists? Did they not under a color and pretense of being fathers of the
Church, by their usurped government, dethrone Christ the head of the church,
and under the color of Religion, take away the vigor and power of Religion.
And while they called themselves the chief priests, were they not Christ^ chief
enemies? certainly none will now (when they are so well discovered) deny it,
that have eyes in their heads, and open. But I hasten to acquit the innocent,
whom all these guilty persons do most unjustly and maliciously accuse and
stigmatize, for the sole and only puritans and hypocrites. In whose trial, two
things are principally to be examined and enquired of.

First, What profession they make, and how agreeable that is to the rule of Gods
word.

Secondly, What their practice is, and how agreeable that is to their
profession.

Sect. 88.
Ob. Now as touching the first, they are much found fault withal: as what
needs so much profession? faith the sensualist (when his spite is at Religion)
cannot men serve God in secret? but they must blow a trumpet, and hang out a
flag for others to take notice of it.

Answ. To the which, that I may make a full and satisfactory answer, pardon the
prolixety of it.

First, Such are to know, that profession can no more be separated from the
truth of Religion, then light from the Sun. If thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe with thine heart: thou shall be saved:
for with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation. And whosoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed. Romans 10. 9. 10. 11.

True* fire (not painted) cannot but heat, break forth, and ascend: We cannot
carry musk in our bosom but the sent will disperse it self. There cannot be a
candle in the house, but it will appear at the window: every fountain has it
streams, by which it may be known. Three things (says the Spanish proverb)
cannot be kept in: Fire, love, and the cough, it may as truly be said of grace.
If Christ the Paschall Lamb, be in the House of the soul, the sprinkling of his
blood will be seen without, by sanctification, and holiness of life.

Whosever is indeed good, shall, and must also seem good: for first, his works
will praise him, whether he will or no: his fruits will show what tree he is.

Indeed, profession may be without grace, as leaves may be without fruit: but
grace cannot be without profession; as fruit cannot be without leaves. That
which is not gold, may glister; but that which is gold, cannot choose but
glister. We read of Wolves that come in sheeps clothing; but never of sheep
that come in wolves clothing. Many harlots will put on the semblances of
chastity; never the contrary. It is no trusting those, who wish not to appear
good.

Good men in Scripture, are compared to good and fruitful trees: the heart is
the root, grace the sapp, good works the fruit profession the leaves and
blossoms: Now if there be sap in the root of a tree, and fruit grow on the
branches; its impossible but some blossoms and leaves will show themselves, Nor
can it be expected, that eveiy such tree; like the mulbery: should first bring
forth fruit, and then blossoms: For even repentance and good works, are but the
fruits of faith; and the usual method is, First the root, then the tree,
then the leaves and blossoms, and last of all the fruit.

Sect* 89.
Indeed there is a dead faith, spoken of Iam. 2. 17. 20* 26. which cannot be
seen: which resembles the Ebone tree: that bears neither leaves nor fruit. But
a true and lively faith, is operative, and works by love. Gal. 5. 6 Yea, it
constrains thereunto: for the heart and mind having begot holy thoughts, the
lips will not fail to bring them forth, witness the thief upon the cross: If
the law of God says David, be in a man's heart: his mouth will speak of wisdom,
and his tongue will talk of judgment. Psalm. 37. 30. 31. The soul that has
received fu^l confirmation from God, in the assurance of its salvation: cannot
but bow the knee, and by all gestures of body tell how it is ravished: whence it
is, that many at their first conversion are held (by their carnal friends) to
be mad, or beside themselves: as our Savior was by his kinsfolk. Mark 3. 21.
Ioh. 10. 20.

Secondly, Unless he keep* his lips always sealed up; he must either
dissemble, which is cowardly and base; Or else his language will bewray what
countryman be is. For if he speak (like the virtuous woman in the Proverbs) he
opens his mouth with wisdom, and the law of grace is in his tongue. And while
the door of his mouth is open: the standers by may behold, as it were in a
temple, the goodly similitudes, and images of the soul.

Neither can he avoid speaking, for admit he be in adverse company: they will
so beset a man with questions, and draw him on, and pick it out of him: that
without an absu^d silence, he must show an inclination one way: even as a
balance cannot stand still: but falls to one side or other: or if he do not,
they will gather as much by his silence, as by his speech.

For in this case carnal men are very apprehensive, for as the paynter
Protogenes knew Apelles by the draught of one line: though he had never seen
him before: so will they a gracious soul, by his very silence.

Or lastly, a man cannot dissent from their wicked customs, he cannot refuse to
run with them to the same excess of riot: in drinking, swearing, profaning
the Lords day, and the like: much less can he admonish them, and so discharge
his conscience (as who having but a spark of the spirit of God in him; can
choose) but he makes too great a show, and his profession troubles them.

Sect. 90.
Indeed they name profession, but their spite is against your religion: for be
but as profane as they, their quarrel is at an end: yea, it is only your holy
and religious conversation, that raises their spleen: in that it ^oth plainly,
though silently* reproove, and condemn, t^eir sinful and ungodly courses. 1
Pet. 4. 3. 4. Nor can they be so sottish, as to think Religion, and the service
of God to be all lyning, no outside: There is a power of Godliness, and a form
there must be: He that has but a form of Religion is an hypocrite but he that
has not a form, is an at heist.

Again, they will call upon us to hear less, and pra, ctise more; but it is
not so much out not practizing of what we hear, that troubles them; as our much
hearing, which shames them for hearing so little: they cry up practice, to cry
down preaching: as the Papists extol St. James, that they may disparage Saint
Paul.

But for resolution herein, It is not to be expected, that religion should be
spoken against under the name of Religion: or holiness under its own name, for
the devil is no dunce: but under the name of profession, puritanisme,
hypocrisy, etc. But when any use these terms, and know also that they will be
taken in an evil sense: it is a manifest sign, that they hate and speak
against Religion, under these names, and notions, and so against holiness it
self* under the name of profession: for otherwise, they would not persecute
honest and orthodox christians; and say, they mean base and dissembling
hypocrites: so imitating the Romans, who in detestation of proud T^rquine, that
had tyrannized over them: banished a good Citizen, only because he bare that
name.

Sect. 91.
And so much to prove the necessity of profession: That true believers cannot
but show the power of grace, both in their words and actions: not to have them
seen, and heard by men; as did the hypocritical pharisees. Matthew. 6. 2. and 23.
5. no^ thereby to merit from God, as do the Pharisaicall papists. They do good
works, not because they should be seen, yet such as may be seen.

Wherein they observe this rule: good actions they will not forbear, let the
malignant world be plea^ed or displeased; but if they can conceal themselves
(so neither God nor others loose thereby) they will: like one that sent a
letter, and a box with 500. pounds in it to Sir Edwine Sands: to be bestowed
for the education of Children in Virginia, and for the propagating of the
Gospel there. And concluded with, Your brother in Christ, dust and ashess

But hear their reasons and why they do it, for all Gods people walk by rule.

Indeed men of the world think, we can allege no other ground for our
pro^ession, but humor: but we have no less then six solid reasons for it, for

1. First, God as strict y commands us to profess him with our mouths, as to
believe in him with our hearts. These words which I command thee this day,
shall be in thine heart. Deuteronomy. 6 6 and what follows? thou shall teach them
diligently, and talk of them when thou si^test in thine house, and when thou
walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Thou shall
bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontli^s between
thine eyes: yea, thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house; and on
thy gates* verse. 7. 8. 9* Yea, our Savior commands it* upon pain of damnation.
Matthew* 10. v. 32. 33* whichis a terrible place for cowards and scoffers.

And as the word of God commands it, so the holy Ghost commends it. Mark. 15.
43. And highly condemns the contrary, in those chief rulers, John 12, 42. who
durstnot confess Christ, though they did believe in him.

Sect. 92.
2. Secondly, they do it, that God may have glory by it: Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorisie your Father
which is in heaven. Matthew. 5. 16. A father gains much honor by the virtuous
and good demeanor of his children. And the glory of a King does much consist,
in the multitude of his known, and loyal subjects. Yea, Christ has therefore
made us a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a peculiar people etc. that
we should show forth the praises of him: who has called us out of darkness,
into his marvelous light. 1 Pet. 2. 9.

So that to be good, and not to appear: or to appear good, and not to be: is
not the way to glorify God, or for him to glorify us.

Sect. 93.
3. Thirdly, We profess Christ openly, that we may win others to the same
truth. St. Paul wishes the Philippians; to shine as lights in the midst of a
naughty and crooked Nation: by a blameless and pure life: thereby to win
others, amongst whom they lived. Phil. 2. 15. And St. Peter the like to his
converts. 1 Pet. 2. 12, A holy life is like a precious and sweet persume; whose
savor spreads it self, and is pleasant to all that come near. A godly man by
his virtuous example: though he otherwise be silent, yet by that dumb Oratory:
he preaches to the world, and does not seldom win others to imitate the same.
We read that many infidels were won to the Christian faith: by seeing the
vertous lives of the Christians. Yea Zozomen reports, that the devout life; of
a poor Captive, Christian maid: made a King, and all his Family embrace the
faith of Christ. And the like memorable president, we have in St. Alborn: who
receiving a poor persecuted Christian into his house; and seeing his holy
devotion, and unblameable life: was so much affected therewith; that he became
both an earnest professor of the faith, and in the end a glorious martyr for
the Faith.

And what says our Savior? No man lights a Candle, and puts it in a
privy place; neither under a bushel; but on a Candle stick: that they which
come in, may see the light. Luke 11 33. Yea a Candle in the house* gives light
not only to them that are within; but also to passengers in the street.

No matter how close evils be, nor how public good is, Yea to conceal
goodness is a vice, and virtue is better by being imparted. Yea so much the
better, by how much the more it is communicated: and to keep it private is the
only way to be deprived of it.

Sect. 94.
4. Fourthly, Because when ever we receive mercy; or are delivered out of
trouble: it is to this very end. Psalm. 50. 15. Luke 8. 38. 39. And to praise
God, and profess his name in the presence of others: is all we can return to
him in way of thankfulness. Yea if I may so speak, how can we requite the
Lord better? Then in bringing him more customers; to buy wine and milk without
money, and without price? Isaey. 55. 1. Whence holy David, so often inculcates
these, and the like vows: O God thou have taught me from my youth, even until
now: Therefore will I tell of thy wondrous* works, Thy righteousness O God,
will I exalt on high: for thou have done great things for me. Psalm. 71. 17.
18. 19. and again, Psalm. 51. Deliver me from blood O Lord, the God of my
salvation: and my tongue shall sing faithfully, of thy righteousness. verse.
14. And again, Psalm. 119. My lips shall speak of thy praise; when thou have
taught me thy statutes. verse. 171. as if he knew not how to do a more
acceptable service.

And least you should think this was in private, between God and his own
soul: he uses these and the like expressions, almost in every Psalm: I will
pay my vows unto the Lord; even now in the presence of all his people: I will
give thanks unto the Lord greatly, with my mouth, and praise him among the
multitude: my mouth shall daily rehearse thy righteousness, and thy salvation:
Yea I have declared thy righteousness, in the great Congregation. Lo I will
not refrain my lips; O Lord thou know: I have not hid thy righteousness
within my heart; but J have declared it. I have not concealed thy mercy, and
thy truth from the great Congregation. Psalm. 22. 22. and 35. 18. and 71. 18.
and 109 and 111. and many the like places. Nor was this only in his prosperity,
and before his own people: but in the midst of reproaches, and before Kings he
had the face; to profess the name of God: without ever being blankt, or
ashamed at their presence. Psalm. 119. 46. which as I conceive was one reason:
why he was called a man after Gods own heart. And that this has been, the
constant practice of Gods people in all ages: both before the Law, under the
Law, and after the Law: I could easily show; but I have already exceeded.

And certainly, if he must be praised in all his creatures, much more in his
new creatures: if in the witless worms, and senseless vapors Psalm. 148.
much more doubtless in men, in holy men, in saints: upon whom he has bestowed
the blessings of the life present; and of that which is to come. And what an
unthankful silence is it, To smother the works of God in an affected secrecy?
Yea to make God a looser, by his bounty to us; were a shameful injustice: even
we our selves, abide not those spunges, that suck up good turns unknown. O
God! we are unworthy our spiritual eye sight: if we do not publish thy
mercies, on the house top; and praise thee, in the great Congregation.

Sect. 95.
5. Fifthly, Another reason is hope of reward: which is so anexed to the
profession of Christ's name: that only to believe in him, is not sufficient.
Matthew. 10. 32. 33. Yea except we confess him here, he will not own us
hereafter. Luke 12. 8. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus
(says St. Paul) and shall believe in thine heart; that God raised him from the
dead: thou shall be saved, Romans 10. 9. 10. where he puts confes^ing, before
believing: for that many do the latter, which never attain unto the former.
And again, 2 Timothy 1. The Lord show mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus (why?
mark the reason) for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my bands,
verse. 16. What is the Heart the better for his horns and strength, since he
wants courage to use them? So what is any man the better for hidden grace, if
it be not exercised, in the practice of good duties? Especially considering,
he loses the reward, which is promised to faith; if that be wanting. For as
Joseph said to his Brethren: see my face no more, except your Brother Benjamin
be with you. So Christ says in the fore mentioned places: You shall never see
my face, except you as well confess my Name, as believe in me.

Sect. 96.
6. The sixth and last reason is, Fear of punishment: Whosoever says our
Savior, shall be ashamed of me, and of my words; among this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes
in the glory of his Father, with his holy Angels, Mark. 8. 38. and in Matthew.
10. 33. You have the same in other words: Now consider these Scriptures
seriously, all ye white* Liver'd Christians: and tremble to think of them.

But thou will say, I am not ashamed of Christ: neither do I deny him; though I
make not so glorious a profession as others.

To which I answer: Not to declare thy faith* is to deny it, says Fulgentius.
Concealment of some truths, is oftentimes as faulty; as a denial. True
fidelity, and sincerity: is not niggardly in her relations: or if she be, she
smarts for it afterward. As see what David speaks in this case; I said I will
ke^pe my mouth bridled, while the wicked is in my sight: I was dumb, and spoke
nothing: I kept silence: even from good. (but mark what follows) my sorrow was
more increased etc. Psalm. 39. 1. 2. And the Prophet ^eremiah, makes the like
confession. Jer. 20. 8 9. 10. they found by experience, that not only not to
deny, and contemn the truth: but not to confess it was dangerous. The
Merozians opposed not; they denied not; they only stood still, did nothing,
said nothing: yet were they cursed. Judge. 5. 23. think of this, ye that hide
Christ, as the woman of Bahurim hid the spies: in the deep well of your
hearts* and cover the mouth of it; with the mantle of discretion, as she did
with corn. 2 Samuel 17. You are dumb to any good, and holy conference: but to any
thing else, you have wind at will, and tongue enough. But talk what you will,
of your honest hearts, whilst ye have dumb mouths, and lame hands: you are no
believers: faith will open the lips, and he that loves God, cannot but speak
for him. None shall reign with Christ, but such as suffer with him, 2 Timothy 2.
12. and none suffer for him, but by reason of their professing him. He who had
not his door poasts sprinkled with the blood of the Paschal Lamb: was sure to
suffer, by the destroying Angel. Exodus 12. 13. And the fearful shall go
first, and before other sinners* into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which it the second death. Rev. 21. 8. They have been the most
backward to all good: and therefore shall be the foremost, and have the
precedence in suffering all evil. And so much of the reasons, why we profess
Christ boldly.

Sect. 97.
It remains to show, what reasons worldly men have, not to confess him
openly: except it make for them; although they do in part believe in him. I
will give you three of the principal; and by them you may guess at the rest.

1. First, because they love the praise of men, more then the praise of God.
This the Apostle shows, to have been the reason: Why many of the chief Rulers
among the Jews; did not confess him. John. 12. 43.

Sect. 98.
2. Secondly, least they should loose their case' profit, or preferment
thereby. And this appears to have been the reason; why the blind man's parents;
whom our Savior cured with Clay and spittle: did not confess him: for they
chose rather to conceal their knowledge of, and love to Christ: then to be
put out of the Synagogue, for confessing of him. Joh. 9. 22. Their hearts were
not so faulty, as their tongues: But had their faith been right and straight:
they would have professed him living, and pronounced him dying: even as the
Martyrs, in the midst of the flames.

Sect. 99.
3. The Third, and principal reason is cowardlynesse, and want of fortitude:
which was Peter's case, when he denied, and foreswore his Master.

There is such a spirit of Cowardice; possesses many: that they are loath to
do ought appertaining to religion; that might difference them from the
multitude; or make them noted for singular. They ow God some good will: but
they dare not be known of it: like Nicodemus, they would steal to heaven: if
no body might see them.

But let such, mind what the scripture speaks: I lay in Syon a stumbling stone
(meaning Christ) and a Rock to make men fall: and every one that bele^veth in
him shall not b^ ashamed, Romans 9. 33. where it is plain, that he who is
ashamed to profess his name: did never truly believe in him, howsoever he may
flatter himself.

As what probability is there? These Cowards can be bold enough, to do any
evil: but they are afraid, and ashamed to do, or so much as seem good. And so
measuring our foot by their own Last: they censure us for silly, or proud; in
doing that which they dare not.

Real and Hearty Christians; will both speak, and if that will not serve; no
less smart for Christ, otherwise be we never so vicelesse, virtuous we cannot
be.

Sect. 100.
And so you have the necessity of profession; with six reasons for it, and
three against it, if you would make a right use thereof? I will give mine
advice in a few words.

Has God inseparably joined these two together? Profession and believing? And
is the same backed with so many solid reasons drawn from the word? Which is
sufficient to decide all controversies; Then let us not separate what he has
joined. Let us not closely dissemble, or conceal that grace which we have;
either for fear of danger, as Peter did his zeal and affection to Christ; or
for shame of being taken notice of; like Nicodemus, when he stole to Christ by
night; until his love and fervor brake forth; and could no longer be
suppressed. But let our light shine before men; so God shall have praise, we
comfort, others profit.

Yea admit we are rebuked for the same; as the blind man was, for calling after
Christ, Luke 18. 39. Or as the two blind men were, for crying O Lord the Son
of David have mercy on us. Matthew. 20. 31. Let us no more forbear then they
did. Yea though we suffer for it, let us never be ashamed of our masters
service. Be not, says St. Paul, ashamed of the testimony of our Lord: neither
of me his prisoner: but be partakers of the afflictions of the Gospel,
according to the power of God, 2 Timothy 19. No matter what Judas says, touching
Mary's ointment: so long as Christ himself approves of it. Did our Savior
Christ forbear to heal on the sabbath day, Because the Scribes and Pharisees
took it il? No but rather did it the more Luke 6. 11. And the like: Luke 13.
31. 32. When Peter and John were charged, to speak no more in the Name of
Jesus: their answer was: we cannot but speak that whieh we have heard and
seen, Acts. 4. 20. Let the same resolution be ours, since the case is the same.

Yea, let us go a strain higher: and the Holy Ghost will bear us out in it
Namely when we are despised for professing the Name of Christ: Let us do it the
rather. When Michael scoft at David, for dancing before the Arc: and called
him Fool: his answer was, I will be yet more vil'd; and will be low (...)
mine own sight. Yielding two reasons for it, First, it was that wherewith God
was well pleased; Secondly he should be had in more honor, with the same maid
servants: in whose eyes she supposed him to be uncovered as a Fool. He knew
that nothing co^ld be more Heroical; then this very abasement.

And it is our very case: every scoffing Michael (for none else will do it)
derides our holy profession: but with God and the gracious; we shall be had in
honor. Yea our malicious and scoffing adversaries: shall honor us, by
deriding us. For when vicious men think to tax and traduce us: they do in truth
commend us: their dispraise is a man's honor, their praise his dishonor. Yea
Terence a heathen could say: that to be evil spoken of by wicked men, was a
glorious and Laudable thing. And another, that it is no small credit with the
vile: to have a vile estimation* which being so: let us with Job take their
reproach upon our shoulders; and hind it as a Crown unto us, Job. 31. 35. 36.
At least let us immitate St. Austen, who feared the praise of Good men, and
detested that of the evil.

And so much of the first general: namely how that profession, which the world
so condemns, and cries out upon; is agreeable to the word. I come now to show,
that their practice is (in an acceptable measure) answerable to their
profession, of which in the next division, or second part: this finding no
worse acceptance, then the former treatise. In the mean time; (to satisfy the
desire of many: who are pleased to enquire after my former Collections) I have
adventured to publish

The Cure of Prejudice. The Benefit of Affliction. The Victory of Patience. A
Counterpoyson; or Sovereign Antidote against all grief. Sin Stigmatized,
with an addition. Complete Armor: against evil society. Cordial Counsel.
Characters, of the kinds of Preaching. Gods goodness, and man's ingatitude. A
hopeful way to cure, that horrid sin of swearing* in two sheets of Paper.
Some of which, are sold only by James Crumpe, a Book binder, in Little
Bartholmews Wellyard.

Imprimatur JOH DOWNHAM.

FINIS.
Of him, and through him, and for him, are all things, to whom be glory for
ever, Amen.

Romans 11. 36.
The Table.
A.
WE are bound to vindicate the Absent. 125. Both good and well must in our
Act^ons meet. page 103. Sensuallists judge of the Action by the success. 77.
They will accuse the Godly for their virtues and Graces. 81. He that accuses
another must be free himself. 70. Advice to the Godly. 128. The Godly may and
ought to agree in affection though they differ in judgment. 5. Different
dispositions can never agree 2. 4. Be men never so opposite they will agree
against the good. 3. Carnal men apply what they hear to others. 153.
B.
The Beggars Character. 150.
C.
Several cases wherein they censure the Godly hypocrites. 123. As for one
single act of impiety, 52. Yea for common infirmities, 57. Yea for sins before
conversion: 51. Yea for any disaster, 77. or natural defect: 78. Yea, for
things indifferent, 79. Yea for their virtues. 81. or their best actions, 99.
Yea condemn all for the faults of a few 70. yea censure them for the greatest
censurers. 36. Eighteen reasons of their censuring the godly 124. as doing it
out of ignorance 111. or out of policy, 112. or ou^ of some natural aptitude
112. or out of busenesse 113. or out of guiltiness 114. or out of pride 115.
or out of prejudice 115. or out of Misprision 116. or out of envy 116. or out
of self-love 117. or that they may be upon even ground with the Godly. 117.
or out of partiality 118 or out of a contrariety of disposition 118 or because
Satan will have them do so 119. or because they cannot do us more mischief
120. or to incite others to do the like 121. or because the world loses a
limb or member 123. and Satan a subject or prisoner by every one that repents
123. though properly they have no cause nor reason. 111. The Censurer always
worse then the censured. 114. They measure others by themselves, 114. they
censure our moats not their own beams. 29. They put their own faults in the
hinder part of the wallet 118. ours in the fore part 118 self examination
would make them more charitable. 118. They that know least Censure most. 112.
They Censure things indifferent, pass by heinous crimes. 112. They expect we
should cease to be men so soon as we become religious. 52. Did we cease to
be Godly their censures would ^ease. 119. They would Censure Christ himself.
128. Neither can God please them. 128. What they are to do that have censured
the Godly. 127. Christian^ bound to believe aright and live well. 20 to shine
out as lights, and profit others, 20. to grow in grace. 20. An evil Christian
the worst of all men. 136. Every man the spouse of Christ, or the Adultresse of
the Devil. 40. Church never without Hypocrites. 71. Civil men pay men their
dues, but not God 158. good negative Christians 156. but reprobate to every
good work 156. searse one in forty prays in his Family. 156. Fears an oath,
or makes conscience of a lie. 157. They are all for Circumstance, nothing for
substance. 82. They pass for good Christians with men of the world 157* yea
with the reverend Prelates 157. none so unlikely to be saved 32. in a worse
condition then the openly profane 159. the more unrebukable the harder to be
convinced. 32. Conditions as various as faces. 1. They will condemn all for
one. 70. How absut^ it is. 71. 73. 74. How Confident the profane, how
diffident the religious. 12. Variousnesse of disposition the cause of
Contention 1. Contrariety a Cause of Misprision. 118. The Trydentine Council.
126. Conscience if good is tender 94. and makes Conscience of every sin 92.
As Conscience must lead us so truth must lead our consciences. 98. Nothing so
raises their spleen as a good Conscience 95. How basely they think of a tender
conscience* 99. Wicked men have dumb consciences, 34. No less difference in
consciences then stomachs. 97.
D.
Ever^ sin deserves Damnation but only continuance in sin damns. 66. A
plausible Deceit* of natural men. 16. How the Devil be-fooles wicked men. 72.
The Godly differ not in fundamentals. 5. Differences arise that the obstinate
may be hardened. 6.
E.
Various Effects of the same sermon. 2. They envy us because we do better,
116. or far better, 116. or are better esteemed. 116. The envious emulate
what they cannot imitate, 116. Only to refrain evil is to be evil. 20. Of two
evils choose neither. 98. To be evil spoken of, by evil men an honor. 175. No
argument of an evil man. 7. The force of example, 121. In what cases example
must lead us, 98. `Naturall men always in extremes. 77.
F.
What use to make of the Saints falls, 67. the godly bettered the wicked
hardened by others falls. 76. The wicked take encouragement from the falls of
Gods people 61. the Godly are made more careful thereby, 62. when thou see
another fall reflect upon thy self. 96. All the Saints have had their failings
63. the best want their grains of allowance, 54 God esteems Faith above all
performances 65. Carnal men flatter themselves that they are good happy etc.
29. and in far better condition then the godly. 30. Formal Christians will
seem to outstrip real, 131. they have only a Form of religion 82* we should
prefer the meanest believer before the best accomplished Formalist. 6.
G.
Guilty persons will accuse the most innocent, 130. they prerend we are guilty
that they may be thought innocent, 115. they speak evil of the godly, they
think otherwise, 96. of which sundry instances. 96. They call evil good, and
good evil, 125. what ever good we do they will strangely censure us, 100. of
which many examples. 100. The Gospel but few firm friends, 155. Every gracious
heart scrupulous, 94. Sometimes Grace is asleep in the waryest breast, 64. The
growth of grace like the growth of a tree, 54.
H.
How wicked men are hardened by others falls. 70. The Worlds hatred a good sign
of a Godly man. 5. Our much hearing troubles carnal men. 165. Until the Heart
be changed God esteems not what we do, 30. Our best virtues but shining sins
3^. Natural men have enlightened Heads dark Hearts' 28., The tongue discovers
the Heart. 44. All Protestants at large Hypocrites, 137. of which many
instances, 84. 85. Profane men notorious Hypocrites, 141* They will go to
Hell, and ask what is that to us? 101. Politicians horrible Hypocrites, 144*
their policy painted out, 72. they can be in each company a several 147. of
any religion, 147. the more foul their intent, the fairer pretense, 148. How
to beware of them, 148. over fair shows an argument of unsoundnesse, 149.
they pretend piety, aim at profit, 145. will execute any cruelty, 146. under
pretense of worshipping Christ they will betray him* 146. Prelaticall and
scandalous Ministers notorious Hypocrites* 138. And Papists the like: 160. and
likewise the Prelates, 161. Ignorant persons notorious Hypocrites 150. What
sort of Hypocrites* do most harm, 143. That there are many hypocrites, 131.
some whereof only profess religion with their mouths, 131 Others hear much
and practice little, 132* to whom they may be compared* 131. 132. a third sort
that make religion a sta^king Horse to vilany, 133. and to whom they may be
compared, 133. The Hypocrite an Atheist, 139. He performs holy duties without
reverence o^ feeling. 156. Hypocrisy the worst of vices, 69. The Hypocrite
makes the way of truth evil spoken of, 134* causes others to blaspheme God,
134* between hypocrites and profane men the righteous suffer, 134. The
hypocrite*hurts others but most himself 135. his reward, 142* they shall have
the lowest place in Hell, 69. 135* He loads Christ with many sins, Christ loads
him with many woes and curses, 135. We never read of an hypocrites repentance,
136. Civil men looking upon* the profane, admire their own holiness, 16. The
more holy a man is* the more sensible of his unholinesse, 9* believers holy in
Gods acconnt 9. Many converted by seeing the holiness of Christians, 168. The
dispraise of wicked men an honor, their praise a dishonor. 175.
I.
Three degrees of ignorants, 23. The zeal of ignorant ones for their Diana.
153. Actions of indifference when they trench upon the Conscience lay deep
obligations upon the Soul 97, Opposers of reformation ^nfit to judge of things
indifferent. 100. Diverse cases wherein natural men will judge the Godly
hypocrites, 52* to 111* How partial they are in ^udging, 56 58* How
quick-sighted in ou^ faults, how blind to their own, 57. they have a veil
over their hearts, 33. none but senfuallists will determine of any ones small
estate, 46. the religious accused of rash judging. 36. but their accusers are
thereof guilty, 36. the religious judge none hypocrites for single actions, 37.
though they may suspend that good opinion, 37* they can distinguish betwixt
sins of infirmity and the common practice of sin, 38* they judge not their
brother for what he has been, 50. he that is wicked now, may be a new man to
morrow, 48. the dangerous consequence of judging men for single actions of
impiety, 68. the tree is known by its stuit, or want of fruit 41. who are in
their natural estate, who in a reprobate condition, 46. God looks not so much
to what we do, as to what we would do* 55. men shall be judged by their
words. 45. Wicked men call execution of justice cruelty, 105. yet no pleasinger
sacrifice to God, then the blood of malefactors, 109. we cannot pleasure a
delinquent more then in yielding him up to justice, 108. nor the Kingdom* 109.
the death of the wolves being the safety of the sheep, 109. Nor a man's self.
109.
L.
Believers freed from the rigor of the law, 55. 56. unbeleevers bound to keep
it actually, and spiritually, 55. 67. Seven reasons of being circumspect in
our lives, 129.
M.
Magistrates must judge according to the Laws written, 108. they are guilty of
the sins they punish not. 110. A world of people enjoy the means 40. year yet
as ignorant as beasts* 156 wicked men resembled to beasts 3 Wicked men decoct
the mercy of God into poison 61. How ignorant worldlings murmr at the
passages of Gods providence, 128.
N.
The reward of a negative christian, 159. the man being new his old sins are
not to be cast in his teeth. 51.
O.
No believing a wicked man's Oath, 59. of which examples 59. An unlawful oath
better broken then kept. 98. Obedience of natural men partial. 83. Outward
things happen alike to all. 78.
P.
Papists painted out 105. 160. many of parents to their Childrens bodies become
murderers of their souls, 153. their passions and affections make them
partial, 118. a Pastor must have regard to circumstances, 103. and preach law
as well as Gospel, 104. how carnal men mistake the word peace, 102. what true
peace is, 102. a civil and a religious peace, 108. the ruin of enmity is the
resurrection of peace, 109. Natural men do well in persecuting the godly, 21.
of which number were the Prelates, 21. they persecute us to the death for
showing them the way to eternal life, 22. What is done to his, Christ takes as
done to him, 127. Of Pluralists, 140. Practice of the French prelates, 126. he
that will know must resolve to practice, 4. wholesome preaching displeases
carnal minds: 103. desparation kills his thonsand* presumption his ten
thousand* 104. pretended lovers of peace professed haters of truth 84 profession
found fault withal, 161. they name profession mean religion, 164. and holiness
165. profession and the truth of religion inseparable 162. profession may be
without grace but grace cannot be without profession, 162. profession put
before believing, 170. six of profession 166. to 172. not to declare our faith
is to deny it, 171 to hide our graces a shameful injustice, 170. not to be
ashamed of our masters service, 174. since God approves of it no matter what
they think, 175* yea if they despise us do it the more 175. Not to shame our
profession* 128* though to forbear evil is quarrel sufficient, 164. a man's
works will declare him, 165. but a dead faith which cannot be seen, 163. that
there are many who profess and practice not 131. to* whom they are like, 131.
profession where is want of inward truth will agravate judgment 129. Civil men
profess not because they love the praise of men. 172. Secondly least they
should lose of their profits, ease, etc. 173* Thirdly because Cowards 173. they
are bold enough to evil ashamed to be thought good, 174. have tongue enough to
dishonor their maker are dumb to his praise, 172. As profane as very Turks
yet none think better of themselves, 154 Natural men pure in their own eyes,
14. to 23* they break none of the commandments, 17. how they applaud
themselves, 14. 15. etc. Seven reasons thereof, 22. Antinomians as pure as the
profane, 12. only sensualists will brag of their faith works and good
meaning 9. No matter how close evils be nor how public good is, 168. The
religious reputed pure in their own eyes, only their accusers are so, 7. When
they term us puritanes themselves know not what they mean thereby, 100* the
Godly ever bewailing his wants, and weaknesses, 8. and best actions, ^* as
knowing themselves marble to all good, wax to all evil, 8. 10. they are humbled
for those sins they never committed, 11. we are commanded to be pure holy and
perfect, even as God is. 86.
Q.
In things of a questionable nature take the surest side. 97.
R.
Carnal men enemies to reformation. 106. How exceedingly the regenerate and
unregenerate differ in their hearts, 23. 24. also in their sight and knowledge
of spiritual things 25. with the use of it, 27. the regenerate man is not
wholly spirit as the carnal man is wholly flesh. 54. Scarce a man but would be
taken for religious, 145. not one in ten realliy religious, 2. most content
themselves with a mere form, 14. the natural man's religion is to oppose the
power of religion 3. all religions will join against the true, 3. for nature
abominates the power and purity of religion, 155. civ l men will conform to
any religion* the state shall establish 155* they think religion consists all
in quietness, 106. signs of the true religion, 4. not the true except every
where spoken against, 5. God esteems of men as they are, or are not religious,
6. Sound repentance turns the back upon all sin, 86. if we meddle not with
repentance, they have no quarrel against us. 119. report from evil men not to
be believed, 58. whereof instances. 58. We make those sins ours, which we do
not r^prove, 101. to be a doer of ill or no hinderer much about ^ne, 101. To be
righteous in our own eyes, see pure; The regenerate and unregenerate walk by
contrary rules* 99.
S.
Though we are perfectly justified we are sanctified but in part, 53. A slander
is Satan's mind in their mouth, his heart in their lips, 119. No possibility of
being saved until we find our selves in a lost condition. 32. Every Atheist
upon occasion can seem a saint, 146. Scandals are traps and ginns, laid to
destroy wicked men, 75. while they scoff at us, God laughs at them* 127. if
they cannot seduce us, they will traduce us, 116. Signs of a wicked man, 39.
Sin is so bred in the bone, that it will never out of the flesh, 52. the
godly see sin in all they speak, think, or do, 8. but natural men want eyes
to see their sins, 22. trouble for sin a good sign, 78. the less sensible
the more sick, 33. natural men will either deny their sins or justify them,
or shift them off to some other, 18. or by subtle distinctions make them no
sins, 18. petty sins no sins with them* 19. they are never troubled for
sinful thoughts, vain words, etc. 16. or for Sins of omission, 16. the true
Catholic has a Catholic care of all sin, 92. a vast difference between
the sins of the Godly and wicked in diverse particulars, 62. Sin in the
regenerate, nothing but sin in the unregenerate, 65. the sins of the Godly
and wicked so differ, that in comparison the former are said not to sin, 63.
where sin now abounds, grace may as much abound, 48. to be the same alone, and
in public, a notable sign of sinc^rity, 96. They slander us to mitigate
their own shame, 117. If we scruple small matters, they say we stumble at
strawes, and leap over blocks, 82. but it is themselves that strain at gnats,
and swallow Camels, 82. Six reasons of making conscience of small sins, 85. 87.
88. 89. 93. to scruple small sins the best evidence of sincerity* 95* examples
of severe punishment for small sins, 89. 90. least things great trials of a
good conscience, 92. he that is unjust in the least will rather in the
greatest, 92. 93. the wages of the least sin, is death, 90. one sin will keep
possession for Satan, as well astwenty. 91. no sin small but comparatively.
90. They speak evil of us, because they cannot do evil to us, 120* or that
they may have some color to persecute us, 120. or that they may incite others
to do the like, 121. The spirit only ^onvinces of sin, 34* 36. How to know
whether we be spiritual or no, 14. They forestall the simple with strange
surmises, against the godly. 125. If we refuse to swear, or drink with them,
we are puritans. 81*
T.
A good sign to know the true religion by, 12* to know the truth we must
become spiritual, 4. the truths adversa^ies pretend as great love to it, as
he^ best friends, 154. nothing must be yielded to that may prejudice the
truth, 108. some as deeply in love with vice and error, as others are with
virtue and truth. 2*
V.
Why God permits his people to vary* 6. The better vice is, the worse it is.
135. The uprightness of Lewis the 12t, 126.
W.
The Waldenses cleared, 126. God will not see weaknesses where he sees truth,
36. Wicked men flint unto good wax to what is ill, 105, they cannot but tell
others that they are wicked, 43. they honor us by deriding us, 175. God in his
accepts of the will for the work, 66. We can do nothing without a million of
witnesses. 96 we may judge of men by their works, 41. and by their words, 42.
43. it is only in Christ that we or our works are accepted, 32.
Z
A description of Zeal, 104. natural men prefer a quiet prophanes before a
Zealous devotion: 106.
FJNJS.
Errata,
The Reader is desired to expunge two lines, and a half, in page 31: beginning
at the 22. line: which by an over-^i^ht escaped, and in page. 137. line 5. for
Herod-like, read Pilate-like: Other litterall mistakes, and points misplaced
there are: which the reader may be pleased to bear withal.


