PANOPLIA: OR, Armor of Proof FOR A WEAK CHRISTIAN, Against the worlds envy,
scoffs and reproaches. Together with the Doves Innocence and the Serpents
subtilty, upon Genesis 3.15. The third Impression. By R.J.
CHAP. I.
Reverend Sir;
SOme time since I heard you upon 1 Cor 6.9, 10. Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor no unrighteous
persons, shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God. What change it has wrought in
me, I forbear to mention: But certainly Satan and the World fear they have
lost, the one a subject or prisoner, the other a limb or member ever since:
for whereas they ^^er molested me formerly; now as if I were rescued out of
Satan's clu^^^es, that Lion foames and roares, and bestirs himself to recover
his loss.

And as for my old acquaintance, they so envy to see themselves casheered, and
so mortally hate me, for that I will no longer continue miserable, nor run with
them (as I have done) to the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. that they make
me weary of my life, as the daughters of Heth did Rebecka, Genesis 27.46.

Yea I am so scoft at and scorned, both by Parents, Friends and Enemies, that
it not only hinders me from doing the good I would, or appearing the same I am;
but it almost beats me off from being religious back to the world.

And certainly he must be more spirit then flesh, that can contentedly make
himself contemptible to follow Christ; be pointed at for singularity, endure so
many base and vile nicknames; have his Religion judged hypocrisy, his godly
simplicity fillinesse, his zeal madness, his contempt of the world ignorance,
his godly sorrow dumpishnesse, and the like malicious and mischievous
constructions made of whatsoever he speaks or does. For my part, I could better
abide a stake (God assisting me) then the mocks, scoffs and scorns which every
where I meet withal. It is death to me to be mocked; as it fared with Zedekiah,
Jer. 38.19. Nor is there above Hell a greater punishment in my judgment, then
to become a Saunio, a subject of scorn, as Sampson (I doubt not) found.
Alcibiades professed, that neither the proscription of his goods, nor his
banishment, not the wounds he received in his body, were so grievous to him as
one scornful word from his enemy Ctesiphon.

Yea doubtlesle our Saviors ear was more painfully pierced, then either his
brows, or hands, or feet. It could not but go deep into his soul, to hear those
bitter and girding reproaches from them whom he came to save: A generous nature
is more wounded with the tongue then with the hand.

CHAP. II.
I Grant there is no such rub in the way to Heaven as this; Minister
Satan has not such a tried shaft in all his quiver: he gets more now by such
discouragements, and the reproaches that are cast upon Religion, then he did
formerly by fire and faggot; for then the blood of the Martyrs, was found to be
the seed of the Church: others ( Phaenix like) springing out of their ashes:
Whereas now, multitudes of souls are scoft out of their Religion by wicked men;
many being apt with Peter to deny their religion, when they come in company
with Christ's enemies; and with David to dissemble their faith when they are
amongst Philistius, lest they should be mocked, have so many frowns, and frumps,
and censures, and scoffs; be branded with that odious and stigmaticall name of
an hypocrite, etc. Yea St Austin confesses, that he often belied himself with
sins which he never committed, lest he should be unacceptable to his sinful
companions; which makes our Savior pronounce that man blessed that is not
offended in him, Matthew. 11.6.

But for all that, a wi^^ ^^an will not be scoft out of his Money, nor a just
man flowted out of his Faith. The taunts of an Ishmael shall never make an
Isaac out of love with his inheritance. Yea for a man to be scoft out of his
goodness by those which are lewd, is all one, as if a man that sees should
blindefold himself or put out his eyes, because some blind wretches revile and
scoff at him for seeing. Or as if one that is sound of limbs, should limp or
maim himself to please the criple, and avoid his taunts, And know this, That if
the barking of these currs, shall hinder us from walking on our way to Heaven,
it is a sign we are most impotent cowards: Yea if our love be so cold to
Christ, that we are ashamed for his sake to bear a few scoffs and reproaches
from the world, it is evident we are but counterfets, such as Christ will be
ashamed of before his Father and his holy Angels as the latter day, Mark. 8.38.
For, for the comfort of all that are single and honest-hearted, notwithstanding
all the scoffs and scorns of atheists and careless worldlings, all their
persuasions and persecutions, they shall both lose their labors and themselves
too in the end. Well may they intend, and also do their utmost to flout us out
of our Faith, that so they may slay us with death eternal, and speed
thereafter; (As God that regards not so much what is performed, as what was
intended, and measures what we do by what we meant to do; as in the case of
Abraham's offering up his son, and those Jews who only thought they had killed
Paul, Acts 14.19.) but they shall be no more able to hinder the salvation of
any one whom God has chosen to his Kingdom of grace and glory, then Saul with
his Courtiers could hinder David from attaining the promised Kingdom of Israel,
Psalm. 129.1. Revel. 13.8. The winds may well toss the ship wherein Christ is,
but never overturn it. If Christ have but once possessed the affections, there is
no dispossessing him again. The League that Heaven has made Hell wants power
to break. Who can separate the conjunctions of the Deity? Whom God did
predestinate, says Paul, them be also called; and whom he called, them he also
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8.30. They shall
sooner blow up hell with trains of powder, then break the chain of this
dependent truth. No power of men or devils is able to withstand the will of
God, it shall stand firmer then the firmament.

A fire in the heart overcomes all other fires without: as we see in the
Martyrs, which when the sweet doctrine of Christ had once got into their
hearts, it could not be got out again by all the torments that wit and cruelty
could devise.

CHAP. III.
BUt how should I a novice, Convert.
a punie, a white-liver, a milksop, shak off this slavish yoke of bondage and
fear in which Satan for the present holds me?

Minister. By well observing what the Scriptures in this case hold forth for
the encouragement of all that thus suffer. I will commend to your serious
consideration only six things, and I pray mind them well; for Virgil most
excellently and profoundly, couples the knowledge of cause, and the conquest of
all fears together.

First observe, that grievous temptations and persecutions, do always
accompany the remission of sins. That all men, as Austins speaks, are
necessitated to miseries, who bend their course toward the Kingdom of Heaven:
neither can Gods love be enjoyed without Satan's disturbance. Yea the world and
the devil therefore hate us, because God has chosen us. If a convert comes
home, the Angels welcome him with songs, the devils follow him with uprore and
fury, his old acquaintance with scorns and obloquie, as you sufficiently find.
Godly men are thorns in wicked men's eyes, as Job was in the devils, because
they are good, or for that they are dearly beloved of God. If a man's person and
ways please God, the world will be displeased with both: whence we are so
often foretold and forewarned of it, that we may be the better forearmed and
prepared to entertain it: All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Ye shall be hated of all men and nations for
my Names sake, Matthew. 10.22. and 24.9. Behold I send you forth, as sheep in the
midst of wolves. Matthew. 10.16. and many the like. Whence also those many and
strong encouragements in the word, which may serve as so many flaggons of wine,
to comfort and strengthen us against whatsoever we meet withal in the world:
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.10. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you, ver. 11, 12. Rejoice,
inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall
be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. For if ye be reproached
for the Name of Christ, happy are ye. For the spirit of glory and of God
rests upon you, which on their part is evil spoken of, but on your part is
glorified, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14. Lo here is reward enough, for all that men or
devils can do against us; which has made thousands even ambitious to embrace
the flames. Your cruelty is our glory, said the Martyrs in Tertullians time to
their persecutors, for the harder we are put to it, the greater shall our
reward be in Heaven. It is to my loss (said Gordius the Martyr) if you bate me
any thing of my sufferings: See more Phil. 1.28, 29. Rev. 2.13.

And so much to show, that he refuses to be an Abel, whom the malice of Cain
does not exercise, as Gregory speaks: For it is an everlasting rule of the
Apostle, He that is born after the flesh, will persecute him that is born after
the spirit (Gal. 4.29) not because he is evil, but because he is so much
better then himself, 1 John 3.12. Because his life is not like other men's, his
ways are of another fashion, Wisd. 2.15.

CHAP. IV.
SEcondly consider, That as we are every where in the word forewarned of it,
so it is not our case alone; for search the whole Bible over, and you shall not
find one holy man mentioned, without mention of something he suffered from
ungodly men; as it were easy to instance, how Abel, Lot, Noah, righteous men;
Abraham the father of the faithful; Isaac, Jacob, Joseph; Patriarchs and
Fathers of the Church; meek Moses, upright Samuel, Job that nonesuch, all the
Lords Priests, Prophets, Apostles; yea the harmless Babes, and our Savior
Christ himself did severally suffer from wicked and ungodly men. Yea never man
came to Heaven, but first he past through this purgatory. God had one son
without sin, but never any one without suffering. Which makes our Savior
say, Woe be to you when all men speak well of you, that is, when evil men speak
well of you; for so did the Jews of the false Prophets, Luke 6.26. Wherefore
marvel not though the world hate you, as St John speaks, 1 John 3.13. Neither
count it strange, as St Peter has it, concerning the fiery trial, which is
amongst you to try you, as though some strange thing were come unto you, 1 Pet.
4.12. For Christ and his Cross are inseparable, Luke 14.27. Whence that
distinction of Luther, that a Christian is a Crosse-bearer. He that will be my
disciple, let him take up his cross daily and follow me, Luke 9.23. and 14 26,
27.

CHAP. V.
THirdly, No hope it should be otherwise, since God from the beginning of the
Creation, has proclaimed a War, enmity and strife, between the wicked and the
godly: Did you never read that Scripture, Genesis 3.15? where God himself says to
the Serpent, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and her seed; he, or it, shall bruise thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel.
Where by the serpents seed, are meant the whole generation of wicked men; and
by the woman's seed, Christ and all his members, as all Interpreters conclude
and other Scriptures make clear; where wicked men are called serpents, a
generation of vipers, and children of the devil, Matthew. 23.33. Joh. 8.44. 1 John 3.10. And as this war was proclaimed in Paradise, even in the beginning of
time, ( original sin being the original of this discord) so it shall
continue to the end of all time: When time, says One, began, this malice first
began, nor will it end but with the latest man. It is an everlasting Act of
Parliament, like a Statute in Magna Charta. Which is the next thing I would
commend to your serious consideration: And that you may be the better confirmed
therein, see how according to the Lords prediction or proclamation, there has
been a perpetual war, enmity and strife in all ages past, is now and ever
shall be, between Satan and Christ; and their Regiments the wicked and the
godly.

For proof whereof I could produce testimonies and examples innumerable, there
being scarce a page in the Bible, which does not express or imply somewhat
touching this enmity. But that I may be brief, and because examples give a
quicker impression then arguments, I will only give you three instances in
every Age. As

First, to begin with the first Age, viz. the old world before the flood. We
read of this mortal enmity and strife between Cain and Abel, 1 John 3.12.
between Lamech and the holy seed, Genesis 4.23, 24. and between those wicked
Giants which Moses speaks of, and the sons of God, Genesis 6*2, to 12. Yea those
Giants bad battle to Heaven, as our Mythologists add to ver. 4.

Secondly, After the Flood, before the Law, between all the men of Sodom and
righteous Lot, Genesis 19.4.9.11. 2 Pet. 2.8. Between Hagar and Ishmael; the
bondwoman and her son, and Sarah and Isaac, the free*woman and her son,
Genesis 21.9, 10. Gal. 4.29. and between Esau and Jacob, first in the womb, the
more plainly to shadow out this enmity, Genesis 25.22, 23. and after they were
born, Genesis 27.41.

Thirdly, After the Law, before Christ, between Doeg and the 85 Priests which
he slew with the edge of the sword, 1 Samuel 22 18, 19. between Jezabel and all
the Prophets of the Lord which she destroyed, 1 King. 18.13, 14. and between
the heads of Israel in Micaiahs time, and all that were good, Mich. 3.2.

Fourthly, Since the Gospel, in the time of Christ and his Apostles; this
enmity so manifested it self not only in the Gentiles, but in the Jews Gods own
people, who first raised those persecutions against Christ and his members;
that having beheaded John Baptist his harbinger, and crucified himself the Lord
of life: We read that of all the twelve, none died a natural death save only
St John, and he also was banished by Domitian to Patmos, and at another time
thrust into a Tun of seething oil at Rome, as Tertullian and St Hierom do
report: See Acts 7*51, ^o 60. and 12.^, to 5. Rom, 8.36. Joh. 21.18, 19.

Fifthly, After the Apostles, if we consider the residue of the ten
Persecutions raised by the Romans against the Christians, which was for three
hundred years, till the coming of godly Constantine, we find that under
Dioclesian, seventeen thousand Christians were slain in one month, amongst
whom was Serena the Emperesse also. Yea under him and nine other Emperors,
there was such an innumerable company of innocent Christians put to death and
tormented, that St Hierom in his Epistle to Chromatius and Heleod^^^ ^aith,
There is no one day in the year, unto which the number of five thousand Martyrs
might not be ascribed, except only the first day of January. Yea there was two
thousand suffered in the same place and at the same time with Nicanor, Acts and
Monuments page 32. who were put to the most exquisite deaths and torments, that
ever the wit or malice of men or devils could invent to inflict upon them, and
all for professing the faith of Christ and being holy: which makes St Paul cry
out, I think that God has set forth us the last Apostles, as men appointed to
death! 1 Cor. 4.9.

CHAP. VI.
Sixthly, From the Primitive times and infancy of the Church hitherto; the Turk
and the Pope have acted their parts in shedding the blood of the Saints, as
well as the Jews and Roman Emperors; touching which I will refer you to the
Book of Acts and Monuments: and Revel. 17. The whore of Babylon was drunk with
the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, ver. 6.
Which in part was fulfilled in England under the reign of Queen Mary: and in
France, where before many late bloody massacres, there were more then two
hundred thousand who suffered Martyrdom about Transubstantiation: See
Ecclesiastical History, lib. 6. cap. 4, 5, 16. But

Seventhly, To come to these present times wherein we live: Is it possible for
a man to live a conscionable and unreprovable life? abstain from drunkenness,
swearing, profaning the Lords day, separate himself from evil company, be
zealous for the glory of God, admonish others that do amiss, etc. without
being traduced, calumniated, hated, slandered and persecuted for the same? no
it is not possible: for if a man but walk according to the rule of Gods word,
he is too precise: if he will be more then almost a Christian, he is curious,
fantastical, factious, and shall be mocked with the spirit. What should I say?
the world is grown so much knave, that it is now a vice to be honest. True,
blessed be God and good Laws, we suffer little but the lash of evil tongues;
but were wicked men's powers answerable to their wills and malice, they would
not suffer a godly man to live, as I shall in due place show you.

Eighthly, For the time to come: It is like not only to continue, but the last
remnants of time are sure to have the most of it; because as in them love shall
wax cold, Matthew. 24.12. so as love grows cold, contention grows hot.

More expressly the Holy Ghost foretells, that in the last days the times shall
be perilous, and that toward the end of the world, there shall be scoffers,
false accusers, cursed speakers, fierce, despisers of them that are good; and
being fleshly not having the spirit, they shall speak evil of the things which
they understand not: and that many shall follow their damnable ways, whereby
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And that as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so these also shall resist the truth, being men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith, being before of old ordained to
condemnation, 2 Timothy 3.1, to 13. 2 Pet. 2 2. and 3.3. Jude 4.10.16, 18, 19. And
so much of the third particular.

CHAP. VII.
FOurthly, It would be considered, that what you suffer is far short of what
others have suffered before you; for whereas you suffer a little
tongue-persecution, your betters and such as the world was not worthy of, have
suffered cruel mockings, and scourgings, bonds, and imprisonments; were
stoned, sawn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword: endured the violence of
fire; were wract, wandered about in deserts and mountains, and in dens and
caves of the earth, in sheepskins and goat skins, destitute, afflicted,
tortured and tormented: Not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a
better resurrection, Heb. 11.35, to 39. Yea turn over Ecclesiastical History,
and you shall find that some of the Martyrs were stoned, some crucified, some
beheaded, some thrust through with spears, some burnt with fire, some broyled,
some brained; with many the like and worse kinds of death: for we read of no
less then twenty nine several deaths they were put unto. But to clear your
sight, I Will give you some particular instances of the several ways that the
best of Gods people have suffered before you.

First, You shall find, that it has been the manner of wicked men, out of
this enmity, to envy the virtuous and good estate of the godly: as Cain envied
Abel, Genesis 4.5. Saul David, 1 Samuel 18.28, 29. and those unbeleeving Jews Paul,
Acts 17.13.

Secondly, To contemn their supposed mean estate, as Sanballat, Tobiah and
Gershom, with the rest of that crew contemned Nehemiah and the Jews, Nehem.
4.1, 2, 3. Rabsheke Hezekiah and his people, 2 King. 18.19, to 36. And the
Epicurean Philosophers Paul. Acts 17.18.

Thirdly, To rejoice at their supposed evil estate, as the Princes of the
Philistines did at Sampsons blindness and bondage, Judge. 16.25. Peninnah at
Hannahs barrenness, especially when she went up to the house of the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.6, 7. And the Jews at the Disciples and the rest of the Church, when
Herod vexed some, and slew others, Acts 12.1, 2, 3.

Fourthly, To hate them, as all carnal men hate the members of Christ, Matthew.
10.22. Ahab Eliah, 1 King. 22.8. and 18.10. And Haman Mordecai, Esth. 3.5, to
15.

CHAP. VIII.
Fifthly, To murmur against them, as Labans sons murmured against Jacob, Genesis
31.1. The Israelites against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 11.1. and 14.2, 3. and the
Laborers in the vineyard, against the Master of the house and their fellows,
Matthew. 20.11, 15.

Sixthly, To censure their actions and misconster their intentions, as Eliab did
David's zeal for Gods glory, in fighting with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.28. and those
wicked ones his fasting and mourning, Psalm. 35.13, to 17. Thus Jobs friends
censured him for an hypocrite, Job 4.6, to 11. and the Jews Christianity to be
heresy, and Paul the Preacher of it a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition,
and maintainer of scisme: yea all the Disciples to be deceivers, 2 Cor. 6.8.

Seventhly, By carrying tales of them unto others, as Cham did to his brethren
of Noah's nakedness, Genesis 9.22. Doeg to Saul of David and Abimeleck, 1 Samuel
22.9, 10. and the Ziphims, 1 Samuel 23.19, 20. and 26.1. And those Libertines
with other suborned men against Steven to the Counsel of Priests, Acts 6.8, to
15.

Eighthly, To persuade and give divelish counsel to others like themselves to
persecute them; as Balam to Balaack against the Children of Israel, when he
could not be suffered to curse them Rev. 2.14. The Princes and Rulers to
Zedekiah the King against Jeremiah, Jer. 38.4. and the Jews of Thessalonica to
the people of Bereah against Paul, Acts 17.13.

Ninethly, To scoff at them, as Ishmael scoft at Isaac, Genesis 21.9. Rabsheke at
Hezekiah and his people, 2 King. 18.27. and the Philosophers at Paul, Acts
17.18, to 21.

Tenthly, To nickname them, as Ahab nicknamed Eliah, 1 King. 18.17. the
wicked Job and David, Psalm. 35.13, 14. Job 4.6, to 11. the Courtiers Jeremiah,
Jer. 37, 15, etc. and the Jews Paul, Acts 24.14. and all the Disciples, 1 Cor.
4.9.10.

Eleventhly, To revile and rail on them, as Goliath reviled and railed on the
Host of Israel and their God, 1 Samuel 17.45. Shemai upon David, 2 Samuel 16.7. and
likewise the Mighty men, Psalm. 31.13. and the Jews upon Paul and Barnabas, Acts
13.45.

Twelfthly, To raise slanders of them, as those wicked men slandered Naboth,
confirming the same with an oath, 1 King. 21. the wicked David, Psalm. 57.4. and
the multitude John Baptist, Matthew. 11.18,

Thirteenthly, To curse them, as Goliath cursed David, 1 Samuel 17.43. and also
Shemei, 2 Samuel 16.7, to 15. the Heathen Israel, Zach. 8.13. and all wicked men
the godly, Matthew. 5.44.

Fourteenthly, To threaten them, as all the men of Sodom did Lot, Genesis 19.9.
Jehoram Elisha, 2 King. 6.31. and as Paul before his conversion did the
Disciples, Acts 9.2.

Fifteenthly, By subtilty to undermine them in talk, that they might betray
them; as Saul caused his servants to undermine David by flattery to work his
confusion, 1 Samuel 18.14. and again, ver. 21, 25. the false Prophets and other
enemies of the truth Jeremiah, seeking every way to destroy him, Jer. 18.18,
etc. and certain of the Synagogue Steven, Acts 6.9, 10.

CHAP. IX.
SIxteenthly, By using scornful and disdainful gestures to despite them; as
Goliath against David, 1 Samuel 17.42. and also those wicked ones, Psalm. 22.7, 13.
and 35.16. and 109.25. Others against Job, Job 16.10. The scoffing Idolaters
against the godly in Isaiahs time, Isa. 57.3, 4. and the Laborers in the
Parable against the Master of the Vineyard, and their fellows, Matthew. 20 15.

Seventeenthly, To withstand and contrary the doctrine which they are commanded
by God to deliver: As Zedekiah the false prophet did Michaiahs doctrine, 1
King. 22.24. the Priests, Prophets and all the people Jeremiahs, Jer. 26.8, 9.
and Elymas the Sorcerer Paul and Barnabas in their preaching, Acts 13.8.

Eighteenthly, To combine themselves together and lay divellish plots to
destroy them; as the new King of Egypt with his people did against the children
of Israel, Exodus 1.9, 10. the hundredth and twenty Governors, to work Daniels
overthrow, Dan. 6. And Demetrius with the rest of the Craftsmen conspired the
death of Paul's companions, Acts 19. and likewise more then forty of the Jews,
which bound themselves by a curse, not to eat nor drink till they had killed
Paul; in which conspiracy the chief Priests were likewise assistants, Acts
23.12, 13, 14.

Nineteenthly, To imprison them, as Ahab did Michaiah, 1 King. 22.27. the
malicious Priests Jeremiah, Jer. 36.5. and all wicked men the godly, when it is
in their power, Luke 21.12. as they served John Baptist, Peter, Paul and many
other of the Apostles, Acts 5.18. and 12.4. and 4.3. and 22.25. and 28.17. 2
Cor. 11.23.

Twentieth, To strike them, as Zedekiah the false Prophet struck Michaiah, 1
King. 22.24, Pashur Jeremiah, Jer. 20.2. and the Princes also, chap. 37.15. and
Ananias the High Priest Paul, Acts 23.2. as also the Jews, 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.

Twenty one, To hurt and maim them, as the whole Congregation of the children
of Israel would have served those true hearted spies, for speaking well of the
Land of Canaan, had not the glory of the Lord appeared in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, Numb. 14.10. the Philistims Sampson, Judge. 16.21. and the Jews of
Antiochia and Iconium Paul, Acts 14.19.

Twenty two and lastly, To slay them, as Doeg slew Ahimeleck and the rest of
the Priests, 1 Samuel 22, 29. Iezabell all the Prophets of the Lord she could
find, 1 King. 18.4. Jerusalem the Prophets, Matthew. 23.37. and Herod all the
male-children that were in Bethlehem and all the coasts thereof, that he might
make sure work with Christ, Matthew. 2.16.

CHAP. X.
NOw to speak nothing in this place of the diversity of deaths and tortures,
that millions of Martyrs have suffered for professing of Christ's Name and
keeping of a good conscience, though their sufferings were nothing, either to
what their sins had deserved, or to what their Savior had done and suffered
for them; for he endured many a little death all his life for our sakes, and at
length that painful, shameful and cursed death ^f the cross: yea he suffered
every one of these two and twenty ways befo^ementioned, and that from his own
countrymen and kinsfolks, yea of the Chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, who
were teachers and expounders of the Law, and which sat in Moses chair. For he
was envied, Matthew. 26.15. Contemned, Matthew. 12.24. and 13.55. Rejoiced at in
his misery and distress, Matthew. 27.29. Hated, Joh. 7.7. Murmured against, Luke
15.2. Had his actions and intentions misconstrued, Matthew. 11.19. Had tales
carried of him, Matthew. 12.14. and divelish counsel given against him, Matthew.
27.20. was scoffed at, Matthew. 27.42. Nicknamed, Matthew. 13.55. Railed on, Luke
23.39. Slandered, Matthew. 28.13. Cursed, Gal. 3.13. Threatened, Joh. 11.53.
Undermined in talk that they might accuse him, Matthew. 22.15. They used
disdainful gestures before him, Matthew. 27.29, 39. Withstood him in his
preaching, and contraried his doctrine, Luk 5.21. Matthew. 9.34. Combined
together and laid divellish plots to destroy him, Matthew. 12.14. Took him
prisoner, Matthew. 26.57. Smote him, Luke 22.64. Hurt and wounded him, Matthew.
27.29. Joh. 19.34. And lastly they put him to death, Matthew. 27.35. And why all
this? not for any evil they found in him; for their own words are, He has done
all things well, Mark. 7.37. He has done, such was his power: all things, such
was his wisdom: well, such was his goodness: and yet crucified and every way
abused he must be. But it was for his zeal, purity and holiness, and because
his life and practice was clean contrary to theirs; his doctrine too powerful
and pure for such carnal hearts to embrace or endure. Now cast up thy Receipts,
and compare them with thy deservings; look upon thy deliverance from the fire
of hell: Yea look but upon thy sufferings single, and thou shall find them
nothing, to what thy fellow Saints and Christ thy elder brother has suffered
before thee. At a Lions den, or a fiery furnace not to turn tail, were
something worthy a Christian. Yea compare thine own estate with thine enemies,
and thou shall see yet greater cause to be not only patient but thankful. For
if these scoffs and flouts of men like thy self are so grievous to thee, how
will thine and Gods enemies endure those mocks and flouts of the devils in
hell? how will they endure that devouring fire, that everlasting burning, Isa.
33.14. Psalm 68.21. And the way not to repine at those above us, is to look at
those below us. But leaving the application until the conclusion,

CHAP. XI.
Fifthly, Consider but seriously, who they are, that hate, scoff and jeer you
and that have persecuted the Saints before you, and mocked at holiness and this
may serve exceedingly to support you against whatever you shall hear or feel
from them. As first, what is their Character in the Scripture are they not such
as these? A company of hypocrites, Psalm. 35. Hypocritical mockers, ver. 16. a
crew of drunkards, Psalm. 69. I am a song of the dru^kards, ver. 12. a sort of
vicious persons, following their lusts, 2 Pet. 3.^^ There shall come mockers,
walking after their own lusts. A company of abje^^ persons, Psalm. 35.15. like
those enemies, Acts 17. Lewd fellows of the bas^ sort, ver. 5. A rout of
profane, godless, irreligious atheists and ignorant foo^ that do no more know
the power, then Turks and heathens know the tru^^ of godliness, Psalm. 14.1, to
6. And it is a shrewd suspicion, that he w^^ is a mocker is an atheist: It well
becomes him to mock at Religion, the denies a God: and it is evident enough
that he denies a God, that mocks at godliness. But secondly, Experience
sufficiently acquaints us what they are, and the examples before rehearsed; for
such as Cain, and the Sodomites, and Ishmael, and Esau, and Haman, and Eliab,
and Goliath, and Michal, and Doeg, and Shemy, and Rabsheke, and Ahab, and
Iezabel, and Tobia, and Sanballat, and Pashur, and Ze^ekiah, and Herod, and
Judas: and St Paul before his conversion, and Ananias the High Priest, and
Dometrius the silversmith, and Alexander the copper smith, and Elimas the
Sorcerer: such as these I say are the men, who amongst us do the like things
that they did. And will any wise man stumble at Religion for such men's scoffs
and reproaches? what better can be expected from them? What said the Orator to
Salust? It cannot be, but he that lives thy life should speak thy language: yea
a man would choose his Religion by such men's enmity, and it is a great honor
to Religion that it has such adversaries. For as the Primitive Christians used
to say when Nero persecuted them; they that know him must needs think it some
great good which Nero so hated and condemned; so every wise man will love
Religion the better, and take it for a great honor to the Saints, that
hypocrites, drunkards, vicious followers of their lusts, base and lewd
fellows, godless atheists, and blind sensualists are her scoffing adversaries:
And scarce do I know a better argument to persuade to love and embrace it, then
that such men hate and deride it: neither can it be the true Religion, which is
not every where thus spoken against, Acts 28.22. But

CHAP. XII.
Sixthly and lastly, Observe but the reasons why they do it; and this will
notably confirm and strengthen you against their scoffs and scorns.

Convert. Have they any reason for their so doing?

Minister. Not properly: For as the Prophet very often complains, they are mine
enemies without a cause, and they hate me without a cause, etc. Psalm. 35.7. and
69.4. though they pretended many causes. So they have no just cause nor reason
to hate, censure and slander us as they do; for no evil deed can have a good
reason: yet they do it not without many by-reasons and self ends. As

First, Their ignorance is a main cause of it, natural men in heavenly things,
resemble shellfish, that have no smell; or the Camelion, that has no taste, at
least they see no more then the bark or outside of spiritual performances, 2 Samuel, 6.16. And the flesh (Satan's ready instrument) will be ever suggesting to
them strange surmises touching what the religious either say or do. As is
evident by what is recorded of Michol, 2 Samuel 6.16. of Nicodemus, Joh. 3.4. of
Festus, Acts 26.24. and lastly of Paul before his conversion, 1 Timothy 1.13. who
was no sooner enlightened with the saving knowledge of the truth, but he preached
that faith which before he condemned and persecuted.

And for testimonies to confirm it these are pregnant, Ioh. 15.21. and 16.2, 3.
Matthew. 16.23. and 22.29. Luke 19.42. 1 Cor. 2.8. Psalm. 2.2.

Though experience may save that labor: for how severely will these ignorant
persons censure and slander not only things indifferent, but the most approved
good duties; while they will patiently pass by the most heinous crimes: an
infallible sign of a man not born anew.

And still the more sottish the more censorious; for where is least brain,
there is most tongue and lowdest. And as ignorance gives disparagement a louder
tongue then knowledge does, so always they that know least will censure most
and most deeply. It is from the weakest judgments that the heaviest judgment
comes.

Secondly, Sometimes on the other side, they will censure and slander them in
policy: that while the standers by are taken up with jeering at our supposed
simplicity, they may not mind their past and intended real villainy. Therein
imitating a thief, who being pursued in a crowd, will be forwardest in crying
stop thief, that so he may neither be attached nor suspected: The case of
Athaliah, 2 King. 11.14.

Thirdly, Another reason may be this; Who so has any thing fixed, either in
their persons or conditions which causes contempt, As they are commonly very
bold, so they have a kind of spur in them, and are most industriously stirred
up to watch, observe and censure the weaknesses of others; that so they may
have somewhat again to repay. See the case of Shemei touching David, 2 Samuel
16.7. of the High Priests, Scribes and Pharisees touching our Savior, Luke
5.21. Matthew. 9.3, 34. and 12.1, 2. and 16.17. and 21.2, 14, 15, 16, 24, 45, 46.
and 22.15, 16, 17. and 27.41, 42. And lastly of Judas touching Mary, Joh. 12.4,
5.

CHAP. XIII.
FOurthly In such as are not regenerate, nor were ever disciplined in the
school of Christ. The ignoblenesse of their dispositions and breeding, may be a
sufficient ground: For baseness, what it cannot attain to, it will vilicate
and deprave. As no wonder if a Carter censure a Scholar, or a Clown a
Courtier; so none can think it strange that brutish sensualists, should censure
the Saints for sullen, shallow, censorious, proud, dissembling, etc. That they
should mistake the way to Heaven for the most melancholy walk, when all that
are born of God, and taught by his Spirit, know them the most merry, wise,
charitable, humble and plain dealing people.

Indeed time and experience will alter their judgments be they never so
brutish and base: as it universally fared with the old world, Genesis 6. and 7.
chapters, who for one hundred and twenty years together, harbored many base
thoughts of Noah: thinking him half mad, to bestow so much labor and cost in
building so vast a vessel as the Ark was: but in process of time, when they
stood upon the tops of the mountains, expecting within a minute to be drowned
in those waters: they beheld him secure to their greater vexation: and
acknowledged themselves stark mad for not timely believing him.

Fifthly, Guiltiness is another main reason: for commonly suspicion proceeds
from a self-defect: and a bad construction from a bad mind.

Deceit^ull, over will mistrustfull be: But no mistrust, is found in honesty.

Natural men, mostly measure others by their own bushel; and so form their
opinions and censures of us according to the mold of wickedness that is in
their own hearts: and doing all their own good in hypocrisy, they cannot think
us better then themselves.

And yet it is a rule which seldom fails: That as Cham was worse then Noah whom
he derided: and Ishmael worse then Isaac whom he mocked: and Saul worse then
David whom he persecuted: and Iezabel worse then Naboth whom she defamed and
murdered: and Herod worse then John Baptist whom he beheaded. So they which
are wont to censure and slander others, have greater faults themselves, and
cause to be censured and condemned of others: which faults they cannot tell how
to cover, but by disgracing of others. And the censured in Scripture, are
always more precious in Gods sight then the censurer: as in the Pharisee and
Publican, Luke 18. and in those Barbarians and Paul, Acts 28.3, 4.

Sixthly, Pride is no small cause: for a proud man is wont to admire his own
actions, but to abate the valu, and derogate from the esteem of others; every
whit as basely to vilify other men's doings, as he over highly prizeth his own.
I (says the proud Pharisee) am not as this Publican, Luke 18.11. Neither was
he if you mark it: for the Publican condemning himself was justified and saved:
he justifying himself was everlastingly condemned.

Again, They know their glory and credit with the world, is greatly eclipsed by
such as excel in virtue: Their vicious lives are plainly reproved, and their
persons most grievously shamed by the holy conversation of good men. And this
makes them smut the face that is fairer: blemish honest men's fame by their
censuring and aspersions; that they may mitigate their own shame with others
discredit; like Potiphars wife, they pretend we are guilty, that themselves may
be taken for innocent.

Seventhly, Another cause is prejudice or misprision; for this like a painted
pair of Spectacles, casts a false color upon the best actions. As we see in
Ahab and Iezabel, touching Eliah and Micaiah.

CHAP. XIV.
Eighthly, They suppose we are not as we seem, ergo we are Puritants, Hypocrites,
etc. A reason of great force with States men and Politicians: Herod thinks
Christ comes to dethrone him; therefore to make sure work, ke murders all the
males in Bethlem. Cambyses dreams overnight, that his brother should be King
of Persia, therefore he puts him to death the next morning. Saul supposes David
a traitor, therefore know ye not that the son of Iesse has conspired against
me? But it were as good an argument to reason thus: All the Apostles were
imposters, and the Gospel it self a fable; for so thought the Scribes and
Pharisees. A man shall do God good service, in persecuting of his faithful
servants; for so thought the Prelates (as themselves have confessed upon their
examination.) Or lastly, there is no God, for so the fool has said in his
heart, Psalm. 14.1. and 53.1.

Ninethly, They envy the godly, either first, because they do better, as Cain
did Abel; or secondly, because they fare better, as Esau did Jacob: or thirdly,
because they are better esteemed, as Saul did David. And this i^ another cause,
for ill will never speaks well; and envy is sick if her neighbor be well. The
ones success is the others vexation, the envious emulate what they cannot
imitate. Whence arises all their censuring and misconstruing their persons,
actions and intentions. For whom they cannot reach by imitation, they will
endeavor to do by detraction: and because they cannot seduce us, they will if
they can traduce us; if we will not partake with them in their sins, we shall
in their shame; if Joseph will not be lewd with his mistress, he shall be
thought as guilty, and suffer as much as if he were.

Tenthly, Sometimes they censure and slander us out of self-love; either that
they may gain, or at least not lose of their honors, pleasures, profits: Saul's
flatterers will sooth him up in his evil surmises against David; saying The
son of Iesse has conspired against thee; that they may have fields and
Vineyards given them; be made Captains over thousands, and Captains over
hundreds. And this tempted Balaam against his conscience, even to curse where
he should bless: he saw how his cursing and cursed counsel might please
Balack, and bless himself with a gainful and gallant promotion. And the like
in Demetrius, for as Paul substracts from Demetrius his profit, so Demetrius
detracts from Paul's credit.

Which was many a man's case within these few years: for some have climed up to
preferment by envaying against the Puritans: and others been ruined and
disgraced by preaching against the Prelates.

Eleventhly, By depraving all good men themselves, (though swearers, drunkards,
whoremongers,) shall be judged indifferent honest men: for were all the world
ugly, deformity would be no monster. Yea, a base person may come to preferment,
if none be thought better then himself. He that has but one eye, may be King
amongst the blind. Whereupon, to have themselves thought as good as any other,
they will not have any thought good that dwells near them.

CHAP. XV.
TWelfthly, Their passions and affections make them so exceeding partial, that
they will more deeply censure our fearing of God, then their own blaspheming
him; and hold it a more heinous crime for us to be sober, then for themselves
to be drunk.

You may think it a big word for want of acquaintance with such: But Drunkards
and Swearers know I speak truth. And I the more confidently believe my own
ears, when I consider the Sodomites quarrel with Lot^^ and many the like in
Scripture. As how did the passion of Anger, rob Haman of his reason, when he
thought Mordecais not bowing the knee to him, a more heinous offense, then his
own murdering of thousands* And Jezabels who thought it a greater sin in Eliah
to kill Baals Priests then in her self, to slay all the Prophets if the Lord.

But no wonder, for as the Eye only looks to things without. And a^ they that
are vertiginous think all things turn round, all err; when the error is only
in their own brains: so fares it with sensual men, transported by passion, and
given up to their lusts. They put their own faults in that part of the Wallet
which is behind them; but ours, in the other part or end which is before them.
Indeed self-examination would make their judgments more charitable.

Thirteenthly, The persons censuring and censured, are as contrary in their
natures as are Heaven and Hell, Light and Darkness, God and the Devil, the one
being Satan's seed, and born after the Flesh: the other being Christ's members,
and born after the spirit, John 3.8. to 15. And this makes the one hate, what
the other loves. A wicked man says Solomon, is abomination to the just, and he
that is upright in his way, is abomination to the wicked. Prove. 29.27. even our
ways, which God commands us to walk in, as well as our persons, are
abomination to them.

Yea, we see by experience, that there is a cursed Zeal in these men to malign
the good Zeal of all men. And that usually they are pleased best with that
which angers God most: No marvel then if they censure and slander such as he
lovesbest.

Fourteenthly, They delight in censuring and slandering us: because Satan (who
is their God, 2 Cor. 4.4. and their Prince, Job. 14.30. and works in them his
pleasure, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26.) is ever prompting them thereunto, Act. 5.3.
Rev. 12.10. For it is Satan that speaks in and by them, as once he did by the
Serpent: It is his mind in their mouth, his heart in their lips, Matthew. 16.23.

And they being his Sons, Servants and Subjects, thirst to do him what honor
and service they can. Nor can they pleasure him more, it being the hopefullest
way to discourage men in the way to heaven, quench the good motions of Gods
spirit, kill the buds and beginnings of grace, draw them back to the world, and
so by consequence damn their souls, that can be, to see that whatsoever they do
or speak; base constructions are made thereof. Whereas if they meddled not with
repentance, nor troubled themselves about religion: the world nor the devil
would not meddle with them, nor once trouble or molest them.

Besides their censures, and false aspersions, cause jealousies where there are
none, increases those thot are, mightily disables some from discerning the
truth, and much hinders others from believing it.

CHAP. XVI.
FIfteenthly, Zoylus-like they censure, and speak evil of us: because they
cannot otherwise hurt us.

They dare not smite us on the mouth as the High Priest served Paul: therefore
they smite us with the mouth: as Zedekiah the false Prophet served Michaiah:
which is as bad or worse. For deal they not with the godly, as the daughters of
Heth did by Rebecca, Genesis 27. who made her weary of her life, and forced her to
cry out in the bitterness of her soul, What avails it me to live: verse. 46.
In which they imitate their Father the devil: who when his hands are bound,
vomits out a flood of reproaches with his tongue. Rev. 12.15.

I confess they were wont, Maximinus like, to speak evil of us; that so they
might persecute us with the more show of reason: accuse us to the Prelates, as
the Jews did Paul to Agrippa: charging us with many things, but proving
nothing, neither could they well undo us, if first they did not falsely accuse
us: as it fared with Iezabel touching Naboth, and the wife of Potiphar touching
Joseph.

Though a little information would serve: for malice regards not how true any
accusation is, but how spiteful. And these prelates, were so far from
discerning or desiring to discern truth from slander, that to the grief of many
good hearts; no music could be so sweet to their ears, as to hear well of
themselves, ill of the religious. And they were as ready to yield their aid as
the other to ask it; being men of the Highpriests humor; who seeing none
offer themselves set on work certain vile persons, to accuse Christ of heinous
evils: that so they might crucify him by a Law: Yea our reverend Bishops and
their bandogs dealt with a poor Minister or Christian, just as the soldiers
did by our Savior: First blind him, then strike him, and last ask him, who
was it that smote thee? and he might answer the best of the three; It was thou
O mine Enemy, thou wast an an Achitophel in the one, a Doeg in the other, a
Belial in both.

Sixteenthly, They censure, and in censuring slander us: that they may incite
and stir up others to do the like: Resembling those ancient enemies of the
Gospel, who clad the Martyrs in the skins of wild beasts: to animate the dogs
to tear them.

It is the nature of ignorant and ill-bred people, who walk after the flesh in
the lust of uncleanness, whom St Peter calls bruit beasts, led with
sensuality, and made to be taken and destroyed, to speak evil of the things
which they understand not, 2 Pet. 2.12. And what one does is a Law to the rest.
As if one in their company but mentions the word Puritan, or tells them how
scrupulous and precise such an one is: all the rest will strive who shall be
forwardest in spitting out his spleen against all the godly. As what a number
of sharp and deadly Arrows will each of them shoot; both at the good and
goodness.

Nor are they so satisfied: but every one runs away with the cry: and barks out
the term against every honest man he meets, whence it is that we are censured,
and laughed to scorn by the greatest number: that we are made the common Butt of
every ones malice, and the subject of all their discourse.

Which yet is no disparagement to us: for these are a generation of men; that
(for matter of religion) can scarcely discern between their right hand and
their left: as it fared with those sixscore thousand Ninevites, Jon. 4.11. I
might heap up instances to prove how strongly and strangely example prevails,
to the committing of evil with ignorant persons, who are Cesterns to sin, Sives
to grace. As in the Sodomites, Genesis 19.4. to 12. In Korah and his 150.
followers: In Demetrius and his fellows, Acts 19. etc.

But it is too well known, how many do censure and blaspheme the Godly, because
they hear others do so.

Nor is it the common peoples case alone: who enquire no farther but believe at
first: for then I should no whit wonder. But even our grave Bishops and Fathers
of the Church did not long since go thus by hearsay, and persecute the
conscionable, because drunkards and deboished persons did so: censuring them in
their High Commission, and other Courts Ecclesiastical; as the other did on
their Ale-benches.

It may seem above belief, and yet it was so, only those barking Currs did
these great Mastifs wake: Whom we may liken to noisome Flies, which sting while
they live, and stink when they are dead; though blessed be God we are now rid
of them.

I need not tell you how many of their Lordships and their Creatures have come
to their great preferments by being bitter Malignants against the best men: for
no knowing man can thereof be ignorant.

Thus I might go on in giving you other reasons of their censuring and
slandering us; as one in regard of Satan, who loses so many of his Subjects or
Captives as turn believers: for every repentant sinner is as a prisoner broke
loose from his chains of darkness,

And another in regard of the World, which loses a limb or member: When a
convert will no longer accompany them in their wicked customs. And show you,
that it fares with all believers as it did with Paul, who so long as he joined
with the Highpriests and Elders to make havoc of the Church was no whit
molested by them; but when he became a convert and preached in the name of
Jesus, none so hated and persecuted as he.

I might also make it appear, that atheism or unbelief is another cause,
speaking of truth another, breaking off society with them another, the
serpentine preaching of some Ministers another, the scandalous lives of some
professors another, flocking after Sermons another, as they make them: but
these I Will pass, and give you but one more, with which I will conclude this
discourse.

CHAP. XVII.
THe main and most material cause why wicked men so mortally hate the godly,
and which breeds so many quarrels, is the contrariety of their natures, as I
briefly hinted in the thirteenth reason; being as contrary one to the other as
are God and the devil, the one being the children of God, and partaking of the
divine nature, as being one with the Father and the Son, 1 Cor. 6.18. Gal.
3.26. Joh. 1.12. and 17.14, 21, 22. 2 Pet. 1.4. being like God in holiness, 1
Pet. 1.15. Brethren of, and heirs annexed with Christ, Romans 8.17, 29. Members
of his body, 1 Cor. 12.27. Bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30.
having his spirit dwelling in them, Romans 8.9, 16. and being Temples of the holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. Jam. 1.18. Joh. 1.13. and 3.5, 8. 1 John 3.9.

And the other being the seed of the serpent and children of the devil; and so
partake of his nature, as is plain by 1 John 3.8.10, 12, 14. Joh. 6.70. and
8.44. Matthew. 13.38, 39. 2 Cor. 4.4. 2 Timothy 2.26. Genesis 3.15. and 5.3. Ephesians.
2.2, etc. Which being so, how is it possible they should ever agree; although
God had not proclaimed an enmity between them? For there can be no amity where
there is no simpathy; no reconciling of the wolf and the lamb, the winds and
the sea; No neighborhood, no alliance, no conjunction, is able to make the
cursed seed of the serpent, and the blessed seed of the woman ever agree. For
fire and water, light and darkness, Heaven and hell are not more contrary.

One blood, one belly, one house, one education, could never make Cain and Abel
accord, Jacob and Esau, Isaac and Ishmael at one. Yea though they be man and
wife, parent and child, yet if they be not like they will not like. 2 Cor.
6.14, 15. And indeed what is the corporal simpathy, to the spiritual
antipathy? Can there be such a parity between the parent and the child, the
husband and the wife, as there is a disparity between God and Satan? no
certainly.

A wicked man can agree with all that are wicked, be they Papists, or Turks, or
Atheists; Profane or Civil men: for all these agree with him in blindness
and darkness: but with sincere Christians and practisers of piety he can never
agree; the religious shall be sure of opposition, because their light is
contrary to his darkness, grace in the one is a secret disgrace to the other.

Yea let wicked men be at never so much ods one with another, yet they will
concur and join against the godly. The Libertines, Cirenians, Alexandrians,
Celicians and Asians, differ they never so much, will join in dispute against
Steven, Act. 6.9. The Saduces, Pharisees and Herodians, were sectaries of diverse
and adverse factions, all differing one from another; yet all join together
against our Savior, Matthew. 22. Herod neither loved the Jews, nor the Jews
Herod, yet both are agreed to vex the Church. Yea Herod and Pilate, two enemies
will agree so it be against Christ: they will fall in one with another, to fall
out with God. Nature will give a man leave to be any thing save a sound
Christian; and agree with all others, be their opinions never so contrary;
provided they agree in the main, are all seed of the same serpent: but let the
natural man meet with one that is spiritual, they agree like heat and cold,
if the one stays the other flies; or if both stay, they agree like two poisons
in one stomach, the one being ever sick of the other be they never so near
allied. As how many a wife is so much the more hated, because a zealous wife?
how many a child less beloved, because a religious child? how many a servant
less respected, because a godly servant? And no marvel, for though they dwell
in the same house, yet they belong to two several Kingdoms: and albeit they
both remain upon earth, yet they are governed by two several Laws, the ones
Burguship being in heaven, Phil. 3.20. and the other being a denizon belonging
to hell; as Irish men are dwellers in Ircland, but donizens of England, and
governed by the Statutes of this Kingdom.

CHAP. XVIII.
NOr is this of theirs an ordinary hatred, but the most bitter, exorbitant
unlimited and implacable of all others. No such concord, no such discord, says
one of the Learned, as that which proceeds from Religion. My name, says
Luther, is more odious to them, then any thief or murderer; as Christ was
more detestable to the Jews, then Barabas. And it was evident enough; for the
Pope was so busy and hot against Luther, that he neglected to look to all
Christendom against the Turk: which declared that he would easier digest
Mahometisme then Lutheranisme. The case of two many in our days, in opposing
the reformation. Behold, says David, mine enemies, for they are many; and they
hate me with a cruel hatred, Psalm. 25.19. yea so cruel, that it makes their
teeth gnash, and their hearts burst again, as it fared with those that stoned
Steven, Acts 7.54. This made the truths adversaries, give St Paul stripes above
measure, 2 Cor. 11.23. And the Heathen Emperors, to devise such cruel
tortures, for all those that but professed themselve; Christians. This made Ahab
so hate Eliah, that there was not one Kingdom or Nation, where he had not sent
to take away his life, 1 King. 18.10. And this made the Papists dig many of our
choice Ministers out of their graves, that they might the better curse them,
with bell, bock and candle. Yea ask from East to West, from one Pole to the
other; search all records under Heaven, if ever there was the like, of the
intended Powder plot.

Neither does this hatred extend it self to this or that person alone, but to
the whole generation of the godly; as is well expressed, Psalm. 83. Come let us
cut them off from being a Nation, and let the Name of Israel be no more in
remembrance, ver. 4, 12. And the like we see in Haman, whose hatred to Mordecai
was so deadly, that he thought it too little to lay hands on him only, except
he destroyed all the Jews his people, that were throughout the whole Kingdom of
Ahashuerosh, Esth. 3.5, 6. For the effecting whereof he offered ten thousand
tallents of silver into the Kings treasury, ver. 9, 13. And of his mind was
Herodias, who preferred the head of John Baptist before the half of Herod's
Kingdom. And such another was cruel Arundale Archbishop of Canterbury, who
swore he would not leave a slip of professors in this Land.

And the world is no changeling, for this age has but too many such Hamans and
Arundales, who so hate the children of God, that they wish as Caligula once did
of the Romans, that they had all but one neck, that so they might cut it off
at a blow, were it in their power. As why are not our Sanctuaries turned into
shambles? and our Beds made to swim with our bloods? but that the God of Israel
has crossed the confederacy of Balack, and their wickedness does not prosper.
For their studies are the plots of our ruin; and the best they intend, is the
destruction and overthrow of Religion, or the religious, or both, Matthew. 24.9.
Joh. 16.2. Yea their enmity and hatred is so virulent and bitter, that were
their power answerable to their wills and malice, the brother would betray the
brother to death, the father the son, and the children would rise up against
their parents, and cause them to die; the kinsman against the kinsman, and the
friend against the friend; only for professing Christ's Name and being
religious, as himself affirms, Matthew. 10.34, 35, 36. Luke 21.16, 17. Neither is
it strange, for this was one of the ends of Christ's coming into the world, as
appears Matthew. 10.34, 35. where himself says, Think not that I am come to send
peace but the sword: meaning between the seed of the serpent, and the seed of
the woman: for I am come to set a man at variance against his father, the
daughter in law angainst the mother in law, and a man's enemies shall be they of
his own household, Luke 12.51, 52, 53.

Neither want we presidents of this: For by whom was upright Abel persecuted
and slain, but by his own brother Cain? who scoft at righteous Noah, but his
own son Cham? by whom was that virtuous and religious Lady Barbara put to
death, for embracing the Christian faith, but by her own father Dioscorus? who
made Serena the Empress a Martyr, for her faith in Christ, but her own husband
Dioclesian? who helped to burn Bradford but Bourne, whose life he had formerly
saved? And lastly, By whom was our Savior Christ betrayed, but by his own
Disciple Judas?

CHAP. XIX.
Wherein consists their unlikenesse and contratiety? Convert.
Minister. There be more differences between the children of God and the
children of the devil, then there are between men and beasts. But principally
they differ in their judgments, affections and actions. How they differ in
their judgments and affections, I have shown upon another occasion. How in
their actions and practice (which occasions the greatest strife and discord) I
will acquaint you as briefly as I can.

There is nothing more common then for all sorts and kinds of men; to hate,
scorn, persecute, reproach, revile, accuse, slander and condemn the religious,
because their own works are evil and wicked, and the others good, holy and
righteous. As wh^r^fore slew Cain his brother, says S. John, but because his
own works were evil and his brothers good, 1 John 3.12? Why was Joseph accused
of his Mistress for an adulterer, and thereupon committed to prison, but
because he would not be an adulterer like her, Genesis 39? yea it was his party
colored coat, composed of all kinds of graces and blessings, that formerly
procured his bretherens hate. And what is it that Jobs wife expostulates with
him about, but his integrity? as if she took it ill that he took it no worse,
his patience made her impatient. Wherefore was holy David, as himself complains
almost in every Psalm, had in derision, hated, slandered, reviled, contemned,
and made a proverb and song of the drunkards and other wicked man which sat in
the gate: but because he followed the things that were good and pleasing unto
God, and in him put his trust? Psalm. 11.2. and 22.6, 7, 8. and 37.14. and
69.10, 11, 12. And lastly (for I might be endless in the prosecution of this,)
Why were all the just in Solomon's time, had in abomination, and mocked of the
wicked? but because they were upright in their way, and holy in their
conversation, Prove. 29.27. Or those numberless Martyrs, whose souls S. John
saw under the Altar, Revel. 6.9. killed? but for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they maintained? And the Master himself? not for any evil as
themselves are forced to confess, Mar. 7.37. Which examples sufficiently
prove, that that great Dragon the Devil, and these his subjects, are wroth with
none, but the woman and the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments
of God, and have the testimony of Jesus, Revel. 12, 17. All was quiet at
Ephesus before St Paul came thither; but then there arose no small strife about
that way, Acts 19.23, etc. A wolf flies not upon a painted sheep: we can with
delight look upon the picture of a Toad: It is your active Christian that is
most spighted and persecuted. As how many with us may complain with Jeremy,
that because they live a godly life themselves, and call upon others to do the
same, they are cursed of every one, and counted contentious, Jer. 15.10. It
faring with many as it did with Caius Selius, of whom the heathen were wo^t to
say, that he was a good man, but he was a Christian. Yea let but a sp^^k of
fervent devotion break out in a family, all the rest are up in clamours; as
when bells ring disorderly, every one is ready with his bucket to ^^ench the
fire: disgraced he must be for a puritan: but only by Laodi^eans. Indifferency
strives to dash zeal out of countenance. And the reason is, wheresoever Christ
comes, there will be opposition. When Christ was born, all Jerusalem was
troubled, and Herod cut the throats of all the children in Bethlem: so when
Christ is born in any man, the soul is in an uprore, and Satan with his
instruments are ready to kill in him every good motion, though it be never so
little a babe. You cannot anger a wicked man worse, then to do well: yea he
hates you more bitterly for this, and the credit you gain thereby, then if you
had cheated him of his patrimony with your own discredit. Whereas, if a man
will but bare them company in their sins, drink, swear, temporize, contemn
holiness, mispend his time, haunt Taverns, play the good fellow, and do as the
rest do; he shall have the approbation and good word of the greatest number.
Yea if none would be precise in their actions, nor reprove others for their
evil courses; if they would but be profane and wicked, and make no bones of
sin; their malice would cease, and we should not have a puritan or roundhead
in all the world.

Neither is Christ a sign to be spoken against of many in Babylon or Assiria,
but of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. where religion is professed publicly: Yea when
sincerity is wanting, the nearer the line with any opposition, the greater
eclipse. The Gadareans but besought Christ to depart; his own country men drove
him out and cast him down headlong, Luke 4.29. And who was his greatest enemy,
but his greatest friend, even one of his household Chaplins? and who but
Ieremies familiars watched for his halting.

Yea commonly, virtue fares hardest from such as should and seem to uphold her;
for the chief persecutors of Christ and his followers, are not professed
Atheists, or Turks, or Jews, but, such as hold some great place in the Church.
And intruders upon other men's right, can endure any man how bad soever rather
to live by them, then the servants of him whom they intrude upon; as you may
see, Matthew. 21.33, to 39. where those farmers of the vineyard did not kill the
thieves, robbers and spoylers of the vineyard; but the servants, yea and the
son too; and the end of all was, that they might take the inheritance. However,
it has been the complaint, almost of all that have written, that they have
suffered most, from such as professed the same faith and religion with them.

And so much touching the main difference between the seed of the serpent and
the seed of the woman.

CHAP. XX.
I Might go on, and show you that as they hate and persecute the godly because
they do well, so likewise because they fare well, and are accepted before them.
As why was Cain wroth with his Brother Abel, and after slew him, as affirms
the holy Ghost, but because the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering,
but unto Cain and his offering he had no respect, Genesis 4.4, 5. Why did Esau
hate Jacob, and purpose to kill him, but because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him? Genesis 27.41. Isaacks blessing bred Esaus hate. Again,
wherefore did the Philistims and Abimelech envy Isaac? stop up his wells, and
banish him from them, but because the Lord so abundantly blessed Isaac? as
appears Genesis 26.12, to 18. Wherefore did Joseph's Brethren hate him, not being
able to speak peaceably unto him, and after sell him into Egypt? but because
his father more favored him, and they feared he should reign over them, Genesis
37.4, to 9. If Joseph be his fathers darling, he is his brethrens eyesore.
Wherefore did Saul persecute David, and pursue after him from place to place to
take away his life, but because he was so praised and preferred of the people
before himself? and the Lord was with David, and prospered him in every thing
he took in hand, 1 Samuel 18.12, 13, 28, 29. David's success is Saul's vexation:
yea, he finds not so much pleasure in his Kingdom, as vexation in the
prosperity of David? And lastly (for I pass by the Elder Brothers envy in the
Parable against his younger Brother, when his Father so royally entertained him
at his return, Luke 15.28. which is meant of the Jews envying the Gentiles
conversion, and many the like instances.) Why was Eliab wroth with his younger
brother? 1 Samuel 17.28. but because he should be more exalted. And I doubt
whether David's brethren were more glad that Goliath was slain, or angry that he
was slain by their brother: For envy is sick if her neighbor be well, and the
good man's honor is the envious man's torment: as it fared between Haman and
Mirdecai; as hereafter the glory of Christ shall add to these Reprobates
confusion, when they are driven to confess this is he whom we once had in
derision, Luke 13.28. I might also apply all this to many in our times. As why
do many men's hearts rise against every holy man they meet? as some stomachs
rise at the sight of sweetmeats: Why do all drunkards and vicious livers hate
the religious? and so belch out their enmity and spleen against them, in
raising and spreading of slanders as they do: but although partly to rescue
themselves from contempt, and to procure a contrary esteem by putting a foul
and ugly vizard upon virtue, and decking up vice in a gorgeous and comely
attire; yet chiefly because they partake of the divine nature, and are one with
the Father and the Son, John 17.14, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 6.18. I might I say be large
upon this, and many the like, but I must only mention them.

CHAP. XXI.
INdeed if there were any speaking to such, I would wish them to beware of this
sin of all other sins in the world. For the godly are unto God as the signet
upon his right hand, Jer. 22.24. yea, as the apple of his own eye, Zech. 2.8.
And whatsoever wrongs and contumelies are done to them, he accounts as done
to himself, as they may see Psa. 44.22. and 69.7. and 74.4, 10, 18, 22, 23. and
83.2, 5, 6. and 89.50, 51. and 139.20. Pro. 19.3. Romans 1.30. and 9.20. Mat.
10.22. and 25.45. Luke 21.17. 1 Samuel 17.45. Isa. 37.4.22, 23.28. and Act. 5.39.
and 9.4, 5. Job 9.4. 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. John 15.18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25. Numb. 16.11.
1 Samuel 8.7.

Yea, thirdly, God has expressly told them, that whosoever shall offend one of
those little ones that believe in him, it were better for him that a millstone
were hung about his neck, and that he were cast into the Sea, Mat. 18.6. And
that he will destroy them for ever, and root them out of the Land of the
living, whose tongues imagine mischief, and are like a sharp razor that cutteth
deceitfully, loving to speak evil more then good, Psa. 52.2. to 8. That he will
confound such as persecute his children, and destroy them with a double
destruction, Jer. 17.18. yea, That he will render unto their enemies sevenfold
into their bosom, their reproach wherewith they have reproached the Lord,
Psalm. 79.12. In fine, That he will reign upon them snares of fire and
brimstome, with storms and tempests, Psa. 11.6. And after all cast them into a
Furnace of fire, where shall be wailing, and gnashing of teeth for evermore:
When the just whom they now despise shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father. Many are apt to think, that because they use their tongues only
they are no persecutors: but they shall hereafter hear themselves styled so in
their Bill of Indictment, Ishmael did but flowt Isaac, yet St Paul says, he
persecuted him, Gal. 4.29. God calls the scorning of his servants by no better a
name then persecution; and will thereafter reward it, perhaps in this life, as
it fared with those two and forty little children, 2 Kin. 2.24. who were
devoured of wild bears, only for nicknaming Elisha: Or as it did with Felix
who for one malicious scoff did nothing day and night but vomit blood, till his
unhappy soul was fetched from his wretched carcass. And Pherecydes who was
consumed by worms alive for giving Religion but a nickname, a small matter if
thou may be made judge. Or as it did with Lucian, who for barking against
Religion like a dog, was by the just judgment of God devoured of dogs. Or as
it did with Nightingale Parson of Crondall in Kent, who was struck dead in the
Pulpit while he was belching out his spleen against Religion and zealous
professors of the Gospel. Or as it did with Steven Gerdiner who would not sit
down to dinner till the news came of the good Bishops burnt at Oxford, but then
came out rejoicing, and saying to the Duke of Norfolk, now let us go to dinner;
but it was the last that ever he eat for it. Or as it fared with Arundell
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Steven Gardener Bishop of Winchester, who putting
to silence both the Word of God and those that purely preach it, were
themselves put to silence, and so smitten in their tongues, that they could not
swallow their meat, nor speak for a good space before they died. The time would
be too short to tell of Cham whose scoffing only brought his Fathers curse, and
Gods upon that. Of the Spies that brought a scandal upon the Land of Canaan
(as these do upon the way of truth) and made all the people to murmr against
Moses: who died by a plague from the Lord, and were not permitted to enter into
it, Numb. 14.37. And the like, which God has inflicted upon men even in this
life: though I count it a m^rcy to smart here (if they die penitent) rather
then be reserved to those flames which are easelesse and endless.

Besides, it is frivolous to say they only use their tongues. It is not so
material what thou do as what thou desire; the very purpose of treason
(though the fact be hindered) is treason, not the outward action but the inward
affection is all in all with God, who measures the work by the will, as men
measure the will by the work.

CHAP. XXII.
NOw the reason why Christ takes what is done to his members as if it were done
to himself; and why he will so severely punish; it is, for that their spite and
malice is principally against God and Christ himself: For thy sake (says holy
David) are we killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter,
Psalm 44.22. True, they are so blind that they think they love God, or at
least do not hate him: but Christ himself says expressly, They have hated both
me and my Father, John 15.23, 24. where he repeats the words twice. Nor will
they spare when vengeance shall seize upon them; openly, and expressly to
blaspheme the God of Heaven to his face, as the holy Ghost twice affirms,
Rev. 16.9, 11. Common eyes may be cheated with easy pretenses, but he that
looks through the heart at the face, knows that the foundation of all their
hatred and enmity to us, is their hatred against God and Christ the chief of
the Woman's seed, even as when Satan slew Jobs servants, his malice was against
Job: Or as when Saul darted a spear at Jonathan, his spite was against David,
1 Samuel 20.33. He that loves not the members was never a friend to the head, He
that wrongs the wife is no friend to the Husband: he loves neither that
vilifies either; yea, they that hate and revile the godly because they are
godly, as these do; (for they could love our persons well enough if we were not
conscionable:) hate and revile God himself; and they that fight against the
grace of the spirit, fight against the spirit, whose grace it is: and
whatsoever wrong is done to one of Christ's little ones, is done unto him, Mat.
25.45. Saul, Saul, says Christ, seeing him make havoc of the Church, why
persecutest thou me: Acts 9.4, 5. It is an idle misprision to sever the sense
of an injury done to any of the members from the head, see Rev. 12. It contents
the dog to gnaw the stone, when he cannot reach the thrower. It was
well-pleasing to Saul, since he could not catch David, that he might have the
blood of Ahimelech, who used him so friendly, and releeved him in his great
distress, 1 Samuel 21. So though these men cannot wreak their malice upon God,
he being out of their power and reach: yet that they may do him all the
mischief they can, have at his Image; they will wreak it upon his children in
whom his spirit dwells. As the Panther will fiercely assault the picture, for
the inveterate and deadly hatred which he bears to man. It being as true of
malice as it is of love; that it will creep where it cannot go. And so much for
the clearing of your judgment: I come now to the use and application of the
whole. And,

CHAP. XXIII.
FIrst, It may serve to inform every man whether he be of the Serpents seed, a
child of the devil, as he came into the world: Or regenerate, and so become of
the woman's seed, a child of God, and member of Christ. For as our Savior
says, speaking of false Prophets, By their fruits ye shall know them, so I of
the seed of the Serpent, and children of the devil; by these two and twenty
fruits or properties of enmity before spoken of, you shall know them, as well
as you shall know the life by breathing, or the day by its light. Wherefore all
ye that read reflect and cast your eyes on these examples, which are such
lively emblemes and representations of your selves: if you be the Serpents
seed, and yet in your sins. Yea, let it make you tremble; For know assuredly,
that if this spawn of enmity remain in you, if any of these ways, you
persecute Christ in his members, or but hate the good, because they will not be
so evil as you are, you have not cast off this Serpentine quality, which you
drew from the loins of old Adam: but it is an infallible sign that you are of
the Serpents seed, and children of the devil; enemies to, and haters of God and
all goodness, the brethren of Cain, or Cain himself in another person, and
without answerable repentance, your portion shall be with Cain, and the rest of
that cursed crew. I have shown you what God in his word speaks, and proved that
your condition is no whit better then the condition of Cain, and Ishmael, and
Haman, and Doeg, and Shemy, and Rahsheke, and their fellows; yea, no glass can
more lively represent your faces, then this Book does your hearts. Only this is
the misery, as when a child beholds his own face in a glass; he thinks he
sees another childs face, and not his own, so fares it with you. What do you
look that Christ Jesus himself from heaven should call to you severally by name
as he did to Saul; and say, Ho Ishmael such an one, or Ho Elimas such an one:
Why do thou persecute me? I am Jesus whom thon persecutest, Acts 9.4, 5.
Which yet if he should, it were no more in effect then he has often done: nor
would you be any more warned or reclaimed by it, as is evident by the example
of Hazael, 2 King. 8.12, 13, etc. And by what Abraham told Dives, Luke 16.31.
For God in his word tells every one of you plainly, that Satan is the God of all
unbeleevers, 2 Cor. 4.4. And their King Joh. 14.30. and 12.31. And their
father, Genesis 3.15. John 8.44. And that they are all his servants, kept by the
devil in a snare, and taken captive of him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. And that
he rules by and works his pleasure in all the children of disobedience, Ephesians.
2.2, 3. And makes it manifest to all (whom the devil has not blinded) that you
of all men in the world, are those unbeleevers, and children of disobedience in
whom he rules. And yet poor souls you know it not. As those four hundred of
Ahabs Prophets, in whom this evil spirit spoke, did not know that Satan spoke
by them, 1 King. 22.22. Neither did Judas know when he eat the sop, that Satan
entered into him, and put it into his heart to betray Christ, Joh. 13.2. Neither
do Magistrates (when they cast the servants of God into prison) once imagine,
that the devil makes them his jaylors, but he does so; whence that phrase of
the holy Ghost, The devil shall cast some of you into prison, Revel. 2.10. They
are his instruments, but he is the principal Author. Neither did Ananias and
Saphira once think, that Satan had filled their hearts, or put that lie into
their mouths which they were struck dead for, Act. 5. yet the holy Ghost tells
us plainly that he did so, ver. 3. No, Eve in Paradise had not the least
suspicion that it was Satan that spoke to her by the Serpent; nor Adam that it
was the devils mind in her mouth, his heart in her lips, when tempted to eat
the forbidden fruit. Nor did David once dream, that it was Satan which moved
him to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Much less did Peter, who so dearly
loved Christ, imagine that he was set on by Satan to tempt his own Lord and
Master with those affectionate words, Master, pity thy self, for if Christ had
pitied himself, Peter and all the world had perished: yet he was so, which
occasioned Christ to answer him, Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.22, 23. But
consider, For hence we may argue, that if Satan can make the best and wisest of
Gods children and servants (who have the very appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22.
Jude 23. Ephesians. 5.27. 2 Pet. 3.14. Jam. 1.27. have the eye of faith, and the
spirits direction, and know the mind of Christ above others, 1 Cor. 2.12, 13,
15, 16. Joh. 10.14.) do him such service unwittingly, and besides their
intention: how much more can he prevail with, and make use of his own servants
and children, that delight only in wickedness, and have not the least
knowledge of, or ability to discern spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Cor. 4.4.
yea, if Satan can persuade you (as he has done millions) that you do God good
service in persecuting his children as the Jews formerly did, in putting his
Prophets to death; as Christ himself expressly tells us, Joh. 16.2. What can he
not persuade them to? what work or service can he not put them upon? without
letting them know, that he their God, Father, and Master, speaks in and acts by
them. Whence that of Solomon, There is a way that seems, right unto a man,
but the issues thereof are the ways of death, Proverbs 14.12. Whence so many
have been so strangely, and so woefully deluded: whereof a few instances very
remarkable. There was a Monk poisoned Henry the seventh Emperor of Germany
with the sacramental bread, and thought he did God good service in so doing.
So did the Powder-Traitors, when they intended to blow up the whole State.
Maximinian thought the blood of Christians would be an acceptable sacrifice to
his gods. So Francis the second of France, and Philip the second of Spain,
thought of the Lutherans blood in their Dominions. In the 6th Council of Toledo
it was enacted, that the King of Spain should suffer none to live in his
dominions that professed not the Roman Catholic Religion: Whereupon King
Philip having hardly escaped shipwreck, as he returned from the Low Countries,
said, he was delivered by the singular providence of God to root out
Lutheranism, which he presently began to do: professing that he had rather have
no subjects then such; In which opinion many depart, but as men go to a
Lottery, with heads full of hopes, but return with hearts full of blanks: so
will it one day fare with you.

CHAP. XXIV.
NOr are they few in number, that (with St Paul before his conversion) do
persecute the people of God, even out of zeal to the traditions of their
fathers, Gal. 1.13, 14. Phil. 3.6. Many walk, says St Paul, that are enemies
to the cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. If many in St Paul's time, many more now.
Yea St John says, that the number of those whom Satan shall thus deceive, is
as the sand of the sea, Rev. 20.8. and 13.16. See Isa. 10.22. 1 John 5.19. Romans
9.27. Matthew. 7.13, 14. and 20.16. and 22.14.

And experience it self tells us, that it is the case almost of who not: For
this sin is so epidemicall, that take forty men where you please, City or
Country, as they dwell, pass the streets, or sit in the Church, and nine and
thirty of them are malignants to the power of Religion. As for other sins, one
man is given to lust, another to intemperance, a third to swearing, a fourth to
cousening; some to more then one, some to all of them; but who is not tainted
with this sin? who is not an open or sccret enemy to holiness, by reason of
that general contempt which is cast upon professors? Yea who is there, even of
those that have resigned up their pride, and their lust, and their lying, and
their cousening, and what other sins they have been prone to, with whom this
sin does not remain? as being carried away with misprisions, surmises, and weak
opinions raised from mere prejudice and shadows of things: And which is worst
of all, it has by long custom, taken such deep root in men's hearts, that I
look never to see it mended till Christ comes in the clouds. Only it behooves
all men, even every living soul of us, to see that himself be none of that
numberless number, whom Satan thus cunningly prevails withal, And not without
need, though most are apt to flatter themselves: for this is an infallible
rule, every man is either of the seed of the Serpent, or of the seed of the
woman, Genesis 3.15. the child of God, or the child of the Devil, 1 John 3.10.
either haters of Religion, or hated for Religion, Matthew. 10.22. and 24.9.
either one of this world, or one that Christ has chosen out of the world, Joh.
15.19.

Though all the devils children are not alike malicious, neither do they so
openly manifest that enmity which is in their hearts: for some transcend this
way, as Doog did the rest of Saul's servants another way; you shall know such an
one, yea all men shall know such to be the devils children by these few marks.
He will hate a man to the death, though he have nothing to condemn him but his
being holy. His hatred is so inveterate and universal, that he spends all his
wit, in frothy scoffs and invectives against the whole people of God: And
nothing so tickles his spleen or glads his heart, as that discourse which may
most shame profession, disgrace Religion, and dishonor God: with Festus he
calls zeal madness, and Religion foolishness with Michall. He will sharpen
his tongue in gall, and dip his pen in poison, to dsgrace the graces of God in
his children. He hates zeal and devotion so inveterately, that he can in no
wise bare with it in others. He is so desperately wicked, that he cannot endure
so much as the sight of godliness: like him in Seneca, who was so fearfully
idle, that his sides would ache to see another work. He is just like the Jews
spoken of Acts 13. who when they saw a great company at Paul's Sermon, were
filled with envy, and fell to contradiction and blasphemy, ver. 45. Or the High
Priests and Pharisees, who when our ^aviour was so flockt after, said among
themselves, perceive ye not, behold the world goes after him; and if we let
him thus alone, all men will believe in him, Joh. 11.48. and 12.19. being like
the dog in the manger, that will neither eat bay himself, nor suffer the Horse.
He is of a reprobate judgment touching actions and persons, esteeming good
evil and evil good. And is so desperately wicked, that he will mock his
admonishers, scoff at the means to be saved, and make himself merry with his
own damnation. As good men by their godly admonition and virtuous example, draw
all they can to heaven; so he by his subtle allurements and wicked example,
draws all he can to hell. He regards more the blasts of men's breath, then the
fire of Gods wroth. He will boldly do what God forbids, and yet confidently
hope to escape what he threatens, etc. Now if you know any that do thus, you
may be sure he is of that wicked one, Joh. 8.44. Matthew. 23.33. 1 John 3.10. For
none but a Cane or a devil in condition, will envy because his own works are
evil and his brothers good. Neither could he do so if the devil were not in his
heart. Neither can there be a greater argument of a foul soul, then the
deriding of holy services. Yea to scoff at Religion is the very depth of sin;
such an one is upon the very threshold of hell, as being set down in a resolute
contempt of all goodness. And so much of the first Use.

CHAP. XXV.
SEcondly, We may learn from the original of this enmity, that to be without
reproaches and persecutions, we may rather wish then hope. For what peace can
we look for, between the seed of the serpent and the seed of the woman, seeing
God himself from the beginning has set them at enmity: yea once to expect it,
were an effect of frenzy not of hope.

Thirdly, From the continuance of it in all ages; and in that all the godly
that have gone before us have been envied, hated, traduced, nicknamed and
persecuted by wicked men, and all that come after us shall be: let no
particular member of the Church, look to fare better then the whole body. We
see the Patriarks went this way, the Prophets this way, the Apostles this way,
the Martyrs this way; this way went all the Saints and servants of God, and do
we look for an easier way. Yea if the dearest of Gods children in former ages,
have suffered so much for Christ, been put to such cruel deaths and torments
for keeping of a good conscience: let us praise the Lord who has dealt with us
far otherwise: and pray for good Magistrates, to whom next under God we owe the
thanks. Yea if our forefathers so willingly underwent those fiery trials, let
none for shame shrink under the burden of an airy trial only. For he will
never endure a blow, that cannot concoct a foul word: He that is discouraged,
and made to return with an Ishmaelitish persecution of the tongue, how would he
endure a Spanish Inquisitian, or those Marian times? He that is so frighted
with a squib, how would he endure the mouth of a Cannon?

Fourthly, If our Savior himself suffered so much and so many ways as he did,
being the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth: Let none of us
hope to be free from suffering, or think it a strange thing when he does suffer
for well doing. For the disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above
his Lord: If they have persecuted Christ, they will persecute you also, Joh.
15.20. If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them
of his household, Matthew. 10.25. Yea senseless were it once to think, that the
same enmity which spared not to strike at the head, will forbear the weakest
and remotest limb. It was the lot of Christ, and must be of all his followers,
to do good and suffer evil. Nor can we else be conformable to Christ our head,
or be like our elder brother; who was consecrated through afflictions: and we
must suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him, Romans 8.17. Yea,
hereunto we are called, says St Peter; For Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. Suffering
is the way to reigning: through many tribulations must we enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Acts 14.22. Even as Christ had his passion before his
assention, and bare his cross before he ware his Crown.

And what greater promotion can flesh and blood be capable of, then a
conformity to the Lord of glory? Who would not be ambitious of the same
entertainment which Christ himself had? Christ wore a Crown of thorns for me,
and shall I grutch to ware this paper cap for him, said John Hus when they put
one upon him, that had ugly devils painted on it, with the Title of Heresy.
And what said a French Martyr, when a rope was put about his fellow, Give me
that gold chain, and dub me a Knight of that Noble Order.

Wherefore arm thou us O God, with an expectation of that evil which we cannot
avoid: yea make thou us as strong as Satan and his instruments are malicious,
and then let them do their worst.

Fifthly, If the brother persecute the brother, the son the father, the parent
the child, the husband his wife, the disciple his Lord: think it not strange
to be persecuted of any; for they which are not persecuted are persecutors
themselves.

CHAP. XXVI.
Sixthly, Since we can expect no peace from the Serpents seed; let as many as
are of the woman's seed and of Christ's side, unanimously hold together and join
against their common enemy. Basil and Eusebius are much to be commended, who
when they perceived the Arians to improve a difference between them, to the
prejudice of the Orthodox; soon reconciled themselves, and united their forces
together against the common enemy. O that all godly and orthodox Christians,
whether Presbyterians or Independents, would join together against Atheists and
Papists; and not so cross, contradict and asperse each other, if they never so
little differ in judgment about circumstantials. As let but two mastiffs be
jarring between themselves; when the Bear comes, they forget private strife to
assoil their common Enemy. And certainly they might be as firm friend^ to
truth, although they were not such bitter enemies to peace. For a^ the case
stands, it is hard to determine whether they more intend to do God service;
or really do the devil and his instruments service.

Seventhly, If the Lord have put this enmity between us and the wicked: here is
warrant in opposing, comfort in suffering. If the seed of the woman fight on
Christ's side, and they have Gods word for their warrant, they are sure to have
him assist them, and prevent their enemies. And is not that God we fight for
able enough to vindicate all our wrongs?

Eighthly, If a Christian in respect of his hard straits between Gods Law on
the one side, and the malignant world on the other; may fitly be compared to
the Gibbionites: who, if they made not their peace with Joshu^ must die by
strangers; and if they did make their peace with him; they must die by
neighbors. Or to Susanna who if she did yield unto the two Elders must lose
her chastity, and hazard her soul; and if she did not yield, she must loose her
life. For we have a Wolf by the ears which we can neither stay nor let go with
safety. If we seek to please God by a holy life we displease the world, and
that will hate and vex us: If we seek to please the world we displease God, and
he will hate and condem^ us: for their commands are diametrically contrary,
Act. 4.18, 19. The^ of two evils let us choose the least; let us not tun into
the fire to avoi^ the smoke. It is better to have the mocks and flouts of men
on earth then the grinning mocks and lashes of the devils in hell. Let us not
b^ like those white-livered Rulers, John 12. that loved the praise of men mo^^
then the praise of God. Nor like Peter, who denied his Lord, and curse^
himself, to get credit amongst a cursed crew: For what are their word^ other
then as a boys-squib, that only flashes, and cracks, and stinks, b^^ is
nothing. And those that hang their faith on such men's lips, do b^^ like Ixion
embrace a cloud instead of Juno. Yea, well may he claim (...) Boat-swayns place
in Barkleys Ship of sools, that will sell his soul for (...) few good words
from wicked men's tongues.

But what will some object: For many with Nicodemus do owe Go^^ some good will,
but they dare not be known of it: like Nicodemus th^^ would steal to heaven, so
no body might see them; they would please God, yet so as they might not
displease others nor themselves. Like the young man in the Gospel; they would
follow Christ, so Christ propounded no other conditions to them then what they
like of. And these will be ready to say, what need we publish our selves or our
faith: cannot men serve God in secret, whereby they may avoid the worlds taunts.

Answ. Profession can no more be separated from the truth of Religion then
light from the Sun, Romans 10.9, 10, 11. True fire (not painted) cannot but heat,
break forth, and ascend, That which is not gold, may glister, but that which is
gold cannot choose but glister. The fruit will show what the Tree is: It is but
a dead faith which has no works, Jam. 2.17.20, 26. Psalm. 37.30, 31.

Secondly, Unless a man keep his lips always sealed up; he must either
dissemble, or else his language will bewray what countreyman he is. Neither can
he avoid telling it, for admit a man be in adverse company, they will so beset
him with questions, and draw him on, and pick it out of him, that without an
absurd silence he must show an inclination one way. Or if he do not, they will
gather as much by his silence as by his speech. Or

Thirdly and lastly, A man cannot dissent from their wicked customs, he cannot
refuse to run with them to the same excess of riot, in drinking, swearing,
profaning the Lords day, and the like; much less can he admonish them, and so
discharge his conscience; but he makes too great a show, and his profession
troubles them.

Besides, As this cannot be, so it ought not to be; and that for many solid
reasons and grounds taken out of Gods word, as I have largely proved in my Cure
of Misprision, and as you may see Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9. Matthew. 5.16. and 10.32, 33.
Mark. 15.43. Joh. 12.42, 43. 1 Pet. 2.9, 12. Phil. 2.15. Luke 11.33. and 12.8.
and 8.38, 39. Psalm. 50.15. and 71.17, 18. and 51.14. and 119.171. and 22.22.
and 35.18. and 119.46. Romans 9.33. and 10.9, 10. 2 Timothy 1.16. Exodus 12.13. Rev.
21.8. Acts 4.20.

Which being so; namely, that there is no pleasing God nor being saved, without
being holy and religious; nor no being religious, but it will appear to the
world, and so occasion its enmity and persecution. Let us in no wise forbear
good actions nor admonitions, be the malignant world pleased or displeased with
it: yea, let us shine as lights in the midst of a naughty and crooked
generation, by a blameless and pure life and conversation: thereby to win
others among whom we live, Phil. 2.15. Let our light so shine before men, that
they may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven, Matthew.
5.16. Let us show forth the praises of him, who has called us out of darkness
into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. And so much the rather, for that our
Savior says expressly, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words among
this adulterous and sinful generation; of him shall the son of man be ashamed,
when he comes in the glory of his Father with his holy Angels, Mark 8.38.
Matthew. 10.33. Not only not to deny, but not to confess the truth is dangerous;
as holy David, Psalm. 39.1, 2. and the Prophet Jeremy found by experience, Jer.
20.8, 9, 10. Not to declare our faith is to deny it, says Fulgentius. The
Merozians opposed not, they denied not, they only stood still, did nothing,
said nothing, yet were they cursed, Judge. 5.23. He who had not his door posts
sprinkled with the blood of the Paschall Lamb, was sure to suffer by the
destroying Angel, Exodus 12.13. And the fearful shall go first and before other
sinners, into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death, Rev. 21.8. They had bee^ most backward to all good, and therefore
shall be the foremost, and have the precedence in suffering all evil. Wherefore
if we love either Christ or our own souls, let us never be ashamed of our
Masters service, what ever we suffer by waring of his livery. Be not, says
Paul, ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, neither of me his prisoner; but be
partakers of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of God, 2 Timothy 1.8.

No matter what Judas says touching Mary's anointing our Saviors feet, so
long as Christ himself approves of it. Our Savior did not forbear to heal, and
do good on the Sabbath day: though the Scribes and Pharisees took it ill; but
rather did it the more, Luke 6.1, to 12. and 13.31, 32. when Peter and John
were charged to speak no more in the Name of Jesus, their answer was, we cannot
but speak that which we have heard and seen, Acts 4.20. Let the same resolution
be ours since the case is the same.

Yea let us (with holy David) go a strain higher: and when any Micholl shall
scoff at us for our zeal, and call us fools; let us be more vile in being more
zealous, and we shall be had in more honor by Christ's friends: yea our
malicious and scoffing adversaries shall honor us by deriding us. For when
vicious men think to tax and traduce us, they do in truth commend us: their
dispraise is a man's honor, their praise his dishonor. Yea Terence a mere
heathen could say, that to be evil spoken of by wicked men, was a glorious and
laudable thing. And another, that it is no small credit with the vile, to have
a vile estimation: which being so, let us with Job take their reproach upon our
shoulder, and bind it as a Crown unto us, Job 31.35, 36. At least let us
imitate St Austin, who feared the praise of good men, and detested that of the
evil.

CHAP. XXVII.
NInthly, For a word of advice to the godly: If all natural men are so apt to
censure the religious, cause or no cause; And that they have so many reasons to
induce them to it: Let us for our Makers, and for our blessed Redeemers sake
take heed what we do: lest we shame our profession, and make the way of truth
evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.2. Not that I expect their mouths should be stopped; for
faults they would find in Christ himself, did he live amongst them: neither
can God please them, as you may see by their continual murmuring at the
several passages of his providence. Being like the Israelites who were never
content, for when they had water they murmr for bread; when they had bread
they complain for flesh: as if they had boarded with God, and he were to
provide them diet: and they good men honestly paid for what they took. Only
let them have no just occasion to censure and speak evil (...) us: for though
all true Christians pass under their sharp censures, and bitter reproaches:
yet I cannot yield him a true servant of Christ that deserves it.

Wherefore if we belong to Gods Family, let us show what house ^e come off: not
only by our Livery, but by our living. The sons of God must be pure,
blameless, and without rebuke, Phil. 2.15. And in the primitive times, a
Christian was known from another man, only by the holiness, and uprightness
of his life and conversation: as Tertullian reports.

And great reason there is for it: for first malice is very quick sighted, to
spy faults. Secondly, the Saints (like a Beacon upon an hill) have all eyes
upon them. Thirdly, virtue or vice in them shall be sure to be margined with a
pointing finger. Fourthly, in purest things, the smallest spot is sooner seen:
then greater stains in baser stuff: every little mote is seen, in a clear
glass, which will not be discerned in an earthen pitcher. A small spot, or
wart, or freckle in the face; is a greater blemish, sooner seen, and more
noted, then an ugly skat, or botch in any other part of the body. Fifthly, the
smallest spot in a religious man's face; shall excuse all the sores and ulcers
in their bodies. Sixthly, in case they see our lives contrary to our
profession: they will even protest against our Religion; saying, if we did
speak as we think, we would do as we speak: if our Religion were true and good,
such as profess it, would live thereafter. Seventhly, in case thy practice is
not suitable to thy profession; woe unto thee; for outward profession, where
there is want of inward truth, and real practice, does but help to draw on and
aggravate judgment. The Scribes and Pharisees had not heard of so many woes,
but for their glorious pretenses. Yea, had the Fig Tree in the Gospel, been
utterly bare, and leave-lesse: it had in all probability, escaped the curse.

Hear this ye vain Hypocrites, that care only to be thought good: your fair
outside, shall be sure to help you to a curse. And it were better for you with
Philosophers, to have honesty without Religion, then with wicked Christians, to
have Religion without honesty.

CHAP. XXVIII.
HEre I might proceed to a use of Exhortation. And because it is hard to say;
whether ignorance or malice does more abound, in these scoffers, and scorners:
whether it be more out of the strength of will, or weakness of judgment; that
they thus have, and persecute us. That these Brute Beasts (as S. Peter calls
them,) led with sensuality; speak evil of the things which they understand
not, 2 Pet. 2.12. Therefore it were requisite, to exhort, and admonish them to
use all possible means; that God has appointed for their renovation. Whereby
of the Serpents seed, and children of the devil, they may become the Children
of God, and members of Christ. For until they be born again, they will be like
Nichodemus, who knew not what it was to be born again, Joh. 3.4. until they be
zealous themselves, they will be like Festus, who thought zeal madness, Act.
26.24. until they be humble themselves, they will be like Michal, who mocked
David for his humility, and thought him a fool for dancing before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.16, 20. Yea to all that shall perish, or are for the present in a
perishing condition: Religion seems no other then foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18.

I might likewise go on to a more particular direction, That is, if in case any
that hear me, have been thus rashly censorious, in making ill constructions of
all that the religious do: and find that these, or some of them, have been the
genuine reasons of their so doing, Let them with Ephraim, Jer. 31.19. strike
themselves upon the thigh. Or with that Publican, Luke 18.13. smite their
breast: And with amazement, and indignation say: What have I done? I have
deeply censured and condemned the generation of the just, I have often raised
an ill report of them, as those false hearted spies, did of the Land of Canaan.
Numb. 13.32, 33. And that scandal passing through many mouths, has multiplied
like a snow ball: which at best has left such a scar of suspicion upon their
names and credits, that even death it self will not be able to cure. Whereas
the Scripture says, Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly, Deuteronomy.
27.24. And him that privily slandereth his Neighbor, will I destroy, Psalm.
101.5.

And as I have thus depraved some; having more malice then matter against them;
so I have corrupted others, and forestalled their judgments with prejudice:
which may prove the bane of many a soul. Woe is me, what shall I do; least God
tear me in pieces, and there be none to deliver? I have been long enough
instrumental to Satan, I will now, and hereafter by Gods grace, serve my
Savior: who is a master without compare: O that my God would give me a heart,
and answerable ability, to be as faithful a friend to Religion, as I have been
a bitter enemy.

Let this I say be thy confession, this thy resolution: otherwise know for a
surety; that while thou scoffest at his children, God laughes at thee, Prove.
1.26. And that it will be bitterness in the end: For what evil is done to
them, Christ takes as done to hims Act. 9.4. And who so thinks holiness a
crime, or religion a disgrace, is so far from being of his spirit, that was a
man after Gods own heart; that there cannot be a greater argument of a foul
soul, held by Satan in a snare, and taken captive of him at his will.

Neither let Satan, nor thy seduced and deceitful heart deceive thee; in
thinking thou have any share in Christ, or the least spark of grace: for though
a man may through his hypocrisy, condemn that evil in another^ which he
allows in himself: yet he cannot condemn the good, which himself is endued
withal. For good cannot but rejoice, and delight in her like.

But this Abstract, being printed occasionally, I am forced to use all possible
brevity. And in case they would see more of this and the like, let them read
The Cure of Misprision, or mistake.

In the mean time, I will humbly beg of God, upon the ben^^ed knees of my
soul; that these lines may not rise up in judgment against those Hazaels, that
have read them, and are never the better: And so instead of curing their sin,
prove a means to increase their torment.

NOw considering the numberless number of those, that by professing themselves
Protestants, discredit the Protestant Religion. That (because they have been
Christened as Simon Magus was, received the Sacrament like Judas, and for
company go to Church also as Dogs do) are called Christians: as we call the
Heathen Images Gods. Yea, and (being blinded by the Prince of Darkness, 2 Cor.
4.4.) think to be saved by Christ, though they take up Arms against him; and
are no more like Christians, then Michals Image of Goates-hair was like David:
That being Christians in name, will scoff at a Christian indeed: That honor
the dead Saints in a cold profession, while they worry the living Saints in a
cruel persecution: That make the World only their God; and pleasure, or profit
alone their Religion: That do what is morally good, more for fear of the Law,
then for love of the Gospel. That fear the Mogistrate, more then they fear God,
or the Devil; And a Prison more, then Hell: That with Adam, will become Satan's
Bondslaves for an Apple: And like Esau, sell their Birthright of grace here,
and their blessing of glory hereafter for a mess of Pottage. That like men
sleeping in a Boat; are carried down the stream of this World, until they
arrive at their Graves-end, [Death;] without once waking to bethink themselves,
whither they are going [to Heaven or Hell.] As also in reference to Levit.
19.17. Isai. 58.1. And out of compassion to their precious souls; There are
therefore at the place hereunder mentioned, eight several Books purposely
composed, whereof one will be freely given, and the other seven lent gratis, to
any that shall require them. Which Books (like Glasses) will show them (from
Gods Word) the very faces of their b^earts. And (like Peter to Cornelius, Act.
11.) tell them words whereby (with blessing from above,) both they and their
Associates (by their means) may be saved, verse 14.

At the Blew Pales, over against the High Constables short of Shoreditch
Church; where is a Glass Lanthorn in the Window: such as please may have them.

The names of the Books are these.
A Hopeful way, to Cure that horrid sin of Swearing. The odious, despicable,
and dreadful condition of a Drunkard. A Glass, for Scoffers at Religion.
Englands Unthankfulness, striving with Gods goodness. The Arraignment, and
remedy of Covetousness. The Character, of a Formal Hypocrite. The Pastors
Advocate; and therein of preaching without a Call. The Whole Duty of a
Christian.
Imprimatur,

John Downame.

FINIS.

