A Touchstone To try (by our knowledge, belief, and life) whether we be
Christians in name only, or Christians in deed. OR, The Character of a true
Believer, that walks in some measure answerable to the Gospel, his Christian
profession, and the millions of mercies he has received. By R. Y. of Roxwell
in Essex.

2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be reprobates?

Printed at London, and are to be sold by Andrew Crook, at the sign of the
Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

I Have perused this Treatise, and approving it to be very pithy, pious, and
profitable, I allow it to be printed and published.

John Downame.

THe Reader may think it strange that the Proofs are not alleged, but they
were found to be so many in number, that the very pointing to them would have
taken up near as much room as the matter it self, and so have doubled the
charge; which (in that they are mostly to be given away) could not be afforded:
Besides, few use to turn to every Scripture; and every sanctified heart is a
Comment upon all that is herein delivered.

The CHARACTER of a true Believer, etc. in reading whereof reflect upon your
selves, and see what comparison there is between that you are, and what you
should be: and then with blessing from above, it will much further you in your
way to Heaven: for therefore are we Christians in name only, because we think
our selves Christians indeed, and already good enough.
. 1. A True Believer is one, that God (of his free grace and good pleasure)
has chosen, and elected to eternal life before the foundation of the World:
and whom Christ has redeemed with his precious blood.

. 2. He is effectually called, and become a new Creature by regeneration, being
both begotten and borne a new of God by the immortal seed of the Word, and the
Spirits powerful working with it. And without this new Birth there is no being
saved, as our Savior himself affirms, John 3.5.

. 3. He is industrious after the means of Grace, loves to hear Christ's voice,
and delights in it, as finding a sweet relish therein; is able to know when he
speaks, and when the tempter; he receives the Word not as the word of men,
but as it is in deed the Word of God, with all readiness; for he resists not
as the wicked do, but obeyes Christ's call; which works in him mightily: for
he finds it by experience quick, and powerful, and sharper then any two edged
sword; piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and of
the joints and marrow; and to the discerning of the very thoughts, and the most
secret intents of the heart.

. 4. His heart is circumcised, or rather God takes away the stony heart out of
his flesh, and gives him a new heart; in which he writes his Law, and puts a
new spirit into him, even his own Spirit; causing him to walk in his
statutes, and keep his ordinances so as to do them.

. 5. He sheds his love abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost, who witnesses to
his conscience, that he is become the child of God; whereby he has union, and
communion with Christ; partakes of the Divine Nature, and becomes like God in
holiness.

. 6. He is brought out of darkness into mavelous light, has his eyes opened
to see the wonders of Gods Law; and that veil, or curtain which before was
drawn over his heart, (2 Cor. 3.15, 16.) taken away, and is turned from the
power of Satan unto God.

. 7. He is ashamed of his former conversation, bewayles, and mournes bitterly
for all his sins, actual and original, of omission, and commission; secret,
as well as known; lesser, as well as greater: yea, as well for the evil which
cleaves to his best works, as for his evil works; being more grieved for
offending so good a God, then for that it does, or might bring him shame, or
punishment in this life, or in Hell.

. 8. He now finds that the Law is spiritual, binding the heart as well as the
hands; to which holy and just rule he brings all his thoughts, words, and
actions; and so sees himself out of measure sinful, as being guilty of all
manner of concupiscence; having broken every one of those righteous precepts (
Exodus 20) more times and ways then he has hairs on his head; not being able
of himself to think a good thought: for that all the powers of his soul, and
members of his body, are wholly, and originally corrupted.

. 9. He sees himself as guilty of Adams sin, (being in his loins) as any
Heir is liable to his Fathers debt; and esteems it the Mother, and Nurse of
all: finding it like the great wheel in a Clock, that sets all the wheels on
moving, while it seems to move slowest; and therefore hates and bewailes it,
as the most soul, hateful, secret, deceitful, and powerful evil.

. 10. Whereupon finding himself in a lost condition, and confessing that he
has deserved all the plagues of this life, and of that which is to come; and
groaning under the burden of sin, utterly dispairing of all help in
himself; he is solicitously careful in the use of the means, to attain
faith in the promise of Gods mercy made in Christ, finding no rest until he
get some assurance, vehemently hungering and thirsting after, and earnestly
praying for the pardon of sin: waiting on the Lord with patience.

. 11. He humbly, unfainedly, and freely confesses all his sins so far as he
is able, with the several circumstances which aggravate the same; to his own
shame, and Gods glory.

. 12. He will take an holy revenge on himself, even to the denying of his own
reason and affections; his credit, carnal friends, profits, pleasures, and
whatever else might hinder: and by restoring goods, or moneys evil gotten;
though it were long since, and when he was a servant: in case he be able.

. 13. He unfainedly desires to forsake all sin, as being in some measure dead
to it, Christ (by his Spirit) having freed him from the power and dominion
thereof, and in part abolished it; at least he so parts from all iniquity, and
hates every false way, that no one sin does reign in him; for when he does
commit any evil, it is full sore against his will, as being led captive to it
by the strength of Satan's temptations, and his own corruptions; for he never
commits it freely and willingly, and with full consent: he allows not of the
evil he does, no he will not premeditately, and in times not utterly deserted;
do the least evil, that the greatest good may come of it: neither is there
any sin he knows by himself, (were it formerly never so pleasing to him)
but he desires as heartily, that he might never commit it; as that God should
never impute it. He likewise hates sin thoroughly and universally, and
therefore is truly grieved for the abominations that are done by others; to the
dishonor of God, and slander of religion, or the ruin of men's souls.

. 14. Nor does he only abhor and depart from evil, but he cleaves unto that
which is good; he is not only dead to, and made free from sin, but as he has
once been the servant of sin, so he becomes the servant of righteousness;
and as he has been isntrumental to Satan, so he will now be as active to
serve Christ; and be as fruitful in good works, as he has formerly been in
evil works.

. 15. He is conformed to the image of Christ, and is led by the Spirit; walks
in newness of life, lives holily, justly, and unblameably, for now he walks
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, and brings forth the fruits of the
Spirit mentioned, Gal. 5.22. so that he is changed, and renewed in every part,
power, and faculty; his understanding is enlightened, his mind renewed, his
will changed, his affections sanctified, etc. and he who thinks he believes,
and finds not a palpable change in his judgment, affections, and actions,
does but deceive himself.

. 16. He goes often, and upon all occasions to God in prayer, in which lies all
his strength; yet not as his, but as it is the intercession of Gods own Spirit
in him, poured out in the name of Christ, and according to his Will; for being
truly sensible of his sins, and wants, he chiefly prays for the pardon of
sin, the effusion of grace, and for the assistance of Gods Spirit; that he
may more firmly believe, more soundly repent, more zealously do, more
patiently suffer, and more constantly persevere in the practice and profession
of every duty. Nor does he for the most part fall into prayer without
meditation, and preparation; nor utter words without devotion, and affection;
nor without some assurance, and persuasion that God will hear, and grant his
requests: yea, he mostly takes notice of his enlargements in prayer, and of the
success afterward, and is accordingly thankful, or humbled; not that he
measures Gods hearing his suit by his present answer, or his present answer by
his own sense; he will pray (at least in some poor measure) at all times,
striving against deadness of spirit, and distractions, as an heavy burden.

. 17. He hears the Word with attention, minds, observes, and remembers it
carefully; receives, and applies whatsoever precept or promise is spoken out of
the Word, as spoken by God to himself in particular; is astonished at the
deepnesse of Gods wisdom, power, and goodness; seriously meditating upon the
Nature, Attributes, Word, and Works of God: he lays it up in his heart,
ponders on it in his mind, and practices it in his life; neither will he
approach unto the Lords Table, without due examination and preparation.

. 18. He loves, and longs after a powerful and searching Ministry above all
earthly treasures, as finding a greater necessity of Spiritual then Corporal
food; and therefore will take any pains, or be at any cost, or suffer any
disgrace to enjoy it.

. 19. He is never offended at any wholesome truth, be it never so untoothsome,
but affects that Ministry most which most lays open, and rebukes his own
sin; even therefore coming to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest. When he hears his own sins spoken against, he does not apply the
same unto others, as is the manor of too many; nor is he wise to defend the
evil he does, but loves to be admonished; nor will he after warning, and
conviction from the Word, go on in an evil way, because his principal care
is to be saved.

. 20. He will not plead against God, nor ask a reason of his actions; if he
meets with hard Scriptures he runs not into error, nor is offended, but
suspends his judgment, and blames his own blindness; you may know him from
an unbeleever by this, he is wise to defend the truth when he hears it spoken
against, but never argues against it; whereas the unbeleever (being prompt by
Satan) can most subtly argue against the truth, though he has not a word to
speak for it; yea, he thinks it religion enough if he can but dispute against
the religious, which is a manifest sign of a wicked man. Briefly, he neither
carpes nor frets against a faithful Minister, nor seeks to entrap him, or
pervert what he delivers, but prays for him, and is ready to speak in his
defense.

. 21. He has an high estimation of the Ministers, and means by which he was
converted, and finds more sweetness in the Gospel then in any thing else in
the world.

. 22. Spiritual judgments, (as a famine of the Word, the blindness of men's
minds, hardness of their hearts, etc.) he accounts more woeful then any
judgment the world can be sensible of.

. 23. He is enlightened with the saving knowledge, and hid things of the
Gospel; and to see truth from error, good from evil; together with his own
wretchedness by sin, and the riches of Gods free grace and mercy in Christ
toward his own soul; he is not ignorant of the principles of Religion, as
most aged people are; but is able and ready to give a reason of the hope that
is in him.

. 24. He prays for the enlargement, and rejoices at the progress of the
Gospel, and in the common good of the Church; and so at the graces or good
success of any member in particular, and will be some way isntrumental for
Christ, praying for, and earnestly desiring the salvation of others; and
likewise endeavoring to win all he can to Christ; rejoicing no less when any
good thing is done by others, then if himself did it. He highly respects all
such as any way promote the Gospel, and is thankful to them.

. 25. He is willing to be at cost to serve the Lord, will freely administer
carnal things, where he partaketh of spiritual things; and counts the same as
a due, not as a benevolence: yea, he thinks it most just, that they who preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel; and that as freely as men of other
Callings: which sign or character shows, a world of men that profess
themselves Christians to be but counterfeits.

. 26. He believes impartially the whole Word of God, threats, and precepts, as
well as promises; and things above the reach of reason, as well as what
experience has made plain to him; he feels the power and efficacy of Gods
Word and Spirit, persuading his conscience, that his sins are pardoned in
Christ, and he in favor with God; so that he can truly apply Christ, and all
his benefits and promises unto his own soul; trusting in him, and casting
himself only upon him for pardon and salvation.

. 27. He has a sweet and sanctified peace in his conscience, arising from the
assured forgiveness of his sins, a sound and strong joy in the Lord, and in
his Word through believing; not seldom the Holy Ghost inwardly setting too
Gods privy seal, by sudden refreshings falling like the dew upon his heart,
and establishing his soul before the Lord, especially after holy duties; yea,
his hope (as being built upon Gods Word, and promises) fills him with such joy
unspeakeable, that it makes him rejoice even in tribulation.

. 28. He sometimes loses the efficacy, feeling, and comfort of faith, but the
seed and habit of faith always remains. He is often and grievously assaulted
with fears, and doubtings, but in the issue he always gets the conquest, and
is the more assured, for having been so much assaulted, and does so much the
more strive to make his Calling and Election sure; and to be assured of future
happiness after this his earthly pilgrimage.

. 29. Or, if he has but a weak faith yet it is sound, against which the very
gates of Hell shall never prevail, for he never utterly falls away from the
grace of God, but perseveres in the truth, and in well doing to the end; and
therein finds also a blessed thriving, and gracious progress in true
holiness.

. 30. He is perfectly justified by the blood of Christ, freed from the rigor
of the Law, and in some good measure from the spirit of bondage; is often in
combat between the flesh and the Spirit, but the Spirit in the end ever gets
the upper hand.

. 31. And as he believes in his heart, so he is not ashamed of the Cross of
Christ, but will profess the truth boldly in all estates, and in times of
suffering, and publish what Christ has done for his soul to Gods glory, and
the comfort of others; yea, if called to it, he will, God assisting him, lay
down his life for Christ, and the Gospel; and rejoice also, that he is
counted worthy.

. 32. Neither is he high-minded, but more fears the want of grace then
confides in what he has, for he works out his salvation with fear and
trembling; and trusts not in the least to his own strength, but is ever
jealous, and suspicious, least his heart should deceive him; but he resolves by
Gods grace not to use any unlawful means, nor yield to any thing against the
truth, for the avoiding of what he fears, be it burning at a stake; as
knowing, and being fully persuaded, that all things shall work together for
the best unto him. And indeed the fear of God, (which is his continual
guardion) keeps him in some measure from the fear of death, and terror of
the world; for he fears not them that can only kill the body, in any degree
like him, that after he has killed can cast both body and soul into Hell. Nor
does he grutch to lose a temporal life, when in lieu thereof he shall obtain
an eternal Crown of glory.

. 33. He is wonderfully inflamed with the love and estimation of God, and of
Christ, especially upon the return of his prayers, or the obtaining of some
mercy; the which he shows by his hating of evil, and by his constant
obedience, and the delight he has in keeping of Gods Commandments, and by his
willingness to be at cost, or suffer for him. Neither is he so in love with
the world, or any thing in it, as that it shall diminish his love to God; yea
he so loves and longs for Christ's appearing, that he may be united to him, and
enjoy his presence; that his daily prayer is, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

. 34. Again, he entirely loves, and highly esteems Gods people, not out of
any carnal or self ends, but for their graces, the truths sake; and because
they are borne of God: more loving and honoring the poor that walk
uprightly, then they that pervert their ways though they be rich; and loving
them best that serve God most: He is prone to justify them, and speak in
their defense when he hears them reviled, slandered, or contemned by wicked
and ungodly men, though he incur their displeasure by it.

. 35. He does not estrange himself from the people of God in their misery, but
is ready to minister unto them when they stand in need, and use any means for
their relief. He will solicit great ones in their behalf, and in Christ's
cause, though he endanger himself thereby; and can be as earnest a Suitor at
the Throne of Grace for others that are in distress, as for himself, even
thursting, and studying how he may do them most good, as participating, and
being touched with compassion, and having a fellow-feeling both of the misery
and felicity of others, as one member has of another; especially of the
Churches, as a member has of the whole body. Neither can he rejoice in his
own peace and welfare, while the Church and people of God are in distress,
whose welfare he preferres before his own.

. 36. He delights in the Saints company above all others, as finding an
heavenly sweetness in their conference and society, where every ones words do
savor of grace and wisdom; and when in every company he shall either do
good, or receive good.

. 37. And as he loves and delights in holy company, so he loathes evil
company; neither will he have any fellowship with the workers of iniquity, or
be in league with the wicked; as Swearers, Drunkards, Whooremongers, Scoffers,
etc. but avoid all needless society with them.

[ Place these 25. Sections next after page 10.. 37.]

Such other signs or properties of A true Believer, as offered themselves
while the second sheet was (by a providence) somewhat long in printing.
1..

HE will neither back-bite others, nor give ear to back-biters of others.
Neither lend Satan his tougue to utter, nor his ears to hear, nor his heart
to believe lies and slanders. He will not lessen his own credit, by traducing
one that wrongs him: he will not lessen his own shame, and blame, by traducing
one he has wronged: as too many do. He wonders not so much at another
ingratitude to him: as at his own unthankfulness to God. He will pardon many
things in others, which he will not tolerate in himself. He will neither
arrogate to himself, nor derogate from another: neither villifie other men's
doings nor over highly prize his own. He will not condemn, censure, or slight
that which he understands not. To find gall in a Pidgion, a knot in a Bulrush
where is none: is none of his humor. In relating an enemies words, he will
neither add to them; nor diminish from them. The faults of a few, shall not
make him uncharitable to all: nor the goodness of many, make him credulous of
the rest. He envies none for doing, or faring, or being better esteemed then
himself.

2.. His graces, and goodness gains him more enemies; and breeds him more
danger, then vice and wickedness does another man: but he is more pleased then
displeased at it, for he knows by the worlds hating of him, that he is not of
the world; but that Christ has chosen him out of the world: and that he some
way discovers the worlds treasons, and deceits. He knows also that to be the
worlds friend, is to be Gods enemy; yea he esteems it an honor to be evil
spoken of, by evil men: (because when a thing is best, they will like it
least:) and a grace, to be disgraced for Christ, who was far more disgraced
for him. Besides, the single approbation of one wise experimental Christian,
is enough with him, to countervaile the disdain, and dislike of a whole Parish
of sensualists; and an ounce of credit with God, more worth then a tallent of
men's praises. And how little is that man hurt, whom malice condemns on earth,
and God commends in Heaven? If he cannot avoid their malice, and evil words;
he will be sure not to deserve them; which is much at one upon the matter: for
as the best confutation of their slanders, is (not by our great words, but) by
our good works: so his conscience knowing him innocent, like a constant friend
takes him by the hand, and cheeres him against all his miseries. However, he
will not in the least wrong his conscience; to avoid the imputation of
singularity. The scoffs of Atheists shall not beat him off from his
Profession: No, if he does well, has Gods Word for his warrant, and glory for
his aim, nothing can daunt or discourage him. Neither the threatenings of fire,
nor the fair, and large promises of cunning, and cruel adversaries; neither
pain, nor loss can make him shrink from Christ; much less the censures, and
scoffs of lewd persons. The conscience of good intentions, let their success
be what it will: is both a sufficient discharge, and comfort to his generous
mind.

3.. Through the studdy of virtue, and Christian prudence; he makes the servile
passions of his mind, (fear and anger) subject to the more noble faculties of
his soul, reason and understanding. As appears in the provocation of an
enemy; for let him be injured, he will both forbear, and forgive: well
considering, that it is the glory of a man to pass by an offense: and that it
is greater fortitude, to overcome his own passions, then to vanquish a City.
Wherefore in stead of returning like for like; he will pacify his enemy with
mild words, and gentle behavior: which may be resembled to Milk that
quenches Wildfire; or Oil that quenches Lime, which by water is kindled: and
thinks it enough for one to be angry at a time. He is not like our Ruffians,
and sons of Beliall: who when they are displeased with others, will fly in
their Makers face, and tear the name of their Savior in pieces: even swearing
away their part in that Blood, which must save them if ever they be saved. Nor
like our Gallants, whom the Devil has so blinded and bewitched: that they
will contend for the way, and strive for the wall even to the death: and kill
one another, as though either of their honors, were of more worth; then both
their souls. Or admit one get the victory, miserable is that victory wherein
thou overcomest thine enemy and thy passions, yea the Devil in the mean time
overcomes thee: perhaps thou slayest his body, but the Devil slayes thy soul.
Nor like those sooles you see walking in Westminster Hall; that like two Cocks
of the Game, peck out one another eyes to make the Lawyers sport. No says he,
why should I vex my self, because another has vexed me? Or why should I do
my self a shrewd turn, because another would? And admit carnal reason shall
allege to him, that his enemy is unworthy to be forgiven: rectified reason
will answer, but Christ is worthy to be obeyed, who has commanded me to
forgive him. And well may I bear with him, when his Maker bears with me: and
forgive him, when Christ has forgiven me much more. Nor can any repute him a
coward for this his humble patience: the true coward is your Hot-spur; that
fears the blasts of men's breath, and not the fire of Gods wrath: that trembles
at the thought of a Prison, and yet fears not Hell fire. But the Believer is
as bold as a Lion if his cause be good; yea to speak rightly, there is no such
coward, none so valliant as the Believer: without Gods warrant he dares do
nothing, with it any thing. He fears none but the displeasure of the highest,
and runs away from nothing but sin. Indeed he more fears the least sin,
then the greatest torment: as may be seen in the Martyrs that noble Army. But
he is so far from fearing an impotent enemy, that he fears not death it
self: no not the Day of Judgment, 1 John 4.17. Luke 21.25. to 29. yea he is
so strong withal, that he is able to prevail with God, Genesis 32.26.28. Exodus
32.10. And overcome the world, the flesh, and the Devil, 1 John 2.14. and 5.4.
Gal. 5.24. and all this by his faith and prayer; and not seldom does he
overcome his enemy too, by well-doing: for he lives so well, that his
backbiting adversaries are either put to silence, or constrained to praise
God, and speak well of him.

4.. He is more knowing then the men of the world: for as he has the light of
the Spirit, and the eye of says above them: so the Word of Christ dwells in
him plentifully, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding: and he
increases daily in the knowledge of God, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; because God reveals himself to him, in a great measure as to his
friend. Besides, his knowledge is about the best things; and one drop of soul
wisdom, and saving knowledge; guided by the fear of God: is more worth then
all humane learning. And to this knowledge, unbeleevers are mere strangers.
Yea be they never so wise, and learned in other things; they have only the
theory of this wisdom; they can prattle of it by roate, but they know not
what it is by effect, and experience. Yea if a man want faith, holiness, the
love of God, and the Spirit of God to be his teacher: he shall not be able
really, and by his own experience, to know the chief points of Christian
Religion; such as are faith, repentance, regeneration, the love of God, the
presence of the Spirit, the remission of sins, the effusion of grace, the
possession of heavenly comforts: not what the peace of conscience, and joy in
the Holy Ghost is; nor what the communion of Saints means; when every one of
these are easy, and familiar to the meanest, and simplest Believer. And the
reason is, the Believer digests his knowledge into practice, and imployes it to
the glory of the Giver, his neighbors good, and the furthering of his own
salvation. He is neither ungrounded in the Principles of Religion, nor
unconcionable in the practice. Each Book or Sermon, both increases his
knowledge, and lessens his vices. Yea he will pick something out of every
thing; and gather honey from the self same thing, that others will poison.
Another hating the truth, shall make him love it the more; for he is
instructed both by similitude, and contrariety. Whereas let the unbeleever know
never so much; he is resolved to be never the better: and they who are
unwilling to obey, God thinks unworthy to know. Whence it is also, that as
what the Believer does is good for the matter, so he will do it well also for
the manner: and in all his actions observe, whether his ends be good, or evil:
for he will do good actions, with good intentions; and not be moved unto them,
by base ends as is the unbeleever. Nor is he pussed up either with his
knowledge, or parts: well knowing that he is ignorant of many things, for a few
that he understands: and that he falls short of others, in what he most
excells. Nor will he build upon his knowledge; but in cases doubtful; he will
advise with others. Yea he will submit to the better advice, even of his
inferior, or Maidservant.

5.. He is not erroneous in his judgment; he neither affects curiosity, nor
singularity: which is the foolish ambition of unblest understandings. But he
wholly applies himself to those things, which God has revealed in his Word;
and to the confirmation of received truths; which is the meekness, and
humility of the best judgments: and so is wise according to sobriety. Nor does
he so cry up Justification, as to cry down, and quite overthrow
Sanctification. He reads, and hears with an honest, and good heart: and to
the end only that he may know savingly, believe rightly, and live religiously:
and God grants his desire in all the three. He is resolved to do Gods Will,
therefore God gives him to know the Doctrine; whether it be of God or no.
Neither will he give heed nor lend his ear to the intising words of false
Prophets, or spirits of error: who speak lies through hypocrisy; as having
their consciences burned with an hot iron. None can beguile him with their
sleights, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive: for his
heart is stablished with grace. He is not wavering, nor carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, which vain talkers, and deceivers of minds daily
vent: because he is rooted, and stablished in the faith. He avoides all
profane, and vain bablings; all foolish, and unlearned questions which are
endless, all strife about words, which is to no profit: all Jewish fables, and
commandments of men, and geneologies: which breed vain janglings, rather then
godly edification which is by faith, all brawlings, and contentions about the
Law; as being unprofitable, and vain. He will not be spoiled through
Philosophy, or great shows of learning. He doteth not about froward
disputations, and things that engender unto more ungodliness: as knowing well,
that the words of these false Apostles, and Teachers of lies fret like a
Canker, poison men's judgments, and pervert their simple and superstitious
hearers: but rather studdies to have a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.
Whereas it is the portion of all rotten hearted, and Hypocritical Professors:
to be given up to error, and to believe lies. In brief, he will entertain
nothing which is contrary to wholesome Doctrine; and not according to the
glorious Gospel, of the blessed God. Yea if there be any that err concerning
the truth, or having a show of godliness deny the power of it: he turns away
from such. Again, he is not for Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas; but for all,
that bring the Word for their warrant. And those who will not suffer wholesome
Doctrine, but having their ears itching, do after their own lusts get them
an heap of Teachers: turning their ears from the truth, being given unto
fables: are far from being of his mind. He is none of those that creep into
Houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sins; and led away with diverse
lusts: that subvert whole families, by walking in craftiness; and handling the
Word deceitfully; and that teach things which they ought not, for filthy lucres
sake: even delighting themselves in their deceivings: that beguile unstable
souls by promising them liberty, and are themselves the servants of
corruption, being men of corrupt minds, that resist the truth; and are
reprobate concerning the faith. He will reject him that is an Heriticke, after
once, or twice admonition: knowing that he who is such, is perverted, and
sins deing damned of his own self. He is no causer of division, or
dissension in the Church.

6.. But he wins many to the truth, for he is charitable, wishes all good, and
happy like himself: and accordingly proves a means of bringing many to
Heaven, and that two ways. First whereas others by their evil example, are a
means to destroy many: he by his good example, is a means to save many. For
he is upright, and sincere hearted to God and man. He is none of those that
profess God with their words, and with their works deny him. He is not
double-tongued, but as he thinks in his heart, so he speaks with his mouth:
and as he is led by his conscience, so his conscience is led by truth. In fine,
he is known from another man, only by the holiness, and uprightness of his
life, and conversation. Yea all may read in his life, that he believes in his
heart: and are forced to say, This is a good God, whose servant is so good. Or
this is a good, holy, and opperative Religion: that thus changes, and
transformes men into new Creatures. For his life is like a precious and sweet
persume: whose savor spreads it self, and is pleasant to all that come near.
Yea, be sowes those good works, that remain to posterity, and are reaped by
succession: and he shall be happy in making others so. But secondly, as the
wicked draw all they can to Hell by their alurements; and subtle persuasions:
so he draws all he can to Heaven, by his admonitions, and sweet compellations.
He loves the soul of his Neighbor, and therefore he will tell him of his
faults, and the Judgments of God due unto the same. Yea rather then let one
go headlong to destruction, he will violently pluck him out of the fire; for
he has not only zeal, but courage to do good: he is not luke warm, nor
will he suffer discretion to eat up his devotion; as it fares with common
professors. For he had rather hazard the censure of some, then hinder the good
of others. Yea rather then be guilty of other men's sins. By his cowardly
silence, he can afford to be despised, and thought out of his wits by the
world; reputed a fool, and pointed at in the streets. For he preferres Gods
favor, before all the worlds: and his glory, before his own credit. Not that
he wants wit, or deserves contempt: for his zeal is mixed with discretion, and
he makes knowledge the pilot of his devotion: but his love to God is such, as
he cannot bear with them that are evil. His righteous soul is vexed with
seeing, and hearing the uncleanly conversation of their unlawful deeds. Yea it
cuts his very heart to hear, Christ so wounded with oaths, blasphemies, and
reproaches, who is the life of his life, and soul of his soul. And his love
to sinners also, for his zeal against them, is a sweet compound of love, and
anger: for though he hates the vices of a wicked man, yet he loves his person:
he can chide him sharply, and yet at the same time pray for him heartily.
Whereby he not seldom saves his brother, for he finds favor in the sight of
God, and prevails with him for things hard to be obtained. As when Stevens
prayer prevailed for persecuting Paul; and our Saviors prayer for his
murderers.

7.. He is not sordedly covetous, nor given to filthy lucre: for the covetous
person is an Idolator, and has no inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and
of God. And therefore cannot possibly be a Believer; nor do we read of one
godly person in the whole Bible, that was covetous. He is contented with things
necessary, and desires not great matters: for if he have food, and raiment, he
will therewith be content: considering how they that will needs be rich, fall
into temptations, and snares, and into many foolish, and noisome lusts; which
drown men in perdition, and destruction. And that the desire of money, is the
root of all evil: which while some lusted after; they erred from the faith,
and peirced themselves through with many sorrows. He will neither defraud, nor
oppress his brother in any matter: he will not deal unjustly in line, in
weight, or in measure. He lusts not after forbidden fruit; nor coveteth that
which is another. He will not remove his neighbors Land mark, nor conceal
any Deeds, or Writings, that make for his neighbors advantage. If his
neighbor suffer prejudice, or loffe in any thing belonging to him; through
his, or his servants means: he will make him recompense to the full. In case
his Cattle break into his neighbors ground, and eat his Corn, or Grass: he
will willingly, and without compulsion satisfy for the damage. He will not
detain the poor Workmans hire, until the morning: least his family should
want Bread for the present. He loves Justice in the least things, and desires
rather to buy what he would have; then that it be given him. Choosing to eat his
own bread, and to drink water out of his own Cesterne. He hates gifts,
least they should corrupt his judgment; and make him partial. Nor is he
legally just, or conscionable according to the statute only; but piously just.
If his conscience tells him, that he has any way prejudiced his neighbor,
though there be noue to witness against him; though it be unknown to the
party himself that suffers the damage: he will make him satisfaction, and
never think he merits by it. If he find any thing, he both desires, and
endeavors to find out the owner; that he may restote it. He will not take
advantege from his neighbors poverty, or simplicity to oppress, or cosen
him. He will not compound with Creditors, for ten shillings in the pound: when
he is able to pay all. He will not take an enemies goods, or the goods of an
Heathen: though it be beyond the Line; without making satisfaction, or
returning a valuable consideration: although the Laws of the Land will bear
him out in it: yea although he have Letters of Markq, for his warrant unless
there be some other cause. If he make an oath, or promise, though to his, and
Gods enemy; and to his great disadvantage: he will faithfully perform it, and
not violate the same. Before he uses the extremity, either of Law, or of
Arms; he offers conditions of peace: and before he will fall to blows, he
will try what reason will do; soundly examine the cause, and hear what the
party can say for himself: and after that, he will rather suffer, and yield
some part of his right; then do wrong, contend, or go to Law. For he will not
do all he may, least evil men speak ill of him, or insult; as they are very
prone to do; by reason of their spite at Religion. Lastly, he seldom but
gets the victory; yea it is rare if he be vanquished, either in going to Law, or
making War: because he never undertakes War, or Suit, without just cause; and
to a good intent. Yea it is rare also, if this be not the issue: the less he
covets, the more he has: and the less he thirsts after these temporal
things; the more he covets spiritual things.

8.. Neither love, nor hatred shall rob him of his judgment; or make him
partial. He will neither esteem Father, nor Mother, nor Wife, nor Child: so
as to disobey God in the least for their sakes, He will not wrong his Children
by a former Wife; to give that which is due unto them, unto the Children of a
second Wife: but he will make his first borne Heir, and give him a double
portion of all that he has. If his Son be stubborn, and disobedient; a
Riater, and a Drunkard: he will not nourish him in it; but inflict due
punishment upon him, according to his demerits. He will not seek to save a
Murderer from death: least he make the whole Land guilty of blood. No, be it
his own Son, least in saving him from a temporal shame, and punishment; he
should bring upon him an eternal: and in liew of saving his body, he should
destroy his soul. Besides, he will rather his own Child shall be destroyed,
then God dishonored, and his Law not executed. It matters not to him what
others would do, nor what all the world says, if they bring not a written
word; they prevail nothing: he will go on in his uprightness, and not shame
to be singular: as more fearing Gods anger, then the worlds scorns. Neither
custom, nor example of his forefathers will he follow; without, or against
the written Word. No, he will not follow Panl himself, any further then he
follows Christ. He remembers how vain, ignorant, and sinful his former
conversation (which he received by the traditions of his Fathers) was: and
thinks it too much to continue still therein. Nor will he take encouragement
from the Saints falls; to do the like: but they shall serve him as Sea-markes,
to make him beware. Indeed when things are of a doubtful nature; he will take
the surest (not the strongest) fide; and which draws nearest to probability:
and where the Law written does cease; he will observe that which is allowed by
the practice and custom of the godly, and religious.

9.. He honors, and obeyes his Parents: and God accordingly prospers him;
and prolongeth his days. If they stand in need, he will nourish, and maintain
them: as they did him, in his need. If a servant, he serves his Master with
singleness of heart, as unto Christ, not with eye-service, but out of
conscience. And the Lord is with him, and prospers all he takes in hand;
gives him such favor in his Masters sight; that he trusts him with all he
has. Yea the Lord blesses his Master, and all the family fares the better for
his sake. He will not be charitable with his Masters goods, nor wastfull with
his Parents. If a Master he uses his servants so, as considering that himself
is a servant, to a greater Master. To a good servant, he is kind, and
liberal: and having staid long with him, and done him good, and faithful
service: he will at the end of his years, not only make him free; but give
him a bountiful reward, answerable to the good service he has performed: and
by this he is more enriched. He will not bid his servants tell lies, or being
at home, to say that he is abroad. He loves not to rail, or speak evil of
Magistrates. as being sent of God, for the punishment of evil doers; and for
the praise of them that do well. In chousing them, he will have respect to
their piety, and fitness: and not to wealth, favor, or any other either
private or base ends. He is no Neuter, when Gods cause is in danger: but he
will help the Lord against the mighty. He imployes himself in some lawful
calling; he lives not idely. He will not company with wicked persons; for fear
of being infected by them: nor join in Marriage either with Idolaters, or
profane persons: least he should learn their customs. Nor give his Children
in marriage to them, for the same reason. He is careful to preserve his
Childrens chastity: and therefore he will in due time, provide fit matches for
them. Be he Parent, Master, or Magistrate; he will think it no disparagement
to his greatness; if Christ's Ambassador shall as he is bound; require him to
give some testimony that he is a Christian; before he intrudes himself to the
Lords Table. Yea, he will as Christ has commanded him; be ready to give a
reason of the hope that is in him, though in the presence of others that are
not so rich, ancient, or learned as himself, though he was never in so many
years examined: and indeed none but proud, and ignorant persons; will stand
upon comparisons in Gods Worship; for pretend they what they will, the genuine
reason is; they are ashamed to make known their ianorance. If a Minister, he
will not preach to please, but to profit: nor will he date to serve at the
Altar, without being holy.

10.. He has low, and mean thoughts of himself; therefore the Lord makes him
excel, and shows his strength by him. He abhorres to think himself better
then others, because God blesses him more with outward blessings, or has
bestowed more inward gifts and graces upon him, then upon others: well knowing
that God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. He is not lifted
up, nor cast down with men's flatteries or slanpers. He forgets his good deeds,
and therefore God remembers them: he remembers his evil deeds, therefore God
forgets them. He is not envious, nor given to strife; but of a meek, and quiet
spirit; peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated. He affects rather
plainness then pomp: and will rather refuse places of honor, then eagerly
pursue after them. He never stands so secure, but he will take heed least he
fall: and preferres an humble fear, before a presumptuous confidence. He makes
conscience of small sins, least they should prove wedges to greater. When he is
tempted to evil, the fear of God keeps him innocent. And it is always in
his mind, that God sees all things, and is ever beholding him. He will
neither deny, nor deminish, nor justitie his sin; nor shift it off to others.
If he have fallen into an evil, he will beware of doing it the second time:
well knowing that there is no laying hold of the Promises, without making
conscience, and obeying the Precepts. He will not mock his admonisher, scoff
at the means to be saved; nor make himself merry with his own Damnation as
the desperately wicked do. He turns not his back upon any truth, nor flies
from any instruction; he hates not the light: yea he loves that Minister best,
that most makes manifest the secrets of his heart; as knowing that God is in
him of a truth. He will not refuse a Pardon, because he dislikes the Messenger.
Indeed he least regards those Ministers, that the world admires: as well
weighing what St. John says, 1 John 4. They are of the world, therefore speak
they of the world, and the world hears them: we are of God, he that knows
God hears us; he that is not of God hears not us: hereby know we the Spirit
of truth, and the spirit of error, ver. 5.6. He is faithful to his friend;
for his love extends to his soul: he will speak of his faults to his face, of
his virtues behind his back. The deep, and devilish plots of wicked
Polliticians; never enter into his thoughts: because the fear of God keeps
them out. Or if they offer to intrude themselves; they have not the least
admittance: for he (so sarre forth as he can) refraines all dispute with sin,
Satan, or his instruments. He is no Health-drinker; for he abhors Drunkenness,
as the root of all evil, and rot of all good: and scorns the reputation of
good fellowship. He is none of those that Peter speaks of; who have eyes full
of Adultery, and that cannot cease to sin: that gaze upon every fair face,
and lust after every beautiful woman. He will not be caught, nor yield to the
embraces of an Harlot; though her lips drop like an Hony-combe, and her mouth
be smoother then Oil; though she offers her self in the streets, and lies
in wait for him at every corner. Yea he is wise enough to consider, that it may
not be a woman, but the Devil in the likeness of a woman as some have thus
been cheated.

11.. So you have (in part) seen; how he loves, and seares, and serves the
Lord; and seeks his glory, and the good of others: but (which is very
observeable) shall I show you how the Lord blesses him, in every thing he
takes in hand, or that does befall him? I pray observe the severalls, and then
if you be not yet a Believer, you will neglect no means, endeavor, or
opportunity to obtain such a blessed condition; the particulars are many, i will
mention a few only. First if he be in prosperity, as he shall be sure to have
plenty of all outward things; if God sees it would be good for him: so that he
shall lend to others, but shall not borrow himself. He will be accordingly
thankful, and as God blesses him more or less, so will he do good; and the
more rich, the more rich will he be in good works, and the more ready to
distribute, and communicate. For he is pitiful, and ready to show mercy where
is need; and to defend, rescue, and deliver the oppressed, out of the hands of
their enemies, and oppressors; if he have power, and opportunity to do it. And
by reason of his bountifulness to the poor, he becomes more rich; so that
he is not more ready to pray, for blessings in his want: then he is to give
thanks for them, being obtained. And be he never so rich; he is not high
minded: neither does he trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God. For
in his prosperity he forgets not his former low estate; but is ever
meditating upon, and admiring the Lords goodness toward him. Yea he sets a
Memorandum upon every remarkable mercy, that he may not forget it: and admires
that God should set his delight, and love upon him; and chose him above many
others; and this makes him strive to surpass others in his love, and service
to God again. Whereas unbeleevers, when they are waxed fat with the good
blessings of God; they will spurn with the heel, and forsake God that made
them: not once regarding the strong God of their salvation; but provoke him
with strange gods, and other abominations: but it fares not so with the
Believer; neither does he so requite the Lord. And as he is thankful to the
Author, so likewise to any that he shall make isntrumental for his good:
thinking himself bound to remember, and requite good turns.

12.. Secondly, if he falls into adversity, or any kind of distress; he
knows it is sent of the Lord in love, and to do him good, and to give him
occasion of rejoicing afterward. He well considers, that scarf any thing more
proves us his, then his stripes: that stripes from the Almighty, are so far
from arguing his displeasure, that contrarily there are few better tokens, and
pledges of his adoption and love: and that they are bastards, and not sons
who are without correction. And so it is, that as many as God loves, he rebukes
and chastens. And as it is sent for his good, so it does him good: crosses in
his estate, diseases in his body, maladies in his mind, are medicines to his
soul: the impairing of the one, is the repairing of the other. His sin dies
with his fame, or with his health, or with his peace, or with his outward
estate. Yea it both lessons his sins, and increases his graces: for God sends
him affliction both for his instruction, and reformation, to scour away the
rust of corruption, and to try the truth of his sanctification; for the
increase of his patience, and the exercise of his faith, and the improvement of
his zeal, and to provoke his importunity, and to double his obligation; to
greaten each other grace, and to augment his glory. Again he inflicts a less
punishment, to avoid a greater: and by smarting in his body, state, or name; he
is saved from smarting in his soul. He is chastned that he may be converted;
not confounded: his worser part to wit his Body, state, or name is impoverisht;
that his better part, that is his soul, may be saved in the day of Judgment.
But see it in some particulars, as first how it makes him humble, and
thankful: for he not only calls to mind his own unworthiness of the least
mercy he still injoyes; and how he has provoked the Giver: (for he is ever
meditating, of what Christ has done, and suffered for him: and how he has
provoked Christ.) But he also compares what he suffers, with what he might have
suffered; arguing thus with himself, he that has taken this from me, might
have taken more: he that afflicts me for a time, could have held me longer; he
that has touched me in part, could have stricken me in whole: he that laid
this upon my body, has power to lay a greater Rod both upon my body and soul,
without doing me the least wrong. And so goes on, I was borne a child of
wrath, and whereas God might have left me in that perishing condition and
chosen others; he has of his free grace adopted me, and left others. And this
makes him cry out, O the depth! as a mercy beyond all expression: saying
further, O my soul, thou have not room enough for thankfulness! And the
truth is, if we could but seriously think upon our deliverance from Hell fire,
it alone would be thought cause enough to make us both patient, and thankful;
though the things we now delight in be taken from us. And sure I am, nothing
can be too much to endure; for those pleasures in Heaven which shall endure for
ever. O that we could keep fast in our memories but these two things! and upon
all occasions make use of them; and consider withal, that the least mercy is
beyond our best merit. And no better remedy for impatience, then to cast up our
receipts, and compare them with our deservings. But secondly, Gods corrections,
are his instructions; his lashes lessons, his scourges schoolmasters, his
chastisements advertisements to him; by feeling of smart he learnes to decline
the cause. Yea, this has taught him to fly from the works of darkness at a
great distance: and to consider as well the bitterness of what will follow, as
the sweetness of a momentary pleasure; and so cleared his sight, that he can
now discern sin in all he thinks, and speaks, and does; for he is ever
bewailing his wants, and weaknesses; the hardness of his heart, want of faith,
etc. Thirdly, it abundantly increases his joy, and comfort: for admit Satan,
and the world should deprive him of all outward comforts at once: yet God at
the same time, will supply the want of these; with comforts far surpassing,
and transcending them: as first, the assurance of the pardon of sin alone, is
able to clear all storms of the mind: it teaches misery, as sickness,
poverty, famine, imprisonment, infamy, etc. even to laugh; for then let death
happen, it matters not; when a Malefactor has sued out his pardon, let the
Assizes come when they will, the sooner the better. But to this is added the
peace of conscience, the marrow of all comforts; otherwise called, the peace of
God, which passes all understanding, and surpasses all commending; for never
did man find pleasure upon earth, like the sweet testimony of an appeased
conscience, reconciled unto God, cleansed by the blood of the Lamb, and
quieted by the presence of the Holy Ghost. As the Martyrs felt, who even clapped
their hands for joy in the midst of the flames; and were even ravished, before
they were permitted to dye: so great, and so passing all expressing is the
peace and comfort of a good conscience. Again, thirdly, affliction brings
with it the company of God himself; I will be with you in tribulation, says
God, Psalm. 91.15. As when those three were cast into the fiery Furnace, Dan. 3.
there was presently a fourth came to bear them company, and that was God
himself, ver. 23. to 27. and his presence makes any condition comfortable were
a man even in Hell it self. See more, Acts 13.52. And as his sufferings
abound, so his consolation also abounds, 2 Cor. 1.5. Indeed the unbeleever
laughs more, but that laughter is only the hypocrisy of mirth: they rejoice
in the face only, and not in the heart: nor can it be solid comfort, except it
has his issue from a good conscience; whereas Gods Word teaches, and a good
conscience finds, that even the tears of those that pray, are sweeter then
the joys of the Theater. But this is not all, for according to the
tribulations laid upon him, and borne by him; shall the retribution of glory be
proportioned. I might go on and show how it makes him pitiful, and
compassionate to others: evils has taught him to bemone all that affliction
makes to groan; and sundry the like which I may not here stand upon. And this
is enough to show, that affliction in general makes much for his advantage;
now see how he is a great gainer by each particular cross: As

13.. First, let him fall into poverty, or have his goods and lands confiscate,
this shall not hurt but do him good also: for he will not by sin releeve his
wants: poverty shall not constrain him to steal. He will not tell a lie ( God
assisting him) though you would give him an house full of gold. Whereas let
unbeleevers fall into the like condition, that they may maintain themselves;
they will lie, deceive, steal, prostitute their chastity, sell their
consciences, and what not. Nor will he murmr, or repine against his Maker;
but bear it patiently and cheerfully: whereas unbeleevers will not only
murmr, and grievously complain: but if God do not answer them in every
thing, they will take pleasure in nothing: yea they will slight all his
blessings, because in one thing he crosses them. And as he will not be the
worse, so he will be much the better for it: for as he grows poor in
temporalls, he will grow rich in spiritualls: his wants kill his wantonness,
his poverty checks his pride, etc. It shall stir him up to prayer, weane him
from the love of the world, approve his sincerity, increase his faith,
spiritual wisdom, patience, and the like; so that let his enemies take all,
so long as they cannot take Christ, and Gods fatherly providence from him; he
is well enough. But that is not all, for whatsoever he parts withal, be it
House, or Land, or any thing else; it is but as seed cast into the ground: for
he shall receive for it an hundredth fold more even in this world; and in the
world to come life everlasting, Mark 10.29.30. But

14.. Secondly, let him be cast into Prison and Bonds, God will do him good by
this also; even the Prison shall prove a means of his spiritual enlargement,
and he shall more freely enjoy the presence of his God. It shall make him with
Paul, and Sylas, sing Psalms for joy at midnight; yea, he shall with that
Seottish King in Mortimers hole, learn more of Christ in a short time, then
abroad he could in many years. And lastly, it shall teach him for ever after,
to remember them that are in Bonds, as if he were bound with them; and them
which suffer adversity, as if he suffered the same things with them.

15.. Thirdly, let his enemies slander him, God will clear his innocence; let
them curse him, the Lord will do him good even for their cursing; let them
despise and disparage him, the Lord will so much the more honor him before the
people: yea, the same men that formerly slighted, and rejected him, shall be
forced to seek and sue unto him. Let an enemy scoff at him for a fault, he
will be the better for it to his dying day. His very scoffs bring him both to
the knowledge, and likewise to the amendment of his faults. His being slighted
shall quell his ambition, and vain glory; and likewise exercise and improve
his other graces. In fine, his enemies by their evil tongues shall beget in
him a good, and holy life.

16.. Fourthly, let there be never so many plots laid to destroy him, he is in
perpetual safety; for the Lord not only gives his Angels a charge over him,
to keep him in all his ways: but himself is ever at hand to deliver him, and
keep him as the apple of his eye; so that all his enemies are not able to do
him hurt, for God is his help, and strength, and deliverer; yea, God by his
providence disposes of things so, that what in appearance, and what they
contrived to be the means of his hurt, turns to his great good; and what they
intended for his destruction, becomes the only means of his preservation.
Again, the Lord is more specially present with him, when he is in the greatest
danger; that he may fight for him against his enemies, and give him victory
over them; that he may sustain him when he faints, and crown him when he
overcomes; that he may be exact in taking notice of his sufferings, count his
wanderings, put his tears into his bottle, and enter all into his Register.
Nor is the Believer more patient to put up wrongs, then God is ready to revenge
them, and right him; and the reason is, Christ takes what is done to him, or
any one of his members, as done to himself. And indeed he that despises,
traduceth, or any way wrongs him for his goodness; his envy strikes at the
Image of God in him; by whose Spirit he both speaks, and acts. And to murmr
against any of Gods Messengers, (as thou art apt enough to do) is to murmr
against God himself that sent them; take notice of this, you that carry an
aching tooth against every godly man you know. Neither shall Sorcery, or
Witchcraft have the least power to do him hurt. In a word, there cannot so
much as an hair fall from his head without the special appointment of his
heavenly Father, who will suffer nothing to befall him, but what shall make for
his servants benefit, and his own glory; for admit God gives his enemy leave,
and power to kill him; he shall not hurt, but pleasure him: as I shall show
when I come unto it.

17.. Fifthly, neither sickness, nor old age can hurt him: his fingers pain
makes him not forget the health of his whole body; one days, or weeks sickness,
makes him not forget many years health. He is not so sensible of a present
distress, nor so ungrateful for favors past; as not to remember many years
enjoyments, more then one weeks misery. Yea, he considers that it is in great
love, that God thus visits him: that he deals mercifully with him, least he
should fall from him and despair; that he beats him, least he should grow
proud, and forget him, and so perish. Besides, he finds by experience, that as
every other affliction rubs off some rust, melts off some dross, strains out
some corruption, etc. so also that sickness cuts the very throat of all his
vices; be it pride, lust, covetousness, or the like; for the very worst
Feavour can come, does not more burn up his blood then his lust; and together
with sweating out the surfits of Nature, at the poares of the body; he weeps
out the sinful corruption of his nature, at the poares of his conscience. And
indeed God scourges his flesh, to this end only, that his spirit may be saved
in the day of Jesus Christ. And the like of old age; his soul waxes, as his
body waineth, and he is wisest to prescribe, when his bones and sinews are
weakest to execute.

18.. Sixthly, suppose he is in distress of conscience, and at the very brinke
of despair, expecting nothing but Hell and Damnation; suppose God hides his
face, and seems to have utterly forsaken him, and to reject his prayers; yea,
suppose the terrors of God fight against him, and the Arrows of the Almighty
stick so fast in him that the venom thereof has drunk up his spirit; so that
in his own apprehension, God is become his mortal enemy, as it fared with
Job, yet all this is for his good, and shall do him good; yea this extreme
severity of God argues favor, for nothing more usual then for God to work
joy out of fear, light out of darkness, and to bring to the Kingdom of
Heaven by the gates of Hell; and thus he deals with his dearest darlings. When
he meant to bless Jacob, he wrestles with him as an adversary, even till he
lamed him; when he meant to prefer Joseph to the Throne, he threw him down
into the Dungeon; and to the Golden chain about his neck, he laded him with
Iron ones about his legs. Nor would Christ cure Lazarus, till after he was
dead, buried, and stunke again: no question to teach us, that we must be cast
down by the Law, before we can be raised up by the Gospel; and become fools,
before we can be truly wise. Nor has he cause to fear, be his case never so
desperate; for God will measure his patience, and make it proportionable to his
suffering; and equal his strength to his temptations: his grace shall be
sufficient for him at the least, 2 Cor. 12.9. Phil. 1.29. and he that made the
Vessel, knows her burden; and how to ballast her. The Bush, which was a tipe
of the Church consumed not, all the while it burned with fire, because God was
in the midst of it. The Anchor lies deep, and is not seen: yet is the stay
of all. The Bladder blown, may float upon the flood; but cannot sink, nor
stick in filthy mud. Sin, Satan, and the world may disturb him, but they can
never destroy him: his head Christ being above, he cannot be drowned; there can
be no disjunction, unless he could be plucked from his arms that is Almighty:
for his life is hid, with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. Besides, if he suffers much,
it shall not be long; if he suffers long, it shall not be much; if his sorrows
be skarpe, they are the shorter. Grievous and sore trialls last but for a
season, 1 Pet. 1.6. a little while, John 16.16. yea but a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17.
For a moment in mine anger says God, I hid my face from thee, for a little
season: but with everlasting mercy, have I had compassion on thee, Isay 54.8.
weeping may abide for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30.5. And
it is ever seen, that his joy both succeeds, and exceeds his sorrow: that his
sadness ends in gladness, and his sorrow in singing. And the more grievous
his exigent, the more glorious his advancement: But the last (which is the
best) gain of all: he grows more holy then ever, for like the Vine he
brings forth the more, and better fruit for paring, and proyning and
bleeding: and though his outward man perish, yet his inward man is renewed
daily; even as a Lamb is much more lively, and nimble for shearing; these very
tempestuous showers, bring forth Spiritual flowers, and herbs in abundance.

19.. Seventhly, let Judgments be inflicted upon the whole Land: they shall
not touch him, nor his family; he shall be singled out for mercy: Or if they
do, they shall be so sanctified, that they shall rather pleasure then hurt
him. As if the Corn be cut down with the weeds, the one shall be carried into
Gods Barn as Lazarus was, the other cast into the fire like Dives; yea, every
stroke in the Judgment shall be as a Monitor, and serve as a Sermon to him:
when he sees another struck, he takes warning. For he will be put unto duty,
even by the shadow of the wande.

20.. Eighthly, the strictest and severest Laws if they be not contrary to
Gods Law, have not power to smite him: for he does those things unbidden, which
others can scarce do being compelled. Yea, the Law protects him against his
enemies, who fear the Jayle more then they fear Hell; and stand more upon
their silver, or their sides smarting then upon their souls. Good Magistratas
also, are the breath of his nostrills, and protect him: while they take
vengeance on them that do ill. Yea they are the Ministers of God for his
wealth, and bound to see him righted; when he receives wrong in his person,
goods, or good name.

21.. Ninthly, his very sins, and infirmities by Gods grace do work his
good; and he is by much the better for them: for he will from hence grow more
holy. Yea, he gains strength by every fall: for hence issues deeper
humiliation, stronger hatred of sin, fresh indignation against himself, more
experience of his hearts deceitfulness, renewed resolutions until sin be
brought under: it makes him more earnest with God by prayer, to keep a more
careful watch over himself; to pity others more, and censure them less when
they offend, or are over-taken: to rest wholly upon the assistance of Gods
Spirit; and to ascribe all glory to him; of whom whatsoever he has he holds.
True, his offending God brings much misery upon him: and God seems to have
left him, and to reject his prayers and humiliation: but at length, and so
soon as the poor soul cease to do evil, and learnes to do well: the
Lord repents him of the evil; and not only delivers him, but returns with
the greater interest of joy and felicity. Indeed the Lord lets him know what it
is to lose his favor, and makes him tugg hard by prayer, and to persevere a
long time in knocking, and asking: but at length he will be sure to give him
what he desires, or that which is better for him; for the prayer of faith, from
the knees of humility, and a broken heart will conquer even the Conqueror.
Indeed, the case may be such that he cannot pray, or not to purpose; as in time
of sickness, by reason of the extremity of pain: but then he can send to the
Congregations, and entreat them to pray for him. Besides, all his former
prayers, and meditations do serve to aid him in his last straits; and meet
together in the center of his extremity: yielding though not sensible relief,
yet secret benefit to his soul. Yea (which is best of all) he has the benefit
of Christ's intercession in Heaven, and of the prayers of all the Saints on
earth.

22.. Tenthly, the malice of Satan, shall make much for his good: for if Satan
be sent to buffet him, as he did Paul; or to winnow him, as he would have done
Peter; it is that he may not be exalted: his malice shall prove the occasion of
much good to him, as it did to the incestious Corinthian; or if God lets him
loose upon him, as he did upon Job: it shall but advance the glory of God,
manifest this Beleevets patience, occasion his own shame, etc. so the Devil
shall be over-shot in his own Bow, and wounded with his own Weapon. And so it
is, that to all whom God has any interest in, this Scorpion shall prove a
Medecin against the sting of the Scorpion. For though he aim at despair, and
destruction; yet God aims at humiliation, and conversion; yea at consolation,
and salvation: and when the Sinner is sufficiently humbled, Satan shall be
cashiered? that Horse-leach shall be taken off, when he has sufficiently
abated the viscous and superfluous blood; so that he shall be healed by
wounding, exalted by humbling; Satan shall help him to the destruction of his
flesh, (his corruption) and the edification of his soul.

23.. Eleventhly, Death, the last and strongest enemy of all, shall do him the
greatest good of all. He may be killed, but he cannot be hurt, nor conquered:
for even Death, that Fiend is to him a friend: like the Red Sea to the
Israelites, that put them over to the Land of Promise; whiles it drowned their
enemies. It is his bridge from woe to glory, for dying he sleeps, and sleeping
he rests from all the travailes of a toylesome life, to live in joy, and bliss
for evermore. It is to him the end of all sorrows, and the beginning of his
everlasting joys. The cessation of all trouble, a supersedias for all
diseases, the extinction of sin, the deliverance from enemies, a rescue from
Satan, the quiet rest of the body, and infranchisement of the soul.

24.. Thus as the unbeleever, and disobedient is cursed in every thing, and
where ever he goes, and in whatsoever he does: cursed in the City, and cursed
also in the Field; cursed in the fruit of his body, and in the fruit of his
ground, and in the fruit of his Cattle: cursed when he comes in, and cursed
also when he goes out: cursed in this life, and cursed in the life to come; as
is at large expressed, Deuteronomy. 28. So the Believer, that obeyes the voice of the
Lord, shall be blessed in every thing he does; where ever he goes, and in
whatsoever befalls him. As God promises in the former part of the same
Chapter, and as I have proved in the eleaven foregoing Sections. Yea, God will
bless all that belong unto him, for his Children, and posterity, yea many
generations after him shall fare the better for his sake: yea the very place
where he dwells, perhaps the whole Kingdom he lives in. Where as many, yea
multitudes, even an whole Army; yea his Childrens Children unto the third and
fourth generation; far the worse for a wicked man- and an unbeleever.
Besides, his prayers shall profit many: for he is more prevalent with God, to
take away a Judgment from a People, or a Nation, then a thousand others. And
he counts it a sin to cease praying for his greatest, and most malicious
enemies; though they like fools, would (if they durst, or were permitted) cut
him off: and all the race of Gods people; which is as if one with his hatchet
should cut off the bough of a Tree upon which he stands. For they are
beholding to Believers, for their very lives: yea it is for their sakes, and
because the number of Christ's Church is not yet accomplished, that they are out
of Hell. But to go on, as all things (viz.) poverty, imprisonment, slander,
persecution, sickness, death, temporal Judgments, spiritual dissertions,
yea even sin, and Satan himself) shall turn together for the best unto
those that love God, as you have seen. So all things shall turn together for
the worst unto them that hate God; as all unbeleevers do, Romans 1.30. John
15.18. even the mercy of God, and the means of grace, shall prove their bane,
and inhance their damnation; yea Christ himself, that only summum bonum, who
is a Savior to all believers, shall be a just revenger to all unbeleevers: and
bid the one, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels: while he shall say unto the other, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc. Which being so, how does it concern all, to
see that they are Believers? Would thou then have it fare so with thee?
Would thou have thy very poisons turned into cordialls? thy terrors, changed
into pleasures? and thy greatest evils made beneficial unto thee? Would
thou be loosed from the chains of thy sins, and delivered from the chains
of plagues? Would thou have the same Corist, with his precious Blood to free
thee, that shall with his word sentence others? As who would not, except Satan
has strangely bewitched him? If thou would, I say, then learn of this
Believer, imitate him in what has been declared, and what I shall further
rehearse touching his knowledge, belief, and life; for I have only brake the
thread of my Discourse, to let in this use in way of a Parenthasis, which
otherwise coming too late must have been left out; and now I return to finish
or complete the foregoing Character, for thereunto may be added as follows.

25.. He loves, and fears, and believes, and serves the Lord, and seeks his
glory, and the good of others in every thing; at least he desires, and
endeavors so to do. He will omit no opportunity of doing good, nor do evil
though he has opportunity. He remembers his vow in Baptism, and is careful
to perform what he then promised: and so far as he comes short of his duty,
so far forth he will be humbled. He tempts not to evil, but draws all he
can to goodness. He will behave himself honestly, and unblameably before
those among whom he lives: that he may not dishonor God, nor offend either
those that are within, or those that are without. He will never suffer base
thoughts of God, to find harbor in his heart deal he never so harshly with
him; being more prone to complain of his sin, then of his punishment: for he
will turn his eyes inward, and read his sin in his punishment; and instead
of murmuring for the few things he wants, be thankful for the many things he
enjoyes. Whereas others that are unbeleevers, will do something for God, when
it makes for their own ends, he will suffer for him; and hold out in his
works where Satan dwells, and keeps his throne. And what they do for fear of
the Law, he does for love of the Gospel. As who are Believer, indeed, is only
known where the power of godliness is in contempt; where a Christian in name
only, will scoff at a Christian indeed: for in such times, many will
superstitiously adore the Crucifix; that are enemies to the Cross of Christ:
and worship the dead Saints in a cold profession; while they worry he living,
in a cruel persecution For Christ is stoned by many that are called
Christians; though no otherwise then the Heathen Images are called gods. But
the Believer, as he will not go on in an evil way, though flattered by never so
good success: so he will not be discouraged in a good way; though he meets
with ill success because he is more careful to please God then men Nature is
like glass bright but brittle: the resolved Christian like Gold; which if we
rub it, or beat it, or melt it: it will endure the Teast, the touch, the
hammer, and still shine more orient A true believer having once acknowledged
the way of righteousness: will not after turn from the holy Commandment. Like
the Dog that returns to his vomit, or the Sow that was washed to her wallowing
in the mire. Again, he will not come to his ends by unlawful means, he
seeks not to Witches, Wizards, or South-sayers in his distress; or to be
resolved of his doubts: but to Gods Word, and Ministers, and to God himself by
prayer; and in praying to him, he desires not outward blessings so much as Gods
blessing upon them: he desires not so much food, and raiment; as that God will
give them power to nourish, warm, and comfort him; knowing that except that be
granted, they cannot of themselves do it. And so of riches, wisdom, etc. He
desires not so much a great estate, as a contended mind. He desires not
riches, that he may lay it out on his pleasures; yea he knows that God will
not give i^ he abuse his gifts And as he prays for Gods blessing, so he
neglect not to use the means. When he has attained his end or receives any
mercy, whether it be riches, or o her gifts, victory or the like: he ascribes
not the praise thereof to his wisdom, or industry but wholly and only to the
free mercy of God in Christ. Now for conclusion of this point, would thou
know whether thou art a Believer or no? this will infallibly inform thee: thy
faith in the Commands will breed obedience, in the threatenings fear, in the
promises comfort.

Here ends the new inserted matter.

Errata.

Page 22. line 30. for Priests, read Princes. line 9. in page E, for deing
right being, line 36. cross out the full point.

. 38. He is zealous to admonish, reclaim, and reduce such as go astray; and to
save those among whom he lives, out of duty and thankfulness to God, and his
Redeemer, and out of love to them.

. 39. He reformes his family, and sets up Gods Worship therein, performing the
duties of Prayer, reading, repeating, etc. and instructing his children and
servants.

. 40. He makes conscience of sanctifying the Sabbath, and sees that all under
him do the same: He will not give liberty to his servants upon the Lords day,
to do what they list.

. 41. He is hated of the world for goodness, and suffers some way for Christ; at
least, he is evil spoken of for well doing, and rejoices therein, or in
whatsoever he suffers; well considering, that all his sufferings in this life
are not worthy that glory he shall enjoy in the next.

. 42. He is just and upright in his dealings, and desires to pay every one his
due; he will not borrow without care to pay again, as do the wicked, for
which they are branded by the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 37.21. He will not detain
wages, or work men's hire, (a crying sin that this City groans under) He is
faithful to such as put him in trust: if a servant, he perloynes not; nor
deceives in going to market; nor did ever any but hipocrite pretend care of
piety toward God, and yet be unmercifull, and unjust to men; yea, it is Devil
like, and double damnation; to pretend Piety, and intend Villainy, Matthew. 23.
And indeed, our faith in Christ is best seen in our faithfulness to men; our
invisible belief by our visible life. O that all hypocritical professors
would try themselves by this touchstone, and consequently either he what they
seem (real Christians) or seem as they are (none of Christ's) so should they
not shame Religion by professing it; whereas now, they make the way of truth
evil spoken of; yea, for their sakes the name of goodness is blasphemed all
the day long, and an ill report raised upon them that serve God in truth; yea,
they have made our savor to stink in the eyes of all the people, and put a
Sword into the hands of profane men to slay us; as woeful experience shows;
for by reason of such, how do the Devil and his Limbs triumph over the
religious; yea, the Saints are not only reproached, the truth disgraced, and
Religion it self scandalized; but this gives occasion to others to blaspheame
God, and to doubt whether all Divinity be not mere Policy, and the Scriptures
a Fable, whereby millions are so hardened, that they even protest against their
own conversion; which being so, if you either love God or his people, if you
either care for other men's souls, or your own, remove this stumbling block,
and no longer deceive your selves; for though he that is not a true Christian
may be just, yet he that is not just cannot possibly be a true Christian.

. 43. He will first labor to inform, and then hearken to, and obey the voice
of conscience together with the motions of Gods Spirit; consider another case
by his own, and in a good measure do to all others as he would have others do
by him.

. 44. And as he is just in getting, so he is neither profuse in spending, nor
backward (according to his ability) in releeving Christ's members for his sake,
but will give back a considerable part of all he has to God; and acknowledge,
that he is only a Steward (not an Owner) of what he does possess.

. 45. He denies ungodliness and worldly lusts, and lives soberly and chastely
in this present world, keeping the members of his body holy; for if he has not
the gist of continency, he will marry; his speech is not lewd, or obscene, nor
uses he any lascivious behavior, nor does he take liberty to gaze upon
beautiful women.

. 46. He is neither Drunkard nor Glutton, he neither tarries long at the Wine,
nor goes often to it, as is the custom of too many; indeed, whether they be
Christians or no I cannot easily be satified.

. 47. It is not his manner to curse be he never so much provoked, neither will
he take the name of God in vain, but reverently use his titles in his talk;
much less will he swear by his Name, except upon urgent occasion, and being
lawfully called to it before a Magistrate; least of all dare he swear by, or
invocate that which is no god; namely, by any Creature, or Idol, which carnal
men ignorantly call petty oaths: No, but as he will not swear, so he fears
an Oath.

. 48. He will speak the truth from his heart, and not willingly and
premeditately either lie, or equivocate, much less will he allow himself in
it, or seek to defend it; for such as will do so, have not as yet past the
second Birth.

. 49. In bearing witness he will speak the whole truth impartially, without
fearing or favoring either Party; that is, as well what makes for the
Defendant, though an enemy, as for the Plaintiff being his friend, or Master;
neither will he conceal a wicked device, when by revealing the same it may be
prevented.

. 50 If a Magistrate, he will not be partial in any cause, nor will he either
for fear or favor do any thing against the truth; or give sentence against
his Conscience, or use his power in favor of the wicked; but be just in
showing mercy, severe to the evil, cherishing and protecting the good.

. 51. He is not implacable, nor will he revenge himself on an enemy, though he
has power in his hand to do it; but shut his ears and heart in this, and
other cases against Satan's temptations; yea, upon the least change, he can
forgive him as heartily as he defires God should forgive him, yea, he loves and
wishes well, and can willingly do good to them that do evil to him; even
desiring his greatest enemies conversion, together with his prosperity. He
rejoices not at another fall, but is grieved both for their sins and
miseries; nor is he grieved at any ones good, especially at his gifts, and the
graces of Gods Spirit in him.

. 52. He has learnt (from Gods dealing with him) to be merciful, as his
heavenly Father is merciful, even to his Beast. Nor do any that resemble God,
or Christ, (but Satan and Antichrist, as partaking of the Devils nature) sport
themselves in Beare-baiting, Dog, or Cock-fighting, hunting of tame Ducks,
and the like; or if so, they are not well verst in Christianity; as for such as
are cruel to their servants, I marvel how they can expect that their master
in Heaven should be merciful to them; and certainly, should they be deprived
from ever having the help or benefit of servants, (as good Queen Elizabeth
once served a Butcher and his Wife, for their cruelty to a poor Girl they
kept) they would in a short time learn to be both wiser and better.

. 53. Whereas many love peace, but regard not truth; and others are all for
truth, without caring for peace: he together with truth loves, and studies, and
labors to have a lawful peace with all men, and so seeks it, that he will
suffer rather then do wrong; and to avoid offense, he will be overruled in
indifferent things: As Christ gave him an example, when he paid Pole Money.

. 54. He is not glad of pretenses against obeying the Magistrates command, but
will obey authority as the ordinance of God; and be subject more out of
conscience then fear, as placed by God over him; and to all their Laws, if
they cross not Gods Law: for otherwise he will lose his liberty: part with the
right hand of profit, and the right eye of pleasure; yea, lose his life rather
then a good conscience, and sin against God; for he will not disobey God, to
obey great ones.

. 55. He is not the worse, or prouder for prosperity, or outward blestings, but
the better, and more thankful for them; he is bettered also by affliction, and
makes a gain of his losses; and being in distress as he prays for
deliverance, so he is accordingly thankful when delivered; yea, he will make
vows, and so promise amendment, that he is as careful to perform the same
when he is delivered, which a wicked man never does.

. 56. He seeks God in all he does, and acknowledges him in all he either
receives or suffers; he observes the several passages of his Providence,
acacknowledging all things to be ordered thereby, and that it extends to the
least hair on his head; has a comfortable experience of his disposing all, to
work for the best unto him; admires the same, and his goodness therein, and
is accordingly thankful for it; yea, he keeps a Record, or Register of Gods
special mercies and deliverances, and of his own often and great
provocations, and not seldom meditates thereon; neither does he murmr when
he wants any thing, as most of our ignorant poor do, whose whole life,
language, and religion is naught elfe but a continued act of muttering and
murmuring; perhaps they want many things for their bodies, because they slight
whatsoever is offered to their souls; and because God the Giver is not in all
their thoughts except to blaspheame him, and to spend his Day in the Devils
service, for they never mind how God has appointed it his Market Day for
their souls; now these brutish Animals are very sensible if they want never so
little, and for that they murmr; but they enjoy millions of mercies which
they never cordially give thanks for; and I wish they were often put in mind
how many thousand Israelites were destroyed in the Wilderness, only for that
grievous sin of murmuring, though their straites and extreamities were far
greater; but as good blow in the dust as speak to these; and as they have no
reason, so they will hear none, only such as truly fear God know that he
owes them nothing; yea, what ever they enjoy on this side Hell, they think
themselves unworthy of it.

57. He is not rashly censorious, but judges of things, actions, and persons,
(not as they are in the worlds repure, but) as they are in Gods account, and as
he in his Word allows or condemns them; he censures none for things
indifferent; but you must be able to allege the violation of some Law: much
less will he mock or despise a man for his poverty, or any natural defect;
as for judging another thoughts to be evil when he cannot tax his life, or
making ill constructions of good actions, or sleighting and disparaging them,
or thinking the vorse of a man for having of a tender conscience, he utterly
abhorres. He is not easily suspicions without just cause, neither will he
willingly wrest men's words, or misconster their meanings, but take their
sayings and doings in the best sense. He will not hearken to tale-beaters, nor
is he apt to believe an evil report without good ground; neither will he
condemn a man without hearing him speak. He never determines of any ones
final estate be he never so wicked, well knowing, that God may change his
heart in a moment; neither will he conclude one to be a wicked man, or an
hypocrite for appearances, or moates, or some sudden eruptions, or common
infirmities, or for sins before conversion, or for this or that single act of
gross impiety; when the maine tenor and course of his life besides is a
continual current of honesty and goodness; though he may suspend his good
opinion in case of some unexpected misdemeanour, or for lesser evils, either
affected or oftea repeated. He is tender hearted, and can bear with the
infirmities of the weak, and is ready to cherish them that are cast down. He
does not expect a full growth of Grace in the Cradle of a man's conversion; yea,
he yields the best Christians (in this their state of imperfection) their
graynes of allowance, as our Savior did to his Apostles.

. 58. He is not of a reprobate judgment in thinking good evil, and evil
good; neither has he a base esteem of Gods people, and their ways, as it
fares with our scoffing adversaries, who look upon zeal and holiness with
the Devils spectacles; nor so far from being holy himself that he hates
holiness in others, or so stupidly sottish as the rude rabble; who will
profess that they love Christ, yet hate all such as any way resemble him. He
will take heed of persecuting the godly either with hand or tongue; and as he
will not condemn the just, so he will not justify the wicked, nor favor them.

. 59. He rejoices when the righteous are exalted, and grieves when the wicked
bear rule. He is no enemy to reformation, but earnestly desires the same, and
furthers it all he can.

. 60. He is so far from taking offense when none is given, that he will not
be offended when offenses come; as at the scandalous lives of Professors, or at
the multitude of Heresies that are daily broached though they grieve his very
soul; but when strange things happen, he makes a wholesome construction thereof.

. 61. He cannot hear God blasphemed or dishonored without being moved
thereat, yea, he is as heartily vexed for any dishonor done to him, as for any
disgrace offered to himself. He has an holy care and endeavor in all places
and companies, to walk so as he may win glory to God, honor his profession,
and give no offense or occasion to the enemies of God to speak evil of him;
he acknowledges all good to come from God, and that all glory is to be given
to him; and accordingly endeavors to honor and serve him with his riches,
wisdom, and what other gifts or abilities he has; neither is he dumb in
publishing his praise, nor backward to justify him in his judgments. He will
not worship an Image, or God in the Image; he seldom sells things tending to
Idolatry, or any other sin, or uses lots in sporting. He fears God, and
fears sin, and this dispelleth in him all other false, fond, and foolish
fears, which others that are void of the fear of God, are grievously and
perpetually perplexed withal; as namely, he fears not that his serving of God
will prove his undoing, he neither fears nor observes the flying of Fowls the
signs of Heaven, the sight of a live Snake, the crossing of an Hare, the
croaking of a Raven, the scritching of an Owl, the howling of a Dog, the
dreaming of Gardens, green Rushes, or dead friends; to eat an Egg in Lent, or
flesh on a Friday never racks his Conscience; whether the Crow cries even or
odd in a morning, or whether he leaves the Cross on his right or left hand as
he goes; whether it be Childermas Day or not, when he takes a Journey, or
undertakes any business, or whether the Salt-seller falls from or toward him,
it is all one to him; nor does stumbling at a threshold presage any evil to
him at all; he never crosses his breast, nor sprinckles his fate when he is to
go abroad, nor nails Horse-shooes at his door, and yet speeds never the
worse; neither old Wives, nor Stars are his Counselors; a Night-spell is
none of his guide, nor Charms his Physician; Erra Pater is no part of his
Creed; neither wears he Ammulets, or Paraselsian Characters about his neck,
you shall never hear him talk of luckey handsell, and Fortune to him is an
ass; Buggs never fright him, nor Fairies pinch him, neither will he put
confidence in any such superstitious and devilish sopperies, as the ignorant
and superstitious do; no, he will not be beholding to the King of Hell for a
shooe-tye.

. 62. He seeks the good, and to preserve the peace of the place he lives in,
and can comfort himself with this, that in his very Calling and public
employments, his aim and endeavor is not more at profit or credit then at the
glory of God, and good of others; he has an humble and public spirit,
delights in doing good offices, and is active to pleasure others, and can make
him self a servant to all that stand in need of him.

. 63. Nor is he partial in his obedience, but universal, making conscience of
every duty, and all that God commands; the first Table as well as the second,
and the second as well as the first; framing his will to Gods Will in every
thing, even laboring to be perfect, and holy, as his Father in Heaven is; and
to imitate Christ, be conformed to his likeness, and to be holy as he was in
all parts of his conversation; and that at all times, and in all companies, as
conscientious alone and in private, where God only sees him, as if his
greatest enemy, or all the world did behold him; he has a spirit without
guile, and is more desirous to be good then so accounted, and more seeks the
power of godliness then the show of it; and therefore keeps a narrower watch
over his very thoughts then any other can do over his actions; and is
accordingly grieved for them. He makes conscience of the smallest things
required or forbidden in the Word; and is as careful to shun the very
occasions of sin, or least appearances, or first motions of sin as actual
sin it self; not daring to gratify Satan in committing the least sin, or
neglect God in omitting the smallest precept.

. 64. He does not serve God by the precepts of men, nor fear his displeasure
for breaking their traditions; neither does he think himself sanctified by
outward performances, as do our Formalists and Protestants at large, who stand
more upon circumstance then substance, and upon outward privileges then inward
graces; but he serves God in spirit, according to Christ's Gospel, for he lives
and believes, and hears, and invocates, and hopes, and fears, and loves, and
worships God in such manner as his Word prescribes, without addition or
demination; neither does he follow the examples of the greatest number, or the
greatest men, or the greatest Scholars, because Christ has plainly told him,
That few of either sort (compared with the multitude) shall be saved; of which
small number he strives to be.

. 65. All which he performs with cheerfulness, being ever willing and ready
to do good; and in sincerity and simplicity, with a single heart, without buy
ends, as loving righteousness and mercy, and doing good duties merely out of
love to God and goodness, and because God commands them that he may be
glorified, and others edified thereby; yea he would do what he is able out of
love to Christ, though himself should never have credit not benefit by it
here, nor hereafter; earnestly desiring grace that he might more honor him,
and grieving that he can perform no better service to so good a Master. He
will not (as too many most sordidly do) take liberty to sin, because God is
merciful, and forbeares to execute judgment speedily; or defer his
repentance, because the Thief upon the Cross was heard at the last hour: but
he will even therefore the more fear him because he is merciful; and
therefore be holy, because he is not under the Law, but under grace.

. 66. And lastly, having thus done, and performed his utmost, not to merit by
it, but to express his thankfulness to him that has done, performed, and
suffered so much for him; he confesses himself an unprofitable servant, and
that in all he comes far short of performing his duty; yea, he ackcowledgeth,
that it were just for God eternally to condemn him. Well may he be comforted
by the graces which God has given him, as an earnest penny of those eternal
Mansions in Heaven; but he will not be exalted by them because they are not his
graces, but the Graces of God in him, and wrought by his Spirit: yea, he so
abhorres to attribute or ascribe ought to doing, that he counts his very
righteousness no better then filthy rags, ascribing every good thought, word,
and action which proceeds from him to Free Grace, for he looks back to the
rock out of which he was hewne, and is not only humbled thereby, but forced
with an holy admiration to wonder at the mavelous and extraordinary change
which God has wrought in him, and also instructed to trust only to Christ's
obedience, in whom only our good works are accepted, and for whom alone they
are rewarded. To shut up all, he endeavors so to live as if there were no
Gospel, and so to dye as if there were no Law.

. 67. Only it remains that you look your selves in this glass, and try your
selves by this touchstone; for though others may give a shrewd guess, yet the
Mother knows best whether the Child be like the Father or no; and the signs
of Salvation are to be sought in our selves, as the cause in Jesus Christ; our
Justification is to be proved by the fruits of our Sanctification, and though
faith alone justifies, yet justifying faith is never alone, but ever
accompanied with spiritual graces, the beauties of the soul, and good works
the beauty of graces; yea, they are as inseparable as the root and the sap, the
Sun and its light; and as Fire may be discerned by heat, and life by motion,
so a man's faith may be discerned by the fruits of it. Nor can any one be
deceived except he desires to deceive himself, for every particular man is
either the Child of God, or the Child of the Devil, as Chrysostom has it,
for there is not a mean betwixt them; and there be more differences between
the Children of God and the Children of the Devil, then there are between Men
and Beasts, whereof I have named not a few; for whatsoever you may find the one
(herein set forth) to speak, think, or do, the other does the contrary; and
to have the true Character of an unbeleever you need but read this Character of
a true Believer backward, understand all by the rule of contraries and be
satisfied; I speak this to Naturians only, for the regenerate man knows the
one to be so by what he is, and the other by what he has been; neither is
there one of all these signs or characters but each experienced Christian
finds it in some degree written in his heart, as his conscience can bear me
witness. And would you know whether you belong to Christ? This will inform
you, you will (by help from above) endeavor to bring into captivity every
thought and thing to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. 1 John, 2.4. but so
have not you in the least so long as you love not, or any way oppose the people
of God; for the very first part of conversion is, to love them that love God, 1
John, 3.10. yea in reason, if the Image of God by faith were repaired in thee,
thou could not but be delighted with those that are like thy self. And what
says St. John, He that pretends interest in God, or Christ, and keeps not
his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; 1 John, 2.4. and in
the third Chapter and eighth Verse he affirms plainly, That all wilful
sinners are the Devils servants. And indeed, let men flatter themselves, or
pretend what they will; it cannot be denied but the fruit tells best the name
of the Tree; the conversation above all shows who carries the bridle of the
will, whether God or Satan: and did not men purposely shut their eyes, and stop
their ears, and harden their own hearts, least they should see, and hear,
and so be converted, as our Savior himself speaks, Matthew. 13.15. they could
not but know that the whole Bible beats upon this: It is Saint Paul's
everlasting rule, Rom 6.16. Yea are his servants to whom ye obey. And Saint
Peter's infallible Doctsrine, 2 Pet. 2.19. Of whom a man is overcome, unto him
he is in bondage. And Saint John's, In this are the Children of God known, and
the Children of the Devil; whosoever does not righteousness is not of God,
but of the Devil, 1 John 3.8, 10. And after this manner does our Savior
reason with the Jews, John 8.33. to 48. See then whose commands ye do, Gods,
or Satan's; if Satan's, then says Saint John, Let no man deceive you through
vain words, for he only that does righteousness is righteous, and he that
does unrighteousness is of the Devil, 1 John 3.7, 8. wherefore if thou art a
common Drunkard, or a continual Swearer, or an usual companion of Harlots, or
an accustomary Deceiver, or a frequent slanderer of thy Neighbor, or an open
and common Sabbath-breaker, or can thou boast of sin and mischief, or
defend it? If thou make no conscience of Praying in thy Family; if thou
call evil good, and good evil; if thou hate thy Brother for doing that
which is good, as Caine did Abel; if Ismael-like thou mockest, or Cham-like
thou scoffest at the religious, or usest bitter jests against them, though it
be under the notion of Roundheads, Puritanes, Sectaries, Black-coates; or the
like; if thou raisest slanders of them, or furtherest them being raised; if
thou do rejoice at the secret infirmities of the godly, or open scandalls of
Hypocrites; if thou do carpe and fret against the Word, refusing to hear it,
or withstandest the preaching of it; if being a Minister thou disgrafest or
revilest the godly in thy preaching, so making sad the hearts of the righteous,
or justifyest the wicked, so strengthening them in their evil courses by
preaching unto them peace; if thou have a base esteem of Gods people and their
ways, and think the worse of a man for scrupling small matters; if thou
make Religion a cloak for villainy, if thou do borrow, or run in debt
without care to pay again; if thou delightest in cruelty, if thou take no
care to provide for thine own family; if thou had rather the wicked should
bear rule then the godly; if thou art an enemy to reformation, if thou had
rather disobey God then displease great ones; if thou desire peace without
any respect to truth; if thou do allow thy self in the practice of any
known gross sin, if thou take liberty to sin because God is merciful,
and forbeares to execute judgment speedily; if thou do not believe all
things to be ordered by Gods providence, and in particular acknowledge him in
all thou either receivest or suffer; if thou murmurest when thou want any
thing, without ever thinking of the many things thou have beyond thy desert; if
thou can hear God blasphemed and dishonored, without being moved thereat;
if the scandalous lives of Professors, or the multitude of Heresies that are
daily broached make thee think, and speak evil of the way of truth; if thou
did never see thy self out of measure sinful, as being many ways guilty of
the breach of every of the Commandments in particular, and so in a lost
condition, utterly despayring of all help in thy self, acknowledging that
thou have deserved all the plagues of this life, and of that which is to come;
if thou art not as well troubled for original guilt, for sins of omission,
for the evil which cleaves to thy best works, and for thy very thoughts, as
for thy actual and manifest evil deeds; if thou have made vows, and promised
amendment when the rod was on thy back, but never cared to perform the same
when thou were released; if thou art not industrious after the means of grace;
if thou love not to hear Christ's voice; if thou find not the Word more
quick, and powerful, and sweet, and efficatious then any other writings; if
it, and the spirit going along with it has not brought thee out of darkness
into mavelous light, in comparison of thy former darkness; if thou art
ignorant of the principalls of Religion in the midst of so much light and
means, and can not yield a reason of the hope that is in thee; if thou do
not find a manifest change in thy judgment, affections, and actions from what
they were by nature; if the old man has not changed with the new man; worldly
wisdom with heavenly wisdom, carnal love for spiritual love; servile
fear for christian and filial fear, idle thoughts for holy thoughts, vain
words for holy and wholesome words, fleshly works for works of righteousness,
etc. as if thou were cast into a new mould even hating what thou formerly
lovedst, and loving what thou formerly hatedst; if thou art not ashamed of thy
former conversation; if thou have not been often and grievously assaulted with
fears and doubtings, and often in combat between the flesh and the spirit,
the spirit getting the better; if thou do not more fear the want of grace
then conside in what thou have; if thou art nor jealous lest thy heart should
deceive thee; yea, if thou art not hated of the world, and evil spoken of for
well doing, thou art the Devils servant, and not as yet one of that small
number whom Christ has chosen out of the world to believe in his name; for
these, or any one of these signs sufficiently brand thee for a wicked man; if
you would see it proved undeniably from Gods Word, read my Cure of Misprision,
Sections the 20. and 21.

. 68. But least any weak Christian should think himself unsound, and so none
of Christ's, because he falls short of this description of a true Believer, and
finds wanting in himself, perhaps many of the former signs or evidences
herein set forth; or should be discouraged by reason of his many and great
faylings, together with the weakness of his faith and love, as for the most
part the true Christian is as fearful to entertain a good opinion of
himself, as the false is unwilling to be driven from it; let such an one take
special notice in the first place, that there are three sorts of true and
sound Christians, as the Apostle Saint John makes the distinction, 1 John 2.12,
13. the first sort are babes in Christ, viz. such as are newborn, or but
weakly qualifyed with the graces of Gods Spirit; A second are strong men, as
having the gifts of the Spirit lively, and in power: The third are Fathers,
such as have had long experience in the powerful practice of Christianity, and
been long exercised in all kinds or well doing. This done:

. 69. Secondly let him know, That as God requires no other obedience in the
best then Evangelicall, so he looks not for the same measure and degree of
grace from Babes, and strong men, or from strong men and Fathers, for God
accepts of every man according to the grace he has received, be it more or
lest, 2 Cor. 8.12. as is manifest by that Parable of the Talents, Matthew.
25.20. to 24. yea, what Father or Master will not from his young and newly
weaned Child, or sick and weak servant, accept of the will for the deed? and
shall not God much more, who is both the Father of mercies, and the Author of
mercy and compassion in others? Yes undoubtedly; as let it be granted, that thy
knowledge is still small, thy faith weak, thy charity cold, thy heart dull and
hard, thy good works few and imperfect, and all thy zealous resolutions easily
hindered and quite over-throwne with every small temptation, yet God that
works in us both the will and the work, will accept the will for the work;
and that which is wanting in us Christ will supply with his own
righteousness; he respects not what we can do so much as what we would do,
and that which we would perform and cannot, he esteems it as though it were
performed; thus he takes an heart desirous to repent and believe for a
penitent and believing heart, whereas take away the will and all acts in Gods
sight are equal. Well might I doubt of my salvation says Bradford, feeling
the weakness of my faith, love, hope, etc. if these were the causes of my
salvation, but there is no other cause of it, or of Gods mercy, but his mercy.
Again,

. 70. Thirdly, you are to observe that as Nature so Grace rises by many degrees
to perfection, we grow in grace and saving knowledge, as a child does in
stature and understanding, until we attain to glory, which is grace
perfected; yea, grace in its growth is but like the change of a man's hair from
black to gray, or the growth of a Tree, which is not accomplished in a month,
or a year, but in many years we not perceiving how.

. 71. Fourthly, consider also that the best have their failings, as had
Abraham, Jacob, David, Peter, etc. you have heard of the patience of Job, says
Saint James, and have we not heard also of his fits of impatiency? Yes, but it
pleased God mercifully to over-looke that; and so of Asah, who had diverse, and
those no small faults, yet with one breath does God report both these; the high
places were not removed, and nevertheless Asahs heart was perfect; so our
faylings be not wilful, though they be many and great, yet they cannot hinder
our interest in the promises of God; an honest and sincere heart bears out
many errors in the eye of mercy, God will not see weaknesses where he sees
truth; yea, if we hate our corruptions, and strive against them, they shall not
be counted ours: It is not I, says Paul, but the sin that dwells in me,
Romans 7.20. And indeed were it not so, what would become of us? for the work of
grace though it does not suffer Christians to live as they list, yet it does
not enable them to live as they would; it is not so broad as to allow of
corruption, nor so narrow but it will permit of corruption.

. 72. But fifthly, least the former considerations should not serve, answer me
ingeniously to these questions:

Do thou not sinde that the Word and Spirit has wrought an apparent change
in thy judgment, affections, and actions to what they were formerly? Is not
Christ thy greatest joy, sin thy greatest sorrow, and grace the prime object of
thy desires? Art thou not careful in the use of the means, to attain faith in
the promise of Gods mercy made in Christ? Do thou not love God, and the
people of God; yea, art thou not prone to speak in their defense when thou
hear them reviled, and contemned by wicked and ungodly men? Do thou not
rejoice when the righteous are exalted, and grieve when the wicked bear rule?
Do thou not desire and pray for the salvation of others? Is it not grievous
to thee to hear God blasphemed, and dishonored? Do thou not make conscience
of sanctifying his Sabbaths? Art thou not as conscienscious alone, and in
private where God only sees thee, as if thy greatest enemy, or all the world
did behold thee? Do thou not make conscience of evil thoughts, grieve for
thy unprofitablenesse under the means of grace, for the evil which cleaves to
thy best actions, and for sins of omision? When thou do any thing amiss do
thou not accuse thy self? if any thing well, do thou not give all the praise
to God? Whatever thou injoyest on this side Hell, do thou not think thy
self unworthy of it? Do thou not more fear the want of grace then confide
in what thou have? Art thou not evil spoken of for well doing? Do thou not
love zeal and devotion in others? Thou art not of a reprobate judgment,
touching things, actions, and persons, accounting good evil, and evil good;
nor do thou think the worse of a man for having of a tender conscience: Thou
art not so offended when offenses come as to think the worse of the way of
truth, yea, when strange things happen do thou not make an wholesome
construction thereof? If so, my soul for thine thou art a true Believer, and
not an hypocrite whatever thy failings be; yea, if thou should find but a
few of these signs in thy self thou need not much fear thine estate, for
a few Grapes will show that the plant is a Vine, and not a Thorn; yea, where
there is any one grace in truth there is every one in their measure: if thou
art sure thou have love, I am sure thou have faith; for they are as inseparable
as fire and heat, life and motion; and so of other graces,

. 73. But sixthly, for I will go yet further with thee; suppose nothing that I
have hitherto said will satisfy thee, and that thou will not auknowledge any
of these graces to be in thee, yet still thy case may be good enough; for a
Christian in times of spiritual distemper and desersion is as one in a sound,
in which case the soul does not exercise her functions; he neither hears, nor
sees, nor feels, yet she is still in the body: Christ is as the Sun to our
souls, and we are like Elementary bodies; which lighten and darken, cool and
warm, dye and revive; as the Sun presents or absents it self from them.
Whence it comes to pass that we have so much crying out in horror of
conscience, I am damned, I am damned; yea, it is a wonder to see how many truly
humbled sinners, who have so tender consciences that they dare not yield to the
least evil for the worlds goods, and refuse no means of being made better;
turn every probation into reprobation, every dejection into rejection; and if
they be cast down they cry out, they are cast away; but in such distempers a
man is not a competent Judge in his own case, as in humane Laws there is
anullity held of words and actions extorted, and wrong from men by fear;
because in such cases a man is held not to have power, or command in some sort
of himself. A troubled soul is like troubled water, we can discern nothing
clearly in it; wherefore in such cases a man must call to remembrance the times
past, and how it has been with him formerly, as David did, Psalm. 77.2. to 12.
and likewise Job, chap. 31. And his must thou do, and then if ever thou had
true faith wrought in thy heart it can never be clean extinguished; and so of
love and godly sorrow, for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance;
as it is Romans 11.29. I the Lord change not, Mal. 3, 6. And the weakest faith if
true, though it be not the like strong, yet it is the like precious faith to
that of Abraham's, whereby to lay hold, and put on the perfect righteousness of
Christ; yea, the truth of grace, be the measure never so small is always blessed
with perseverance; and if grace but conquer us first, we by it shall conquer
all things else, whether it be corruptions within us, or temptations without
us; yea, to speak rightly, thou art the better to be thought of, and the less
to be feared for this thy fear, for no man so truly loves as he that fears to
offend; and good is that fear which keeps us from evil acts, yea, as a
bleeding wound is better then that which bleeds not; so thy very complaint of
sin springing from a displeasure against it shows, that there is something
in thee opposite to sin, viz. that thou art penitent in affection though not
in action; even as a Child is rational in power, though not in act; neither
was the Centurian ever so worthy as when he thought himself most unworthy; for
all our worthiness is in a capable misery.

. 74. But here by the way observe one caution, as the Plaster must not be
less then the sore, so the tem must not be bigger then the wound. Though the
grievousnesse of our sins should increase our repentance, yet they should not
diminish our faith, and assurance of pardon and forgiveness. Because the Law
is not more a Glass to show us our sins, then the Gospel is a Fountain to
wash them away; wherefore cast not both thine eyes upon thy sin, but reserve
one to behold the remedy; look upon the Law to keep thee from presumption,
and upon the Gospel to keep thee from despair; this is both a sweet and an
even course. But as an empty Vessel close luted, though you throw it into the
midst of the Sea will receive no water, so all pleas are in vain to them that
are deafned with their own fears; for as Mary would not be comforted with the
sight and speech of Angels, no not with the fight and speech of Jesus himself,
till he made her know that it was Jesus; so until the Spirit of God sprinkleth
the conscience with the blond of Christ, and sheds his love into the heart;
nothing will do, no Creature can take off wrath from the conscience but he
that set it on; wherefore the God of peace give you the peace of God which
passes all understanding, yea, O Lord, speak thou music to the wounded
conscience, thunder to the seared; that thy Justice may reclaim the one, thy
mercy releeve the other, and thy favor comfort us all, with peace and
salvation in Jesus Christ.

. 75. The comfort of what has been said in these seven last Sections, is
intended and belongs to weak Christians, troubled consciences, and those that
would feign do better; but let no unbeleever, impenitent, or profane person
meddle with it, for all such are to know that their very best services, as
praying, and fasting, and receiving, and giving of Alms, etc. (because they
are not done in faith, and obedience to the Word, and that God may be glorified
thereby) are no better in Gods account then if they had stain a Man, or cut of
a Dogs neck, or offered Swines blood, or blessed an Idol, as himself
affirms, Isay 66.3. Nor will God accept of any action unless it flows from a
pious and good heart sanctified by the Holy Ghost; yea civil honesty severed
from true piety, humility, saving knowledge, sincere love to God, true
obedience to his Word, justifying faith, a zeal of Gods glory, and a desire to
edify and win others, God will neither accept nor reward, but account of their
moral virtues as of shining or glistering sins; because they spring from
pride, ignorance, infidelity, self-love, and other such carnal respects, as
many examples prove, namely, Caines sacrifycing, 1 John 3.12. the Jews
fasting, Isay 58. those reprobates preaching in Christ's name, and casting out
Devils, Matthew. 7.22, 23. and the like, whose outward works were the same
which the godly perform; and what says Austine most excellently, There is no
true virtue where there is no true Religion; and that conscience which is not
directed by the Word even when it does best does ill, because it does it not in
faith, obedience, and love.

. 76. Secondly let them know, that being out of Christ they are bound to keep
the whole Law, Gal. 5.2, 3. or stand liable to suffer the penalty thereof for
not keeping it; for though this be the condition of the New Covenant, Believe
and thou shall be saved; yet all that they have to trust unto is, Do this and
live, Romans 10.5. and cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. And I wish
that they would seriously think of it, and what need they have of Christ, whom
they rather persecute then obey his Gospel in love.

. 77. Indeed let them get a true lively and justifying faith, put ye off
concerning the former conversation, the old man which is corrupted through the
deceiveable lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your minds; and put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians.
4.22, 23, 24. and then Christ, and all his benefits and promises will belong
unto you, but not before; in the mean time you are in your blood, Ezekiel
16.6. and have to answer not only for your original guilt, but for every
thought, word, and action of yours from your infancy, Matthew. 9.12, 13. Luke
1.53. Gal. 5.1. to 7. enough to startle you if you be not stark dead.

. 78. But perhaps thy heart and conscience is not only Sermon, but Thunder
proof, and then nothing will do good upon thee (the case of all incorrigible
ones) yea most men now adays are judgment proof; and let them be never so
clearly convinced from the word that they are in a dangerous condition, all
thoughts thereof presently pass away like the sound of a Bell that is rung; or
if not, Satan can furnish them with an evasion, be the case what it will;
amongst many of his delusions I will mention two of the principal, and which I
hold to be the strongest bars to keep men out of Heaven that can be named.

The first is this, Never regard (will he say to a poor soul) what a few
melancholy Precissions say when every one does so, and so; or every one is of
this or that judgment; yea, do not such and such the like, who are wiser, and
greater, and better men then your self? They are of another mind, neither do
they trouble themselves so much about Religion, and yet they look to speed as
well as the precisest; yea will he say, Do ye not see many Ministers, and
great Professors of Religion, who pretend it is good being religious and holy,
and press others to it, that do only pretend it, for they live as loosely,
and deal as unjustly as any other men; and they are not ignorant of what they
do, and this you may be sure of, that if they did speak as they think they
would do as they speak; therefore what should ye be so singular, will ye be
wiser then all your friends, or neighbors; yea, then ninety and nine parts of
the Kingdom? What a mad conceit were this? then yields the poor soul, and
counts it a pleasure too that he is seduced, and by this kind of Sophistry
Satan prevails with millions; yea, I have ever noted, that this one artlesse
persuasion of others do so, prevails more with the world then all the places
of reason, but this plea or argument is not more common and taking then it is
sortsh and dangerous, if it be well looked into; for besides that it is Gods
express charge, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2.
and Saint Paul's everlasting rule, Fashion not your selves like unto this world,
Romans 12.2. Our Savior Christ has plainly told us, That the greatest number
go the broad way to destruction, and but a few the narrow way which leads
unto life, Matthew. 7.13, 14. And Saint John, That the number of those whom Satan
shall deceive is as the sand of the sea, Revel. 20.8. and 13.16. Isay 10.22.
Romans 9.27. yea, that the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. whereas
those whom Christ has chosen out of it, and that believe the Gospel, are but
a little flock, and few in number, Luke 12.32. Revel. 3.4. Isay 53.1. Romans
10.16. 2 Cor. 4.4. which testimonies have proved true in all former Ages; there
could not be found eight righteous persons in the old world, for one was an
impious Cham, all Sodom afforded not ten; Eliah could say, I only remain a
Prophet of the Lord, but Baals prophets are four hundred and fifty, 1 Kings
18.22. And Micha complains of the multitude of the wicked in his time, and
small number of the faithful, Micha 7.2. Behold says Isaiah, I and the
Children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and wonders in Israel,
Isay 8.18. so few and rare that they were gazed upon as monsters. And what
faith the Lord himself; Though the number of the Children of Israel be as the
sand of the sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved, Isay 10.22. Romans 9.27.
Neither has it been otherwise since the Gospel, the whole City went out to
send Christ packing, not a Gadaren was found that either dehorted his fellow,
or opposed the motion, Mat 8.34. When Pilate asked, What shall be done with
Jesus, all with one consent cried out, Let him be Crucified, Matthew. 27.22.
there was a general shout for Diana for two hours together, Great is Diana of
the Ephesians; not one man took Paul's part, Act. 19.34. yea the Jews told
Paul, that his Sect was every where spoken against, Acts 28, 22. yea all, both
small and great, rich and poor, free and bond receive the mark of the Beast
in their foreheads, Rev. 13.16 so that number is but an ill sign of a good
cause; or rather it is the best note of the worst way.

. 79. Secondly, nor will any wise man think his actions ever the more
warrantable for that he does as the greatest, richest, and noblest of the Land
do; for Not many noble are called: but (as Paul speaks) God has chosen the
base things of the world, and things that are despised to confound the mighty,
1 Cor. 1.26, 27. And has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith,
James 2.5. yea, he fills the hungry with good things, whereas he sends away
the rich empty, Luke 1.52, 53. Neither is this the manner of his donation only,
but of his acceptance also, for God esteems more of virtue clad in rags then
of vice in velvit; he respects a man not for his greatness, but for his
goodness; not for his birth, but for his New Birth; not for his honor, but
for his holiness; not for his wealth, but for his wisdom: The righteous
says Solomon is more worthy then his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. and, Better is
the poor that walks uprightly, then he that perverteth his ways though he
be rich, Prove, 28.6. and thus the Bareans are reputed by the Holy Ghost; More
noble men then they of Thessalonica, because they received the Word with all
readiness, and searched the Scriptures whether those things were so which Paul
preached, Act. 17.11. Whence it is that David thought it not so happy for him
to be a King in his own house as a Door keeper in Gobs house. That godly
Constantine rejoiced more in being the servant of Christ then in being Emperor
of the whole world; that Theodosius the Emperor preferred the title of Membrum
Ecclesia before that of Caput imperii, professing that he had rather be a Saint
and no King, then a King and no Saint; yea Ignasius said, he had rather be a
Martyr then a Monarch. Besides, experience proves greatness, nobility, and
riches, to be a most deceitful rule to walk by; for, the Kings of the earth
band themselves, and the Princes are assembled together against the Lord, and
against his Christ, Psalm. 2.2. And in the first of Kings, 20.16. we read of no
less then two and thirty Kings in a cluster that were every one drunk; and
elsewhere, that a thousand of the chief Priests of Israel committed
fornication, and were all destroyed for their labor in one day, Numb. 25.9. 1
Cor. 10.8. yea of twenty Kings of Judah which the Scripture mentions, we read
of but six that were godly, and of eighteen Kings of Israel all but two are
branded by the Holy Ghost for wicked, and yet this Nation was Gods peculier and
chosen people out of all the world; and lastly, when the Rulers sat in
counsel against Christ, none spoke for him but Nichodemas, Joh, 7.50, 51. All
which shows; that it is neither a good nor a safe way to imitate other men's
examples, be they never so rich, never so great; or if we sin together, we
shall be sure to perish together; as when those three and twenty thousand
Israelites committed fornication after the example of the chief Princes, they
were every one destroyed, both leaders and followers, Numb. 25.9. 1 Cor. 10.8.
and as when those other Cities followed Sodoms lust, they were all consumed
with Sodoms fire, Judge. 7.

. 80. But thirdly admit thou could allege for thine excuse, that thou do
but as most of the wise, learned, and greatest Scholars in the Land do, yet
all were one, this could not excuse thee; for first, Not many wise men after
the flesh are called, but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 29. yea, the preaching of Christ crucified,
was foolishness to the wise Sages of the world, 1 Cor. 1.23. It pleases God
for the most part, to hide the mysteries of salvation from the wise and
learned, and revealed them unto babes, Matthew. 11.25. Luke 10.21. yea the saving
knowledge of Christ is hid to all that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. but if once men
abuse their knowledge and learning to Gods dishonor, and comply with Satan and
the world against the Church (as how many Scholars in all ages of the world
have resembled Trajan, who was endued with great knowledge and other singular
virtues, but desaced them all by hating Christianity, and opposing the power of
godliness) in this case he takes that knowledge which once they had from
them, as he took heat from the fire when it would burn his children, Dan.
3.27. I will destroy the tokens of the Soothsayers, (says God) and make them
that conjecture fools; I will turn the wise men backward, and make their
knowledge foolishness, Isay 44.25. And again, He takes the wise in their
own craftiness, and the council of the wicked is made foolish, Job 5.13. And
justly are they forsaken of their reason who have abandoned God; yea most just
it is, that they who want grace should want wit too, for which read, 2 Thessalonians.
2.10, 11, 12. Thus I might go on and show, that we may not imitate the
actions, nor follow the examples of the best and holiest men in every thing
they do, though we have some plausible reasons for our doing so, and also good
and holy intentions in our so doing, or if we do that, we may go to Hell
notwithstanding.

. 81. But you will say, if neither custom of the greatest number, nor of the
greatest men, nor of the greatest Scholars, nor of the best and holiest men,
though we have reason for our doing it, and good intentions in the doing of it
is a sufficient warrant for our actions, but that all these are crooked and
deceitful guides; then what may be a safe guide, and an infallible rule in all
cases to steer by and square all our actions?

I answer; As a rule directs the Artificer in his work, and keeps him from
erring, so does Gods Word direct the religious in their lives, and keep them
from erring. The right way is the signified Will of God, and whatsoever swerves
from, or is repugnant to the right is wrong and crooked; Law and Precept is a
straight line to show us whether we do mis-beleeve, or mis-live, 2 Pet. 1.19.
Ephesians. 2.20. Gal. 6.16. John 5.39. And it has ever been the care of Christians
to stick close to the written Word, having always, and in all cases an eye
thereunto; and without this written Word, a man in the world is as a Ship on
the Sea without a guide; yea, he that lives without making this his rule, he
who sets not the Dial or Clock of his life by this Sun, he who directs not
his course in walking by this North Pole, or Load-starre, but by the wavouring,
uncertain, and moveable stars of custom, example, reason, and good
intentions, sails without a Compass; and may look every minute to be
swallowed up in the Ocia^ of sin and judgment; nor will any that have grace
in their hearts make custom, example, or the badnesse of the times a cloak to
excuse their conformity in evil courses, but rather a spur to incite them to
be so much the more careful not to be swayed with the common stream; and
happy is that man who makes another vices steps to climb to Heaven by, as it
fared with righteous Lot; and so does every wise and good man, as why should
they not make this use of the corruptions of the times, when even the mud of
the world by the industrious Hollander is turned to an useful fuel. If the
Air be generally infectious, had we not need to be so much the more strict in
our Diet, and careful in the use of wholesome preservatives? Nor is fingularity
in such cases only lawful but laudable, when vice grows into fashion,
singularity is a virtue; and when sanctity is counted singularity, happy is he
that goes alone, and resolves to be an example to others; yea, most happy is
he that can stand upright when the world declines, and can endeavor to repair
the common ruin with a constancy in goodness; that can resolve with Joshua,
whatever the world does, yet, I and my house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.
It was Noah's happiness in the old world, that he followed not the worlds
fashions; he believed alone when all the world contested against him, and he
was saved alone when all the world perished without him. It was Lots
happiness, that he sollowed not the fashions of Sodom. It was Abraham's
happiness, that he did not like the Chaldreans; Daniels happiness, that he
did not like the Babilonians. It was good for Job that he was singular in the
Land of Vzze; good for Nichodemas, that he was singular among the Rulers, as
now they all find to their great comfort, and exceeding great reward; yea, it
was happy for Ruben, that he was opposite to all his Brethren; happy for Caleb,
and Joshua, that they were opposite to the rest of the Spies, happy for the
Jews, that their customs were diverse, and contrary to all other people,
though Haman was pleased to make it their great and heinous crime, Ester 3.8.
Happy for Luther, that he was opposite to the rest of his Country: and no less
happy shall we be, if with the Dear we can feed against the wind of popular
applause; if with the Sturgion, or Crab-fish, we can swim against the stream
of custom and example; if with Atticus, we can cleave to the right though
losing side; or if we do nor, we shall miss of the narrow way, and
consequently fail of entering in at the strait Gate, for the greatest part
shuts out God upon Earth, and is excluded from God elsewhere; Matthew. 7.13, 14.
And indeed, if Jesus Christ and his twelve Apostles be on our side, what need
we care though Herod, and Pontius Pilate, and all the Rulers, and the whole
Nation of the Jews, together with a world of the Romish Faction be against us;
and certainly if thou were not a soole, thou would hold it better to be in
the small number of Christ's little flock which are to be saved, then in the
numerous herds of those Goats that are destinated to destruction: and so much
for answer to Satan's first plea or objection. But,

. 82. Secondly, he has a worse and more dangerous delusion then this, for if
he see a man convinced that he is nothing so as he ought to be, (that he may
keep him still impenitent) he will say unto him, Trouble not thy self with
these things, do thou not know that God is merciful, and that Christ came
into the world to save sinners, witness the Thief upon the Cross, who was
heard, and saved by him at the very last hour; and upon this ground a world of
men in a carnal presumption go on to destruction, without ever bethinking
themselves; for say they, Let the worst that can come, repentance? at the last
hour, and saying, Lord have mercy upon me will make all even, otherwise God is
not so good as his word; who says, At what time soever a sinner repents,
etc. but let the argument be well scand, and this will be found as sottish,
deceitful, and dangerous as the other; wherefore that Satan (who is always a
liar) may not by his cunning delusions gull you of your souls, and plunge you
into everlasting horror; consider with me in the first place, that as God is
merciful, so he is also just, and true, and speaks as he means in his Word;
yea, he is truth it self, and his Word is the ground and touchstone of all
truth; wherefore, if any spirit, or an Angel from Heaven cross the written
Word, we are to hold him accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. Now we shall find, that
salvation is not more promised to the godly (in any part of the Bible, Old
Testament or New) then eternal death and destruction is threatened to the
wicked, as you may see, John 5.28. to 47. Heb. 12.29. Deuteronomy. 4.24. and 29.19,
20. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.21. Revel. 21.8. 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. Jer 16.13. Mattth.
7.13, 14. and 25.34.41. James 2.13. 1 John 3.6. Luke. 13.24. 1 Pet. 4.18. yea,
God has sufficiently manifested his justice and severity already in punishing
sin, and pouring vengeance upon those that have provoked him, as upon the
Angels, our first Parents, and all the race of Mankind; upon the old world,
upon whole Monarchs and Empires, upon whole Nations, Cities. and Fomilies, upon
diverse particular persons, as upon Pharaoh, Nadah, and Abihu, Chora, Dathan,
and Abiram with their 250. Captains, and many thousand of the Children of
Israel, upon Hammon and Balaam, Saul and Doeg, Absalon and Achittophel, Ahab
and Jezabell, Senacharib and Nebuchadnezzar, the two Captains and their
fifties, Herod and Judas, Annanias and Saphira, with a world of others; yea,
how severely has he dealt with his own children when they finned against him?
viz. with Moses, and Aaron, and Ely, who were in singular favor with him; yea
with David, a man after Gods own heart, and that after his sin was remitted,
and lastly with his own Son, that no finne might go unpunished, which may
make all impenitent persons tremble; for if God was so just and severe to his
own Son, that nothing would appease him but his death on the Cross, how can
the wicked his enemies look to be spared? and if Gods own Servants, who are
as dear and near to him as the apple of his own eye, or as the signet on his
right hand, suffer so many and grievous afflictions here, what shall his
adversaries suffer in Hell? But because thou shall have nothing to object, Will thou believe Christ himself, whom thou think came to save all
indifferently; if thou will turn but to Matthew. 25. and he will tell thee, that
at his coming to Judgment he will as well say to the disobedient, Depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels; as to the obedient, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
of heaven, prepared for you from the foundation of the world, ver. 34.41.
Again, least any should be over consident, he tells all men plainly, that the
gate of heaven is so straight that few shall find it, Matthew. 7.13, 14. and
that many shall seek to enter thereat and shall not be able, Luke 13.24. And
that many are called, ( viz. by the outward ministry of the Word) but few
chosen, Matthew. 20.16. and 22.14. sad predictions for such as apply Christ's
Passion as a warrant for their lisentiousnesse, not as a remedy; and take his
Death as a license to sin, his Cross as a Letters Patent to do mischief. O
that men would seriously think upon these Scriptures, together with that, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. where the Apostle tells us, that the Lord Jesus shall come
the second time in flaming fire, to render vengeance unto them that know him
not, and that obey not his Gospel, 1 Pet. 4.18. where the Holy Ghost tells us,
that even the righteous shall scarcely be saved. And Deuteronomy. 29.19. to 29. where
God tells us expressly, that he will not be merciful unto such, as flatter
themselves in an evil way; but that his wrath and sealousie shall smoke
against them, etc. and that if we will not regard nor hearken unto him when he
calls upon us for repentance, he will not hear nor regard us, when in our
distress and anguish we shall call upon him for mercy, but even laugh at our
destruction, and mock when our fear comes Prove. 1.24. to 33. and that he will
recompense every man according to his works be they good or evil, Revel.
20.13. and 22.12. Rom, 2.6. Ezekiel. 7.4.8.9. and 9.10. and. 11.21. and 16.43. but
this is the misery, and a just plague upon our so much formality and
profaneness, under our so much means of grace; there be very few men that make
not the whole Bible, and all the Sermons they hear, yea the checks of their
own consciences, and the motions of Gods Spirit utterly ineffectuall for want
of wit and grace to apply the same to themselves; but to go on.

. 83 Secondly, we shall find that though Christ in the Gospel has made many
large and precious promises, yet there are none so general which are not
limited with the condition of says, and the fruit thereof unfeigned repentance,
and each of them are so tied and entayled that none can lay claim to them but
true Believers which repent, and turn from all their sins to serve him in
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. and 5.9. Mark
16.16. John 3.36. Isay 59.20. Neither was it ever heard that any ascended into
Heaven without going up the stayers of obedience and good works, that any have
attained unto everlasting life without faith, repentance, and sanctification,
for even the Thief upon the Cross (whom you ignorantly allege) believed in
Christ, and showed the fruits of his faith in acknowledging his own sin,
reproving his fellow, and confessing our Savior Christ even then when his
Apostles denied and forsook him, in calling upon his name, desiring, and
confidently trusting by his means and merits to have everlasting life. And
indeed, the very end of Gods electing, and of Christ's redeeming us was; That we
might be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. Mat. 19.17 and therefore he binds it with an oath,
That whomsoever he redeemeth out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, they
shall worship him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives,
Luke 1.70. to 76. 1 Pet. 2.24. they therefore that never came to be holy were
never chosen, never redeemed; other Scriptures to this purpose are many, see
only Tit. 2.12.14. 1 Pet. 2.24. Matthew. 19.17. nor ought any indeed to call
upon Christ, or once to name him with their mouths, except they depart from
iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19 Neither does the Thiefes example make any whit for the
comfort of procrastinators; for First, we read not that ever he was outwardly
called until this very hour; Secondly, though there was one saved at the last
hour that none might despair, yet there was but one that none should presume;
and millions who had less iniquity have found less mercy. Thirdly, the
Thiefes conversion was one of the Miracles, with the glory whereof our Savior
would honor the ignominy of his Cross, Again, Fourthly, the Thief was saved
at the very instant of time, when our Savior triumphed on the Cross, took
his leave of the world, and entered into his glory. Now it is usual with
Princes to save some heinous Malefactors at their Coronation, when they enter
upon their Kingdoms in triumph, which they are never known to do afterward,
which circumstances being rightly considered, together with the wonderful
change so suddenly wrought in him as I showed before, his example will yield
little encouragement to men of thy condition; nor was his sudden conversion
ever intended in Gods purpose for a temptation, and yet by Satan's policy
working upon wicked men's depraved judgments, and corrupt hearts in wresting
this Scripture, it has proved (by accident) the loss of many thousand souls,
and take heed it prove not thy case; to which end let not Satan any longer
bewitch you, so to think upon Gods mercy as in the mean time to forget that
he is also just, and true; and so much for answer to those two objections,
which Satan finds more prevalent then all the rest he is able to invent.

. 84. Now to wind up all with a word of exhortation, if thou be convinst,
and resolvest upon a new course, let thy resolution be peremptory and constant,
and take heed thou harden not again, as Pharaoh, the Philistines, the young
man in the Gospel, Pilate and Judas did. Resemble not the Iron, which is no
longer soft then it is in the fire; be not like those that are Seasick, who are
much troubled while they are on Shipboard, but presently well again when they
are come to shore; for that good (says Gregory) will do us no good which is
not made good by perseverance. If with these premonisions the Spirit shall
vouchsafe to stir up in thine heart, any good motions and holy purposes to obey
God, in letting thy sins go, quench not, grieve not the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
return not with the Dog to thy vomit, least thy latter end prove seven fold
worse then thy beginning, Matthew. 12.43.45. As it fared with Julian the
Apostate, and Judas the traitor. O it is a fearful thing to receive the grace
of God in vain; and a desperate thing being warned of a Rock, wilfully to cast
our selves upon it! Neither let Satan persuade you to defer your repentance,
no not an hour, least your resolution proves as a false conception which never
comes to bearing; for as ill Debtors put off their Creditors first one week,
then another, till at last they are able to pay nothing, so deal delayers with
God. Besides, death may be sudden, even the least of a thousand things can
kill thee, and give thee no leisure to be sick.

. 85. Secondly, or if death be not sudden, repentance is no such easy work
as to be put off to sickness; and though true repentance be never too late,
yet late repentance is seldom true; and indeed there is small hope of
repentance at the hour of death, where there was no regard of honesty in the
time of life; and Millions are now in Hell who thought they would repent
hereafter; not being wise enough to consider that it is with sin in the
heart, as with a tree planted in the ground, which the longer it grows the
harder it is to be plucked up; or a nail in a post, which is made faster by
every stroke of the Hammer. As what says the Holy Ghost, Can the Black Moore
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are
accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13.23.

. 86. Thirdly, or suppose after many years spent in the service of sin and
Satan thou art willing to relinquish thy lusts, and offer to God thy service
and best devotions at the last gasp, will he accept of them? No, he has
expressly told us the contrary, Prove. 1.24. to 32. yea, is it likely that God
will accept of thy dry bones when Satan has sucked out all the marrow? That he
will give his heavenly and spiritual graces at the hour of death, to those
who have contemned them all their life? Yea, is it not most just and equal if
God will not be found of those that were content to loose him? If he shut his
ear against their prayers calling to him for pardon, that stopped their ears
against his Voice calling upon them for repentance. The Lord has made a
promise to late repentance, not of late repentance; if thou convertest to
morrow thou art sure of grace, but thou art not sure of to morrowes conversion;
if in any reasonable time we pray he will hear us, if we repent he will pardon
us, if we amend our lives he will save us; but for want of this timely
consideration Dives prayed but was not heard, Esau wept but was not pitied,
the foolish Virgins knocked but were denied, and so thousands have cried unto
God at the hour of death and found no repentance, but they dyed as they lived,
and went from despair unto destruction. Wherefore, as you tender the good of
your own soul, set upon the work presently, provide with Joseph for the
dearth to come; and with Noah, in the days of thine health build the Arc of a
good Conscience against the floods of sickness; imitate the Ant, who provides
her meat in Summer for the Winter following: yea, do it while the yerning
bowels, the bleeding wounds, and compassionute arms of Jesus Christ lies open
to receive you; whiles ye have health, and life, and means, and time to
repent; and make your peace with God. As you tender I say the everlasting
happiness and welfare of your almost lost and drowned soul, as you expect or
hope for grace or mercy, for joy and comfort, for Heaven and salvation, for
endless bliss and glory at the last; as you would escape the direful Wrath
of God, the bitter Sentence and Docme of Christ, the never dying sting and
worm of Conscience, the tormenting and soulescorching flames of Hell, and
everlasting separation from Gods blisfull presence, abjure, and utterly
renounce all wilful and affected evil. To which end;

. 87. In the next place be diligent to hear Gods Word (powerfully preached)
which is the sword of the Spirit, that kills our corruptions, and that
unresistable Cannon-shot which beats and battereth down all the strong holds
of sin and Satan.

. 88. Thirdly, ponder and meditate seriously on Gods inestimable love toward
us, who has nor spared to give his only beloved Son out of his bosom to
dye for us, and to purchase thereby every good thing we do enjoy either for
soul or body, even to the least bit of bread we eat; and this will make thee
(if thou have any ingenuity) to direct all thy thoughts, speeches, and actions
to his glory, as he has directed thy eternal salvation thereunto, and often
force thee to break out into this or the like expression, What shall I render
unto thee O Lord for all thy benefits? but love thee my Creator, and become a
new creature.

. 89. Fourthly, consider that the Lord beholds thee in all places, and in
every thing thou do; even as the eyes of a well drawn Picture are fastened
on thee which way soever thou turnest; yea, consider him as a just Judge, who
will not let sin go unpunished, and this will make thee keep a narrower
watch over thy very thoughts then any other can do over thine actions.

. 90. Fifthly, if thou will be safe from evil works avoid the occasions at
least if thou will keep thy self from iniquity, have no fellowship with the
workers of iniquity, for it is not more hard to find virtue in evil company
then to miss vice; They were mingled among the Heathen (says the Psalmist)
and what follows, they learned their works, Psalm. 106.35. yea, how soon was
Peter changed, with but coming into the High Priests Hall; and the like with
David and Solomon, which made David to say so soon as he had considered it,
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, for I will keep the Commandments
of my God, Psalm. 119.115. knowing that he could not do the one without the
other. And indeed, the choice of a man's company is one of the most weighty
actions of our lives, for our future well or ill being depends on that
election, and many a man had been good that is not if he had but kept good
company.

. 91. Sixthly and lastly, but chiefly and principally, omit not to pray for the
assistance of Gods spirit, otherwise thy strength is small; yea, except God
give thee repentance, and removes all impediments that may hinder, thou can
no more turn thy self then thou could at first make thy self; We are not
sufficient of our selves to think, much less to speak, least of all to do
that which is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. John 15.4, 5. we are swift to all evil but to
any good immovable; wherefore beg of God, that he will give you a' new heart,
and when the heart is changed all the members will follow after it, as the rest
of the Creatures after the Sun when it arises; importune him for grace, that
thou may firmly resolve; speedily begin, and continually persevere in
doing, and suffering his holy Will; desire him to inform and reform thee so,
that thou may neither misbeleeve nor mis-live; to regenerate thy heart,
change and purify thy nature, subdue thy reason, rectify thy judgment,
reform and strengthen thy will, renew thy affections, and beat down in thee
whatsoever stands in opposition to the Scepter of Jesus Christ; not forgetting
that prayer is the key of Heaven, as Ambrose calls it.

And now for conclusion, if thou receivest any power against thy corruptions
forget not to be thankful, and when God has the fruit of his mercies he will
not spare to sow much where he reapes much. Consider what I say, and the Lord
give you understanding to strive after those graces wherewith a true Believer
is quallified; and whereof I have given you a Copy in the fore going Character.

FINIS.
Add this Character of A true Believer, as an appendix to The Cure of
Misprision.


