The Run-awayes Routed: OR, A WHIP for MOMVS. Being an Answer, and a
Confutation, Against the Run-awayes, and their Vindication.
Quicquid Conabor dicere Versus est, OVID.
OFF with your Doublet Sirrah, come you Ass,
Must every Coxcomb for a Poet pass?
With my Satyrick Rod I will thee Whip,
And through the Royal Change i will make thee Skip
Like Jack a Lent, that goodly Round shall be
No more abused by thy dull Poetry;
For with my thundering Verse I Will quite confound,
And hurl thy Lines out of that famous Round;
My Soul does mount on golden wings that fly
Three times thrice higher than the Starry Sky.
But babbling Battus needs must be in Print,
Though neither Head, nor Foot, nor matter in it;
Fie Battus, fie, is it not a burning shame,
To put in Print such paltry Lines and lame?
And for to Vindicate thou know not what,
For by this Act no credit have thou got,
But foul disgrace, for as I did pass by
(Upon my Word I do not tell a Lie,)
The Royal Change, the Women that did stand
With thy disgraceful Paper in their hand:
It is such filly and such paltry stuff,
(Say they) there is none that sees them but does puff;
It is a shame, a blemish and Disgrace,
Unto this Famous Round, and goodly Place
To have such senseless idle Lines to sell;
For Battus, if thou wilt give me leave to tell
Thee, they are raw and senseless, dull and naught,
And that's the cause so few of them are bought;
For those same Women that thy Lines do cry
(If they could once this gallant Poet spy,)
They Would scratch thy eyes out, and from off thy face
Would pluck thy Nose, and with a foul disgrace,
They Would cause the boys to hoot at thee, and shout,
Till from that Royal Round they did thee rout!
To cause them daily in the cold to stand,
With such a senseless Paper in their hand,
Until there brains do crow, their hearts do ache,
And cannot so much as a penny take;
Therefore thou famous Poet be advised
For if thou come, I wish thee come disguised.
Thou say the Prophets did from Solyma flee,
But prithee what is that to thee and me?
They had a special call from thence to go,
But these themselves, I Am sure cannot say so.
All argument by Scripture must be tried,
But then the Scripture must be right applied;
It Is Aprosdionuson nihil ad rem,
For what have thou and I to do with them?
When in the Camp the Plague was now begun,
Did Moses, or did Aaron seek to shun?
Or were they so afraid they durst not stay?
Or did they once attempt to Run away?
They did not stir afoot, but rather Ran
Unto that place where they heard it began;
So that it does appear they ran not from't,
But with undaunted Spirits ran unto't.
Betwixt the Living and the Dead they stayed,
And to the God of Heaven there they prayed;
The sum is this, it is not to Run away
Can save a Man, but to repent and pray.
For if a sinner Rove the World about,
His sins pursue him and will find him out.
The Plague will follow sin be where it will,
Without repentance it a Man will Kill.
No more of Scripture Battus, let us see,
How we can prove it by Philosophy;
Tollitur causa, Tollit effectus;
The best Philosophers do argue thus.
The cause removed, the effect does cease to be,
This is both Scripture and Philosophy.
Sin is the Cause, then take the Cause away,
And the effect it can no longer stay;
Thou sai'st that Majesty did bid them go,
But prithee tell me can thou prove it so?
Did Majesty bid them run, and not thee?
Thou wast to stay for to write Poetry,
It Is well Majestic Poet thou did stay,
For had thou Money to have Run away,
'Ime sure thou would not long have stayed behind,
Thou art so giddy and distract in mind.
Thou Wooden Dunce that can do naught but Vaper,
Go pay the Printer for his pains and Paper.
For he his like to loose by thy Dull Brain,
And the poor Women for their daily pain;
Must all be loosers, they must never see
One penny by thy Babbling Poetry.
There Is not a man alive did ever write
Such paltry nonsense, or did ere indite
Such Fustian stuff, for sure thou art some Boy,
That want Wit, and so do write a Toy!
Farewell, Farewell, poor Momus, my dear Honey,
I wish thee more Wit, and my self more Money.
Ars inimicum non habet nisi ignorantem. FINIS.
London, Printed for the Author, Anno Domini. M. DC. LXV.


