the ASCENTS of the SOUL
ASSENTS

Psalmodia

King David plays his harp before the altar of sacrifice, while angels ascend a
stairway to heaven 1 Chronicles 15. Cap. Colloss. 3.16.17. monogram Design.


LA SCALA SANTA: OR, A Scale of Devotions MUSICAL and GRADUAL: BEING DESCANTS
ON THE Fifteen Psalms of Degrees, IN METER; With Contemplations and Collects
upon them, IN PROSE, 1670.

(...).

(...), etc. Epictet. in Arrian. Dissert. lib. 1. cap. 17. LONDON, Printed by
A. Godbid and J. Playford, Anno Dom. 1681.

THE MIND OF THE FRONTISPIECE.
GReatness and Piety combine
To make the Psalmodist Divine
(Good Actions following pure Intents)
His Soul ASCENDS, his God ASSENTS.
TO THE Right Honorable THE LEARNED AUTHOR.
A PINDARIQVE ODE.
I.
Rouse up dull Quill, and never Dormant lie
Upon thy Cotton Pillow, stiff and dry;
Useless, and void of all Activity.
I Will not disturb thy Rest
To travel long, in quest
Of some impertinent Romance,
To Ape the fond or sighing Lover:
No, for by chance
I lately did discover,
In a fair view upon the Prospect-Land,
Greatness and Goodness walking hand in hand.
II.
By the safe Conduct of a gentle Muse
I traced a Royal Court,
Which led me to the Sacred Fort,
Where Strength and Beauty might amuse.
Fifteen Ascents of fair and precious Stone,
(Not such as here are found)
Did mount me from the lower Ground,
To view a large and wondrous Throne;
Whereon
I spied a David, and a Jonathan.
III.
A Jonathan, who whilom did employ
His Quill, to imp his Dart;
Whereby not to annoy
Young Jesse's Heart:
But Love, and needful Secrets to impart.
One who is able to engage
With the Goliahs of the Age:
Those Debauchees, who complement
A Cloud; and labor to entice
The very Principles of Virtue into Vice,
With gaudy and profane Embellishment.
Now, for the wanton Fancy's sake,
Their Souls lie cankered in the Rust
Of Ease ill-manag'd; now they make
Greatness a Pander unto Lust.
If ever Prophecy did nick the Times,
David foresaw their Scurrilis Cant. de Davide and Bath. non ita pridem compos.
Dytherambique Rhimes;
For when he counts his Injuries and Wrongs,
He adds, Psalm. 69.12.
On me the Drunkards make their Songs.
IV.
Often have I seen the Sun's declining Light
Drowsily nod down to the Lap of Night;
But when (next Morn) the Champion wakes,
(For it is not long he Dreams)
About the Globe's wide Lists a gallant Ring he takes,
(Brandishing his Lance of Beams:)
And when he manages a well-drest Ray,
The Nightmare Sleep (as frighted) starts away.
Old Darkness is dismounted by the brisk young Day:
The World's called up again, and Men revive
With a more strong assurance that they live.
Thus when the shades of Drollery possessed
The Seat, where Virgin Muses once did rest:
When we despaired that pious Lays,
Or useful Rhimes should e're more guild our Days;
A Star strangely propitious did appear,
Darting its Splendors from the wise Men's Hemisphere;
They Would much of Goodness, much of heavenly Grace,
As far as that can mix with humane Race;
And did portend the overthrow
Of sordid Wit, (if that be Wit that some called so.)
V.
Their low-born Muse, armed with Poetic Rage,
And License, basely congeed to the Stage;
They trod mean Paths, whose whole Design and Wit
Could reach no farther than the Neighboring Pit.
When as your towering Soul,
Leaving us beneath,
All humane Passions does control,
And mount into those Regions, where
Is naught but pure and subtle Air,
Where common Mortals cannot breath.
VI.
Go on, thou noble Hero, who do know
The Paths of Honor, and of Virtue too;
A Soul so Skilful! so inured to Good!
Never proud Greek or Roman understood:
They only built a gaudy Theater
Sacred to Virtue; thou have raised thy self to her:
Such a clean Lodging every Soul may boast,
Who bears the Temple of the Holy Ghost.
Others for Pomp or Safety may provide
Against their fatal Day,
A costly Dungeon, or a Memphian Pyramid
(TO enclose their Souls too with their mouldering Clay;)
While by the Virtue of thy sacred Fire,
(Decreed not to expire)
Your Honor shall (surviving Fame)
Live in a heavenly Cone of Flame.
VII.
When I peruse the Comment, and the Text,
Nothing I find so dubious, or perplexed,
Tin. 1.14.
By Jewish Fables, or Conceits of Men;
But your unerring Pen
Dictator does Commence,
And reconcile King David's sense,
With such Illustrations there,
As if thou were his Privy-Counsellor:
Your Version modest, and yet faithful too,
Shows what thou do, and able art to do.
VIII.
My Numbers must fall short, of what is due
To such pure Zeal, and depth of Judgment too:
Fifteen Degrees! Henceforth shall every Psalm
Boast, that it can
Receive the Honor of thy skilful Name,
THE CHIEF MUSICIAN.
Then, Pardon Sir, if I aspire
To kiss the lowest Step of your advanced Quire.
S. H.

AD NOBILISSIMUM AUTHOREM.
JActitet immensi Salomonem Machina Templi
Structorem, Graduum te Chorus ipse canit:
Stantia non poterant tecta probare Deos: Mart. utpote Christus Templi Excidium
praesagivit.
Illius obruitur moles operosa ruina,
Vim frustra his infers Vespasiane, tuam.
Ficta Poetarum torpescant Numina, quorum
Gleba Sepulchralis Frigida Membra tegit:
Musarum Lymphis incassum labra retingunt,
Ni prunam Linguis praebeat Ara suis.
Vestris aspirat caeptis Deus ille Deorum,
Et sic Divino jure Poeta cluis:
Te merito canimus; aujus conscendere Scalam
Laurea subrepens ambitiosa cupit:
Te miseret Plantae; quoties tremebunda precatur
Ut Paradisiacis insita, vivat, Agris.
O Dilecte Deo! pergas tibi ut Orbis Honor
Agnoscat nullum, nec Pietate, parem:
Oro, ut digneris Triviae Tentamina Musae
Qua placida semper Front videre soles:
For sitan insolitum videar compingere Carmen;
Scilicet apposite scribere causa vetat.
Honoris vestri obsequio deditissimus, S. H.

TO THE Most Illustrious And Serenest STELLA.
MADAM,
AS soon as Nature had awaked my Duty in the tender of its Devotion to Lucinda,
I was prompted by Justice, as well as Love, to lay my next Offering at Your
Feet, because I must avow to all the World, that nothing has that Ascendant
over my Soul as Ye Two have, who make my Passions high, yet honest; Ye are
Twin-Stars of the first Magnitude, so that I cannot show Ye my Respects,
without advancing my Religion, Your Piety encouraging that unto some nobler
Effort, while it instructs these in the most decent and humble ways of
submitting my Desires to Heaven's acceptance first, and then to Your Graces.

Madam, You know I never yet approached You but with a Prayer, or with Music,
(admiring the Divinity which still arrays Your Person;) the Imitation of your
Holy and Harmonious Mind, I think, is Work for the most Excellent upon Earth,
as the Admiration of it is my chiefest pleasure, and has been the cause of
publishing these the Essays of my younger time, (began about twenty years ago
at my entrance into Your Service) when I aimed at nothing but God's Grace, and
Yours.

Madam, The intent of my first Affections would palliate their weaker Actings,
since (as the strength of Zeal may still excuse some Errors) the Daughter of
Time is here with a Gift, though the Daughter of Tire be not in her Robes: Here
is no gentile Vanity, or curious Texture of Wit; no Colors of Rhetoric, nor
modish Points of Courtship, to inveigle Your Opinion of the present.

Yet, Madam, here is that, may well become Your Grace,
The most Angelike Dress, in fashion upon Earth;
The way to pierce the Skies, with Orisons and Praise;
The way to pass our Lives, in truest Ease, and Mirth.
I wish You like the making up of this Suit (as it is) with the truth of his
Devotion and Service, who is ready to wait upon You (in his Holy Day habit)
both to Your Closet, and to Our Church, as

MADAM, The humblest and faithfullest of your Ministers.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAVING with much admiration and delight been long conversant with the Psalter,
I find, as it is wisely appointed for the first Book that we read or study, so
it may fitly be used to the last minute of our Life and Breathing; Luke 23.46.
Psalm. 30.6.
since our blessed Lord himself handed his Soul unto his Father in these words
of the Psalmist. And I never knew any condition, how sad soever, that might not
receive some Entertainment, Mat. 21.16. 21.42. 27.46. 22.44. 13.35. John 2.17.
6.32. 10.34. 13.18. 15.25. 19.24.
some Company and Discourse (as well as Music), and so some ease and relief
from that glorious Book of the Psalms; which is not only beautified by our
Savior his frequent use of it (both living and dying,) but by the continual
Services, and best Devotion of all the Saints and Children of God: For (to say
nothing of the Esteem it has, even in the Mohammedan Religion) there has been
no Church, either of Jews or Christians, nay, scarce one eminent Person in
either of those Churches, Sixty Proofs cited out of the Psalms in the N. T.
Psalm. 1.2.
who has not only allowed much time and attention, but likewise shown the
greatest remarks of Piety and Zeal, in the studious perusal thereof. For these
Spiritual Songs (as all sacred Worship was of old wrapped up in Meter) do, with
their most charming Melody, and sweetness of Expression, both set forth the Law
of the Lord, and the love of his Servants, (as on Mount Sion, not on Sinai,
viz.) in so lofty and taking a way, as that surely they contain not only the
Body and Substance, but the Spirit and Quintescence, the pleasant Tastes, and
best Relishes of our holiest Religion! Besides the variety of Subjects, and
richness of each Theme, serving (as the Treasures of several Mines) for the
furnishing and rewarding both our fancies and labors with Materials,
sufficient to please, to profit, to enrich our Meditations. So that truly it is
a ravishing, and no less than Heavenly delight, to hear the holy Persons of all
Times and Ages (like Birds in the Spring) descanting on the self-same Subject;
but with such different Notes, Melody, and Accent, as it is wonderful to
observe (while every one does well in doing his best,) what rare Divisions are
run by the joining of so full a Consort: Whilst the Music becomes more
excellent by the admirable variety thereof.

This has often set on work, and satisfied my Thoughts with the Contemplation
of our Eternal employ, the praising of God in Heaven, perhaps too in the Songs
of David, (as well as of Moses, since these were the Songs of the Lamb while he
was here on Sion) according to our best Capacities and Visions: So that as the
Angels envy not the Cherub for sitting higher, or seeing more than they; nor
the Seraphim despise the Angels, because these cannot reach the others Pitch in
their mighty Raptures and heavenly Addresses, (for they are all in the same
way, though concerned in several degrees of Duty;) It is my opinion, that no
true Christian should be discouraged, either by his own weakness, or others
greater Abilities, from turning Psalmodist, and helping the Quire with his
Notes, though they be of a harsher kind, and flatter Key, than many others
which are used there; because both in the Church here, and that above, he must
sing the same which others do, though (it may be) not with the same Elegance;
yet if his Heart be right, and his Desires sincere, though his Place and Parts
may be inferior to many, his good Will and Intent shall afford joy,
satisfaction, and bliss, and secure him from the Censure of all others.

Nay, he may suppose the Music and the Mirth of Saints to arise like the Flame
from those lowest Coals of the Altar, which lie obscurely in their Ashes; and
thence to ascend by the Degrees of the Sons of Fire to the top of their lofty
Pyramid, the Deity; and from that Central Point again stream forth such Harmony
and Delight, as may reach and fill, inflame and enlighten, array and gild the
whole Circumference of the Blessed Eternity.

Therefore since he which has the lowest Voice may bear a Part in Music, we
should neither contemn nor hinder their singing, who cannot reach so high a
strain as our selves; but bear with, or encourage, rather than silence and
disturb the Devotions of the weakest, who may be more acceptable to God in
their well-meaning, than we are to Men in our finer expressions.

Upon this account I have often judged it expedient, that Censure should be
shut out of the Church Doors, when any ones Verse or Music is brought within
them; and though we might be able to mend that which is there allowed, yet we
are rather to use than blame it, because it is prescribed by such, whom we must
yield best able to discern what is fit for the public Worship, which certainly
differs from each Man's private Devotions, more than does his Night-dress from
the Habit he must wear at Noonday.

So that though I might plead for Hopkin's and Sternhold's, for the meanest
Translation of the Psalms in our Parish Churches, (as Men do for some Customs
and Fashions) because countenanced by Authority and long Usage; yet I would not
from thence conclude, that they are the best, or that I must keep them in my
own Closet, or particular Devotions: But as I will not refuse them publicly
whilst commanded, so I will not reproach them privately; much less censure or
deter others in their singular Industry, who have not only designed, but
attempted, both to do better than the weakest Age of English Poetry; and
withal, equal the strongest Reach of Sense and Expression that is found in the
best Translators of the Psalms.

Amongst whom I would count two very late Authors, Mr. S. W. Mr. M. S.
(who might be fancied the two Poles, including a World of our Rithmical
Paraphrasts, and pretending something above them) but that the one seems to be
in the excess of Gaudiness, and liberty of Fancy, while the other is in the
worse extreme of meanness of Verse, and want of plainness; so that as the
former will be thought by some too Luxuriant and Copious, (both in Measure and
Conceit) the latter will be found incurious, and fallen short of expectation;
since he forgets the Poet, while he stoops to accommodate the People, and can
neither afford Rhyme to half his Lines, (which is easy enough to be had in our
tinkling Tongue) nor clearness to his Verse, which might have excused the other
defect, (and is but needful for the vulgar way of reading, and then singing)
because the Sentence of his Verse too frequently out-runs the Measures, and so
leaves that unfinished at the end of these; which surely is a fault that my
self (as most others) may be guilty of sometimes in those short Caesura's we
make use of, but should be avoided with all possible care; for when the Stops
reach farther than the Lines, the Breaks of these must needs be as unpleasant
to the Ear, as it is commonly in jurious to the Sense: And so are the
big-belly'd Epithetes (the (...)) wherewith some Versions abound, which are
Pedantic Charms, conjuring Ignorance into Admiration, pleasing or employing
those most of all, who least understand their use and meaning: Whereas the
words of Truth and Soberness, Acts 26.25. Genesis 34. Genesis 38.14.
such as were dictated by God's own Spirit, want (no Bombast) neither the Dress
of Dinah, nor of Thamar, to make them seem wanton, and then alluring.

The Heathens indeed set out their Fables, like Prostitutes, to put them off,
and made them cried up by the mistakes of too many; but to trick up the most
Sacred Poems in the mode of the Idolatrous Ethnic, is a License no Man has a
Patent for from Holy Writ: And though, with Politian and Bonamy, some have
preferred Pindar, I think there are as many genuine Beauties, excellent Parts
and Proportions in David, as in any uncircumcised Philistine, any monstrous
Pagan, 1 Samuel 16.12.
we can meet with: And as he appeared to Samuel, when God himself said, Arise,
anoint him, for this is he; so when I look upon him in his Psalms, I guess
surely the Anointed of the Lord is before me. How frequent, full, and
admirable, are his Metaphors, Similies, Figures, and Enrichments of Phrase! All
which ought to have right done them, (being the Daughters to so great a King)
and to be clothed according to their Quality and Excellency; 2 King. 9.34.
and that is not with Babylonish Garments, with the Thread of Egypt, or the
Garb of Aliens, but, like the Silkworm, only with Robes spun out of their own
Bowels; for they are rich enough to furnish themselves (as the Israelites did
their Tabernable) both with Coverings and Ornaments: And as the Armor of Saul
did not fit David's Person, no more does extravagant Words or Conceits become
his Poems, 1 Samuel 16.18.
who is said to be as prudent in his Speech, as skilful in his Music.

And seeing there are such apposite Allusions and Relations in each part of
these Divine Poems to the other Portions of holy Writ, which (as the Rays of
the Sun do to the World) dart Light and Beauty from one corner of the Bible to
the other; we need repair to no other Wardrobe than the Book of God, for the
trimming out any part of it, with sufficient elegancy, fullness, and
embellishment.

Therefore I endeavor in these Essays, not only to have as much of the sense
of the Psalm, but likewise of such other Scriptures as it may seem to relate
to, (whereby it may be unfolded and adorned) that they might be composed in the
plainest English, and easiest manner of Verse; yet with as much of holy Writ as
can be put into them, studying for Congruity between them and the Original,
more than Curiosity in the Texture; and to be full, though not prolix; and
useful to some, if not pleasant.

St. Hillary shows us from the Revelations who it is that holds the Key of
David: Rev. 3.7.
It is too hard for any Mortal to open the Door of this vast Palace. Humane
Fancy may peep in, only to see it, might go far, rather than venture therein to
lose it self. And if the adventurous Poet draw Stanza's of an extraordinary
length (like a Body on the Wrack) the Coherence of the Parts is often loosened,
distorted, or undiscerned; and the Musician discouraged from setting or
composing such tedious Numbers into Anthems, since these are usually not long.

And if it be so, (as I have heard) that the Hebrew Meter through the Book of
Psalms is generally very short, surely we are more obliged to conform to the
Original, and measure our Feet (as near as may be) by that Model, or else by
the Standard Measures of our Age, which have been allowed, known, and directed,
even to the vulgar: Therefore as I have somewhat observed the manner of the
Jewish Music in these Psalms of Degrees, (by frequent Repetitions and
Responses) so I have confined my self, perhaps without too much straitness, to
the Staffs, our ordinary Church Tunes do lean upon, that they may be made
useful to many by the common Notes, as they may become grateful to others by
their being capable of various better Compositions, (they being designed for
Anthems and Hymns, as well as Psalms.)

Yet would I not have them humorously set up, nor sent forth strangely dressed,
Judge. 17.5. 19.29.
like the Mistress of the Levite, or the Idol of the young Man; but modestly
and gravely accoutred like the Mother of Solomon, Prove. 31.
like our Church of England, that the Graces in these Spiritual Songs may be
more charming, as more conspicuous, by being suited to the benefit and
conversation of all, even of the lowest, as well as of the sublimer Capacities:
Since by these I wish as general a good as is possible, without any undeserved
Praise to my self, or any Detraction from another Person. For though I have
pointed a two modern Men, as the Herculean Pillars, between whom I take my way;
yet I have no great occasion to find fault with them, because the one stands on
this side, and the other on that, of the Course I steer, whilst both serve to
my safer Convoy into those Streights whither I am bound.

It Is true, the kinds of Verse I make use of, are neither grateful nor
fashionable (in this Licentious and Dyther ambique Time); but they are the best
known of any, and have no small interest in the common Approbation; and, as the
old Maxim told me, The more common the better, of what is good: So the late
excellent Bishop of Chichester (Dr. H. King) induced me, rather (by his
Example) to redress and amend the Vulgar, than to deride their lame and feeble
Sense; especially if (by the boldest attempts of Wit and Learning) we cannot
come near the Majesty and Excellency of the first Penman, it is more
reasonable that we should submit our Endeavors (as Publicola did his Fasces)
to the use and benefit of the most and meanest, rather than make them Trophies
of our own Arrogance, and our Brethren's weakness.

Our continual work is, Mark 9.49, 50.
to have about us that Salt of Charity, which may season our Offerings both to
God and Man, while we thank the one, or assist the other.

Is it not double Superstition, and worse than Folly, to court the Prayers of
Men in Heaven, and the Praises of Men on Earth? It Is enough to have an Interest
quite otherwise Religion, and to forward Man's Good with God's Glory, (more
than with our own); or God's Blessing with our own good Deeds, rather than with
others good Words.

So that I would not be thought Censorious nor Singular, nor any other ways
Pharisaical in my Entertainments here. Though I bring several Courses of
Devotion, they are not worthy to be compared to the good piece of Flesh, and
Flagon of Wine, wherewith our great Exemplar once treated the People; yet (let
these be never such course Fare) they are really designed for a Blessing to
all, as David's Banquet was, in 1 Chronicles. 16.34. and I can conclude with his
Royal word, As for me, 1 Chronicles. 29.17, 18.
in the uprightness of my Heart I have willingly offered all these things.

Noli altum sapere, sed time.

More ERRATA's in the First Part.
Page 11. l. 34. read off. l. 42. r. holiest. p. 14. l. 3. insert thou. p. 15.
l. 30. insert is the wickedness of Folly, Eccles. 7.25. l. 41. dele from. p.
16. l. 2. for from them, read for Women. In Margin Psalm. 92.13. l. 32. r. my.
p. 21. l. 14. dele the. l. 20. r. were. p. 25. l. 43. r. they will. p. 27. l.
19. r. weep thus, dele this. l. 34. insert and thine, dele and. p. 28. l. 28.
r. thee. p. 32. in Margin insert Dan. 4.31.32. Jer. 51.9. p. 38. l. 30. dele a.
p. 40. l. 42. in Margin Deuteronomy. 32.4. l. 45. dele the. p. 43. l. 32. insert for.
p. 48. l. 12. in Margin 2 King. 6.16, 23. to l. 46. in Margin Dan. 4.12, 13. p.
50. l. 25. for secured, read soured. p. 53. l. 38. read we may be.

ERRATA in the Second Part.
Page 10. in Gloria Patri, read To God, to Father, Son. p. 21. l. 22. insert
are given us. p. 24. l. 20. dele as thou did the Prophet, which is twice
repeated. p. 26. l. 14. for O Lord, read O God. remove the * from l. 24. to l.
20. p. 35. l. 16. read establish his Kingdom. p. 41. l. 32. read and a
fruitful. p. 45. l. 16. in Margin Isa. 36.10. p. 48. l. 2. in Margin Ruth 2.4.
p. 49. l. 17. read the Rods. l. 33. read preserved it. p. 50. l. 4. read thou.
p. 55. l. 32. read Jewish. l. 33. in Margin Jer. 38.12, 13. p. 56. l. 2. in
Margin Jonas 2.5, 6. l. 17. read this present state. p. 60. l. 6. for Loving,
read Leaving the Breast. p. 61. l. 6. read Root. p. 62. l. 3. read Uzzah. l.
23. read Rereward. p. 64. in Margin, read Clarius. in l. 23. read sedem innuit
Aris. p. 68. in Marg. read nictaturus sim. p. 79. l. 13. read but to the people
who watched there. p. 84. l. 17. read Songs of Elevation. And note: This whole
84th Page should have been the first.

THE FIRST Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXX. PSALM.
It is a Complaint, and Prayer against the falsness, fraud, and impious
Designs, rather than the force, of inhumane Adversaries: Because their Strength
and Power may (at least for a Time) be from God's Will and Permission; but
Deceit and Perfidiousness owe their Birth to Men's Prevarications, and the
subtle Temptations of the Evil One: And therefore ought the rather to be
deprecated.

The Author of this Psalm is not known, but supposed to be David, and made by
him upon the like occasion that the 7th, the 34th, and the 52d were Composed,
when he fled to Gath, ob Aethiopem Jeminiensem, (as In Psalm. 7.
Castalio phraseth it) or upon the implacable Fury of Saul; truly and tivilly,
as well as elegantly styled, A melancholy terrible Man: Or else upon the
malicious Information of a Cushite or Edomite against an Israelite indeed, in
whom there was no guile; which seems very probable from his Description of the
Parties, who were after the way of Mesech (as the Aethiopians Cushites were)
and allied to the sordid Tents of Kedar, or Arabia; of which Country Doeg was a
Native.

This Psalm likewise looks Prophetically at the sworn Enemies of Jerusalem's
Peace; such as were the confederate Arabians and Asiaticks at the building the
Temple, and afterward with Antiochus, at the defacing of the same: All which
cruel and cunning Foes are expressed by Ezck, 38.2.
Gog and Magog.

(...), etc.
^ IN my di -- stress and fear, For S. Steven's day, or some time of Trial.
I cried unto the Lord; who soon did help, as hear, when I this wish did word;
From Lips, made foul by guile and wrongs, and from false Tongues, Lord save my
Soul. Quid tibi dabit? aut quid addet tibi? Spoken as to Saul (perhaps) by the
Psalmist, upon the account of Doeg,


What Praise? what Profit shall
The treacherous Tongue bring thee?
Poor Soul! 'twill scorch and Gall
Thy self, as well as me.
'Twill doubly harm, Having been straightened in my Verse, I desire to observe
in Prose the rare Elegancy of the Psalmist here; who speaking of a desert state
and place among the Sons of Ismael, (the great Archer) he tells his savage
Foes, (though Companions) that they shall be struck with their own Weapons, as
Saul was; and burnt with the Coals of the Wilderness, where Juniper most
abounds, which was the most desolate and grievous Fire, from the nature of the
Wood; and so proper fuel for the black Tents of Kedar, and for Mesech; (the
Asiaticks) if taken for a People wild, and wandering about in Wagons, or living
in Tents covered with Skins: But if it referrs to a place, it is well rendered
by the LXXII. whom I follow, with Symachus and Aquila, etc,

By Fire; and Shot
Like Darts made hot
From some strong Arm.
Why then? O why so long
Do I protract my Woes?
By wandering still among
War's Friends, and Peace's Foes:
I Am in a Tent
Who are on Theft;
Of Arabs left,
And Murder bent.
At me their Bows are bent,
Their Malice does increase;
They say no good I meant,
When I did seek their Peace:
When I speak fair,
And straight the Swarm
I them all-arm,
Their Stings prepare.
Corollarium (...).

Which may be used, or omitted,

It being another Repetition of the Sense It being another Return of the Music
It being another Recollection of the Psalm.
BUT though the Sland'rers sting, Ver. 3, 4.

Like Lightning, pierced and burned:
The Stones which he did sling,
Heaven in his Face returned.
Live Coals from Hell,
By his bad Tongue,
And Javelings flung
On his Head fell.
Therefore no more will I
Be of such Bruits afraid; Ver. 2, 7.

No more I Will sigh, or cry, Ver. 5, 6.

Though I Am in Deserts stayed:
In all my Ways
Who do afford
I Will Bless Thee, Lord, Ver. 1, 2.

Such cause of Praise.
Though I Am in Deserts stayed,
No more I Will sigh, or cry:
Or be of Bruits afraid,
No longer now will I.
Such cause of Praise
We'll Bless Thee, Lord,
Thou do afford;
In all our Ways.
Gloria Patri, etc.
Glory be to our King,
Who shall be, was, and is;
Loud Hallelujahs sing
To God, the God of Peace:
The Lord of Hosts,
The Father, Son,
The Three in One,
And Holy Ghost.
AMEN.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE First PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXX.
PSALM.
O Lord, our Redeemer! a very present help in trouble, as I have found thee
heretofore, blessed be thy powerful Compassion, so I desire to approve thee
whenever, as at this time, I cry unto thee to deliver my Soul. O God! I see
that I am fallen into a dangerous Condition, by the Lies of the Serpent, the
Treacheries of my own Flesh, and the Falsehoods of the World, which I have
sought and served, listened and trusted to, and so am justly appay'd with
Cousenage and Disgrace, with Calumnies and Accusation. For what can be had from
the Accuser of the Brethren, from the deceitfulness of Riches, and from the
Cheats of all things here below, but disappointments, and vexation for such as
follow lying Vanities, forsaking thy Mercies, and their own?

Alas! then woe is me! that I have heaped up such Coals of Vengeance on my own
Head, and pierced my Heart through with so many Darts of Sorrow, by not
delighting in the Tents of the Righteous, nor in the Tabernacles of thy
Holiness, but in the Dwellings of Ungodliness, and in the House of the
Accursed; so that I have deserved indeed to be made a Vagabond like Cain, and a
Slave like Cham, in a perpetual Banishment from Comfort, and in a Captivity
unto Sin, by having my Conversation according to the evil fashion of this Age.

But, Lord! how long, how long shall I sojourn, either amongst the Enemies of
thy Grace, or of my Peace? Amongst the Superstitious or Idolatrous? Amongst
those who are after the way of Mesech? Or those who dwell in the black aboads
of Kedar? O! prolong not my Danger and Unhappiness any more among them, nor
protract my Wanderings with a backsliding People; for I seek Peace, Peace with
Thee, with my own Conscience, and with all the World.

But can the Egyptian change his Skin? Had Zimri Peace, who slew his Master? No
Lord. There is no Peace (thou have said it) to the Wicked, who are at defiance
with thee, and with themselves, and make War in the face of Heaven.

Therefore that I may find Peace, I seek thy Pardon, and my Soul's Purity, and
desire thee to preserve me from the Pollutions and Snares of a perverse
Generation, that dissemble as strange Children, that so (having no fellowship
with the workers of Iniquity) I might live in the sweet Communion of thy
Saints, and to be furthered by their Examples and Conversation in the way of
Peace and Holiness.

For, Lord! I would be a pacifick Jacob, and dwell under the shadow of thy
Wings, there accounting my self secure though I have no other Covering. Thou
art the best place to hide me in, and it is not my Sword or Bow shall settle or
secure me, but thy Mercy, thy Grace, and thy Spirit. No strange Arms here can
give me a certain or safe Abode, unless thou be on my side.

Therefore, dear God! whilst many rise up against me to trouble me, in saying,
Where is thy God? (seeking to destroy me with their own quiet) be thou a God
nigh at hand to deliver me from Treachery, Malice, Turbulence, and Hypocrisy.
And while my Foes heap Coals of Fire on their own Heads by unjust Actions, and
hard Speeches, let my Mouth be touched with a Coal from thine Altar, that I may
know how to keep the Door of my Lips from all Cursing and Bitterness, Lying and
Blasphemies, fraudulent and filthy Communication; and how to open it in Praying
to thee, that I may find the Blessings of Peace within, above, abroad, about
me, by Repentance of my Sins, Reformation of my Life, Regeneration of my
Nature, and Reconciliation to thy Love.

O! let it suffice that I have stayed so long in their Habitations, where the
Instruments of Cruelty remain, where I might have been drawn either unto base
Earthly Sorrow and Distraction, or to foul Hellish Guilt and Desperation, and
so to inevitable Destruction both of Soul and Body. Let it pity thee to see my
poor Soul in such a Sink, such a Gaol and Mill, in such a nasty, vile, and
slavish State as it has endured. And do thou cover my Head while my Foes make
them ready to Battle.

Then shall I be guarded from the strife of Tongues, from the contradiction of
Sinners, from the reproach that I fear, and from Satan that is come forth
against me with great wrath, because I have called on thy Name, while thou art
not angry that I cry unto thee,

Our Father, etc.

THE SECOND Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXI. PSALM,
Is an Act of Acquiescence and Trust in God's Power and Presence, made by David
(as it is thought) when hunted like a Partridg on the Mountains; and pursued by
Saul, when he made the 54th, 55th, and 57th Psalm: And this, being much used by
the Jews in Babylon, (as most suitable for times of Persecution or Sickness)
was at their going up from thence appointed to be one of their Psalms of
Ascents, and therefore to be sung frequently, loudly, and by Responses; which
occasioned this Composing it like an Anthem, (...): The Stanza's being so
pointed and divided as to answer alternately by Disticks (if it may better suit
the Music.)

The Title of it has a difference from the rest, (as the Rabbis observe)
being (...) and not as in others (...):

It may be styled David's March, made by him (or some other considerable
Person) while be kept the Field, either for the safety of his Flocks (as Jacob
did), or of his Friends (as Abram): Thus did the Royal Shepherd, and sweet
Singer of Israel exercise, and employ his Mind in the grateful Memory of the
Divine Goodness. Well might he then here pray and hope like a Soldier, that
God would be his Shade (as well as his Shield) as near to him as his shadow;
that the Sun might not hurt him by Day, nor the Moon by Night, (as Absalom, and
Achitophel, the one by Day, and the other by Night, intended to have done.)

And if we look on David, as he went up the Ascent of Mount Olivet: This Psalm
was very proper for his Condition then, as it is for any Person's now, in the
interval of War; the Phrases being throughout the whole Psalm Military; and
allusive to Soldiers besieged, as in the first Verse; relieved, as in the
second; all-arm'd, as in the third; secured, watched, and guarded, as in the
fourth; shielded and surrounded, as in the fifth and sixth; in the seventh and
eighth hemmed in, and convoyed out for Victory and Triumph.

^ WHere shall I seek for aid? For the Second of September and October.
where shall I set mine Eyes? mine Eyes and Prayers, like Birds afraid, up to
the Hills would rise. But whither would they rise? un -- to some dangerous
height? O no, this Quarry thither flies, whence springs our help, and light.

Nor has our Health and Light
From things below their Birth:
But from the highest Rock of Might,
Who made both Heaven and Earth.
Therefore, though false foul Earth
Thy Soul with Foes surround:
Shall it be moved from holy Mirth?
Shall Cares run it on Ground?
Christ is the Ark to ground Genesis 8.11.

Thy Heart on, when distressed:
From head to foot he will make thee sound;
On him did Jacob rest. Genesis 28.11.

But he does never rest Non dormitabit, multo minus dormiet, (...): quamvis
(...), and ex impatientia Iugentis Deus obdormire dicitur. Psalm. 44.24.

From doing good, nor sleeps:
That with such Guards thou may be blessed, Genesis 32.2.

As he his Israel keeps.
Good Shepherd he does keep Psalm. 22.1, 4.

His Flock, even in Death's shade:
See then (if thou art of his Sheep)
How on thy side he is laid.
Though Dangers have waylaid
Thy going out, or in:
See how thy Husband's Arm's displayed, Isa. 54.5.

To save thy very Skin.
Like the three Children's Skin, Dan. 3.27.

Thine shall be scorched by none:
Whatever Heat thou may be in,
Whatever Star has shown.
Nor shall the Moon, nor Sun
Hurt thee, by Night or Day:
No Mischief seen, nor closely done,
Shall touch thee any way.
God shall preserve thy Ways
And Mind, from all that is ill
In Youth: And when thy Life decays,
Blessed thou shall be still.
Then trust and bless him still,
Who endless Safety sends:
God through this Vale of Sorrows, will
Guide us to joyful ends.
The Entrance, Progress, Ends,
Public and private Powers;
Labors, and Studies of his Friends,
God blesses at all hours.
Then trust and bless him still,
Who still did us defend:
God does, and ever will,
Give Blessings without end: Antistrophe.
Give Blessings without end,
God does and ever will;
He still did us defend,
Then trust and bless him still.
The Entrance, Progress, Ends,
Public and private Powers:
And Works of all his Friends,
God blesses: Lord bless Ours.
Gloria Patri, etc.
To God, (...) Father, (...) Son,
And to the Holy Ghost,
Be Glory: And let every one
Strive who shall praise God most.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Second PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXI.
PSALM.
I Will lift up my Heart to thee, O Lord! And though it be cast down with the
dangers and diffidence I am in, while mine Afflictions and mine Enemies have
cast a Mount about me, to hinder me from the sight and hope of Succor, yet
have I God's Hill to fly unto; and from thy House I can survey the end of the
Wicked, the Redemption of thy Captives, and the height of thy Power, that is
higher than the highest. But O the depth of thy Love! What a pleasant Vale is
this under it? How does this smile and sing, and stand full of Corn, that
strengthens Man's Heart? So that although I remain in the Valley of the shadow
of Death, if I can but look up to the Rock that is higher than I, to Christ
(the Shecinah) the true Mercy Seat, that is placed above the Cherubims, all
Types and Symbols of his Presence, I shall neither lose my Faith, nor my Life;
I shall not be discomfitted, nor enslaved like a surprised Zedekiah, I shall
not be famished, nor broken up like a long besieged Jerusalem. Though mine
Enemies hem me in on every side, and carnal Fear cause me to cry out (as the
Prophet's Servant) What shall we do? Yet if I can but lift up mine Eyes to
thee, which indeed are naturally as heavy as Moses his Hand, I shall perceive
somewhat else besides Perils and Foes on every side, I shall find the Mountains
full of Chariots of Fire, and more for me than can be against me. For an Host
of Angels shall pitch their Tents about me to secure me, and those mighty
Ministers of thy good pleasure shall keep me like Daniel from the power of the
Lion. So that my most Savage Enemies shall lack and suffer hunger, while I want
nothing that is good. For though my way be hedged up that I cannot pass which
way I would, nor follow the Lusts of my Heart, and the desires of mine Eyes, as
many do, yet I may look up with joy and confidence (as I trust I shall) at the
last day, because my Salvation is drawing nigh.

My Hope, my Help, comes from the Lord, not from the Angels in his Presence,
but from the Angel of his Presence, and of his Covenant, the Blessed JESUS, who
having taken our Nature that he might be sensible of our Infirmities, ever
abides with Humanity, at thy right Hand making Intercession for us. And as he
made the Heavens and the Earth for us, so he makes a new Heaven and a new Earth
of us, by justifying and sanctifying both our Souls and Bodies, through the
mighty Work of his Spirit, in his Word and Sacraments: For these are the
Mountains of the Lord, wherein he is apparently seen, Glorious in Holiness,
Fearful in Praises, doing Wonders, and abounding in Goodness and Truth. If we
Worship him (as our Fathers did) in these Mountains, in the heights of
Sincerity and Devotion, we may expect to hear God promising us graciously, as
he did Abraham, that he will be a God to us, and to our Seed after us: And we
may hope to see him, as Manoah and his Wife did, in the Zealous performances of
his holy Worship, in the Flame arising from the Altar of our Hearts; from
whence God would not accept a Service, if he desired the Death of Sinners.

Therefore we may be assured, that if we keep in his ways he will keep us in
ours, as he did his Israel, both by the Pillar of Fire, and by the Pillar of a
Cloud; by the flame of Affliction, as well as by the light of Prosperity. And
while we lay hold on these, (as Sampson did on the two Columns) let us invoke
thy help, O Lord; saying,

O Lord! Though thou may call to Baldness, to Weeping, to Weakness, or to
Want; though thou may touch the Sinew, and make it shrink; or strive with me
as thou did with Israel, and begin to afflict me, or seem to depart from me,
so that my Flesh and my Heart may fail, yet O suffer not my Soul to slip, let
not my Foot my Foundation be removed, but let it rest with thy Dove upon the
Ark of thy Covenant, and be fixed on the Rock Christ Jesus, that thou may
order all my goings.

O! do thou go out and in before me, that my going out and coming in may be
ever blessed. If thou go not out with us, carry us not abroad, nor let us stay
at home without thee. Let not the Vanities of the Day, nor the Visions of the
Night, disturb our Senses, or abuse our Souls. O Lord, prevent the Midday
Devils, and the Arrows that fly by Noon, from blasting or hurting of us; nor
let Nocturnal Evils, or any mischief in the dark, have Power to smite us: But
be thou a Succor, a Second, a God, not a far off, to preserve and prosper us
in all our Actions, public and private, in our Labors, in our Studies, in our
Rest, in our Retirements, in our weak Beginnings, in our happier Progresses,
and in our best Conclusions. O Lord, be with us in our entrance on the Stage of
this World, in our Parts here, in our Exit hence, even now and for evermore.
Amen.

THE THIRD Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXII. PSALM,
Deseribeth David's Joy, which is expressed in the 30th Psalm, at the bringing
of the Ark, and Offering for the Temple, and Dedication of his House to God's
Service: And it is a Preparative Hymn for the Devout, in their going up to the
Places of Religion and Solemn Worship; containing their Thanks, Praise, and
Pleasure, in the return of the Comfort and Company, which they enjoyed in the
public Adoration of God; and their Prayers for the longer continuance of such
signal Blessings: Made by David (as it is thought) upon his return to
Jerusalem, after his flight from Absalom; and solemnly sung by the Levites at
their coming out of Captivity. Jerusalem in general (as the Temple more
especially) being the Type of God's Church, both Militant and Triumphant, that
is built with the precious Stones of the Apostles and Prophets, CHRIST himself
being the Rock, Caput Anguli, and Caput Angelorum; to whom when many come,
there is much Joy.

The Poem is Dramatick, (like the 118th Psalm) in which the King, Priest, and
People, seem to bear their Parts of Rejoicing at the public Festivals (which
were thrice every Year to be solemnized at Jerusalem) according to the Command
of God; which occasioned the great Beautifying, Enlarging, and Fortifying of
that City, intimated in the 2d, 3d, 6th, and 7th Verses; as well as the other
reason of its Happiness and Amplitude, (from the Temple of God, and Throne of
David) mentioned in the 1st, 5th, 8th, and 9th Verses: To which may be added
this reason, because there was the great Senate of the LXXII. or Sanhedrim.

The King begins the Psalm in the 1st Verse, the Priests follow in the 2d,
the People in the 3d, and they go on in the 4th. Then the King takes it again
in the 5th, the Priests in the 6th, and the People go on in the 7th (as in a
Procession, and good order): The Priests take it again in the 8th, and the the
King concludes in the best, (though last place) with a fixed and pious
Resolution.

This may properly be set for the 29th of May.

^ BLes -- sed be God for the good News, and Freedom, which he does afford:
From The House of Bondage, like glad Jews, we come un -- to thy House, O Lord.

Our Woes and Wand'rings now shall cease,
While rooted fast, like Trees, we stand
Within thy Courts; who do with Peace
Plant us again in our Land.
Our Joys shoot up with fresh increase,
While rooted fast, like Trees, we stand
Within thy Courts; who do with Peace
Plant us again in our own Land.
See, Hierosolyma optime instituta concors, and ideo duratura.
see, how comely! how compact!
Peace makes this Gyant-City seem:
Our Union makes her Form exact,
Like the Heavenly New Jerusalem.
Whither, to an Eternal Feast
All the Lord's Tribes at last shall go;
And on his Hill above find rest,
As we do in his House below.
Here now, (as at a Passover)
Our Tribes (like Streams) in the Ocean meet;
To serve thee, as thy Laws averr:
And Praise thy Name, that is so great.
Here now, (as at a Passover)
Our Tribes (like Streams) in the Ocean meet;
To serve thee, as thy Statutes are:
And Praise thy Name, that is so great.
Here is God's Temple, David's Throne,
The Bench of Justice, Mercy's Seat:
Here Princes, Prophets, Priests make known
How good our Church! our State how great!
Here Is the Blessed Type of Heaven above,
Pray then for Salem; here for Peace:
Since they who love this Place, do prove
Happy, and blessed with much Increase.
Lord, bless us, and this Place, with Peace,
With Plenty, and with Piety:
For thy Name's sake, let our's increase,
Our King's, and Friends Prosperity.
All Ties, both Humane, and Divine;
Our Love for Men, our Zeal for God,
What we can do, or wish, combine Fiat Pax in Antemurali tuo, and Abundantia,
(...). in Palatiis, Turrium ad instar structis.

To seek the Bliss of this abode.
Gloria Patri, etc.
In the Lord's Praise let none be Dumb,
But Father, Son, and Ghost adore;
Who was, and is, and is to come,
Thrice Blessed God for evermore.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Third PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXII.
PSALM.
O Glorious God! to whom Praise and Worship is due, to whom Vengeance and
Holiness belongs; accept the Joys, and Adorations of our Souls and Bodies, for
that we have not only Freedom in our own Persons, but also Encouragement from
our Relations to come along with them, and many more of thy People, to the most
proper place, and by the appointed way, of public Worshipping and Praising of
thee.

Oh! how glad (as if we had found great Spoils) may we be to find, not only
that we can, but also that others will plant themselves within thy Courts, and
not stand in the way of Sinners, that we may prosper together like Trees by the
Water side, and bring forth Fruit, and that in due season?

Dear, and gracious Lord! when we go hence, and shall be called away by Death,
how happy should we be, could we come to thee as easily as we now can come to
the Church, and bring this Olive Branch in our Mouths into thy Ark!

Let us go up into the House of the Lord, let us ascend unto his holy Hill; let
us be transplanted from the Gates of Death, to be rooted in the Porches of the
New Jerusalem; for one day in thy Courts is better than a thousand in any
other. I had rather be a Doorkeeper in thy Tabernacle, than to dwell in the
Tents of Wickedness.

Help us then to join with the blessed Choir, both of the Church Militant and
Triumphant, in a Lesson of the best Service, even Love and Charity, which is
the compleatest Religion, the fulfiller of the Law, the filler full of Heaven.

For see the Jerusalem that comes down thence, as well as that which is above,
agrees in all its Parts and Graces, and by its lovely Symmetry makes up the
sweetest Harmony of Heaven and Earth, declaring Charity the bond of Peace, as
Peace the breeder of Felicity.

Therefore while we see the present Concord and Conformity thou have afforded
our Nation, we look with joy upon an Emblem of that glorious Day, when thou
shall gather thy Children from the four Winds, and bring them together in the
Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and to live with him for ever.

Lord! 'till that time come, preserve thy Church among us from Rent and Spot,
from Breach and Blemish, and meet with us graciously (as thou did with
Elijah) in the soft mild Voice of thy Gospel, in the favoury Breath of thy
Spirit, in the sweet Airs of our pious and public Services; wherein make us to
consent to Pray for the Peace of our Souls, and of thy People; as also for the
Plenty of our Land, for the Piety of our Governors, for the Prosperity of
their Government and Persons; for the Purity of Religion, for the Perpetuity of
thy Church among us; as also for Unanimity, and Uniformity in the way of thy
Worship, that we may endeavor, as well as desire, the most durable Good here,
and an eternal Good hereafter, to our selves, and ours, and all thine.

Which we beseech thee grant for Jesus Christ 's sake, who is of the Stock and
Lineage of David, to whom belongs the Seat of Judgment for ever and ever. Amen.

THE FOURTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXIII. PSALM,
Is agreeable to the condition of David in the third Psalm; as also to the sad
State of the Israelites: Composed (perhaps) by Ezra at Babylon, and from that
time frequent in use; being Calculated for the Times of Trouble and Tyranny.
Wherein the Church (as under Antiochus, or some such insulting Oppressor)
prays, complains, and trusts to God.

The Priest beginning (as it were with an Oremus) to the People in the first
Verse; and then the whole Congregation joining and going on with him to the end
of the Psalm.

^ TO thee, who do a -- bide, a -- bove the Starry Spheres, yet have our
Griefs with Pi -- ty eyed; to thee we send our Tears.

To Heaven this Spring of Tears
From hence does bubling rise;
Which from low Grounds our Passion rears Psalm. 121.1

To thee, that have our Eyes.
Nor do we need an Eye, By Hand in the Text is understood help, strength, or
protection; by those who take the words of this Verse to imply the Servant's
repairing to his Lord for succor and defense from Foreign injuries. It also
signifies bounty, direction, and correction, to those who take the meaning as I
apprehend it.

But to observe thy Hands:
Which way for Blessing us they lie;
By Chast'nings, or Commands.
Since often, like Israel's Hands, Genesis 48.14, 19.

Thine, as across, are spread;
For God (not Man) best understands
How to Crown Ephraim's Head.
Therefore we raise our Heads,
Not to repine, but pray;
To mark how our chief Joshua leads,
And how we him obey.
As Soldiers still obey
Their Leader's Staff, and Rod,
And at their Becks do go or stay;
So wait we on our God.
Thy Smile or Frowns, O God,
Like humblest Handmaids, we
Do bear; and from our Lord's abode
Do not (like Hagar) flee. Genesis 21.14.

No Jonas here will fly Jon. 1.3.

From thee; Jon. 4.8.
(though Chasten'd) thus
We, 2 King. 5.2.
as meek Servants, carefully
Stay, 'till thou pity us.
Thy Mercy we implore,
Thy speedy Mercy, Multum saturata est Anima subsannatione: As if played upon,
and scoffed at, by the Soldiery, while led in Triumph; according to the
expression in Psalm. 137.3.
Lord:
For now our Lives are scorned; nay more,
Our very Souls abhorred.
By those we are abhorred,
(As we do loath their Pride)
Who can with Insolence afford
To wrong us, and deride.
But God shall them deride,
Whose Scorns o're-charge our Hearts;
When these are full, and can abide
No more, God takes our parts.
And since God takes our parts,
To him our Tears shall glide:
To him we'll lift our Looks and Hearts,
Who does in Heaven abide.
Now since God takes our part,
To him our Tears shall glide:
To him we'll lift our Looks and Hearts,
Who does in Heaven abide.
Gloria Patri, etc.
All Glory, Praise, and Bliss,
To the Three, in Unity;
Who (as at first) was God, now is,
And evermore shall be.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Fourth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXIII.
PSALM.
O Thou great Lord and King, that dwell in the Heavens! David has taught me
to lift up mine Eyes to thee, and the Son of David has better instructed me to
call thee by thy Spirit, Abba, Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy
Name, etc.

That gracious Name of Our Father, invites us, Lord, to call upon thee in the
needful time of Trouble. For though thou dwell in the highest Heavens, thou
art not contained by them; but from that thy Throne, vouchsafest to look down
upon what is done and suffered upon Earth. So that in the deepest evils of our
Sufferance, as in all the good of our Enjoyment here, we may still look up, and
see thy doing, and be satisfied in the Wonder that thou do so much for our
advantage.

Ah! how mavelous is it in our Eyes, that when Hope and Help both fail on
Earth, we can seek much higher for them, and even then too, when we are justly
corrected; because thou art a merciful King, and behold we are thy Servants for
all that thou have afforded us.

We submit to thee with humble Fear, and wait on thee with Thanksgiving, and
Praise thee for smiting and subduing us thy People under thee. For thou do as
the King of Israel did to Benhadad; thou beatest, that thou may bring us to
thy self; thou conquerest, that thou may be kind; taking away a little, that
thou might give a better Kingdom. Wherefore we beg, and trust, that when
thou have convinced us how worthy we all are of Hate, Death, and Disgrace, that
then thou will restore us to Life, Favor, and Prosperity.

Well may we be watchful Suppliants and Expectants for some Token of thy Pity,
when thy left Hand, some sinister Providence is laid upon us, because thou have
still thy right Hand, the Man of thy right Hand to embrace thy Spouse, when thy
afflicting Hand is never so heavy upon her, either by the Tyranny of
Oppressors, or by the Rod of Tribulation.

Let us rightly hearken to this Rod, and see the Hand which has appointed it,
and not look awry by Pride, Uncharitableness, Impenitence, or Impatience, on
what thou do; because as thy provoked Justice is the Author, so our
Provocations are the just Original of our Sorrows, and the Springs of our
Sufferings. And it is well for us in our Calamities when we are not thrown out,
but fall into the Hands of God, who is no less pitiful, than powerful, to
deliver us with David out of the Hands of all our Enemies, and out of the Hands
of Saul too: From all our wicked Foes, (I mean) and from our most wicked selves
also; from our own Unrighteousness, as well as others, which fills our Souls
with Shame, our State with Contempt, and our Lives with Sorrow.

For is not proud Lucifer, as it were, at ease, when we tumble our selves down
by diffidence in God, or self-deceit? And vile Oppressors, like the Devils
themselves, are in their proper and pleasant work, when they are Lording it
over thine Heritage.

Wherefore preserve us, we beseech thee, from our own Baseness and Falsehood, as
well as from the Tyranny and Treachery of thine other Enemies. And plead thou
our Cause for us with others, and with our selves, for thy Son's, and for our
Soul's sake.

And when we are driven by the Insolence of others, or by the Demerits of our
own Actings, to implore thy Mercy, and thy Pity, with all the prostitute
Submission, humble Confidence, and absolute Resignation of Obedient Servants.
O! let us not be slothful in our Duties, or doubtful of thy Providence, but
diligent in all the Labor that thou call us to, thanking our selves for
deserving Correction, as thee our Lord for correcting us so Father-like, and
trusting by thy Chastisements to prove in us more of thy Love, and of our
Adoption.

THE FIFTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXIV. PSALM,
Is entitled David's, according to the Tenor of that in Samuel, Cap. 2. v. 22.
being a Commemoration of his wonderful deliverance from great and many
Dangers; together with a thankful acknowledgment to God, the sole Author of
Safety and Success, properly used at any time of eminent Preservation; (as on
the Fifth of November, or Third of June.)

It may be called, David's Triumphs for more than one Victory, by God's special
assistance, as may be gathered from the repetition of the first words, (nisi
quod Dominus) which imply the iteration of God's Goodness, and Man's gratitude;
for when he is pleased to manifest the largeness of Lovingkindness to us, then
especially ought we to make our return of Gratitude with a Non nobis.

This Divine Io Paean was composed (probably) after the Conquest of the
Ammonites, who had beset David on every side, according to that expression of
their force and inhumane Rage, Tunc homines (Adham per contemptum) vivos
deglutiissent nos; or (as the word Adham seems to hint to me) upon his subduing
of the Edomites, when he made the 60th Psalm; or (as others think) after most
of his Victories over the Philistines, etc. in Chron. when the Snare was broke
by the Death of his Enemies, as (in the Prophecy) the Jews Bondage was, by the
Persians breaking the Chaldean Monarchy.

And so the late and former, the many and wonderful Deliverances of our Nation,
are to own the immediate effect of God's gracious interposition; and as a
signal Evidence of His all-swaying Power, (as the first Creation of the World
was) that we might not Sacrifice to our Nets and Bulwarks, nor value our selves
upon the store of deeper Waters (like once Proud, but now Desolate, Tire;) but
that our Trust, Succor, and Defense, may be founded on him, the Supreme of all
Beings, on whom depends the whole Creation.

^ HAd not the Lord been on our side, now may the wrestling Is -- rael say,
when E -- sau did his Troops provide; our Flocks had been the Ly -- ons prey.

Had not the Lord been on our side,
When Men against us rose (like Waves);
The Surges of their Rage, and Pride,
Had snatched us quick into our Graves.
Like Whales upon Amittay's Son, Jonas.

Death's Jaws on us they opened wide:
Dathan's strange End, Numb. 16.29.
how could we shun?
Had not the Lord been on our side.
When Seas of Rage swelled to that height,
As on our Souls to whelm their Tide;
Those Torrents had destroyed us quite,
Had not the Lord been on our side!
Then had the Streams our strength o're-pow'r'd,
But we through Floods, through Foes did wade:
And were not, as a Prey, devoured;
Nor of their cursed Teeth afraid.
Blessed be God! our Life's got free
From all the Toyls, their Mischief set:
As Birds out of a Snare, so we
'Scape strangely through the Fowler's Net.
Hell Snares are broke, our Souls are freed,
For on God's help our Hearts are stayed:
God's Word speaks Heaven, and Earth his Deed;
His Hands preserve the Works they made.
God keep us all, as all he made;
From him the Heavens and Earth proceed:
Upon his Truth our Trust is stayed;
Hell's Snares are broke, and we are freed.
Gloria Patri, etc.
Glory be to the Father, Son,
And Holy Ghost, whom we adore
In Persons three, in Essence one,
Who was, is, shall be evermore.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Fifth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXIV.
PSALM.
O Thou Lion of the Tribe of Judah, thou Shepherd of Israel, that leadest thy
People like a Flock, while we with thankfulness look up to thy strength for us,
to thy stay of us, and thy staff over us, let us look down with Humility on our
own unworthiness. We deserve not the least part of that care and watchfulness
of thine, which defends us daily from the ravenous Bear of this World's
Temptations, from the Uncircumcised Philistine our own Flesh, and from the
roaring Lion of the Abyss, that goes about seeking to devour, to swallow us up
quick, as it were, at a Morsel: And yet, blessed be the Lord, he has not given
us up for a Prey to these Destroyers; and if we give not up our selves by our
sinful fears, and easy submissions, though Satan's rage be like his Hell
enflamed, he cannot have his will of us. That Lion may come out against us with
great wrath, and fright us by his vain Noises, but cannot fall upon us at once,
as he desires. He has no part, no power of us, 'till we give it to him.

If therefore, O Lord, we are on thy side, or thou on ours, we need not fear
what Devils, or what Man can do unto us, even when they rise never so proudly,
never so powerfully against us. Let us but set the Lord our Righteousness at
our right hands; let us but have righteous Hands, and innocent Hearts, and we
shall not be so greatly moved or terrified, as to let the Enemy triumph over
our Souls; though yet we must confess with Grief, that many Waters have gone
over them. The swelling Torrents of sinful Passions and Prosperity, the mighty
Floods of worldly Cares and Vanities, the supersluities of naughty sensual
Pleasures, have not only tossed and endangered, but even overwhelmed and
swallowed up our Lives. So that we have been sinking into destruction, like
those that are howling in the Pit.

Alas! the bitter Streams of our vile imaginations and transgressions, have,
like a deadly draught or Poison, been sucked in greedily, and sent to our very
Hearts; so that we had been past all means of escape, or hope of succor, if
thou had not stood by us, as thou did by thy Servant Paul, and not only
strengthened, but saved us, as thou did the Prophet, by drawing us forth as
thou did the Prophet of the dangerous Gulf of estrangement and infidelity,
into which our triple Enemies would have thrown us. Their Power would be great,
like their Malice: Did not thou take our part, O holy Spirit! and plead our
Cause. O sweetest Jesus! Blessed be thy omnipotent, and most glorious Mercy,
that has made our Souls as a Bird that may fly up to Heaven and be secure. We
praise, and thank thee, dearest Father! for those Wings of Faith, Prayer, Love,
and Devotion, whereby we can escape the Snare of the cunning Fowler, and all
his noysom Plagues and Temptations. O! still cover us, both with thy gracious
Protection, and with the lovely Wings of the Holy of Holies, so that we may
break the Bands of Satan asunder, and cast away his Cords from us, and neither
have the Eyes of our Faith held from seeing thee, nor the Feet of our
Affections from seeking thee, but like thy beloved and most loving Disciples,
Peter and John, leave our Nets whereby we take others, and all those
Entanglements whereby we are so caught our selves, and throw off every
Impediment for the better, following of our Master Christ, under the Patronage
of whose Love and Power we would roost and nestle our Beings for ever: For it
is he that has made Heaven and Earth for us, for our Habitation, and will make
a new Heaven and Earth about us for our Regeneration. And since this is a
greater Blessing than the first Creation of Man, let our delivery from the Jaws
of Hell bring him more Honor than all his other Dealings with us, even Glory
for evermore. Amen.

THE SIXTH Psalmof Degrees, BEING The CXXV. PSALM,
Like the 11th Psalm, shows David's Trust and Recourse to God, not like Saul
to the Witch of Endor, or Wealth of Amalek, but where Believers are established
and secured in the Presence of the Almighty, and perpetuity of the Church,
whereby they find the goodness of their Portion, and the evil Lot of the
Wicked, whatsoever he be, whether Hypocritical, Profane, or Backsliding.

It is applied by the Rabbis to the Days of the Messiah; and so by us it may
be appositely used on Sacramental Days, or any such time of greater
manifestation and experience of God's Integrity, and the Faith of Man.

^ WHO on the Lord do build their Trust, For S. John's day.
like Si -- on they command; up in -- to Heaven their Heads they thrust, their
Feet un -- mo -- ved stand.

Right safe, high, strong, they always stand,
Like God's most Holy ground;
The Rock of Ages on each hand
Does shade them, and surround.
As Hills Jerusalem surround
To deck her, and defend;
So God encircles, and has crowned
His folk, World without end.
As Hills, etc.
For least in Sin their Sufferings end,
Though an Egyptian For the Rod or Scepter of Wickedness is the Tyranny of a
Pharaonick Oppression over the lot of the Righteous, that is, the Church of
God; which he may lay on, but will not leave, nor suffer to lie still, God
having the Rod of their Portion in his hand, (alluding to the old way of
Sortition by Staves, whereof see Numb. 17. and Josh. 18.) For the Reasons
mentioned observe how aptly the Portions of the Wicked (let them be never so
fat or fair, like Esau's here) are termed Rods to plague ofttimes both
themselves and others, as Dives's Portion did: But the Portion of the Godly is
styled a Lot, and a pleasant one, as David's 16 Psalm. 6. or a Cup of Blessing
indeed, like Jacob's; and of abundance, like Benjamin's, Genesis 33.11. Genesis 44.2.
Rod
To the Goshen of the good extend;
It Is thence removed by God.
Do good still to the Good, O Lord,
To him whose Heart and Line
Bend not to wrong; whose Feet never trod
Ways which to Hell incline.
Since such, as crooked ways incline
To do, or cherish ill,
God shall drive from him; but design
Peace to his Israel.
For such, etc.
Gloria Patri, etc.
To Father, Son, and The sudden change in the expression of God, from the
second Person to the third: As it is an elegancy in the Original, so it may
note, such shall not know God (in the second Person of the Trinity) as a
Savior, but at a far greater distance as a Judge; Heb. 10.38, 39. who draw
back, and turn aside (perverting their way which is already crooked, Prove.
14.2.) to more depraved Obliquities, and desperate Apostasy, after a profession
of the right way: But they shall be tortured with Hypocrites and Unbelievers,
while he shall be kept (like Israel, Genesis 32.) in perfect Peace, whose Mind is
stayed on God, Isa. 26.3. to the greater vexation of those Edomites, who
perhaps sometime persecuted him.
Ghost, we bow,
One glorious God w' adore:
As in beginning was, is now,
And shall be evermore.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Sixth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXV.
PSALM.
O Thou immutable Lord God, most faithful Creator, Redeemer, and Comforter, I
desire not only to believe of thee in the world, to credit what thou art in thy
self; but to trust to what thou say in thy Gospel, to rely on thee for what
thou do at present, and acquiesce in thee for what thou will do hereafter,
and stay my self on thee through thine everlasting good pleasure: For thou art
the Lord that do not change, and therefore we are not consumed, but are
converted from Creatures to thy Children, confirmed from our weaknesses by thy
Spirit, and continued in thy service with thy self.

Ah the safety! the assurance, the steadiness, the solace, the sole and
supernatural satisfaction that is in fullness of Faith upon thee the Messiah,
the Lamb of God, who make us thereby the Temples of the living God, the City
of the Lamb, the New Jerusalem that shall ascend up above, and be made
illustrious with all the Jewels of the concord, regularity, and brightness of
Spiritual Graces, as with the eternal Riches of ineffable Love, and heavenly
Glory: So that we shall never be removed from our Abode in Jesus Christ (thou
have made our Rock so strong), and if we believe surely we shall be established
for ever, for the foundation of God stands sure. As we shall here be surrounded
with the munition of Rocks, (the Rock of Ages, and all his Angels) like
Jerusalem the holy City; so also we shall be wholly blessed, and saved to the
very uttermost: For neither the blasts of Temptation (the Spirit that rules in
the Children of Disobedience) shall attack the corners of our Dwellings, as he
did Job's Sons; nor from the Wilderness assault us (as he did our Savior) to
spoil our Labors, or our hopes. Nor shall the storms of Tribulation be able to
beat upon our House, so as to make it shake or totter: For though our building
of Faith be raised high, even unto the Heavens; yet it is no Babel, it is no
Jericho, but a Fabric that the Lord will bless and defend, and because it
stands upright, it shall stand fast for ever. The strength of our confidence in
God shall put to flight the Armies of those Aliens that would enter and destroy
its strong holds; for there are Mountains of Horses, and Chariots of Fire,
round about the Faithful to secure them; so that they cannot be immured or shut
up, when never so closely begirt by Adversaries. They can still look up, nay,
go up to the Hill of Sion, from whence comes their help, even to Jesus, the
Author and finisher of their Faith, who not only pitched the forces of his Word
and Miracles, but the red Standard of his Cross, and the first Camp of his
Martyrs and Apostles upon the Hills of Jerusalem, to Convoy all Comers to the
City of our God, and to draw all to him from the Center of the World.

Oh therefore! let neither the Rod, nor the Staff of the Wicked, be laid or
lest upon my score or part, lest I do or suffer the evil of Sinners; but let
thy Rod, and thy Shepherds Staff, both thy Cross and mine, dear Jesu, comfort
and fill up my Cup, and make mine Heritage and Lot like thine: For then it
shall be good, and thou that art so, ever wilt do good to me, making and
keeping me upright in Heart, clean in my Hands, single in mine Eye of Faith,
and sound in the Feet of mine Affections, steady in the ways of thy
Commandments.

Lord! if thy hand be not graciously (when most heavily) upon me, how soon may
I put forth my hand unto wickedness, like Came, Pharaoh, Balaam, Achan, and
Jeroboam, and like Judas, Ananias, and Simon Magus.

This makes me yet pray more earnestly, that Christ may still pray for me,
since he that Christ prays for shall believe aright; and he that so believes,
shall not find upon his lot the Scepter of Unrighteousness, the Rule of Satan,
the Domination of Sin, the Rod of the Wicked, the Guilt or Punishment of
Reprobates.

Oh then! that my lot and last end may be in the Righteousness of Jesus my
Lord, that I may not fall presumptuously, nor fear greatly, nor be driven forth
with evil doers; but be led forth into the Paths of Peace into the straight way
that leads to life, there to taste of the Brook in the way (the quiet and
sufficiency thou affordest thy Flock here) and to drink of the Rivers of thy
Pleasures hereafter; to lie down like thy Sheep in the green Pastures of Hope,
in the never fading, never failing enclosure of thine Arms, and to rise in
Glory with thine Inheritance for evermore. Amen.

THE SEVENTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXVI. PSALM,
Is thought to be composed by Esdras, or some of that time, after the
Babylonish Bondage, because in the first part of the Psalm it joyfully
Celebrates the Return of some, as in the second part heartily wishes the
Restoration of all the rest of the Captivity, from the Land of the North, (as
the Realm of Babylon is called, Jer. 13.19, 20. Jer. 16.19.
in regard of its site to Judea) making that apt and excellent resemblance of
them to Strcams, running into the dry and desolate parts of the South, which
must needs be very welcome there, and are said to flow thither as Torrents in
great abundance, upon the melting of the Snows, and producing of Showers by the
South Wind: So that whether you take for the South Wind, or South part of the
World, the comparison may hold to either acceptance of the Word very full and
elegant. The Jews flocking Southwards home, but (not all together) as the
Spirit of God moved on the Waters in Babylon, in the Days of Cyrus, Darius, and
Xerxes, stirring up Zerubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, and others, to bring back the
Hebrews, restore Religion, rebuild the Temple, and repair Jerusalem, which had
been demolished and burnt by Nebuzaradan in the fifth Month, 2 Kin. 25.8.
((...)) and in that same Month (about Harvest time) was the Return of the Jews
with Ezra, c. 7. v. 9. who had been led away Captive at their Sowing time:
Therefore the Simile of the Husbandman here was rarely apposite, both to the
occasion of their Joy, and season of the Year, and their manner of Exaltation.

This PSALM is very proper for our 23d of April, and 29th of May, or any such
happy Time of recovery from Trouble, Danger, and Oppression.

^ AFTER the long Night of a State, so dark as ours, so de -- so -- late; who
could so much as Dream, that we should wake out of Cap -- ti -- vi -- ty? But
when God took that Plague a -- way, that E -- gypt which on Si -- on lay; our
Pangs, like Dreams, a -- way did fly, and we had safe de -- li -- ve -- ry.

Pleased, and transported with our Change,
By a Recovery so strange;
(As Cripples cured by Wonders) we Acts 3.9.

Soon got both Strength and Liberty.
Soon we got well, well home; and found
Grief did no Soul, no Body wound:
But Hearts and Tongues in Psalms agree,
And they got Feet as well as we.
Then both our Chains and Silence broke;
Then Pagans too, the Truth thus spoke:
The Lord has done great things for ye;
The Lord has done so, answered we.
Therefore God's Works with joy we tell,
Which may convince the Infidel;
And call up Prayers for such as be
Not yet returned from Slavery.
O! were our Friends (our Foes and all)
Redeemed from their Egyptian Thrall;
From Satan, and from Sin set free,
How welcome were their Liberty?
Welcome as Nilus in the South,
And sweet as Showers in days of Drouth;
For all, with us, we long to see
Reap Mirth, who plough'd in Misery.
Sure, Lord, thy Lab'rers, in the heat
Who take the pains, shall taste the Wheat; 2 These. 3.7, 8, 9.

And may with shouts receive from thee
A Largess of Prosperity.
We, who dropped little hopes in Tears,
When driven hence by Foes or Fears;
Now loaded back with Solace, see
Rich Incomes from Captivity.
Thus the poor Seeds-man sadly goes, Eundo ibit, and flendo port^^s pretlum
semlnis: pretlosum ob caricaiem.

While on the ground his Wealth he strows;
But when the Harvest Crowns him, he
Jogs home with Sheaves and jollity. Veniendo veniet cum ex^^ sat^^^.

So they who shed a few small Tears
In The Seed-time of their Hopes and Fears,
Shall glad Returns from Sadness see,
And shock up more Felicity.
Nay, he that goes from hence, and bears
To Earth his Dust, to Heaven his Tears;
Shall find those precious Grains to be
Vast Crops in blessed Eternity.
Gloria Patri, etc.
In the Lord's Praise let none be dumb,
But Father, Son, and Ghost adore:
Who was, and is, and is to come,
Thrice Blessed God for evermore.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Seventh PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXVI.
PSALM.
O Most dear Redeemer Jesus, who would be the Lord our Righteousness, we
must confess thou might justly become our Enemy, (as Joseph's Brethren
became his Foes) because of the multitude of our Dreams; those vain conceits of
Happiness which have been trusted and leaned upon, though but Egyptian Reeds,
have greatly merited thy Punishment, and our farther deceptions. We have
deserved to be most terribly mistaken, like the hungry wretch, who dreams he
eats, but he awakes, and behold he is faint, and the more afamisht. Thus are
our Souls but the more starved by those Visions of the Night; those short
unsatisfying pleasures; those shadows, and fond imaginations, in which we have
been lulled asleep by the Flesh, the World, and the Evil one, leading us
Captive by them at their pleasure. But, Lord, if thou will teach us like thy
self, to lead Captivity Captive, and to subdue their triple Band that lies in
Ambush against us, (as Abimelech's against the Men of Shechem) then shall we be
like the Widow's Son raised even from the Dead: We shall not only recover our
strength wonderfully, as did the Cripple, before we go hence, but be recalled
with Lazarus to newness of Life, and have our Wills and Faculties unbound, our
Mouths and Hearts opened, our Hands and Feet loosed and enlarged to sing the
Praises of the Lord, to run the Paths of his Commands, and to teach
Transgressors his ways, that so Sinners may be converted unto him, admiring the
great things which God has done for us, and we praise him for continually; for
as God's Praise must be ever in our Mouths upon the account of his miraculous
Redemption of us, (who were conquered and taken, enslaved and sold) so ought we
incessantly to pray for the Conversion of others, (remembering those that are in
Bonds as bound with them) and that thy Servants, O Christ! who are many, may be
made one Bread, and they who sit in the darkness of Ignorance, or in the
shadows of Error, may be delivered from the power of Satan, into the glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God.

Blessed Lord! thou have Brethren here that the World knows not, nor thinks to
be such. O! that all the Sheep, though they have gone astray, may be reduced
from their Wanderings, and brought out of their Wilderness, Condition, and
desert State, by resting on the Shoulders of thy Power, and leaning on the
Bosom of thy Love. O thou well-beloved and best loving Jesus! how grateful,
gracious, and desirable, how profitable, sweet, and suitable will such a stream
of Grace prove to thine Israel in their Pilgrimage? It will be a Well springing
up, and raising thy poor Creatures unto Life; it will be like drops upon the
tender Herb, like showers upon the thirsty Ground, making the hard-hearted and
barren Soul to rejoice, and to break forth into gladness, and into
fruitfulness: For when thy Word distills like the Dew, and thou sendest a
gracious Rain upon thine Heritage, it must needs be refreshed and renewed like
the face of the good Ground which thou have Blessed; for that which is sterile
is nigh unto Cursing, but that which kindly receives the Rain that comes often
upon it, brings forth Food meet for him by whom it is dressed, what kind of
Husbandry soever he uses toward it. So we beseech thee grant, O thou good
Husbandman! that (since thou do so plentifully shower amongst us thy
benefits, and the good tidings of the Gospel) we may bring forth the fruits of
thy Spirit, such as are proper for our places and conditions, and for the Ages
of our Lives, and of the World, what way soever thou take with us, whether
thou break us up by the Plough of Afflictions, or dig about us by forbearance
and prosperities.

We know that he who Sows the good Seed of thy Grace in an honest Heart with
the Tears of true Remorse (although the Enemy should mingle Tares among the
Wheat, yet) being a painful Labourer, shall Reap a good Crop at the Harvest of
the World, and that with Joy, and not with Grief; for godly Sorrow works
Repentance unto Salvation, not to be repented of. Let us not therefore sorrow,
as do many, for Temporal losses, but rather let us rejoice that thou pourest
down plentifully of thy Grace upon us, which is better than abundance of Corn
and Wine. And so even when we go forth, with Peter, weeping bitterly for our
Sins, if we bear with us the precious Seeds of Adoption and Regeneration; and
these abide with us, although we may lie down in the duft of Death, or go out
of the Land of the Living here, yet shall we come again with Bosoms full of
Joy, and with Arms full of a Jesus that went out before us bearing our
Reproach, and who with Tears and strong Cries pleaded for the handful that was
given him out of the World, and shall come again like a happy Reaper, bringing
Sheaves of Corn with him, that the people whom he has labored for, and united
unto himself, may be crowned with Victory, Prosperity, and Glory, and
completed with Gladness with him for evermore. Amen.

THE EIGHTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXVII. PSALM,
Was compiled by Solomon, as a Compendium of his Ecclesiastes, showing the
vanity (and therein the vexation) of all worldly Travel and Care without God's
Blessing, in the principal instances of this Life's concernment, which are the
building of our Houses by strength and safety, as in the first Verse; by
Frugality and Wealth, as in the second Verse; and chiefly by Children and
Heirs, to make our Habitations, Names, and Inheritances to remain for ever, as
much as in us lies, as in the third: And this I take to be the meaning here of
building an House, as it is the work of the Master of a Family in Economy,
rather than that of the Mathematician in Architecture: And in this sense the
Phrase is taken often in Scripture; as we read, Exodus 1.21.
God gave the Midwives for their Faith, Hope, and Charity, Protection, Riches,
and Progeny, to support their Families: So likewise, 1 Chronicles. 17.10, 11.
the promise of God's building David's House, is explained by giving him Issue,
which should establing his Kingdom botter than Solomon could do,
notwithstanding all his Wisdom, Power, and number of Women; since we read but
of one Son (and he weak and infirm) which that mighty Builder raised up to
support the Royal State, Crown and Dignity of the House of David.

Well then might the Author of this Psalm (who has inserted his Name (...) in
the second Verse) be a Type of the Messiah, and begin to affirm and reiterate
the Nisi Dominus here, and infer that, Except the Lord ( David's Lord, as well
as Son) did build his House, Solomon, and other Kings, should but labor in
vain.

This Psalm might be superscribed with (...), as being sung with loud and
frequent Responses by the Levites, at the erecting and re-edifying of the
Temple, and therefore intended by me (...), as an Anthem for the Day of a
Nativity, or Baptism.

^ TIL God the House does build, For Shrove-Tuesday, or a Wedding.
and Fa -- mily maintain; Workmen, though never so strong, or skilled, La --
bour, a -- las! in vain. Fa -- there is get Sons in vain; in vain the Watchmen
ward our Gates, un -- less the Lord or -- dain his Host, to be our Guard.

In vain a Life we keep,
Rise early, late take Rest;
Fare hardly, For I take it with the 72 (...), when others take pains with care
to provide for their Families, God's Beloved thrive better, and yet do not so
much as lose their sleep, or rest, in pursuit of those enjoyments, which others
incessantly toil for. This shows the vanity of our Solicitude, as the other
sense ( viz. so he gives) speaks God's Blessing of honest Labor, whereby he
brings Rest, and makes both it, and what else got by Labor, pleasant,
according to Eccles. 5.11.
lose our loved Sleep,
'Till God our Stock has blessed.
But they, whom God has blessed,
Like Job, regain their Peace;
God gives his Jedidiahs Rest, Nempe Dilectis Domini, viz. Jedidiah's, such as
Solomon.

And with their Rest; Increase.
Look, All Children are given as an Inheritance, passing from the Father of
Heaven to us, not purchased by our own Ability; but the Wise and Good are more
than David's pleasant and goodly Heritage; for they are also a Reward (as here)
and a Crown, especially such as are born to us in our stronger and youthful
Age; who may be grown up, and able to give advice and assistance, and ready at
hand to help or adorn, as Arrows in the Quiver of an Archer; so that we may go
in or out of the Gates of our House, City, or Li^e, with honor and safety, and
speak either with Friends or Foes, strong or great, the Judge or General.
Whether it be in public in the sight of all, (as Aben Ezra construes in Porta)
or whether it be in the place where the People assemble, where the Nobles meet,
where the Thrones are set, the Prophets prophecy, the Right is pleaded, the
Guards are kept, the Soldiers stand, and the Judges fit, as they did formerly
in the Gate. Vide Ruth 4.1. 1 King. 22.10. 2 King. 7. 20. Judge. 9.52. etc.
even our best Increase,
Children come from the Lord; Ruth 4.13.

Those Fruits of the Womb, Genesis 30.2.
which some may guess
Man's Work, are God's Reward.
Children both give, and Ward
A blow; for (though but young)
To Parents they are a double Guard,
Like Weapons to the Strong.
Those Shafts help against wrong,
Life against Death provide;
Like Jonathan's, they home are flung
To shield our threatened side.
Happy the Man, whose side
Bears Quivers of such Arms;
For wheresoever his Cause is tried,
He Is quit of Shame and Harms.
Thus we, whom God has Blessed,
Like Job, regain our Peace;
Since God gives his Beloved Rest,
And with our Rest increase.
Gloria Patri, etc.
To God the Father, Son,
And God the Holy Ghost,
Be Glory; and let every one
Strive who shall praise God most.
HOSANNA.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Eighth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXVII.
PSALM.
GRacious Father! who workest hitherto as thy Son also works, look upon us
thy Workmanship, make us thy Building, who as lively Stones, well wrought and
figured, would be built up a Spiritual House unto thee: And we know, except thy
Divine Wisdom thus frame and raise us, bearing up the Pillars of our Strength,
hewing out the Stones of our hard Hearts to be polished Corners of thy Temple,
we shall prove but sorry Tabernacles, but foolish Builders, and Laborers in
vain: For who amongst us can say, that he has made his Heart clean? Who can
come to the Rock to lay a good Foundation, except it be given him from above?
Or who can keep himself so clean, as that the foul and wicked Spirit touch him
not, nor enter in again after he has been cast out of a Man, except thou, O
Lord! who art stronger than the Enemy, do watch and defend the House of the
poor Soul? Thou must work all our Works in us, and for us, for without thee we
can do nothing. O therefore! raise, strengthen, stablish, and complete us thou
glorious Solomon, thou who must edify us by thy Apostles and Teachers, and
instruct us how to be Temples for thy holiest Spirit, and the Heritage of the
Lord for evermore.

We must acknowledge that our best Skill, and carefullest Actions, our
Watchings and Fastings, our Righteousness and Charities; are as Stones which
thou, O Master Builder! might refuse, being fit for nothing but to debase
and throw us down to Hell, affording us no prop or safe reliance upon them.
It Is thou alone, O truest Jedidiah! that foundest thy beloved Church upon the
Cornerstone of Faith, which edifies with joy and peace, with rest and firmness
in believing. So build us up, we beseech thee, and watch over our Souls, that
we may not be found to have watched, or to have worked, to have instructed our
Hearts, to have cleansed our Hands in vain, but to have done the Work, and
completed the Task which thou have appointed us to do, by edifying both our
selves and others in our most holy Faith. We throw our selves, Lord Jesus, on
thy gentlest Bosom of Compassions, to be regarded and instructed by thee, and
trust that we are not Judas's whilst we eat of thy Bread, and drink of thy Cup,
but shall be unto thee Sons and Daughters, such an Inheritance as may be the
Crown of thy Rejoicing, the purchse of thy Labors, the proof of thy Power, the
Arrows in thy Quiver, with which thou may triumphantly come to the Almighty,
and say, Behold me, and the Children which thou have given me.

Let not thine Arms be full or weary, dear Lord, 'till thou have enclosed our
Souls within them, and made us so the Children of thy strength, as that we may
be able to come with boldness to the Throne of Grace, and neither be affrighted
when we meet with our Enemies in the Gate of Death, nor when we shall speak
with our Accuser, and our Judge, at the great Tribunal of the last day.

From the various Proofs of thy tenderness over thy Flock, in giving them
repose and comfort, and blessed content, in the midst of their hard fare, hard
work, and harder want, O skilful Shepherd of our Souls, let us learn to cast
our Care upon thee for our protection and provision, for thy preservation of
our Persons, and propagation of our Families; and if thou carest for us, we
need take no more care than Abraham did, for God will provide for us, for our
Offspring, for our chief Good, and for his Glory. The Lord shall build his
David a House, and he will be an exceeding great Reward (even above that of the
Fruit of the Womb) unto his Friend Abraham, whose Children we are if we believe
as he: Lord, we believe, help our unbelief, that we might not throw away our
loved sleep, much less our best beloved Souls, in carking after the things of
this Life, whether they be Pleasures, Profits, Power, Posterity, Preferments,
or vain Past-times; for what are these in respect of a Soul? But giving up our
Souls, Estates, and Concernments, into the hands of a faithful Creator, who is
able to keep them and us to the very uttermost, let us be preserved not only in
perfect Peace and Prosperity in this Life, but also in a happy and safe Repose
even in Death it self, when we expect to rest from our Labors, and to sleep in
Jesus. Amen.

THE NINTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXVIII. PSALM,
Is a Description of the Felicities of such Good Men, as fear the Lord, (that
is, say the Rabbis) who cease to do evil, and learn to do well; who walk in
the ways of God, and are not only negatively good but positively; making their
own hands minister to their Necessities, (as the Apostle did) knowing that he
who will not labor shall not eat: But such as labor honestly, (either to
obtain a livelihood and subsistence here, or a better Life hereafter) shall
find the fruit of their Pains to be Peace and Plenty: Not the Apples of Sodom.
or Clusters of Gomorrah; but those of Mercies Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal:
Such as are here enumerated, from the 2d. Verse to the end, far better than by
any other Poet.

Amongst which Blessings, (as to this World) the greatest are esteemed, Vitam
quae faciunt Beatiorem, etc. Martial. lib. 10. Epig. 47.


1. A Fruitful Meet Companion, neither barren in good Works, nor Offspring:
And therefore compared to a Vine; or because (says Kimchi) she can live well
and plentifully within Doors, and only desires that her Branches may go abroad:
As a Vine (says he) will grow and flourish though rooted within a House, so
the spreading Limbs be carried into the Air.

2. Then a cheerful Table decently replenisht, with Legitimate, Pious, and
Healthful Children: Likened to Olive Plants, either because they are hopeful,
and flourishing, (as the Olive Tree is always green;) or useful and Ornamental,
(as those Trees are to Entertainments in the East;) or Emblems of unfading
Happiness, (as Olive Branches were to Victors;) or not a shameful and spurious
Offspring: For it is reported of the Olive Stock, that it will nourish no
Grafts, but of its own Kind.

These Blessings being described by two such admirable sweet Comparisons, (that
strive to cheer and refresh the Laborious and Prosperous Man) the Author breaks
off his Apostrophe by a short Epiphonema in the 5th Ver. (but who the Author of
this Psalm was appears not) and then in the 6th and 7th Ver. goes on to pray
for other Joys for the good Man, toward the completing those promised in the
2.3.4. Verses. Which indeed so fed, nay feasted my eager Thoughts with that
most excellent Scripture Abundance, expressed by Corn and Oil, Judge. 9.9, 13.
(that which Chears and Honors God and Man) that I could not withhold from
enlarging my delight in ruminating thus far upon it.

Like the fat Olive, and the fruitful Vine,
Cheerful to make Man's Heart, his Face to shine,
Are well bred Children, and fruitful Wife;
In this World's Paradise those Trees of Life:
They wander not afar, but still abide
By their own lucky Boards, or House's fide:
At Home they Live and Thrive, fix and Increase,
The Prosperous Signs of Plenty, Mirth, and Peace.
Pax (seu Pacem) super Israel, concludes the Psalm, as the 125.

This seems proper for a Wedding day, or any such time of Festivity, and
therefore used thus Solemnly to be Sung after the Captivity by the Levites,
among the other Psalms of Degrees: And it is intended by me for St. Lucy's day,
and New Year's Tide.

^ Blessed is the Man that fears the Lord, and walks in ways taught by God's
word: while such a Joseph, Vice refrains, to Prison Walls tho bound he be, he
spreads like Egypt's patient Tree, and bears more Fruit by wearing Chains.

Who e're thou art that fear the Lord,
Fearing to sin in work or word,
Plenty, with Ease, shall crown thy Pain;
Thy Hands shall get Wealth that will last,
The Sweets of which thy Lips shall taste,
Doubling, by relishing, thy Gain.
Thy Wife shall, like a fruitful Vine, Ruth 4.11, 12.

Deck thy House-side, as well as thine,
And see thine Offspring shade thy Board;
As pleasant Olive-Plants are set,
To grace and guard thee at thy Meat,
Thus art thou Blessed that fear the Lord.
In Heaven thrice happy shall thou be,
As here below it is well with thee,
Thy Joys from Sion still increase;
Thine Age to three Descents shall see
Thine Issue fair, thy Nation free;
And (what is best) on Israel Peace.
As here below it is well with thee,
In Heaven thrice happy shall thou be,
From Sion's shall thy Joys increase;
Thou shall outlive one Age, to see
Good on thy Land and Family,
And (which is best) on Israel Peace.
Gloria Patri, etc.
Glory be to the Father, Son,
And Holy Ghost, the Three in One,
Whose Deity we shall adore;
Since every Person of the Three
For ever was, shall ever be,
And is, God Blessed evermore.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Ninth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXVIII.
PSALM.
O Most glorious and gracious Lord God, who art fit to be feared, and worthy to
be loved, grant that I may not only serve thee out of filial Reverence, and
sense of Duty, but also and chiefly out of most passionate Affection and
Delight, walking in thy ways as well as learning them, and doing thy Will as
well as knowing it, from a principle of entire and true Love, and of full and
absolute Choice. Grant that whether I am born unto Trouble and Care, or to eat
and reap the Fruit of others Pains, both by my own and others Labors, my
Repose may be afterward more sweet and nourishing, and my Enjoyments more
solid, as my Endeavors successful, while I have Religion, though not Riches,
and that which with Content is great Gain, notwithstanding the shortness and
loss of worldly Treasures.

If I partake of the true Vine, and of the travel of his Soul, who was full as
God, and made full as Man, that of his fullness we might receive and feast for
evermore, then how well shall it be with me here? How much better hereafter?
Come what can come I shall have comfort enough in this World, and a Crown in
the next: Nay, I shall be a Crown to my dear Bridegroom, a Glory to my
Redeemer, as the wise Spouse is to her Husband; for in this, good and true is
the Word of the Lord which he has spoken (not only in the Literal, but also in
the Spiritual sense) and so shall his Work be; as to the Head, so to the
Members. He will make the Church Christ's Wife, and she shall be a Vine as well
as he, and so great a Bearer, as that she hall cover and adorn all the sides of
his House, and bring him clusters of Eshcol, Grapes of Sion, Loads of Comfort
and Satisfactions, Tokens of Plenty and Delight, for having trodden the Wine
Press alone.

And then, O beloved Husbandman! when thou shall visit this Vine, and behold
the Offspring which thou have brought her with transports of Joy and
Contentation, O! then look upon me and mine, and see us grafted into the right
Olive, though we be sprung from that which is wild by nature, that we may grow
up as Plants of thy own planting, and flourish round about thy Table: For this
has God promised unto thee, O Christ! and we beseech thee to make it good unto
us, by making us thy Children. O Lord! how should we praise, honor, and serve
thee? Were we, like David, such Olive Trees as might be fixed in thy House, and
framed into more holy Uses, to be farther instrumental to thy Glory? Behold a
greater than Solomon is here to make us fit to attend thy Oracles, and with the
Cherubs to be near thy Mercy Seat. Dear God! prepare us for such high places
there, however thou cut and strike us here, that we might be the better formed,
and wrought out of the World's glory, for our own, into thine, even by the
beauty of Holiness, that New Jerusalem that comes down from above. Then shall
we admire the good of Sanctity, and wish the good of thy People all the days of
our life, and rejoice in the happiness of thy Chosen all the days of Eternity:
For as we are Blessed in serving thee out of thy House and Sanctuary, so we hope
to be Blessed with thee in thy holy Hill of Sion, where we shall see the
glorious Harvest of all Ages, the eternal Happiness of our Generations, and the
never-fading Peace of thy chosen Israel. AMEN.

THE TENTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXIX. PSALM,
Is a Commemoration, not unlike that Solemn one, which every true Israelite was
to make at the Offering of the First Fruits; Deuteronomy. 26.35, 36, 37.
and Secondly, a Prognostication of the cursed End and Ruin of the Church her
Enemies, from the Consideration of the wonderful Deliverance which God had
wrought, and reiterated for his People a Juventute (both from theirs and the
World's Infancy;) so that at length their Adversaries, according to their
Prayers, shall be but weak, few, like the Grass on the House top, (...), not
growing up, there being formerly a Meter, or gatherer of Grass (as we have now
of Grain), most in fashion about those fertile Countries, where Grass is of an
excessive length even at this day, (as modern Travellers' affirm.)
that withers before it is pulling.

But Zion's Foes (says Ezra, or whosoever it was, who in his Time compiled
this Prophetical Psalm and Prayer) shall one Day be so inconsiderable, that as
they shall have no Eulogies to encourage their Growth or Harvest, so they shall
need no Weapon to cut them down; for they shall drop away shamefully of their
own accord, without a Dominus Vobiscum said unto them: 1 Cor. 14.25. Isa. 36.10.
For all they may say (though not of a Truth) what once a Sennacherib and a
Rabshakeh falsely affirmed, That God is with us.

Qua de causa a me Selectus est hic Hymnus in Tertium Septembris. Propter M. O.
C. nee non in Quintum Novembris.

^ IF Ja -- cob did in E -- gypt tell, what Troubles in his time be -- fell;
how few and e -- vil were his Days? How hard Life's travel in rough ways: In Ca
-- naan well may Is -- rael say, From my Youth up, God was my stay.

From my Youth up I met with Foes, Genesis 28.16, 17.

But to God's House I 'scap'd from those;
Many a time was I assailed,
But I as many times prevailed:
God broke my Cords which they did bind, Exodus 2.24.25.

And made them Captive, if not kind.
Long did they with deep Furrows wound, Exodus 5.19.

And Plow my Back, as 'twere their Ground; Mark 15.15.

But the good Husbandman now cracks
The Ploughman's Whip on their own Backs: John 15.1.

The Righteous Lord stays not too long 1 Cor. 10.13.

From resc'uing his who suffer wrong.
Therefore shall Zion's Enemy 2 Samuel 3.33.

Like Fools wax faint, like Cowards fly; Psalm. 73.6.

Whom Pride does cloth, Shame shall confound, Prove. 16.18.

As Corn that grows in no good Ground: Mat. 13.5.

But stands (with Kings) on the Housetop, 2 Samuel 11.4.

Where comes a Blast, and that is its Crop. Dan. 4.30, 31.

Its Crop does rot before it is ripe,
Nor can it fill the Reapers gripe,
Nor joy his Heart: For (what is worse)
It bears no Burden, but a Curse.
It Is no Man's comfort, no Man's care;
No Man for such bids one short Prayer.
None in God's Name give such good speed,
As Boaz to his Harvest did: Ruth. 2.4.

[Gloria Patri.]
But we to God will Glory give,
Who, with the Son, and Spirit, does live:
God Reigns, and shall, as heretofore;
Blessed be his Name for evermore.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Tenth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXIX.
PSALM.
O Dearest Jesu! let me behold thee as an Israelite indeed, in whom there was
no guile, and yet how many a time, even from Herod's persecution of thee in thy
Youth, were thou afflicted. Thou did grow up as a Stem out of a dry Ground,
very poorly and despicably in the Eyes of the vain proud World, who looked for
another appearance and attendance than thou, O King of Glory! did affect on
Earth, and therefore were thou rejected as a Man of Sadness. And well might
thou be acquainted with much Grief, when thou did bear our greatest Sins,
even those whereby we did set thee at naught, (as did Herod and his Soldiers)
and even sought the holy Child, the Firstborn of Grace, in our Hearts to take
away its Life.

O Lord! we must confess how many a time, too often, we have betrayed and
exposed thy Name and Body, thy Word and Members, to Shame and Reproach, to
Indignities and Sufferings: We have smitten and pierced them through with many
Sorrows; we have knotted the Whip, and lengthened out the Rods to plough thy
Back, (as the Jews did by their lashing Taunts when thou were dying on the
Cross) only to nonplus thy Love and patience if it were possible: But the Lord
is Righteous, and the Lord is Merciful, and therefore he has cut asunder the
Cords of the Wicked, and by his Righteousness shall justify many, as also
confound all such as have evil will toward his Zion. Grant therefore, dear
Lord! that we may not prove such a Crop as grows upon the House, or among the
Stones, which withers as soon as it is put forth. But as from our Childoood,
we have been acquainted graciously with thy Mind and Gospel, so grant that we
may grow up in Grace, and in the knowledge of a Savior, and have the Blessing
of Almighty God from the very Ground of our Hearts, to the last Harvest of our
Lives, and be able to bless many others, as Boaz did, in the Name of thee,

Our Father, etc.

TO thee, dear God! be all the Dominion, the Power and Glory of my Being, for
thou have prepared it from the fury of my Adversaries ever since the first
motions of that evil Figment in my Heart, which has broke out often into evil
Concupiscences, and endeavored to plough with my Heifer, to plot with my
naughty Flesh, to bind and to deliver me a Prisoner unto Satan; but my Lusts
have not led me Captive, nor plough'd upon my Back as they conspired to do, for
thou, O Lord most just and holy! would not suffer them to Tyrannize or
Triumph too long over me, but have broke those Bands of Wickedness, and cast
their Cords from me, that I might be thy Servant, and there the Lord my
Righteousness: So that I trust they shall be confounded that contend with thee
for my Soul, and I shall not be ashamed while I wait on thee, though my Flesh
be as Grass that withers away. Thou art my Strength, O Lord, and my Portion for
ever, who wilt, I trust, give a Blessing to my Seed, to my Harvest, to my
House, to my Endeavors and Increase, that my Work and thine may prosper in my
hand, and bring fullness of Joy and Satisfaction to my Breast, while all the
vain Thoughts, and viler Suggestions of my Heart, I desire so to hate, as to
wish (like the Grass upon the House tops withered and faded away) that they may
never grow up to a Crop, lest (sowing the Wind) I Reap the Whirlwind, and have
my Recompense in vanity (according to my delight or trust,) and come to nothing
before my time. But, O Lord! I wait on thee for a Blessing in this my day, and
for thine Eternity, that I may be like a Field whom God has enriched; if he be
not on my side, I cannot prosper, and I know, him whom thou blessest is
Blessed: Bless me therefore, even me, O!

Our Father, etc.
THE ELEVENTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXX. PSALM
(...); De dolor Profundo, and ex imo cord; and not (as the Papists would
have it) De Profundis Purgatorii, to be used for the Dead: It is an Act and
incitement of Hope, under the most weighty Pressures, from this Proof, viz.
That neither with the strongest Angels, nor Saints departed, (much less with
the greatest, or best of Men upon Earth) is any Pardon or Propitiation to be
found, but only with God; who allows us here space and place for Repentance,
that he may be feared, (not so slavishly as to be fled from, or hated) that he
may be sued unto, adored, and attended on, in the holy Duties of Prayer,
Praise, and Trust; which are comprised in this Psalm to be used sedulously and
constantly night and day, according to that which the Repetition of the
comparison in the sixth Verse does infer, which is thus gloss'd on by Kimchi:
My Soul waits in the Night for the Lord, that it may be in the number of
those who rise in the Morning-Watch to pray. And this sense being most
comprehensive of the Times and Method, both of Jewish, and the greatest of
Devotion, I follow it in my Version, and desire to do so in my Practice.

This Psalm was made (as some think) in the time of the Captivity, for
Redemption from it, as may be judged by the last Verse: But others ascribe it
to David, giving it the same Date with the 51st, and is reckoned the sixth of
the Penitentials, i. e. of those which were used when public Penitents were
brought and reconciled to the Church, who might well say, Because there is
Pardon (as says the Text) or Propitiation (as the 72d) with thee, O Lord,
therefore shall thou be feared, i. e. obeyed; (...), because the mildness of
his Laws, and meekness of his Dealings, were strong Motives for Repentance.

Anthema Hocce a me usitatum est, ut primo factum, in Secundum Octobris.

^ OUT of the Deep, wherein, like Jo -- nas, I was tried; out of the mire of
Sin, my Clay to God has cried, Lord hear my Voice, give what I crave; O! let
me have thy Love, Heavens Joys.

Too often we choose false Joys;
And should thou be severe
To chasten our ill Choice,
What Man his Ills can bear?
But we have proved,
That thou may be
Pardon's with thee;
Both feared and loved.
I Will fear, lest thou art loved
Too little; and I Will flee
(When Fear my Heart has moved)
Unto thy Sanctuary:
Early and late
Grace to afford;
There waits the Lord,
Therefore I Will wait.
My Soul on high shall wait,
(Like those, who watch the rise
Of Day) to Officiate
At Morning Sacrifice.
Nay, like the Guard;
Remove the Night,
Who long 'till Light
And them reward.
'Till Jacob's Star reward
Your Hopes, and on you rise;
Wait Israel on your Lord
With wakeful wishing Eyes.
Look 'till the Sun
Does heal and bless,
Of Righteousness
And brings God's Son.
O! shield ye with his Sun
God's People, trust his Word;
Since full Salvation
Attends our gracious Lord:
There Is Pity seen,
Who will Redeem
And Power in him,
Us from all Sin.
Gloria Patri, etc.
Glory be to our King,
Who shall be, was, and is;
Loud Hallelujahs Sing
To God, the God of Peace.
The Lord of Hosts,
The Father, Son,
The Three in One,
And Holy Ghost.
AMEN.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Eleventh PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXX.
PSALM.
O Dearest Jesu! when I consider thee, crying with strong Cries to thy Father
for me out of the depths of thine Agony, and of thy Sufferings, both in
Gethsemane, and in Golgotha, how am I swallowed up in the Abysses, both of thy
Passion and Compassion for us! Ah! what fathomless Depths indeed! O! what
unmeasurable Dimensions, both of Grief and Goodness, are there for us to be
immersed in! and since they who are conversant among great Waters see the
Wonders of the Lord, O! how may we behold these in the drops of thine Eyes, and
of thy Wounds, in the Rivers of thy Tears, and of thy wonderful Sweat, in the
Ocean of thy Love and Sorrows for Mankind! When thy Soul was heavy, and sunk
down even unto Death, and all the Cataracts of Shame and Fury passed over thy
Head, O King of Righteousness and Glory! yet out of the deep and horrible Pit
of God's Wrath, into which thy condition was plunged for our sakes, how did
thou reach up thy very Sighs and Groans, thy Pains and Sadness, thy Prayers,
and all thy Passions, unto Heaven it self, to reach us thence a Medicine, and a
Remedy, more certain Health, and a more happy Life, than the lifting up of the
Serpent in the Wilderness ever brought to its beholders! I will therefore look
unto thee, and be enlightened, even while thou seem Eclipsed; I will stay my
self on the Tree of thy Cross, and secure my self under the Shadows of thy
Crucifixion, when I am most cast down or overwhelmed with the Seas of my
Anxieties and Trials, for the Lord has been deeply sensible of our
Infirmities, and touched to the quick with humane Miseries, that he might not
be fled from, (as he was formerly, both while he stood on Sinai, and on
Golgotha) but that he might be feared, and approached unto with Reverence,
because there is a Propitiation with him for us, there is an Atonement made by
him our High Priest: Therefore, O God! hear my Voice, though my Sins cry aloud
for Vengeance; and thou may be more strict (than thou were formerly under the
more imperfect Light of Nature, or of the Ieish Law) to mark the failings and
stumblings of Mankind now in the lightsom daytime of the Gospel; yet do thou,
my Father, Jeremiah. 38.12, 13.
and my Prince, pity me in the Dungeon of my Corruptions, and draw my Feet out
of the Mire of my Lusts, out of the Clay of my earthly Mindedness, out of the
Waters of my worldly Sorrows, and bring me to the desired Shore of thy sure
Mercies in Christ Jesus; set my feet on the Rock, and order my Goings, that my
Footsteps may not slip, but that I may walk in the Land of the Living unto the
Land of Promise; and when I go down to the bottom of the Mountains, and the
Weeds are wrapped about my Head, Jonas. 2.5, 6
and the Earth with her Bars enclose me on every side, that then I may not be
cast out of thy sight, nor into the Bonds of mine Iniquities, nor into the
Belly of the lowest Hell: O our Father! since thou have not left thy Son there,
grant that my Life may be brought up from Corruption. I know Salvation is from
thee alone, and with thee infinite abundance of Bowels of the tenderest
Compassions why thou should be reverenced and repaired unto, there is a
Jesus in thy Bosom to redeem from all Sins, from Dangers, Enemies, and
Troubles, and to represent us covered with his Righteousness; otherwise
should thou view us in our Original Nakedness, or actual Filthiness, we
could not stand before thee in Judgment. But since there is Forgiveness with
thee, O God! there is cause enough why we should fly unto thee, trust in thee,
wait on thee, and watch for thee, more than they who watch for the Morning, for
if Light be so grateful to those who walk in Darkness, how amiable is thy
Countenance to us in the gloominess of this present State? And how much more
lovely will it be when we lie down in the Night of Death, that the Dayspring
from on high may visit us, and bring the joyful Morning of a Resurrection, both
from Sin and the Grave? O! do thou make have my beloved Savior, and be as a
Roe, and a young Heart, Caut. 2.
on the Mountain of Spices: Thou that art the Heart of the Morning, who out of
the midst of thy deepest Woes, and dying Pangs, did cry unto God for us, do
thou send us timely help, for we would seek thee early in the prime of our Age,
(hastening from the very dawn of our Lives to prevent the Night-Watches, and
like thy Spouse or beloved Mary) to see the Sun of Righteousness risen on the
Earth before we get to our Zoar.

O! that our Prayers might ascend like Incense by the meritorious lifting up of
thy Body for us! Dear Lord! impute no Guilt to us, but cleanse us from all,
that we may be blessed, and holy, and happy, as we beg to be, for thy own sake,
O gracious Savior! to whom be Glory, etc.

THE TWELFTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXXI. PSALM,
Was composed by David in the lifetime of Saul, when most humble, innocent,
and distant from the Succession to the Crown, though then suspected, envied,
and accused: It was appointed to be used at the Jews Return, because no temper
better qualifies us for God's Mercy, nor more becomes us under the greatest
Mercies, (such as those we have enjoyed) than that Humility, Self-denial,
Resignation, and Affiance in God's Will, which are here exemplified in the
first and second Verses, and exhorted unto in the last.

While the Psalmist with that frequent Elegancy in the holy Tongue, suppresseth
the Imprecation, and imposes a kind of Silence upon himself after his
Attestation, proceeding to an Asseveration, (...), If I have not, etc. viz.
stilled and pacified my Soul as the Waves, Ievell'd and smoothed my Brow like
the face of the Ground, and have put my Hand upon my Mouth; viz. I have ceased
from crying and throbbing, as at the Mother's command the Child does, who
although weaned, can without Solicitude yield and conform to the Mother's
Direction and Provision.

Thus the Comparison is fitly squared, As a Child is in quiet and order with
its Mother, so is my Soul with me: (As the Jewish, Arab. notes the Repetition
to import) I have weaned it from Transgressions: Non arrogavi mihi magna,
mirabilia, inconcessa, inhonesta, as the first Verse intimates; and this whole
Psalm, says Grotius, savours much of a Gospel Spirit, as of that gracious and
modest Disposition with which David was endowed, eminently, so as to make him
be styled, After God's own Heart.

^ NO, For Innocents day.
Lord! I do not look too high, tho to this lof -- ty pitch I fly, to seek thy
Throne and Ma -- je -- sty. No Earthly Crown do I de -- sign, nor as my
Sov'raign's Son to shine; my sole Am -- by -- tion's to be thine.

(Like Bethshemites) I dare not pry
In things for me too Great, too High;
My Heart is humble as mine Eye.
But the proud Foe my Heart mistook,
Whilst I his Frowns did fairly brook,
Without returning one Ill look.
I soon lay quiet, to control
The froward Passions, that did roll
Like Waves, about to move my Soul.
My Soul is hush't; like a weaned Child,
That from the Mother's sight exiled,
To any thing's strait reconciled:
And surely I my self behave
Like a wise Man, while thus I crave
Like a weak Child, what I would have.
May Israel do, as I have done,
(To all things here indiff'rent grown)
Trust always -- But in God alone.
May Israel do, as we, etc.
Gloria Patri, etc.
Give Glory, Praise, Dominion,
To God the Father, with the Son,
And Spirit, thrice Blessed Three in One.
Sicut erat in Principio, etc.
Now let us all the Lord adore,
Who is the same as heretofore,
And shall be King for evermore.
HOSANNA.
Another VERSION of Psalm CXXXI.
[ To be sung as Mr. George Sandys Paraphrase, Psalm. 1.]
LORD, 2 Samuel 6.21, 22. Acts 13.22.
I Will prelude to my Lord's humblest part,
That I may be the Man after thine Heart;
I hate proud Looks, and glance not up an Eye
At things too hard, too hidden, or too high.
But as a Child, whom its kind Mother weans,
(Loving the Breast) yet on her Bosom leans,
I hold me at thy Hand; nor once repine,
But quietly repose, receive, resign:
Wishing our Israel thus may trust God still,
And frame their State according to thy Will.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Twelfth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The CXXXI.
PSALM.
O Thou Son of David! of whom we ought to learn to be Meek and Lowly, let us
see what kind of Disciples we are by regarding our dear Master, and find what
Proficients in thy School by minding the Copy thou have set us: There appeared
not the least glance of Pride, Arrogance, or Self-love, in thy Behavior; there
was not the least Root of Bitterness in thy Breast, for thou came to Atone
the first Sin of our first Parents; and so for all thou were exalted far above
all that are here called Gods, yet thy Spirit was not haughty (as Lucifer's)
nor thine Eyes lift up to the forbidden Fruit. Mark 13, 32.
Thou were willing to be ignorant (as Man) of those things which did not befit
Men to pry nicely into, that thou might stoop to the weaknesses of thy Body
the Church, and comply more absolutely with the divine Will, and Compassionate
more serisibly the Infirmities or Ignorances of Mankind. O most gracious
condescending Jesus! how were thy Delights among the Children of Men! while
thou did not behave thy self like a Simon Magus, like an Impostor that would
be admired for some God below; but, like thy Servant Moses, did vail thy
self, that thou might be conversed withal, and did not walk too much
obscured by thine own Luster and Transcendency, but did leave the Doctors and
Learned Jews to go down with thy humble Mother into Galilee, and to be subject
unto her as a weaned Child. And though thou would not exercise thy self in
things too high for thee, yet, O! how low would thou appear in thy
Employments? How plain in thy Countenance? how easy and affable in thy
Conversation? that Publicans and Sinners, and little Children, might come unto
thee, and hear thy excellent Discourses, and taste thy miraculous Provisions,
while thou wentest about doing good, and telling Men that they should follow
thy steps in being meek, humble, quiet, and contented, doing Good, readily
suffering Evil patiently as dear Children.

Lord! How then should we abhor our selves, when we either think of thee, or of
our selves! How unlike are we become to thee, if we claim any Kindred with
thee! For do we not still continue, like Leviathan, among the Sons of Pride? Do
we seem little in our own Eyes, as thy Servant David did, when thou did make
him a great King? Or rather do we not lift up our Wills and Understandings, and
walk with a stiff Neck of Perverseness in opposition to thee, as it were, aiming
even at Heaven it self, like the Tail of the old Serpent? So far are we from
receiving the Kingdom of Heaven like little Children! But, O! when then shall
it once be that we shall not be High-minded, but fear, and love, and own thee
to be Lord over us? Then shall we not rashly venture with Uzzah to meddle with
those things which are unmeet for us, or forbidden to us; but we shall be
weaned from our Mother Earth, from the love of this dirty World, and from
loving its foul Inclinations; and we shall cast our Cares and Affairs on thee,
renouncing all Self-Trusts or Conceits, to level the face of our Souls before
the feet of the holy Jesus; that when thou come, O most holy Spirit! to
prepare the way of the Lord in us, he may find no Rock nor Mountain, nothing
too hard or haughty in us, nothing untractable or inaccessible to obstruct or
oppose his Progress. But, O! let the too mighty Elevations of my vain Thoughts
be brought down, and the crooked ways of my Heart be made strait, and the rough
ways of my Condition be made smooth, that my Soul may be still quiet with me,
and stilled and quietted by thee. Rebuke the tempestuous Motions of a froward
Mind, that I may repose my self sweetly and safely on thy Promises, on thy
Provisions, and resign my self wholly to thy Inspirations: And God grant that
all thine Israel may (like Jacob) wrestle with Principalities and Powers, even
in the highest and most heavenly Things; and though never so much in a Night of
Cares and darkest perplexities, or to encounter with enraged Enemies, yet let
them wait and hope on the Lord, and stay and strengthen themselves on their God
(as David did at Ziklag,) for he is a sure Reward, and a constant Reward, a
Pillar of Fire, and a Pillar of a Cloud, a Sun, and a Shield, in whose Name we
ought to trust, denying our own Conjectures, Affections, and Desires, rather
than an absolute Dependence on him for ever and ever. AMEN.

THE THIRTEENTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXXII. PSALM,
Is a Narration of David's Devotion, and of God's Promises and Appointment; as
to David and his Seed, and the settling of the Ark on Sion; which was a Type of
the stability of Christ's Kingdom, and of the future Felicities of his
Servants, in the Reign of the Son of David, (the Messiah, the Horn spoken of
here in Verse 17, as the Rabbis agree) which the Apostle proves, Acts 2.30.

Therefore it was solemnly used at the Rebuilding of Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 6.41,
42. Deuteronomy. 12.11. 1 Chronicles. 17.11, 12.
and most probably (as Grotius thinks) a composition of Solomon's at his
raising of the Temple for the Honor of God, and the Place; containing in it
part of Solomon's Prayer, part of God's Promise to the Jews, and to David.

But Kimchi and others think it made by David, at that very time, 1 Chronicles.
21.26. 1 Chronicles. 22.1.
when the situation of the future Temple was miraculously shown unto him (as
it is hinted in the word Invenimus) by the Sign from Heaven.

For as David was absolutely forbidden the building of a Temple, so 'till the
Prophet Gad came to him with a Divine Command, 1 Chronicles. 17.12.
That he should build an Altar in the Threshing-Floor of Araunah: (For all his
great desire, like Abraham's, to see such a glorious Day, and notwithstanding
his Devotion, like Jacob, to the Service of God) yet he knew not the place that
God would choose, as his Heaven upon Earth, for his most eminent and suitable
Habitation. Therefore his Care and Concern chiefly reflecting on his Vows here
made were the more considerable, and might well be styled Afflictions, worthy
to be Commemorated as well as his former Persecutions. His constant Humility,
Meekness, pious Solicitude, and Affection for God's Service, demonstrated in 2 Samuel 7.2. and 1 Chronicles. 17.16. and all these senses the word Afflictions will
bear, as I have shown in my Version.

Where also I have endeavored to be as clear as I could in the Exposition of
that dark place of the sixth Verse, Hic versus plurimum Hebraeos fatigat.
inquit clarius.
which by some Commentators (like the Jewish Arab. here) is rendered much more
shady and obscure; so that the Elegant Castalio was forced to confess, That he
understood not the meaning of the Text, viz. Verse 6. Therefore herein (as all
along) by the help of the Crities, with the assistance of the Learned Hammond
and De Muys, I strive to sum up briefly as much of the sense as my Verse and
Knowledge will give me leave to do.

Yet I cannot omit Buchanan's Version of this hard Sentence, which is as
singular, as his Paraphrase elsewhere is excellent.

Fama licet Patriae multum promitteret orae,
Inter saxa tamen Sylvestribus obsita dumis:
Monstravit Deus ipse locum, Deus ipse perenne
Hic Templum; Templique sacris sedem innuitarie
Though Fame has promised much to Judah's Coast
By the Ark's stay, (whereof our Towns may boast;)
Yet God himself has shown, and we have found
Old Prophecies, (which did at Bethlem sound,
Fulfilled on woody Hills. --
-- where the Ark stood,
Or where it was to stand, high as a Wood.)
For the Woods of the Field, or the Fields of the Wood, may be taken as for the
House of Aminadab in the Hill of Kiriathjarim, which was a City in a woody
place, from whence David and all Israel fetched the Ark from the House of
Obed-Edom: So for the City of Jerusalem, and especially the Mount Moriah, which
was a close Covert in Abraham's time, witness the Ram caught in the Thicket;
and was afterward more adorned with Wood when the Temple was built thereon:
This being frequently by the Prophets called (...), the Wood; as Bethlechem,
the place of Bread, is also called Ephratah, viz. Fruitful.

It was the City of David, where he might learn from his pious Ancestors, that
neither Silo, nor Gibeon, nor Nob, but Moriah, (which was a part of Mount Sion,
and here by way of Eminency bears the name of the whole Hill) should be the
chief place of worshipping the Mighty God of Jacob.

God is so called here, because he calls himself the Almighty, Genesis 35.10, 11.
Genesis 49.24. Genesis 28.20.
when he named Jacob, Israel; and Jacob first calls God so, and is the first of
all the Patriarchs who is mentioned to have vowed a Vow; as the most ancient
Rabbi Abahu notes: Non dicitur, vovit forti Abraham, aut forti Isaac, sed forti
Jacob, quod primus omnium vovit Jacob votum dicendo, etc. Dicendo quid? Dicendo
omnibus, seu docendo omnes, vovendum esse in Calamitatibus.

But I think it a fine Dream of the Rabbis, who say, Quam Terribilis est iste
Locu? erit Bethel; i. e. Domus Dei, seu Domus Orationis, (Dixit) Quandoquidem
vidi hoc ipso in loco aedificatum iri Templum. 2 Samuel 24.16, 17.
Jacob is here mentioned, because (in his sleep) when he saw those Degrees
which reached Heaven, he had a Vision of the Temple that Solomon built; and
being amazed at the Majesty thereof, speaks of it, and not of Bethel.

And David (as they say) made the Vow, mentioned in this Psalm, when the Plague
was stayed at the Threshing-Floor of the Jebusite, and notice given him where
the Temple should be built, (as I have noted before.)

Thus much may suffice by way of Argument, because I have wrote more in
Annotations upon this Psalm, it being the longest and most difficult of my
undertaking: Therefore I would be excused by the more Critical and Learned
Reader, if the pains I took do neither please nor profit him in the full
understanding, or explaining the sense hereof; because these Notes were not
intended to nauseate the public with Crambes, but to inform those, who are of
as low rank in knowledge as my self.

Having put the word Shechinah in the Margin of my Verses, I was once asked,
why I did so? Therefore I here give the reason, because I look on that Petition
of the Psalmist in the tenth Verse, Janus-like, with two Faces, and most fit
for Solomon to make, who built both the Temple, and a place, on purpose to
worship toward the holiest of Holies, as if he had in this manner uttered his
Mind.

O! let me never prove so Idolatrous, as to turn away to other Gods, from this
place of Worshipping toward thy holy Temple (toward the Shechinah, the special
place of thy Presence,) nor let me prove so rejected by thee, as in thine Anger
to be cast out from before thee; but do thou empower me here to make thy
Presence, and to meet with thy Favors in my Worship and Adoration of thee.

Then I have doubly rendered the last Verse, because of the fullness of the Word
(Induam), I Will cloth or put on, or throw on, as the (...).
Retiarii did their Nets over the Secutores, i. e. publicly in the sight of
all Men, by covering and overwhelming them to disgrace and destroy them.

And this Induam is put in opposition to the clothing of such Men, Verse. 9, 10.
who having Truth and Righteousness visibly about them, (as it were, their
Raiment) shall be manifestly preserved and adorned thereby, as Judges by their
Robes, through the overruling Providence and Tuition of the Almighty.

^ LOrd! For Christmas day, as it is appointed by the Church.
think on him whom thou did find, the Man ac -- cor -- ding to thy Mind; who
could for thee with all things part: With his Wives love, and his own State,
that on thy Ser -- vice he might wait. Remember Da -- vid's humble Heart.

Think on his Hand that brings thee Praise,
Strikes down thy Foes, ill Spirits lays,
And Gifts and Music does afford: 1 Samuel 17.49 16.16

Though he did right, 2 Samuel 6.19. 6.16. 6.21.
he had much wrong,
Even while he brought thy Ark along:
Remember David's Troubles, Lord.
Think on the King, and on his Care,
Who for thy Place did well prepare;
Lord Bless his Heir, 1 Chr. 22.3. 4.5. 28.14 5. 2. 15.1.
build up his House:
He would have set, and trimmed up thine,
Lord! bless our acting his Design.
Remember David, and his Vows.
Thus said he, 2 Samuel 5.9.
when he took his Oath,
To Jacob's God I plight my Troth,
Though I am safe in my new Forts:
I will not sleep, nor there sit still,
'Till the Ark rests on Zion's Hill, 2 Samuel 7.2.

And from its Tabernacula.
Curtains comes to Vsus est numero multitudinis, ad plures Templi parts
indicandas; nam in Templo (inquit Kimchi) crant Domus tres.
Courts.
My House (though built) shall not be It shall not be Dedicated, and so not
dwelt in 'till Consecrated; as the Jews did ever some part of their House for
special Worship.
Blessed; 1 Samuel 19.15, 16.

My Bed shall yield me no more Tandem tam long abest ut ego sim dormiturus; ut
ne oculis quidem mictaturus sim.
Rest,
Than when 'twas searched for no good:
'Till here (with ours) God's Seat is found, 1 Chronicles. 13.5, 6.

Being with lofty Cedars crowned,
Instead of Kiriath-jearim's Wood.
For in the Woods we lately found 1 Samuel 7.1.

Joys, which to Abram's Hill may sound,
When God shall there be seen again; Genesis 22.13. 1 Samuel 16.1. Mic. 5.2.

As first at Bethlem we did hear
How glorious all his Goings were,
Up to the Mountams from the Plain.
And while God comes with the glad Throng, Cant. 2.8. Rev. 14.1. Psalm. 114.4.

In every place we hear this Song,
See, see, where our Beloved goes:
That he may stand on Sion still,
Look how he leaps from Hill to Hill,
And makes us skip for joy, like Roes.
Come, John. 2.22.
let us to Sion march along
In order, (lest we Worship wrong)
After the Ark our Course is bent: Numb. 10.33, 35, 36.

We'll worship with the solemn Cries,
Rise, Lord! unto thy Rest arise,
Rise to a Temple from a Tent.
The Train shall shout, 1 Chr. 15.27.
and so will I,
The Choir shall raise their Voices high;
The Priests shall show the Sanctity
Both of thy Person, and their Place,
By being clothed with Righteousness: 2 Chr. 6.12, 13.

And thine Anointed thou shall bless,
Nor from thy Or Favor. See Gregory's Notes on the word.
Presence turn his Face.
Oh! 2 Samuel 6.21.
never turn from us thy Face,
For David's sake, love David's Race;
Do not his Stock (as Readiness) disown:
Since, if his Sons thy Laws obey,
Thou, 2 Chr. 9.17.
Lord, have sworn his De fructu Ventris tui, quoniam uterus Vxoris cum omni suo
fructu ad Maritum pertinet.
Seed shall sway,
And here for ever have a Throne.
For here has God his Favor shown, 2 Samuel 6.12.13.

And chose our Dwellings for his own;
He will not stay with Edom Neither with Edom whom he hated; nor Obed Edom whom
he blessed.
still,
But his Provisions shall bless ours,
Since on the Rich he dainty's showers,
And can with Bread the Hungry fill.
Here will I sit, says God, 2 Chr. 6.41.
and Carve
To each poor Soul, Significare vult apertam and manifestam salutem quae
omnibus pateat, cum sacerdotes salute quasi vest circumdarentur; qui nunquam
deerint gratiarum repetendarum Officio.
that none may starve; Victum eis (non viduam) benedicam.

All Wants I will so far supply, (...), as the 72 Interp. will render it, which
properly signifies Venison (a dainty indeed,) but it implies more largely any
Victuals or Provisions.

That a large Alb of Thankfulness
Shall be my Priest's perpetual Dress,
And Saints shall set their Joys on high.
On high shall David see my Love,
As here in Sion; so above,
Like Aaron's Rod, shall bud his His Royal Dignity, Power, and Off spring. 1
King. 11.36.
Horn:
(...), which mystically refers to Christ. Psalm. 4.2.
Glory's own Lamp lights up his Line,
And on his Head my Crown shall shine;
But on his Foes I Will Haud secus ac Retiarii; ut supra in Comment.

Gloria Patri, etc.
Glory be to the Father, Son,
And Holy Ghost, the Three in One,
Whom as one Being we adore:
Tho every Person of the Three
For ever was, shall ever be,
And is, God Blessed evermore.
AMEN.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Thirteenth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The
CXXXII. PSALM.
O Lord God! that thou may the more graciously consider us and our Affairs,
Remember our Lord Jesus we beseech thee, and all his Afflictions, all his
Humblings, all his Troubles, his Cares, and Loves, and Passions for us: look
how through the whole Volume of thy Book it is written of him, That he should
fulfill thy Will, O God! and therefore he beggered himself so far as to be born
of the Stock and Lineage of David, that he might perform the Promise he had
made, not to fail his People, but to become their Righteousness, and their
Redemption; and so though the Foxes had holes, and the Birds of the Air nests,
he would not have where to lay his Head: Neither would he give sleep to his
Eyes, but would be walking, and watching, and praying, whole Nights together,
that he might be doing good to us, for us, in us, and with us, that here again
in this base Earth and World of ours, he might find out an Habitation for the
Mighty God, and a place where his holy Dove might rest. Grant then, O glorious
Lord! that all his Labors and Desires, his Endeavors and good Will concerning
us may not be frustrated, but let us be built up a Spiritual House upon him,
and be blessed in our Undertakings through him unto thy Glory; that as we have
been directed, so we may go on (not stand still) to see thy Salvation, and to
worship thy Goodness, which does arise with healing under its Wings for us, as
a Hen, and as an Eagle, to cure, to carry, to secure and feed us, to make our
Natures thy Abode, our Hearts thy Sanctuary, our Souls the resting Place, both
for thee, and the Ark of thy Strength; and all this, to what purpose? but for
our Advantage, (not thine) that we might be a Chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, clothed with Christ's Righteousness, and covered with thy
Comeliness, which invests us with all Peace and Joy through the Holy Ghost.

O therefore! let us lift up our Hearts with Love, and Praise, and Comfort, in
believing, trusting, and begging, for thy Son's sake, that neither our Faces
may be turned from thee to go a Whoring after other things (that are not God,
nor indeed good), nor let the face of thine Anointed be turned so away from us,
as not to know us at the last Day.

No, blessed Lord! grant us such an interest in our dear Redeemer, as that we
may have a Title to thy Favor, and be able to put thee in mind how thou have
sworn, and wilt not fail unto thy well-beloved Son, that of the Fruit of his
Body thou will set upon the Throne, and have promised to all true Believers
(his Servants,) that if they keep thy Covenant, they and their Children shall
Reign with thee for ever, and find new cause of rejoicing in thee, who have
chosen the Sons of Men for thy Zion, and desired their enlarged Souls for thy
restful Habitation, and chief Delight!

But when shall we come to this Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory? When we
have with patience waited on thy good pleasure, and not fainted in our
expectation of thy faithfulness, then for certain we shall see thee, abundantly
blessing and rewarding the small Provisions made here to serve thee withal,
and thou will satisfy such as hunger and thirst after thy Kingdom with the
Bread of Life, and with the Wells of Salvation, and they shall be arrayed like
thy Priests with Holiness, and shine like Lamps in thy Presence for evermore.
Amen.

HElp us, O Mighty God of Jacob! to sing no Requiems to our Souls or Conditions
here, 'till we have not only heard of thee with the hearing of the Ear, but
hearkened unto thee with the attention of the Mind, and come unto thee with the
obedience of the Will, finding out a place in our Affections and Understandings
where thou may dwell, that thou may hereafter prepare a Mansion for us,
even in thy House, O Father!

And with us be mindful of all Degrees amongst us, from David upon the Throne,
to Job upon the Dunghill; be good unto them in all their Cares, Vows, Prayers,
Devotions, and Afflictions, according to the multitude of thy most tender
Mercies, and comfortable Promises: Let the King rejoice in thy strength, O
Lord! and do thou make his Power to flourish, and his Righteousness to blossom
like the Rod of Aaron; ordain a luster of Honor and Happiness for him and his
House for evermore; let not his Candle go out in obscurity, nor quench the
Light of Israel, but let his Enemies be inveloped with disgrace and
disappointments, and cloth thy Priests, and our Church of England, with
Honor, Prosperity, and perfect Redemption, that the Horn of David may bud
amongst us, and the Power of Godliness shoot forth every where in our Land, in
the great City, in Princes Courts, and in thy House and ours, so that thou
may have Mercy on Zion, and repair the breaches of thy Jerusalem, while she
that sat Disconsolate as a Widow may now be feasted with Bread from Heaven,
with the Manna of Divine Ordinances duly administered; so that no Soul amongst
us may go empty away, but that even he who gathers least may have no lack.
Exodus 16.18.


Lord! thou can make thy holy Viands, like David's Provision at the Passover,
be dealt so plentifully to every one, as that none shall be unprovided for, or
ashamed, who depend like Ruth upon thy Bounty; but they who despise thee shall
be wrapped up in Confusion as in a Cloak

Therefore let thy Servants joy in thy Salvation, and all our People know the
Lord, acknowledging his Goodness and his Bounty that blesses the Abundance of
the Rich, and fills the Hungry with good things, that both may have Bread
enough, and neither want nor repine, but seek their Food of God, while he makes
those that depart wickedly from him to continue in shame and scarcity.

Ah! that we may stand in a we and not sin, lest we inherit the promotion of
Fools, instead of the Kingdom and Crown of David; so provide for us, gracious
Master, in every state and condition, as may seem best to thy God-like Wisdom,
and prove most to thine Eternal Glory, if not to ours, O! Our Father, etc.

THE FOURTEENTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXXIII. PSALM,
Was composed by David (as some think) at his Coronation, 2 Samuel 5. 1 Chr. 1. 2
Pet. 1.7. 1 Samuel 17.29. 1 Samuel 18. 2 Samuel 1. 2 Samuel 3. 2 Samuel 10. and 9. and
18. etc.
after his eight years Civil War, to exhort the People to Love and Amity,
according to the exhortation of the Apostle, for those were the Graces which
did most adorn his Life, both when a public and a private Person; and so this
Psahn, as the next, was fitted for the most Solemn Times of Worship, and the
happy Return from Bondage and Captivity, because it magnifies the pious Accord,
Uniformity, and Blessed Communion of the Church of God in all Times.

It Celebrates the Excellencies of Love, both in and toward God and Man; it
reflects much Joy from the Consideration of the Mystical Union between Christ
and his Members, whom he owns as Brethren, who shall live, and live together
also with him, though he is their High Priest, Rock, and Prince, according to
the most apt Comparisons of the holy Oil, and highborn Dew; which Similies, In
Zorobabel, and Joshua, Types of the Messiah.
as well as the Subject, were so well calculated to the Time, when there was a
Prince and an High Priest restored again to Israel, that it is no wonder we
find it placed among the Graduals.

Some apply it to all the Israelites Love one toward another, who were
Brethren of the same Stock (as we are all in Adam;) and likewise to their Love
of their Ruler, who was higher than the rest, (as was shown in Saul) like Mount
Hermon and Sion, more advancing than other Hills: Therefore to animate us with
the like affections toward our Brethren, Parents, and Superiors, they say,
the Priest's Blessing is compared to the Sacred Oil, and the Prince's Favor to
the fruitful Dew, (according to that expression of the Wisest of Kings) which
descends from the highest to the lowest, and is both pleasant and profitable to
all; Prove. 19.12.
as the Heathen Poet Meander (once quoted by St. Paul himself) could say,

(...). Some of the Rabbis think it a particular Eulogy of the Concord and
Conformity among the Priests in their Religious Exercises; and therefore
mention is made of Aaron the most Anointed of the Lord (as he may be termed,
rather than chief Anointed,) because most Oil was expended on him.

^ BE -- hold how plea -- sant it is! For Saint George's, or All Saints Day.
how good! But, O! how rare, and hard to find, Brethren, of the same House and
Blood, be -- come of the same way and mind.

Like Sampson's Honey, strong and sweet, Judge. 14.14.

It Is thus to see Men's Hearts and Hands,
As Jonathan's and David's meet,
Twisting together in Love's Bands. 1 Samuel 18.3.

When Prince and People so are one,
As that the Oil, poured on his Head, 2 Samuel 19.39. 5.3. 19.23.

Down to the lowest Limb does run;
In Grace, and Peace, and Pardon spread.
It Is like the precious Ointment shed Levit. 8.12.

Upon the High Priest's hallowed Crown,
Which both perfumed his Beard and Head,
And thence upon his Clothes fell down.
Thus have I seen Clouds big with Rain
First give their Dews to all the Hills,
And then shower Wealth on the low Plain
As Friendship benefits distills.
On Friendship's Fleece God's Love brings down Judge. 6.38, 39.

Blessings, as numberless as Drops;
Which from Mount Sion deck the Town, Vide Hammond.

And cloth the Fields from Hermon's Tops.
As to the Vale, these Mountains are;
So to the Weak, the Potent prove
Useful and kind, though distant far;
Yet centered, like the World, by Love.
For all our Comforts come from Love,
By Love, God gives the Happy Life;
That Blessed below, and best above,
There without end, here without strife.
Gloria Patri.
Glory to him who makes our Bliss,
To the one God, in Persons three;
As in beginning was, now is,
And shall be to Eternity.
AMEN.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Fourteenth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The
CXXXIII. PSALM.
O Blessed Father! who have made many of us of one Blood and Kind: O blessed
Savior! who have made us many of one Bread, and one Lump: O blessed Spirit!
who art the Love, both of the Father, and of the Son, shed this abroad into all
our Hearts abundantly; look upon us graciously, O thou only one, most loving
and pitying Lord God! that we may look upon thee better (though it be but
darkly at the best) in that Sea of Glass before the Throne, in that clearest
mirror and reflection of thy favor to Mankind, to wit, in Christ incarnate, in
whom God is most wonderfully, wisely, and kindly seen to reconcile the World
(what is that but Vileness, Vanity, and Vexation, Frailty, and a Curse) unto
himself, that Man might be far more able than he was by the Glasses and Laver
of the Tabernacle, both to see his Spots and Pollutions to get clean from them,
and that God might be considered and admired not so much in the broken Glass of
Nature, nor in the blotted Book of the Creature, (which show us his power and
greatness) as in the Face of a Redeemer, in the Testament of the holy Jesus,
which most plainly, and yet most gloriously speaks thy Love and Goodness, and
calls for ours; since if thou have so loved this naughty World, and us that
help to make it worse, how ought we to love thee, and also to love one another?

O how good, as well as how pleasant, a thing it is to know Christ as our Head,
and we our selves his Members! This is as sweet and useful as Life it self, to
make our short Lives here not tedious to our selves or others; nay, this is
Life Eternal, because Charity never fails: We shall have that Grace for all if
we are Christians, we shall keep it always if we are Saints, for it is
Holiness, and will be Happiness; it is the Oil that from our Head, from our
everlasting Aaron, falls down to the very Skirts of his Clothing, to revive and
refresh the lowest and most humbled Sinner (if believing), and it is that
Anointing from above which we must not want, especially at the last Article of
Life, in the greatest extremities of Temptation, but we must carry it along
with us into our Father's presence; then shall we be in his sight as a Field
which the Lord has blessed, then will he smell the Odor of our elder Brother's
Vest upon us, and we shall inherit the Promises, and abide in his Love in the
participation, and in the propagation thereof, Divine Love being the Dew of
Heaven that causes the fruitfulness of the Earth; it makes us high and white
like Hermon, pleasant and safe as Mount Sion; it makes our Superiors, and the
great ones of the Earth, not to be Rocks of Offense to us, but to be rather, as
the shadows of a Rock in a dry Land, needful Supports, convenient Sanctuaries
and Refreshments, and it causes God to command a Blessing on us from all
degrees of People above us, and of conditions round about us. Therefore,

Dear Lord! help us to live in such Concord and brotherly Kindness, as that we
may be Blessed from all our Relations, from our Superiors, by having the Oil
of Spiritual Blessings, and the Dew of Temporal Favors bestowed on us, Love
and good Will from Equals, Prayers and good Wishes from Inferiors; being so
careful and affectionate, both for thy Priests, and for our Princes, as that
neither Moses nor Aaron may be murmured at, but obeyed by us, and we may be
protected and guided by their Hands in the Spirit and Practice of all true Love
and Charity, for the honor of our Christian Profession, and for the glory of
thy holiest Name, O Christ Jesus our Lord! who live and reignest, etc.

THE FIFTEENTH Psalm of Degrees, BEING The CXXXIV. PSALM,
Was composed by David ( De Muys thinks) as well as the former, and appointed
to put the People in mind of their more solemn Times of Meeting with that
pious, charitable, and unspotted Souls, with which they ought to approach God;
this being an Euge, an incitement to all, who are the Lord's Servants, to be
constant and pure in his Service, as a particular hoc age to the Priests at the
Canonical Hours of Prayer, and stated Times of public Worship, to lift up clean
Hands, and holy Hearts.

It is a proper Close to the preceding Hymns, being often sung at Midnight at
the end of the Nocturnal Offices by the Jews, and designed by me for the Eves
of our greater Festivals: It is an Exhortation generally directed not only to
the Priests, who kept the Watch in the Temple, so to the People, who watched
these Days and Nights, for many departed not, as you may gather from Psalm.
92.2. and Luke 2.37.

It seems to me most probable, that this Psalm was composed by Ezra the Priest,
or some of his Time, not only because it is the last of the Graduals, which
were accommodated for the Return from Captivity, but because it is Dramatic;
chiefly concerning the Priests, who stand by night in the House of the Lord; or
as the 72d, in the Courts of the House, which was not built in David's time;
and therefore it is not so likely a composition of David's, but of Ezra, when
the holy manner of worshipping God was restored, Ezra 8.6. and the Priests set
in their Courses, Verse. 7.

In the first Verse of this Psalm I should suppose the Choir joining to the
Music, and then the Chief Priest (for that Watch) giving the rest Directions as
in the second Verse, and they again in the third Verse blessing him, (for it is
Bless thee, and not ye) though in my version I use the Plural throughout.

^ ALL ye, A Nocturnis for Christmas Eve.
who God's Do -- me -- stics are, see you, with An -- gels wait; and in your
Courses, like each Star, by Night shine at Heavens Gate.

Look while ye stand, Among the Jews the Choir stood, the People kneeled, the
High Priest sat, and the washings of their Hands and Feet (so frequent during
the time of their officiating) were called Sanctifications.
or kneel, or sit,
Ye serve and bless the Lord;
Look that your Hands God's Altar fit,
And to his Praise accord.
Look ye be clean, for Holiness
Becomes God's holy Place;
Watch well, (...), in the 72. is short of the Original, though it means in
holy Things, as well as Places, for it signifies Holiness in the Abstract (
Christ typified by the Ark of the Covenant); and such Holiness in Men as could
adapt them for the discharge of their Duty, which is hinted by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.8. And this was signified by the Jews often washing their Hands and Feet
before their Praying, which was styled (...) Sanctification: Vt alibi
indigitavi.
and Pray, that Filthiness
None of God's Works deface.
Then God, who made the World, and stays
On Sion, Grace shall send;
'Till he shall Bless, and we shall Praise,
From hence, World without end.
Gloria Patri, etc.
To God the Father, God the Son,
And God the Holy Ghost,
Be Glory given, by every one
Who make the Lord their Boast.
AMEN.
CONTEMPLATIONS and COLLECTS ON THE Fifteenth PSALM of DEGREES, BEING The
CXXXIV. PSALM.
O Thou that acceptest not the Persons of Princes, nor regardest the Rich more
than the Poor, since they are all alike the Works of thy Hands! grant that we
may not be such Fools as to forget thee in any time of our quiet, fullness, or
repose, lest thou come at an Hour when thou art not looked for by us, and find
us unfit for thy Appearance, who can trouble whole Nations even at Midnight
(at a time when we least think of Disturbance or Remove), as we have great
Examples in the People of Israel, Egypt, and Assyria; for there is not any
Darkness (no not the shadows of Death) where the workers of Iniquity can hide
themselves from thine Eyes, though all the Mountains of the World should cover
them; thou beholdest all our Goings, though thy Footsteps are too little
regarded by us.

Therefore let us not think to do mischief or wrong like the Evil one, who
sowed Tares while other Men slept; nor to commit Violence or Robbery; 1 King.
3.20.
nor to Defraud or Deceive, like the Harlot at Midnight; but even at that
Season be Chaste, and Pious, and Charitable, like Boaz, denying our selves, and
mastering our Concupiscences, and (like Sampson in Gaza) disappoint the malice
of that implacable Adversary, who hunts after our Souls, and ceases not, like a
Dog, to go about seeking whom he may devour.

Lord! deliver thou my Darling from his Power, as thou did St. Paul, even at
such a dismal time when I may seem in his very Jaws; then let my Soul escape
and get away, and find a way to serve thee, (as that chosen Vessel did) who
could Pray and sing Praises unto thee even at Midnight; so let us endeavor to
worship the Lord with holy Worship, with clean Hands, and a pure Heart, that we
may stand on his holy Hill, and remember in all the Formalities of outward
Cleanness to keep our Spirits pure; and in all our Approaches to thee, to keep
our selves unspotted of the World; to this end give us inward Holiness, and the
Sanctifications both of Heart and Life, that in the darkest hour of Temptation,
in the deadest time of Distress, in the cloudiest night of Trouble, or of
Agonies, we may lift up our Praises and Adorations unto thee, who can send
thine Angel (as thou did once thy Son, at such a time) to comfort and recover
our vile Natures, and to command Deliverances unto thy People, even from thy
most holy Place.

O! that we may be of the number of those who qualify themselves by thy
Service for the better discharge of their Duty and thy Will; that having the
filthy Garments of our own evil Thoughts, Words, and Actions (like Joshua's the
High-Priest's) taken off from us, we may not have Satan left at our right Hands
to accuse or command us, but may see Jesus at thy right Hand interceding for
us; and being clothed in the long Robes of his Righteousness, we may lift up
our Hands in thy Sanctuary, and bless thee for evermore, who have made the
Heavens as well as the Sea, for thy Children to adore thee in, O!

Our Father, etc.

THE FIFTEEN Psalms of Degrees, OR ASCENTS,
Are so called, because they were sung Anthem-wise by several Parts of the
Choir, with Elevation of Voice on some higher Ground, or place of advantage;
perhaps on the Steps of the Temple, which in Ezekiel's Vision are mentioned to
be Fifteen in number: Ca. 40. v. 22.34.
And just so many Stairs, say the Talmudists, were there mounting from the
Women's Court to the Men's, on which, they fancy, these PSALMS were sung, and
therefore thus termed, (...) ((...), as Aquila and Symachus.)

But I think rather because they were much used by the Hebrews upon their
coming up from Babylon, and at the building of the second Temple, Cap. 8.
as may be guessed from Nehemiah; at which time they might indeed begin very
properly with the 120th Psalm, by reason of the contempt and calumniation of
their ill-willers at that time; who were such as are there described Arabians,
crafty and cruel Adversaries, who maliciously opposed both their unloosing the
Chains of Captivity, and the erection of their Buildings.

Need was there then of Songs of E^^^ation and Ascents to advance God's high
Deliverances of them, and exalt his Praise and Glory in the most excellent way
of rejoicing, which was in their eminent Music, as the Title (...), rendered
Cantica Dignitatum, may likewise bear.

As also to revive their drooping Spirits by some pleasant kind of Melody or
lofty Note, well known to the Jews by the name of (...), which some suppose may
here import no more than this (...), as (...) in the front of other Psalms,
viz. to notify that the Tune or Key these were to be sang in, was the same
with such other Psalms as were known to begin with the word (...).

FINIS.

