Mercurius Cambro-Britannus, THE BRITISH MERCURY; OR THE WELSH DIURNALL.

Communicating remarkable Intelligences, and true News to awle the whole
Kingdom, from Monday November 20, to Monday the 27. 1643.

1. Prince Rupert her unmercifull plunderings in Northamptonshire, which her
intend to make as poor as Wales. 2. Te pigge successes of Sir Thomas Middleton
and Sir William Brereton in Shropshire, and of teyr advancing toward West
chester, which spite of awle te Irish Rebels lately landed, her ferily hope,
that tey will take in good time. 3. Sir Thomas Glemham was hear was made
Governor of New Castle, and te warm news of Coals coming to London. 4. Te
creat war, and te quarrels like to grow high betwixt te Tevill (God bless
us) and te Pope. 5. A true Relation of horrible plunderings in Ireland, which
her would have you know grew a creat deal taller then tey were by te late
Cessation of Arms. 6. Her can tell you of some hopes of Peace, and how far
te French Ambassador will travel to pring it about. 7. Vas tell of creat
defeat given to Colonel Huddleston by her Colonel Rigby near Thurland Castle,
and her tell how Thurland Castle was taken all to pieces, and demolished. 8. Te
creat Mount near Plymmouth was taken by Tevill-Cavilliers, and te Tevill will
take te Cavilliers. 9. Bazing House (her hear) is not taken yet, and (her
hear) it is not like to be taken creat while. 10. Sir Ralph Hopton, that hopt
on to Winchester has now got creat pride (...) mind, and offer to face (her
hear) and deface if her can Sir William Wallets men, and from awle te Rooms
in her house. 11. News from her own house in her Country of Wales.
Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, November. 27. 1943.

THE BRITISH MERCURY COMMUNICATING Remarkable Intelligences, and true News to
awle the whole Kingdom, from Monday November 20. to Monday November. 27. 1643.
WHen her was a Student in te University of Oxford, nothing could be more
welcome unto her, then to receive from her friends good news, and half a
piece of gold enclosed in a Letter, but now they write, and write, but send no
gold in her Letter, but cold news; would te war might cease, that her pen
might not travel from Town to Town to hear matters, and show all as the
maid did, who fell from her horse with her coat over her head, and discovered
her naked belly, and more and more beside, whereof her will not give you
account.

But her will make more serious narrations, and from Shropshire bordering on
Wales, tell you that which is sober cood news, namely that Sir Thomas
Middleton a creat landed man in Wales, and Sir William Brereton have lately
gone bravely on, and done matter of valor whereby to raise their fame, for
they have lately taken Holl-Castle being the Earl of Bridgewaters house, both
te Hall, and te Parlour, and te Kitching, and te fery house of Office, and
moreover her have lately took the Town of Roxford, whereby te passages into
North Wales are cleared, and her may by day or te light of te moon safely
travel, te carrier may pass between te legs of te mountain, te narrow way
does lie wide open like te whore to receive awle comers.

Her be no Prophet, yet her do fery well remember that her cried out always
against te Irish Rebels, coming to cut te Protestants throat, but Cassandra
was creat Prophetess, that foretold the destruction of Troy, yet was not
believed, and so her words formerly were not regarded, but now her hear from
Ireland that te soldiers are grown so fery bold, that they took men's
clo^thes from their back, and hats from their heads; and it is thought te Irish
Rebels coming into Wales on Saint Taffyes day, would take her hat with te
Leek in it from her head, as they do in Ireland.

And now her talk of Hull, the Earl of New Castle has sent Sir Thomas
Glemham to New Castle with a Regiment of foot to strenthen te Garrison, and
has put te Town into his protection, which occasioned some discords betwixt
Sir Thomas Glemham, and the Major of New Castle and te soldiers on te reciving
of teyr new Governor, began to mutiny for their pay due unto them, and would
not be pacified, until they were promised that te Seaport should be open, and
that they should have liberty to make money by selling of the coal, which may
be fery warm news into the City of London, where they are feign to spend
their money in Alehouses to warm their toes, and teyr hands, in te cold
weather by the fire side.

By a ship which from foreign parts arrived in Wales, her do certainly
understand that some grudgings has begot a creat discontent between te Pope
and te Devil, who does intend to come against him with awle his black furies
and infernal forces, but Cardinals knowing that te Devil has been always
assisting to te Pope and te Papists, as in te Powder Treasons and other plots,
they endeavor what they can to make te Pope consider that the Devil has been
always his close friend, and that her had long since fallen out of her chair
of Supremacy, if her had not been held up by the immediate power of te Devil,
and so the Pope and te Cardinals are intended to make a new Peace with te
Devil, for if te Popish malignant devilish Kingdom should be divided against
it self, it could not stand.

Prince Rupert and his Cavaliers (as her do hear) have done creat harm in
Northamptonshire, by their pillaging and plundering, wheresoever they come, and
do every day take to the value of a thousand pound from te Inhabitants, for
now her have got a custom of robbing, her cannot leave it; for robbing of men's
houses is grown a common trade amongst Soldiers, and they are more to be
blamed, that do live by spoiling te Kings good Subjects, then those that do
steal for necessities, and what will be the funeral end of aul, but a
generally desolations, which will come speedily upon this Kingdom, for no man
possesses te thing that he can call his own, the subject having only
liberty to choose whether he will beg or starve, when aul his coods have been
taken from her by te Cavaliers.

O Saint TAFFY, who would have thought to have seen such ploody times and
manners? For since the Cessation of Arms, they have Killed creat many true
Protestants, and have made te hand of te King, and te hand of aul ^e
Commissioners, that signed and put creat Seal to te Articles of peace with te
ploody Rebels, to be guilty of much creat deal of plood. And to show her
parbarous minds, being like Gripe te Usurer, that does take and get aul: the
Lord of Castlehaven has taken in Irelaud thiry two Castles, and killed the men
that were within them, and te Inhabitants of of Wichloe have drove from Dublin
400. Cowes, and have seized on merchandise, and took te owners prrisoners, and
have sent them afterward home almost naked, and without hat, coat or dublet,
that te cold might be guilty of their bloodshed, and to show te Cruelty of te
Barber or Chyrurgion, they cut off one man's nose or lips, and some of his
skull, as if they would make him an Anathomy, and read Lectures over him, as
they do in the Surgeons Hall. But indeed the Rebels endeavor is, to ruin
and extinguish te Protestants quite out of te Realm.

Her do love to see peace exceedingly both in the Commonwealth, and in her
house, and there is a kind of glimmering light of peace that does break
through the Cloud of war, for the French Ambassador has lately by his
letter sent unto te Houses, moved for the procuring of a peace, and her do wish
with aul te heart in her pelly, that there were peace between her King and
Parliament, but how can that be by shedding of plood? if aul Protestants be
brethren, must her kill one another, as Kain killed Abel at the beginning of
the Would? no, no, if her King and Parliament would agree, then her might live
at quiet on her Mountains, and if her could see that day, her would have aul te
bells to ring in Wales, make Bonfire of her bushes, and in Metheglin drink
healths to her King, and to confusion of aul those that have hindered the
agreement between the King and Parliament, for her be weary of writing of the
War, and her is now tired with fighting in te War.

Yer her will next present unto your knowledge a creat defeat given to a body
of te Earl of Newcastles Army near Thurland Castle, upon the edge of
Lancashire. For the said Colonel Rigby, having not above 200. horse, and 300
foot forsook the Castle, whereunto her had formerly laid siege, and advanted
with her forces to encounter te enemy, being about 3000. horse and foot, and
coming suddenly upon them, put te enemy into such a fright, that they were
absolutely dispersed and routed, many killed, and about 400. taken prisoners,
among te rest, Colonel Huddleston their chief Commander, and afterward her
returned to Thurland Castle, which was presently surrendered and demolished. Her
do wonder that te malignants dare so often appear in te open field, unless
te reason is, that the Northern people being rude by nature and education, have
desires to be peaten into better manners, but indeed, for the true Cause, her
must look up among te stars, and there behold te hand of Providence, letting
victorious garlands fall down on te heads of te Parliaments Soldiers, for te
truth of te Protestant Cause is creat, and shall in te conclusions prevail over
te Papists and malignants.

But all matters run not even in te affairs of War, for te creat work at
Plymmouth called Mount Stamford, is taken by te enemy, and they do want
chiefly admonition, her should say Ammunition, which te Parliament will spedily
send them. All te Townsmen have entered into a solemn Oath. to live and dye
together, and to oppose te enemy, by standing it out to te last man, which is
indeed as a prave Resolution, as if they had been aul descended from her
ancient Prittish Worthy Owen Glendor, for he that would win a victory, or a
fair Mistress, must always stand stiffely to the matter.

Her have read, that in old times mighty Giants live in enchanted Castles, and
her do now hear, that a creat company of Malignants live so strongly fortifyed
in Bazing House, so that Sir William Waller has drawn his foot forces from
thence to Farnham Castle, for te walls be as thick as those of Plutoes Court,
where he does live with his malignant Queen Proserpine, and there be many
malignant Ladies, and other women within the Castle, from the walls whereof,
the women threw brickbats on our Soldiers heads; and bid te Souliers, Come up
Roundheads if ye dare; and no doubt but her will hereafter come up, and take
away aul her gold and silver that does lie buried in te gound in te sheets.

From Scotland her be informed, that when they heard that te Article of accord
from te Parliameut, with te advance money, were put to sea; they presently gave
order to draw their Forces into Body, whereby they might be in te more
readiness to advance into England, so that they will make te Earl of Newcastle
fly from place to place, like her young Goat chased by her little puppy dog
over te Mountain, for they will come to Newcastle and Hull, and other towns.

Her will now in a compendious manner tell you awle te remarkable passages of
this week handsomely packt together, because close doing is best under the
sheet.

Prince Rupert does go in his plundering way, and has made Northamptonshire
as poor as Wales, and is now within four miles of Northampton Town with a
strong Body of Horse.

Many Volantiers out of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire are come to aid Sir
Thomas Fairfax,

Sir William Wallers Horse lie about te country to starve teyr pellies, and to
keep awle provision from coming to relieve the malignant in Bazing House.

Sir Ralph Hopton is hopt on to Winchester, but is lame in men and Ammunition,
and not able to meet with Sir William Waller.

The Bishop of Canterbury appeared before te Parliament, but her Counsel being
no cood Doctors to clear and purge him, he was sent back again to te Tower.

The Earl of New-castles Army does moulter away, and he is sick of te
consumption of his Army; and the Gentry of te Northern Counties stand for te
Parliament.

Grief it is to tell that his Majey has sent for all te English Regiments in
Ireland to serve against te Parliament, six Regiments are to be transported to
Bristoll, and the Earl of Cork will bring four other Regiments to maintain
it is unnatural war against te Parliament.

Sir William Waller (as her hear) lately took te Popish Lord Salton at
Newbery. who coming from France, landed in Sussex, and with him four thousand
pound was taken Prisoner, and his Lordship is brought up to London.

Upon te news of te Advance-mony sent into Scotland, they have drawn their
forces into Poddies, and will speedily advance into England, then toward te
malignants.

Tere was lately some skirmishes between te Parliaments forces and te
Cavalliers at Owlney, wherein te London Red Regiment were shrewdly put to it by
te enemy, but yet they got honor, te only salve that cures te Soldiers
wounds. Sir Ralph Hoptons Dragooners have lately met with Sir William Wallers
Dragooners, by whom they were turned into flying Dragons, and were awle
compelled to run away, for to chance of war can put wings upon te shoulders
of the most valiant Soldier, and make tem trust to their legs more then their
Arms.

The News from Oxford is. that aul te affairs at Court are steered by te
Cabinet Counsel, as Bristoll, Cottington, Digby, and some other creat Lords
friends to te Irish Rebels, and preferred to the places of creat trust, that
aul te world may see that te malignants design is to extirpate the Protestants
in Ireland, and to introduce Popery in England.

Yet te bad minds of te people are by a divine power soon changed into a better
temper, for those two Irish Regements that came out with Colonel Vavasour and
Paulet, are most of them returned to te Parliament about Gloucester and
Tewxbury; and creat shentlemen in te North Country have forsook te New Castle
forces, and will no longer assist te King in regard of te cessation with te
bloody Rebels in Ireland, for this cessation has made creat soldiers fall
away from te King, te cruel effects which will follow, being so clearly
manifested and known.

Her will now send you up some News from her own house in Wales, which her know
to be true, and therefore it may be easily believed: and first her must inform
you from te hall of her pigge-house, that all te guns and Pikes that hung again
te wall, are awl taken down to serve for Arms, to set out her Contrymen:
Whereby the Story of te wise Solomon, giving judgment between the true mother
and te Harlot concerning doviding of te child, may be plainly discerned, the
Moral whereof is, That true love can admit of no destroying division, and
therefore such as have divided te Commonwealth into one part for te King, and
the other for te Parliament, are false-hearted Subjects both unto te State, and
te Church of England. Her must tell you also, that her creat house. keeping is
become so poor and wretched, that te Mouse starve in te Buttery, and te
Cavaliere may rise from her long table an hungry, and not be welcome neither;
was strange alteration in Wales.

From her Kitchen her must inform you, that it has not been warmed creat
whiles: but will tell you News, that awl the Fat is in the fire (for her love
Proverbs) that is, awl the fruitfulness of England will be consumed in te
flame of te Civil war. And hark you, there are more Jacks then in her
kitchen, that have turned from te Parliament to te King, and from te King to te
Parliament. And moreover awl her Country, and indeed awl te Kingdom does now
keep-a continual Shrovetide, all their words and actions are Fritters of
fraud, seething in te creat skillet of malignancy, awl her Spit is turned into
long-sword, wherewith her spit one another, as her do Wodcock in her Country,
one in te arse of another. Te Bishops and Lawyers were so sat, that awl their
conscience dript from them, her was feed her self, let her flock starve, creat
pigg-bellys, love her kitchen better then te pulpit or te Commonwealth. Te
malignants are like her half-baked Pyes, for between standing for te King and
Parliament they are lukewarm, and must come to te Oven, to make them hard and
stiff for Religion. The fury of te Irish Rebels is like her very hot boiling
pot of discention, and te skum of te Rebels fly over into England. But now
from her study observe, it is worth notice, that awl her liberal Arts are
turned into lying Arts, and her creat books of History of War between Pompey
and Caesar do blush in Vermilion to hear of te unnatural war of te King
against te Parliament. Her say also that her should tell her that no good
Orator does or can write against te King and Parliament, for nihil dicendum
est de principibus and Parliamento nisi bonum, we ought as te Frenchman says,
parley bien on parley rien, speak well, or speak nothing, and therefore to
conclude well, Vivat Rex faustum and foelix sit Parliamentum, God save te King,
and bless the proceedings of te Parliament; her cood write Greek too, but her
would not pose but please her Readers.

FINIS.

