Mercurius Cambro-Britannus, THE BRITISH MERCURY, OR THE WELSH DIURNALL.

Communicating remarkable Intelligences, and true News to awle the whole
Kingdom, from Friday November 11, till Monday the 20. 1643.

1. Her tell of horrible creat Beast seen falling te Mountain of Wales, te
last creat light Night. 2. Her told very true story of Carmarthanshires
passages, and of Merlyns Prophecies. 3. Her come fery late from Sir William
Wallers Army, and tell her all the proceedings at Bazing-House. 4. Her show
fery feelingly that all the hearts in Flintshire which before were hearts of
Flint to te Parliament, be now become soft to them, and supple as teir own
gloves. 5. Her tell certain truth of a Mare in Pembrokeshire that sold a Coult
with shoes on its feet, which Coult ere be long, her will bring up to London.
6. Her be heartily sorry that her must speak the truth, and tell that the
burning of Okingham etc. was occasioned by a Commission signed with C.R. 7. Her
make Declarations of te cood Protestants in Ireland, and would not serve Sir
Ralph Hopton against te Parliament. 8. Her show you all the marks of te old
Great Seal, and Her tell you of the Virtue of te new. 9. Her would have her
know te creat pains her take in coming from Wales to acquaint you with her
true Intelligence, and her beseech you therefore to take te pains to look it
over.
Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, November. 20. 1943.

THE BRITISH MERCURY, COMMUNICATING Remarkable Intelligences, and true News
to awle the whole Kingdom, from Friday November 11. till November 20. 1643.
HEt has waygated over all Walls, since her sent you in her last News, and
her is since so pig with her new Remonstrances, her deliberations, and
considerations, that her be scurvily afraid (if any true Brettayn will put her
thought in press) and give tem to her country men te Hawkers, they will sell
themselves awle like Tevils by two farding, tree farding a piece, will prove a
banck of good news for awle te Nations in te Urlds.

Her have terefore bin prodigally careful, wat with te corns on te feet of
her staff, and te corns on te toes of her feet to come now to you with creat
deal pain, and though her feet be creat deal weary, her assure you, her
prayne is good and true.

First, know he be mannerly and wise, for her scorn to tell her best news at
first, or wat was the mischance that came to her Daughter Thomsin dancing at te
May Pole on a Sunday at Abercover, or when Iinkin up Vaughan with creat noise
and threatening, stole away her prowne bill, and going home, put her into a
yellow fear, which falling from behind, came trickling down with creat have.
Her come laden with fresher news from all te parts of Christendom in Wales.
Her begin first with Flintshire. Her say tat all the Hearts of Wales in that
country be awle now as soft as te fery moulten wax, and pecause tey are so
often vexed with te steel of te Cavaliers, her be awle resolved to lend no
more fire to burn her own country and her pedigrees, but te Parliament shall
find them all as supple as teyr own chivrell gloves. Her was in
Carmarthenshire. Was all knew te prave blood of Prophet Merlyn, her confess,
her found tem all naught tere, Her all drank tere for te Prince of Wales, yet
her must know (since good Metheglin begette cood spirit) her come at last to
the Parliament, and by and by her be awle again in remorse, and either stand
for tem or against them. Was creat gate open, and by and by was creat gate
shut, and then was creat gate open again. Was all fery unruly, until up
Sampson up Price, up Hercules up Owen, up Hector up Llewellyn, up Prince Arthur
up Howell, began to recite to her own countrymen some of her creat Prophet
Merlyns own Prophecies, if her can remember them you shall have them presently,
it was spoke (as her conceive) of her present times.

With fire and blood this Age is coverd over,
(One thousand and six hundred left in score)
The Parliament in forty three that stood
Shall shake Church, Churches, and the Roman Rood.
Her would feign know of all her Malignants, if Prophet Merlyn was true Prophet
or no, her told besides tat all te Provinces in Wales, and all to high Hill,
should submit themselves and make legs to te quiet vales, and to te Peace,
which te good and creat Parliament would make in England. Her told us besides
of many shrewd and happy things which since have come to pass. Merlyn was
Merlyn believe it. But te last week as her past to countries for her
recreation, and your information; Her met with shrewsbury shentleman, her
fery own cood Cousin, who told her (her know not what of te Lord Capell, and
tat te creat Town of Shrewsbury, and all te English lay on te Marches of
Wales, were fery sick of te Army disease, and had got creat shaking Ague, and
were like to dye of creat mischief, which te little hungry worms had brought
upon tem; And tat tere was no hope that te creat Town of Shrewsbury should be
releived, and tat te hearts of our countrymen should be quieted, unless that
her Lord Little-ton should come to pacify her angry minds, for her did love
her fery well before, but since her have renounced te faith of true British
shentleman, and have used the creat Seal (by Gar (her knows) to fery bad
uses) her have lost all hearts in Wales and England, and her know Chrisendome
fery well, for her has bin in her creat Grandfathers chine in Holland, when
te pigge to live in the bad Urld, her urind forth half of te great spirit of
her Nephew, to come at the siege of Ostend.

Her delights not much in her own pedigree though it be fery famous, her have
not leisure to tell tat which would fill te cheeks of Fame. Her comes only
with petty things, as te news of Peace or te peace of Religion, or so which
her knows fery well tat no Welsh Shentleman of her own Nation with te King
do either much desire or expect, for her in Wales be scouring of her old
Murrions with ashes, and running over their rusty blades with Seacole dust,
which by the care and thrift of some of her forefathers was provided for te
fodder of it is winters chimneyes. Yet her be so bold to advise tem to take
notice, tat though awle her Bedlam Cosins in Pembrokeshire and in Tenbigh be so
mad to forsake te Parliament, teir friends, and liberty, and run to cover
temselves under te wings of te Malignants, who are ready to devour tem, yet
her is ferily persuaded in soul and conscience, her will awle have te leisure
to repent it is ill bargain contracted with te Cavalliers in Ireland, and tat te
many Regiments which are now coming from Ireland to help his Majesty of
England, will be a burden (if beaten by ill winds into our shores) too
unsupportable for her and awle her good kindred to endure. Her terefore in good
time advise those her good Cosins of Wales to desist; tat is in plain Welsh to
shiet off awle tose pad neighbors who wish so ill to te advancement of Wales,
or te pad behoof of any who are of Pendragons generation.

Her was pesides in Anglesey, where whatsoever looks her Countrymen have, tey
have hearts for te Parliament, and will be ready on any advantage to testify
her most humble accommodations, obligations, and awle te gradations of truest
devotion to them.

But hark you what: It was her fortune to come into Monmouth, and to visit
Ragland Castle. Her found her own Countrymen fery desolate and few in number.
Her was bold to ask the cause. Her kind Cousins awle te Shentlewomen told
her, tat te good Lord of Worester since he was made Marquis. was so full of te
bloody war, tat tere was no sheese, or Mouse to feed on tat sheese in awle
his Castle; her had hope of some tenants, but not only tere but in
Glamorganshire her can find nether heart nor tongue to bid welcome, nor bone
nor bit to give the Cavalliers a breakfast.

Her now like to Welsh Divines, that make teyr prayer in te middle of teyr
Sermon, will begin to make her Apology in te middle of her Book. And in sober
sadness, it may seem wondrous matter in tese sad times, that her dare appear
in Print every week, (for fear of te which, her has this week adjourned her
Welsh Merury from Saturday to Monday, for though her be a Mercury (her will
nere as her can) keep her constant seasons and revolutions, moving always in
te Orb of honest Mirth, and next to Truth, for though her seem sometimes
merry, yet her may be true and and serious in her Resolutions. And why not, her
pray you? mark and observe her intelligence according to teir order.

Her be glad in the first place that some be wiser then some, was proverb
true, for as her Contrymen has made Declarations of her wisdom by leaving
te Kings Army, so te Irish forces peing creat thousands, have made
manifestations, and resolutions, tat tey will never have copulation with Sir
Ralph Hopton or any other against te Parliament, and thereupon they are gone to
Bathe, and sent to the prave Sir William Waller for Officers to go in and out
before them. Was no doubt terefore but awse te Malignants will go Westward,
and down te wind.

Her was hear of a creat House called Bazing House, pigger then all her Welsh
Tenements; and Sir William Waller laid close sieges to it, and sent out a
number to hunt for te Malignant in te Kings Park neat Bazing House, and to
chase tem up and down te Park, as her do te running Wat, was reported tat
his good Vrship had taken te Outworks, but her sure was very hot fervice te
last Sunday night, and te last Monday was hurt creat many men kill some, but
Sir William Waller will take a time ere it be long, either by night or by day,
to be eaven with them.

Te creat House of Bazing is mightily haunted with malignant spirits, and teyr
chief is Captain Royden. As for te Lieutenant Colonel! Mr. Peake, that had
creat hope py his Valor to peake himself at least into a Knight, was killed
dead as door nail, and was peake into her grave.

Her countryman ap Powell told her that her countryman told her countryman,
and her told her British Mercury tat te North was in cood manners and
conditions, and without complements, the Truth is tat a great part of te Earl
of Manchesters horse is quartered about Newarke, and have driven away all te
Cattle, te beast, sheep, and Oxen, and lowing Cow toward Boston, and
Lincoln, and was make Newarke and all te Inhabitants fery thin, and look like
Mr. Rawbones. And Sir Thomas Fairfax was gone with thirty creat Troops of
Horse into Nottinghamshire, and was put Newarke and Newcastle into such
terrors, tat her Newcastle will be as Sir John Old-castle that could not stand
it out to make his water against te wall, but dribbled in her breeches, and her
verily believe tat te malignants will run temselves into a looseness of
smelling pudder when they find themselves so hard beset.

(...) Her asked her Cousin Morgan, a man of pigge credit, and rich in bearded
Leeke, and bearded Coat, and her told her, and her swore to her to by Saint
Taffy, that tere was create hope tat te Parliament forces was have pig
successes, and tat her Garrison at Plimmouth have pravely defended temselves
against te besiegers, and have come out against te enemy and peat tem from teyr
outworkes, and have received te money sent from te Praliament, it is was fery
good, te Gold and te Money was make her fery valiant I warrant, for gold,
silver and Metheglin are te three Souls that do make her Countrymen have
both being and valor.

But her will tell her memorable news from Glamorganshire, was creat light
night was seen not long ago over awle Wales, and was so pright her believe in
her fery conscience it was not night, but day light sick, and her Cousin up
Ienkin was looking in her prospective-glasse to te creat high hill in
Monmouth-shire to see what te matter was, and just here upon te somnet of all
the hill, where it verged down in the steepest Precipice, and looked
point-blanck toward Hell, her saw creat Beast falling down never to rise
again, and te hills round about did shake for fear, this was certainly about
midnight (as her can pring very good witness) and yet te light was so creat
that her Cousin so far off could see fery apparently just as it was, te creat
Beast falling down, and te creat Collar that. was about its neck, and did read
the letters that was on the Collar, which was ANTICHRISTO.

Her have also some other strange news to acquaint you with, her shall only
desire her may be privileged to speak te truth which is: That in
Penbrokeshire as her was coming up to acquaint you wit her Intelligences, her
saw in te way behind the hedge a Mare foling of a Coult, her staid a creat
while to fee what Nature would send, at length her kenned prave new Colt come
into te world, with new shoes on its feet, and the Nails so closely and
handsomely clinched, that her ferily believe, tat the best Farrier in the Vrld
could not have set them better on. When ever te Colt grow a little older, her
really intend to bring it up to London to make a show, and to get Portion by it
for her daughter Thomasin, who (as her told you a little before) by great
mischance was great with child, yet her must nor dissemble te fears which by
reason of this Portentous birth, her Nation is in, viz. that the sad employment
for horse and the Iron age of War will continue.

Here by the way, hear one thing more that does make her heart tremble and her
eyes swim in teyr own tears, and tat was that at the firing and burning of
Okeingham in Berkeshire her think it is, her is sure out it is in England, one
of the Cavallier Captains told te inhabitants tat he was come to fire te
Town, and putting his hand into his poke, he pulled out his Confession which
was signed with two great Letters C. R. was strange thing tat her King should
put her hand to such a fiery Confession. Her self was also fearful, and so
was her father before her, to put her hand to Bond, or Pill, or any Obligation,
but te King (and her pe sorry for it) is persuaded against his heart to have a
hand in te fiting of Towns, and te destruction of his own subjects.

Her had almost quite fogot to tell her te Remarkable Passages which her saw at
Bath, which was tat creat many English Protestants are come out of Ireland, and
quartered tere in tat City. Sir Raph Hopton sent tem from Bristoll some barrels
af Beer, and half a Crown a piece in money to drink cood healths unto te
King, and to make tem stand for te honor of te Crown, but tey had more wit in
teir own crown ten tey received profit by Sir Ralph Hoptons half Crown, and
returned answer, tat tey would not make War and fight against te Parliament,
but was come to fight against te Papists, whereupon Sir Ralph Hopton crew into
creat discontent, and sent tem command to deliver up teir Arms, but tey would
not yield unto it, but will prove as true as her own Countrymen of Wales, in
standing with their arms and legs for te Parliament.

FINIS.

