Mercurius Cambro-Britannus, THE BRITISH MERCURY, OR THE WELSH DIURNALL.

Communicating remarkable Intelligences, and true News to awle the whole
Kingdom, from Monday November 27. to December. the 5. 1643.

1 Her be resolved not to side with the King, to fight against the Parliament.
2 Her tell in what lamentable condition the city of Bristoll at this rresent
is, by reason of the Bloody Cavaliers. 3 Her make representations of the great
access of supplies, who are newly come to Sir William Waller. 4 Te brave
resolutions and successful actions which have very lately been sent in many
letters from Dorsetshire to London. 5 Her cannot choose but grieve with the sad
people of New Castle and Durham, for entertain Peter Popery, Perkin
Prerogative, Simon slavery, Paul Prelacie, and Barnaby Bishop. 6 Te Town of
Plimmouth, her thank GOD, is very well, and safe, and the great care the
Parliament does take for preservation of the same. 7 The Earl of Warwick is
sending forth great many Ships to stop the landing of the Rebels coming from
Ireland, to exercise their late practiced cruelties upon the Protestants in
England. 8 The Countries near Oxford fast, while the City of Oxford feasts. 9
Her be sorry to hear that the good Soldiers Colonel Jonas A Draske, and
Captain Smith were wounded at Odeam, in Night-service, and are now brought to
London. 10 Her show that the Noble Earl of Manchester is raising great forces,
and intends to join with Colonel Crumwell in Lincolnshire. 11 Her give the
reason in the last place, Why the Counsel at Oxford is so malignant to the
coming over of the States Ambassador from Holland.
Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, December. 5. 1643.

THE BRITISH MERCURY COMMUNICATING Remarkable Intelligences, and true News to
awle the whole Kingdom, from Monday November 27. to Tuesday December. 5. 1643.
TO confirm the ancient report that the WELCH-MEN both for Antiquity and
fidelity, are the truest Britain, her vil declare unto you the noble
resolution of Sir Richard Lloyd, one of the chief Commanders of Flintshire, who
having sent his Commission of Array unto Sir Thomas Middleton, offers to come
to him with fifteen hundred men, to do service for the Parliament, and besides
the Welchmen being now grown sensible, that it is the part of no true Subject,
to bring fuel to maintain the flames of this unnatural war, they do
continually flock in to submit themselves in obedience to the Parliament, for
the Welchmen are not so mad, but that her do very well understand, that to
side with the King, is to fight against her self, the Protestant Religion, and
that ancient liberty of the Subject, which though often attempted by many
Conquering Monarchs, her has so long time freely enjoyed in Wales.

But we cannot always set fair and loyal actions in the view of your eye,
therefore behold the City of Bristoll in a lamentable condition, swarming with
the Irish Rebels, who having mustered many hundred Protestants in Ireland, do
come over with a full intent to bathe their swords in the English blood, and to
make this land a desolate Wilderness, full of such wild and bloody beasts, as
they are. For one of them being lately (by a woman, who fled thither out of
Ireland two years since) challenged for murdering five of her Children; he
answered, That he had Commission for it, and if he had the like Commission, he
would do as much here. Her do wonder, that the Vessels which bring over so
many Hoggs-heads, or Doggs-heads of cruelty, are not cast away by the justice
of the Winds, but it is likely, that being not borne under a drowning destiny,
their fate will lead them on to hanging, according to their papisticall merits.

Sir William Wallers Army is now very well recruted, and strengthened by
Colonel Muleyr, and Colonel Nortons Regiment of horse, and a thousand horse
and Dragoones of Kent, and as many more out of Sussex, Surrey and Hampshire. so
that the Lord Hopton, if her were creat English Saint, pigger then Saint
George, or Saint TAPFY, himself, could not encounter so many cruel, nay her
may say, flying and stinging Fyery Dragons.

As the Welchmen, observing that matters were carried on to advance Popery and
other ill purposes, are now awaked from her Dream and Visions, to see what
fools, nay Slaves they were like to be made, by joining themselves to the
Kings Army, and do in considerations thereof, purpose with their best service
to aid the Parliament, so the Inhabitants of Cumberland and Westmerland have
been of late solicited with much importunity by the Lord Widdrington, and Sir
Thomas Glenham, to assist them with supplies of horse or foot, and stand in
their defenses against the invasions of the advanced Scots, but those Countries
being as wise as WALES, have refused to send them any aid, alleging that the
Scots, at their last being there, carried themselves with more civility, and in
better fashions, then the plundering and armed Inhabitants of their own
country. Hence you may discern, that not the advance money does make the
Scots a man, but her cood manners, and true religions, does make her company so
much desired in England.

From the West her can inform you, that the Garrison Soldiers at Poole in
Dorsetshire, made an Issue out as far as Preston and took there a French
Captain that commanded Sir John Heales troop, and in the night, they fell upon
Colonel Tregewells quarter at Shapwick, killed some men, took some Gentlemen
prisoners, and some 40. horse, afterward they killed the Ambuscade that was set
behind hedges, and beat them from Fool to Winborne; took one Captain, one
Ensign, and some fourteen Prisoners: Would all the Garrison Soldiers, that
have more time to be drunk, then to do any thing would show her the like
magnanimities and courage.

New Castle does now repent her favoring and receiving of malignants: You may
see what it is to have friendship with the Devil, had you kept them out, you
had not now lamented the putting of them in. Though you are called Newcastle,
yet you are an Old-castle, and should have had more wit, then to admit your
enemy, Art thou not able to fall in pieces with age and grief, to think of thy
disobedience to the Parliament, and keeping the Coals from London? which does
show that thy love to the City is very cold, and cold comfort thou shall find,
I warrant thee in thy distress, take heed thy new Governor do not make thee
the first slaved Town subjected to the Kings authority, when thy liberty shall
be slavery, plundering thy policy, and thou shall iudure whole chauldrons of
misery; before thou had received malignants, thou had better have fired thy
Coale-pits, and have burnt a happy Martyr for the Parliament.

The Marquess of New Castle is advanced into Nottinghamshire, to join with
the Kings forces. Her believe her Armies defire to make a malignant marriage,
that the issue which their conjunction does intend to produce, might be four
unhappy sons, Peter Popery, Perkin Prerogative, Simon Slavery, and Paul
Prelacy, or Barnaby Bishop; and these being the Kings adopted Sons, should
together with the King rule the whole land. And indeed the Newcastles Army is
falling to pieces, and therefore it had need to be joined together with the
Popish cement and glue of the Kings Army, for there are many stones at Oxford,
as the Lord Cottington, Digby, and others, besides Prelates that do all join
together to build up the Roman Church in England, and would make the King the
chief cornerstone, but though earth conspire and join forces, heaven can
denounce their malignant purposes, and Newcastles Army shall be beaten awle to
pieces, and upon the Scots advancing, not a man of them shall go Scot-free.

The town of Plymmouth is very well and safe, you may see by them what it is
to have good in works, that is good Heart, for though they lost their Outworks,
yet her do still keep out their enemy, and make her for to pray to the Lady
Mary and Saint Margery, and yet they cannot help her to take the town, and the
Parliament has lately sent them aid from hence, so that Prince Rupert, Prince
Maurice, and awle the Masse-saying-Prelates at Oxford, may fling their caps at
it, Father Francis, and Father. Joseph, and all the Magicians in Oxford, cannot
conjure the gates of the town open for like a Maiden Town she does withstand
the Cavalliors and neither by force nor flattery can be won from the
Parliament.

It is reported that Sir William Waller has given the Lord Hopton a great
overthrow, and obtained a great victory against him, but can believe no such
matter, those that are overthrown horse and man in books are very well
recovered the next week. The war is like a foot-ball-play, where one side
does give the other a kind of overthrow, and strikes up another heels, but
presently they rise up and give the other as creat a blow again, Overthrowes
are now very common, but let awle well affected persons strive that Papistry
and Prelacy may be overthrown in this kingdom, and let us pray that Peace may
be again established, least this kingdom be ruinated by these overthrowes,
and besides, what victory is it for one subject to kill another? If the King
would get a victory over himself, and banish from him all malignant
Counselors, then we should hear no more of Sir Ralph Hopton and many other
Lords and Knights, that now carry victory in their pockets, and plunders whole
Countries, and burns towns as the Kings forces did at Ockingham.

The Earl of Warwick does desire of the Parliament forty small ships to
surprise Sir John Penningtons small frigots that do bring over the Irish
Rebels, but who shall encounter those that are come over already, and the King
send ships daily for more, and as if his Subjects throats should not be cut
sast enough, he sends daily for those Butchers. The Irish faction does indeed
rule very much at Court, and Rebels are in Oxford language called the Kings
Catholic Subjects, plundering Cavalliers are Royallists, and Popish Bishops
are the Kings Shaplins, would his Majesty would provide ships to send them all
away to Rome, for here is no Room for them in England, and therefore it were a
happy turn if they were hanged or drowned, so that we were rid of their Popish
company.

At Oxford there is creat plenty of food and cood diet, but while they feast,
they have by their plundering made the Country fast, who do curse them to the
bottomless pit of hell; but they need not do so, for if swearing and profane
living can bring them on, they are in a fair way.

To refresh you after this tedious narration, you may understand that at Oxford
the Bishops are turned Soldiers, and the Bishop of York has got a company of
soldiers to guard the Irish Rebels, and to bring them on by the Grace of the
Pope, but her great preparations are but the fables of many reports, who come
on purpose to Oxford to join with the malignants, for they have the Popes and
the Kingdoms pardon. Is this the calling of Bishops to turn fighters for
Room, when they cannot preach for Room, nor put poor Ministers in prison
without Room; now they will venture the Miter, and go on with courage they
know neither, either to the Devil, or the Pope, or both together.

There was a valliant German, Jonas Adruskey, called in English Van Drushe, who
having showed the height of the High Germans valor, under the the Command of
Sir William Waller, received two shots in his arm, and is now brought to
London wounded, to the great grief of Sir William Waller, who had rather have
lost his right hand; you see all true affected Persons are willing to loose
their lives for the Parliament.

Her hear that the Earl of Manchester is raising creat many foot in the
Northern associated Counties, and that Gainsborough and Newarke, and the other
Malignant Towns thereabouts will (it is hoped) be feign stoop to the Command
of the Parliament, for that the Earl of Manchester who is now at Cambridge
will not stay there long, but as soon as her has gotten up her considerable
forces, her will march that way, and show them what it is to be so rebellious,
and malignant against the Parliament.

And to this purpose he has already two thousand foot at Lincoln, to defend
that City from the Popish Enemy, and he has left his cood Horse (which made
the Cavalliers so fly before him at Bullingbroke Castle) in Lincolnshire at a
Town called Sheford, and there te valiant Captain Cromwell, (as her know fery
well) not above twelve miles from Newarke, and some of his horse have regained
a prize of above three thousand sheep which the Cavalliers had taken and were
driving the said Cattle to Newark, and they then got all (much good do it
their good hearts) creat quantity of fine flexe wool, which cood booties (put
altogether) will both feed and cloth them.

Her bring not all te news from England, Wales or Scotland, or from Ireland,
her has bin informed with some news from Holland. Secretary Nicholas has
written from Oxford, and require, his Majesty's Agent at te Hague, to work, and
endeavor by working with might and with main to hinder the coming of the
Scots Ambassadors into England, and her can con you the reason of it, which
is, that they ferily believe that the said Ambassadors will not comply with
teyr purposes for they at Oxford will have him to be teir Ambassador, who did
negotiate the marriage in England betwixt the Princess Mary and the young
Prince of Orange, but the States be wise, and know who to send, and they will
have none for their Ambassador, but those that shall seek the Establishment of
the True Religion, and see those Delinquents brought to Trial, who for a while
did hide their heads in that Country from the reach (as they thought) and the
justice of the Parliament.

The times are doubtful and dangerous; bloody and cruel, and why I pray you?
that were a wise question, if well answered, some body has done something, and
something is come of that, which is a Child that spoke it self a live to
crying War, but now it will not be quieted, but will suck the Commonwealth
dry of blood and money, Let us put this Child of War to nurse in other
Countries, for the Land is weary of the keeping of it; it is now three years
old, and does do many unhappy tricks, but you must pardon it, for it knows
not what it does, it will prattle, and say it stands alone for the King and
Parliament, But I wish it might fall and be quiet, then should we all rejoice;
The King and Parliament would not strive about the divided Child of the
Commonwealth, and your Welsh Mercury would write no more the unhappy tricks
of this childish war, which her does count day by day, and are here set
down in her Diurnall.

From War, much Wine, and bad Women, keep you all well affected Citizens.

FINIS.

