THE WHOLE BODY OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION,

BY HIERON. ZANCHIUS.

Translated out of Latin By D. RALPH WINTERTON.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN REDMAYNE 1659.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
IF thou be merely English, it is thy great Interest to welcome and embrace
such labors as this is: for know, what thou art here presented with, are the
Orient irradiations of Zanchie's divine soul through the clear glass of an
ingenuous Interpreter; without whose industry this rich Argosy had never
arrived at our English shore; And what are the most precious commodities in
foreign parts to us without the benefit of Importation? I know not what reason
Horace had to style Translatours, Servum pecus, as if it were a mere
journey-work and nothing else. Surely, if all Metaphrases might be measured by
this, the imploiment and art of reflecting uninfranchis'd learning into our own
Dialect cannot justly come under the Satyrist's expression, except it will
admit the sense of (usefulness and Commodity.) For the Author Zanchie
himself, he did not only, as many do, fill up the number of Modern Divines, but
was, and is still accounted, the very head of the chief Classis, Flos delibatus
Cleri, the very flower of the prime choice, neither is he one jot disfigured in
this representation, he is the same man even here, only in an English garb Nor
had this dress now been put upon him but for their sakes, who not able to have
access to the persons of great ones, are content to behold them in Effigy.
I Will add no more, knowing, that long and dark Entries do rather injure, then
officiate to, fair Buildings: the Gates are open, enter and entertain thy self.

The First Chapter. Concerning the Holy Scriptures, which are the foundation of
all Christian Religion.
The First Doctrine. That concerning God, and matters pertaining to religion,
we are to believe God only simply and absolutely.
AS concerning God, and divine matters pertaining to the Kingdom of Christ and
our salvation, we believe that none can teach us better and more certainly then
God himself; Ambros. epist. 32.
who can neither deceive nor be deceived. Ioh. 1.18.
The only begotten Son, which is in the besome of the Father, he has
declared him.

DOCT. II. That God speaks unto us in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles.
ALthough God, Rom 1.20 21.
By the things which are made, has so made known unto all men in the world his
eternal power and Godhead, that as many as have known him, and yet not
glorified him as God, are without excuse: Yet we know, that he has in a more
peculiar manner, Heb. 1.1. Heb. 2.3 2 Pet. 1.21 Matthew. 10.20.
that is by his Prophets and Apostles, who spoke and wrote as they were moved
by the holy Ghost, revealed himself and his will more clearly and fully unto
his Church, and therefore, that the writings of the Prophets and Apostles are
the very word of God.

DOCT. III. That the writings of the Prophets and Apostles only are Canonical
Books.
WE do not doubt; but those are the writings of the Prophets and Apostles,
which the Church of God is therefore wont to call by the name of Canonical
books, because knowing assuredly that they were given by inspiration of God,
she has always acknowledged them for the Canon and rule, 2 Timothy 3.16.
whereby all controversies about religion are to be examined. The other books,
although they be contained in the volume of the Bible, yet she therefore
calls Apocrypha, because she has no certain knowledge that they are from
the holy Ghost as the others are.

DOCT. IV. What Books are Canonical, and what Apocrypha.
WE together with the whole Church before and since the coming of Christ, do
without all manner of doubting acknowledge, and embrace these books of the old
Testament for the undoubted word of God, viz.

Genesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numbers. Deuteronomie. Joshua. Judges. Ruth. 1.
Samuel. 2. Samuel. 1. Kings. 2. Kings. 1. Chronicles. 2. Chronicles. Ezra.
Nehemiah. Esther. Job. Psalms. Proverbs. Ecclesiastes. Solomon's Song. Isaiah.
Jeremiah. Lamentations. Ezekiel. Daniel. Hosea. Joel. Amos. Obadiah. Jonah.
Micah. Nahum. Habakkuk. Zephaniah. Haggai. Zechariah. Malachi.
But these books following we count not Canonical. 1. Esdras. 2. Esdras.
Tobit. Judeth. The rest of Esther. Wisdom. Ecclesiasticus. Baruch with the
Epistle of Jeremiah. The Song of the three Children. The Story of Susanna. The
idol Bell and the Dragon. The Prayer of Manasseh. 1. Maccabees. 2. Maccabees.


IN the new Testament we except none: For although in former times there has
been some question concerning some of them; yet afterward in process of time
they have been acknowledged for Apostolical as well as the rest.

Of the first sort are these that follow. The Gospel according to St. Matthew.
The Acts of the Apostles. The Gospel according to St. Mark. The Epistles of
St. Paul. The Gospel according to St. Luke. The 1. Epistle of St. Peter. The
Gospel according to St. John. The 1. Epistle of St. John.


Of the second sort are these. The Epistle to the Hebrews. The Epistle of St.
James. The 2. Epistle of St. Peter. The 2. and 3. Epist. of St. John. The
Epistle of St. Jude. The Revelation.


FOr although those of which there has never been question made, may seem in
some sort to be of greater authority then those of which there has been
question made: Yet notwithstanding we believe one as well as the other, as
being both the undoubted word of God. As concerning the books commonly called
Apocrypha, contained in the volume of the Bible, we give them the next place
after the Canonical Scripture.

DOCT. V. That Doctrines of faith can only be proved by the Canonical
Scripture.
Hieron. in Praefat. in Lib Sal Cyprian in Symb. page 377. Concii. Load. cap 39.
ANd therefore we use only Canonical Scripture to prove doctrines of faith;
and we teach also according to the opinion of the Fathers, that the Canonical
only is to be used. As concerning the other books, we grant that they have no
small authority to confirm the same after that they are proved.

DOCT. VI. That the Canonical Scripture received not authority from the
Church.
WHerefore, without all controversy this we hold, and think most fit to be
held; That, although the Church being taught by the primitive fathers, to wit,
the Prophets and Apostles, who received the doctrine immediately from God, and
committed it to writing) and being also persuaded by the holy Ghost by a
perpetual and continued tradition, what books are Canonical, and what not?
has declared it unto posterity, from time to time, and has also given, and
does still give testimony thereunto of divine, and heavenly truth. We hold I
say, that notwithstanding all this, the Canonical Scripture neither received
at any time, not now has any authority from the Church, but from God alone,
who is the proper author, and giver thereof, and therefore we say farther;
that of it self, in as much, as it is the word of God, it has power over all,
and is worthy to be believed, and obeyed by all simply and absolutely.

DOCT. VII. That the authority of the Church is of great use, and has much
power to bring men to believe the holy Scripture.
ANd yet we deny not, but the authority of the Church has great power to move
men to hear, and to read the holy Scripture as being truly the word of God:
according to that of St. Augustine, Tom. 6. contra Epi Fund. c 5.
I had not believed the Gospel had not the authority of the Church moved me
thereunto: And yet the same Augustine every where professes, that where as he
did believe, he received it not from the Church; but from the holy Ghost, whose
gift is faith.

DOCT. VIII. That the Church has no authority over the holy Scripture.
BUt, to dispute whether the authority of the Church be not greater, then the
holy Scripture; and much more to aver the affirmative part, as if the Church,
beside the gift of trying spirits, and discerning Canonical Scripture from
that which is not, and testifying concerning it, and interpreting of it, had
also power to add to, take from, and despense with it: This we judge to be
more then sacrilege; For it is God's commandment, Ye shall not add unto the
Word which I command you, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Revel. 2^.18.19. Deuteronomy 5 32.
neither shall you diminish ought from it, and you shall not turn aside to the
right hand, or to the left, and further, it is his will and pleasure, that all,
and every one in all things simply obey him, speaking unto those out of his
holy word.

DOCT. IX. That the holy Scripture is so perfect that we can neither add unto
it, nor take from it.
FOr the holy Scripture is so absolute and perfect, containing in it abundantly
whatsoever is needful unto salvation, that nothing can be added unto it: and
again, it is penned with such divine wisdom, that nothing can be taken from it.

DOCT. X. That we must rely, and rest upon the holy Scripture.
THerefore do we rely, and rest upon the doctrine of holy Scripture, as also
all that are godly ought to do, holding fast that of the Apostle, All Scripture
is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16.
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, 17.
thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

DOCT. XI. That nothing is to be determined concerning religion, without the
word of God, and that all things are to be corrected by it.
WHerefore also this is our judgment, that nothing is to be determined in the
Church concerning religion, which has not either pregnant proof out of the
Canonical Scripture, or else may be evinced from thence by plain and
necessary consequence, and that if ought at any time has crept into the
Church either concerning doctrine or worship, which is not agreeable unto holy
Scripture, it ought either by a lawful course absolutely be taken away, or
else be corrected by the word of God: And again, that all controversies
concerning religion ought lawfully to be judged, and decided by the said holy
Scripture.

DOCT. XII. That the Traditions which are truly Catholic and Apostolic, are
to be retained in the Church.
YEt such Traditions as it is certain that they are descended from the
Apostles, August. Tom. 7. contr. Donat. lib. 4. cap. 24. Et Tom. 2 ad Ian. Ep.
118. D. 11. cap. 8.
and have always been observed by all the Churches, as that concerning
sanctifying the Lords day, in stead of the Sabbath, and such like: although we
have no commandment in Scripture for keeping, and observing them; yet we think
it fit that they should be retained in the Churches.

DOCT. XIII. That the Scripture is perspicuous in those things which are
necessary unto salvation, and therefore, that it ought to be read of all.
WE understand, and know that the whole doctrine of salvation is not only
sufficiently but also perspicuously delivered in holy Scripture: seeing that
God himself speaking unto his people used no other language; but the vulgar,
that it might be understood of all; And therefore we count it wonderful
injustice, and very tyranny to interdict or debar any one from reading or
translating such books, as God would have all men for their salvation to read,
and turn over again, and again day and night. Psalm. 1.2.


DOCT. XIV. That the faithful interpretations of the godly and learned are not
to be contemned.
ALthough the holy Scripture be perspicuous in those things which are
necessary unto salvation: Yet we do not dislike the interpretations, and
expositions of learned, and godly men, as well ancient as modern, which are
fetched out of the same holy Scripture, and as far forth as the Scripture is
expounded by the Scripture, and that agreeably to the first principles of
faith: the sum whereof is contained in the Apostles Creed, and also in the
Creeds of the truly Oecumenicall, or general Councils, both ancient and holy,
assembled together against known heretics.

DOCT. XV. That the word of God is the only prop of faith and foundation of
Religion.
FOr our faith neither can nor ought to rely upon any thing else; but the word
of God, delivered in the holy Scripture: Romans 10.17.
For Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. To which
whatsoever is repugnant, be it written by what man soever, we reject; and
whatsoever is agreeable unto it, we embrace, and what soever is neither,
according as it shall seem expedient, or not expedient to the Churches, we
admit or reject, and we teach that it is to be admitted or rejected.

CHAP. II. Concerning God, the divine Persons, and Properties.
DOCTRINE I. That there is but one God, distinguished into three Persons.
Being then taught of God in the holy Scripture, which is his word, 1 Thessalonians.
4.9.
we believe that there is but one God, that is, one most simple, indivisible,
eternal, living, and most perfect Essence, subsisting in three Persons, to
wit, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, being distinguished each from
other, but yet without all manner of division. The author and cause of all
things.

DOCT. II. That each Person by himself is true God, but yet so that there are
not three Gods.
FOr thus we believe, as we are taught out of the holy Scripture, That the
Father by himself is true and perfect God, the Son is God and the holy Ghost
is also God: and yet there are not three Gods, but one God: Romans 11.36.
And of him, and through him, and to him are all things.

DOCT. III. That one Person is distinguished from another by Personal
Properties: and that by Essential Properties, they are distinguished from all
creatures.
BUt, because the holy Scripture so speaks of God, that it attributes unto
him many Properties, both Essential and Personal: and teaches, that by the
Essential he is distinguished from all things created; and by the Personal,
each Person from other: Therefore we also believe that: As to beget the Son
is so proper to the Father, that it can neither be attributed to the Son, nor
to the holy Ghost; And again, to be begotten, cannot be attributed; but to the
Son only, and so likewise in the rest: So also, to be most simple, eternal,
infinite, every where present, simply omniscient, simply omnipotent, simply
good, and the rest of like sort, are so proper unto God, that they cannot
really or truly be communicated to any creature, in such matter that it can be
(for instance sake) good by an infinite goodness, or omnipotent by an infinite
power, etc. As God is.

DOCT. IV. That the Essential Properties in God do not really differ from his
Essence.
FOr we acknowledge, that in God, by reason of his simplicity, his Essential
Properties do not really differ from his Essence; and therefore that they
cannot without this be communicated to any creature: And therefore, that no
creature is, or can be truly said to be simply (for (...) sake) omnipotent,
good, just (...) As also our Lord Jesus speaking of one attribute, taught us
concerning all, Matthew. ^^.17.
saying, There is none good (that is simply) but one, that is God.

DOCT. V. That nothing is, or can be simply such as God is: unless it can be
simply God also.
WHerefore, whosoever hold that any created substance could ever be made, or
can now or hereafter be made partaker of the divine attributes or properties,
by which it may become such as God is: as for example, simply omnipotent etc.
They must also necessariny confess that the same is, or may be coessentiall
with God: For as much as even the Son himself is not simply Almighty; but as
he is coessentiall with the Father; and so likewise the holy Ghost.

DOCT. VI. The confirmation of the foregoing doctrine.
FRom whence also we understand, how it comes to pass, that, whereas the Son
is no less Almighty then the Father, and so in like manner the holy Ghost;
yet we say not that there are three Almighties; Symbol. Athan.
but confess with Athanasius, and the whole Church, that there is only one
Almighty: because they have all one and the same essence. Seeing then that no
thing created has one and the same essence with God; but another and that
far diverse: How can any created thing be made Almighty? Or, if any thing by
the communication of Gods Almighty power could be made Almighty; it must
needs follow that there are more Almighties then one: which we count it
blasphemy once to affirm.

DOCT. VII. Heresies and Errors condemned.
THerefore we condemn and detest all heresies, which have rose up against this
article of our Faith, and being fetched back from hell have been condemned by
the Holy Fathers in lawful Councills, viz. The Heresy of Cerinthus, Ebion,
Valentius, Marcion, Manichaeus, Arius, Eunomius, Sabellius, Prax, Fotinus, and
such like, as Servitus, and the Tritheites (which hold that there be three
Gods) as likewise the blasphemies of the Jews and Turks; and also all Heresies
which have been broched by the devil either against the Unity of the Godhead,
or against the Trinity of Persons; and further such as either deny the Son
to be true and eternal God, and so the holy Ghost also; or else confound the
Persons, and say that they are but one and the same, but yet for diverse
respects called by diverse names, viz. Father, Son, and holy Ghost: And to
conclude, we condemn also the errors of those, who separate the essential
Properties of God from his divine essence: which they seem to us to do,
whosoever do teach that they may be communicated to any creature, without the
communication of essence, or indeed rather which teach that they are
communicated already.

CHAP. III. Concerning Gods foreknowledge and Praedestination.
DOCTRINE I. That God foreknew, and foresaw all things from Eternity.
WE believe that God, Acts 15.18.
from the beginning of the world, yea even from Eternity according to his
infinite wisdom foreknew all things to come, both the good, which he would do;
and the evil, which he would permit to be done; so far forth that nothing did
or could lie hid from him: And we doubt not but all things, Hebr ^.13.
whatsoever have been, are, shall or may be, although they never come to pass,
are and have been always naked and open in his sight.

DOCT. II. That God in his eternal counsel praedetermined all things, and
praeordained them to the best ends.
NEither do we believe only, That God foresaw all things, and has them ever
present in his sight; but also, that in his most wise and eternal counsel he
has before determined all things, Acts 4.28.
whatsoever did or do concern the creation and government of the world, as also
the gathering together of his Church out of the sinful offspring of Adam, and
likewise their redemption and salvation; and further, that of his infinite
goodness he has before ordained all the evil, which in his wisdom he purposed
to suffer and permit, to the best ends: insomuch that there shall not an hair
perish, Luke 21.18. Matt. 10.30.
or fall from our head without the will of our heavenly Father.

DOCT. III. That God has predestined some men unto life and others unto
death.
WHerefore we make no doubt of this, That God out of men (to speak nothing of
the Angels) whom at the creation he made all righteous in Adam, but foresaw
that they would all sin likewise in him, Ephesians. ^.3.4.
has in Christ chosen some that they should be holy and without blame before
him in love, and has also predestined them unto eternal life, of his mere
grate, and according to the good pleasure of his will: Rom 9.22.
but in his just judgment has not vouchsafed to give his grace unto others,
as being the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction: That in those, his
infinite mercy; but in these, his justice might be made known unto the world,
to his own glory.

DOCT. IV. That the Election of the Saints is of Gods mere Grace.
FOr as our Vocation unto Christ, Tit 3.7. Ephesians. 2.9.
and our Justification in Christ is merely of Gods grace and not of our works:
So also we hold that the predestination of the Saints, is merely of grace,
because it was made in Christ.

That no flesh should glory in his presence; Ephesians. 1.3. 1 Cor 1.29.31.
but, that he that gloryeth, should glory in the Lord.

DOCT. V. That we are predestined not only to the end, but also to the
means.
WHereupon we believe also, Ephesians. 1.3.4.
that, seeing God in Christ has chosen us, before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: We are
predestined not only to the end, which is eternal life and glory; but also
to the Means tending to that End, and especial Faith, whereby we are
ingrafted into Christ; and Regeneration also and true Repentance, by which we
are made in Christ a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. Matt. 5.16.
that we may lead a godly life to the glorifying of him, and the edifying of
our neighbor.

DOCT. VI. That they are not elected, and so cannot be saved whosoever are
ingrafted into Christ by the holy Ghost, and by a true lively Faith.
THerefore those are shamefully mistaken, and deceived to their own
destruction, whosoever think that they are elected, and so consequently shall
be saved, although they be not ingrafted into Christ by Faith, nor repent them
of their sins, nor study to do the will of God, and practice good works which
God has before ordained that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2.10.
For they disjoyne what God would have conjoined.

DOCT. VII, That every man ought to believe that he is elected in Christ: And,
that we may be certain of it by the sense of our Faith in Christ.
FRom hence it appears, That although no man in general ought to exempt
himself out of the number of the elect (seeing that the Scripture it self has
not done it) but rather be confident, that, in as much as he is called unto
Christ, he is also called according to God's eternal purpose and election:
Yet, if any man would be certain of his election, he must run to his faith, and
the testimony of his Conscience, and Examine himself whether he be in the
faith of Christ, 2 Cor. xiii.v.
or no; and whether he feels within himself the sincere love of God, and his
neighbor, or no. But, if he feel it not solidly and effectually, yet let him
not despair, but pray unto God to help his unbelief; Mar. 9.24.
and hope that he may yet be made certain of it.

DOCT. VIII. The causes why the Doctrine of Predestination is delivered unto us
in the holy Scripture.
FOr the Doctrine of the eternal, free, and immutable predestination of God is
not in holy Scripture delivered unto us, that either we should neglect Christ,
or despair of our salvation, or through security let the reigns loose unto
concupiscence, or to conclude, that we should wax insolent and proud: but
contrarily for these reasons especially. First, That we may know, There is no
salvation in any other; Act. 4.4.12.
but in Christ: For the foundation of all our salvation was laid and settled in
Christ, 2 Timothy 1.11.
before the foundation of the world. Secondly, That in time of tentations we,
which believe in Christ, Romans 1. throughout the whole 2 Timothy 2.19.
may be underpropped, and supported by the certainty of our salvation, so that
we neither despair nor distrust: for as much as it stands firm and sure in
God's eternal decree. Thirdly, That we may from thence be stirred up to the
study of faith in Christ, to sanctity of life, and the practice of good
works: for as much as we were elected and chosen of God that we should be
faithful and holy and without blame before him, Ephesians. 1.4.2.10.
in love; and walk in good works. Fourthly and Lastly, that we should not wax
insolent or proud, but He that glories should glory in the Lord: 1 Cor. 1.^1.
because, if we believe in Christ and live a holy and godly life, we are to
attribute it only unto the mere grace and mercy of God to us in Christ, who
from all eternity ordained that we should be such; and that of his free grace
to us in Christ.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Gods Omnipotence and will.
DOCT. I. That God is so Omnipotent that he can do more then he will.
WE believe that God is so Omnipotent or Almighty, that he has not only done
and also still does whatsoever it was, or is his will to do: but also that he
can both will and do infinitely more then he will do. And our belief one this
part is grounded upon the doctrine of St. John, who said, God is able of these
stones to raise up children unto Abraham; Mat^. 3.^.
and the doctrine of the Apostle, who wrote thus concerning God, speaking unto
Moses. Romans 9.^^.
I will have mercy one whom I will have mercy (whereas he might have said, I
will have mercy on all men) and again, he hardneth (not all, as he might, but)
whom he will: (...) Tertul^. contra Prax.
So then it is more then impious, for a man from God's Omnipotence only,
without declaring it to be his will, once to presume to conclude that any thing
has been, is, or should be done by God.

DOCT. II. That it is not repugnant to Gods Omnipotence, to say that there are
some things which God cannot do.
SEeing that the Apostle writes that God cannot deny himself: 2 Timothy 2.13.
we believe that there is no wrong done to Gods Omnipotence, if we say that
there are many things which God cannot do: viz. such as are repugnant to his
nature, and employ a contradiction.

DOCT. III. The confirmation of the foregoing.
FOr seeing that God is the chief and sovereign Good; he can neither become
evil, nor do that which is evil. Seeing that he is the chief and Sovereign
Truth; he cannot lie: Seeing that he is the chief and Sovereign Justice: He
can do nothing unjustly * Seeing that he is Life it self; How can he die? And
(to conclude) seeing that he is but one only true God uncreated, eternal,
subsisting in three persons only; We believe and confess that he cannot
assume any creature to himself in such manner as to make it coessentiall with
him, and such altogether as he is, or constitute any fourth person: and we are
fully persuaded that by this our confession we derogate or detract nothing from
Gods Omnipotence. As surely what has been, God cannot cause not to have been;
what formerly has been done, he cannot cause now not to have been done: For it
is most certain, that he who is Truth it self cannot do any thing which implies
a contradiction. For to say, He can, is openly to deny his Omnipotence, by
which he has done, whatsoever has been done.

DOCT. IV. That we are to search for the Will of God only in the holy Scripture
FUrthermore seeing that the counsels of God are infinite and secret, and such
as are not made known, Mark 13.32.
no not to the Angels themselves; We believe, that, when there is any question
concerning the will of God, John 5.39.
we are to search for it no where else, but in the holy Scriptures: where God
of his great goodness has made known unto us, John 15 15, 17, 29.
by his Spirit, what is his will; and has abundantly and perspicuously
declared and afforded unto as whatsoever is necessary unto salvation.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Creation of the world, the Angels, and the first
estate of man.
DOCTRINE I. That all things were created of God; and that, they were exceeding
good.
WE believe, That God the Father, by the Son, together with the holy Ghost,
Genesis 1. Coloss. 7.16. Genesis 1.1.
in six days created all things visible and invisible: which the holy Ghost,
in the holy Scripture, expresses by the name of Heaven and Earth; and they
were all exceeding good. Prove. 16.4.
And we believe likewise that he ordained them for the use of man, and for his
own glory. And therefore we acknowledge both the Son and the holy Ghost to
be Creator of the world as well as the Father: For as much as the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost is but one and the same God.

DOCT. II. That the Heaven is distinguished from the Earth: and, that the
Heaven of the blessed does differ from the other Heavens.
NEither do we mingle Heaven and Earth together, 2 ^^r. 22.2. Matthew. 6.10.
nor make a confusion of the Heavens one with another; but according to the
holy Scripture we make a distinction: as we see the elements, and all kinds of
creatures animate and inanimate to be distinguished. And further we confess
that the Heaven in which the souls of the blessed live with Christ, and the
bodies of all the godly shall; which Christ also calls his John 14.2.
Fathers house, and Luke 23.43.
Paradise; and which the Apostle calls, Heb. 11.10.
A city which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God: We confess, I
say, that this Heaven differs from the other Heavens, but much more from
Earth and Hell. Unto this Heaven also the Apostle alluded when he said, 2 Cor.
12.2.
That he was caught up to the third Heaven, to wit, above the Heaven of the
air, and above all the visible and moveable orbs.

DOCT. III. That all the Angels were created good: although they did not all
stand fast in the truth.
WE believe also, That the Angels were all created good and righteous, being
substances spiritual and immortal, and endued with understanding and
free will: although they did not all stand fast in goodness, and righteousness,
John. ^.44.
and the Truth (as our Lord Jesus speaks) but did many of them, from the very
beginning, sin, of their own free will, and so became the enemies of God and
all goodness, the enemies of all mankind, and especially of the Church of God,
liars, and speaking lies of their own, murderers, devils, evil spirits: and, 2
Pet. 2.4.
that therefore they were cast down to Hell, and delivered into chains of
darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.

DOCT. IV. The causes or reasons why many of the heavenly Spirits were
permitted to sin and became evil
ANd this was not without cause permitted by the wisdom of God, as we are
taught in holy Scripture. For besides that God would have his justice and
judgment made known unto them, as likewise his anger and wrath against sin by
what creature soever committed: he has also appointed to use them as his
instruments to 1 King. 21.22.
tempt us, and exercise our faith and patience in Ephesians. 6.12.
spiritual combats, and all to further our salvation: and (to conclude) He
would have them to be the executors and administrators of his justice and
judgments against man's wickedness; that as many as 2 These. 2.12.
will not believe the truth, whereby they may be saved, should follow the Tim.
4, 1.
doctrines of devils giving heed to seducing spirits, and 2 These. 2, 11.
believing lies, and so 12.
be damned.

DOCT. V. That the good Angels were by the grace of God preserved in goodness,
that so they might become God's ministering Spirits for our good.
AGain, we believe, That D 10.
innumerable of the celestial spirits were by the grace of God in Christ
preserved that they might not sin with the rest, but persist in truth and
obedience: and that so they became Gods messengers and Heb 1.14.
ministering spirits, for the good of his elect, to defend and protect them
against the devils, and to promote the Kingdom of Christ. And they do so love
us and wait upon us, that they do exceedingly Luke 15.10.
rejoice for our salvation: But they will Revel. 22.9.
not be worshipped of us by any means, but put us in mind, that God only is
to be worshipped, and that they are but our fellow servants: with whom we shall
also live a blessed and eternal life, as the Angels of God in heaven. Matthew.
22.30.


DOCT. VI. That man was created after the Image of God.
WE believe, That after that all other things were created, at last man also
was Genesis 1.26, 27.
created after the Image and likeness of God his body being 2 7.
formed out of the earth, but his soul which is a spiritual and immortal
substance, being made of nothing, and ibid.
inspired by God into his body: Not long after a wife also was by God given
unto him, 2.22.
made of his bone, as concerning the body, and created after the Image of God.

DOCT. VII. Wherein especialy that Image of God consisted.
BUt we believe, that the Image of God consisted in this especially; That, as
God is the absolute Lord of all things; So unto man were G^^. 1.28. Psalm. 8.6,
7, 8.
all things made subject that he should have dominion over the fowls of the
air, the fishes of the sea, and the beasts of the land, insomuch that he was
the king of all the lower world: And again more especially in this, That, as
God is most holy and righteous; So also man was Eccl. 7.29.
created upright at the first, that is, Ephesians. 4, 24.
in righteousness and true holiness, as the Apostle does interpret it.

DOCT. VIII. That Adam had free will before his fall.
HEreupon we believe, that man in his first estate had not only this liberty,
that he could will nothing against his will (which liberty has always
remained in man and still remains) but also, that he was endued with such
power from above, that if he would, he might have not sinned, and so not have
died; but have persevered in righteousness, and have escaped death: Insomuch
that his loss of both is to be justly attributed unto himself, and not unto
any other.

DOCT. IX. Heresies and Errors condemned.
WE condemn therefore the Valentinians, Alarcionites, Manichees, and as many
as have taught, or have left any thing in writing behind them, against this
article of our Christian faith: whether they feigned the world to be made by
some other God then the Father of Christ; or whether they held that, all things
that are good were made by one God that is good, and all things that are evil
by another that is evil. For, how can he be God which is not the chief and
sovereign good, and the only maker of all good things. We condemn also all
those which hold that the soul of man was made of the substance of God; or
which deny it to be immortal and always working; or which make the Image of
God to consist only in the dominion over his creatures; or, last of all, which
deny that the first man was created by God at the first with free will truly
so called.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Gods Providence, and his governing the world.
DOCTRINE I. That the world and all the things which are therein are governed
by Gods Providence.
WE believe that God after that he had created all things, so rested from his
work, that nevertheless he never ceased neither yet does cease to guide, Wisd.
14.3.
govern, and look after the world and all the things that are therein, as well
small as great; but especially mankind in general, and every man in
particular: So that Matt. 10 29, 30
not any thing happens, or is done in the world, which is not guided and c
governed by his Providence.

DOCT. II. That God governs his Church after a more peculiar manner.
ALthough all, and every thing is subject to Gods Providence; yet we believe
that he has a more especial Wisd. 14.3.
care of his Church, and that he guides and governs it after a more
especial manner, as likewise the wills and actions of all and every one of his
elect: For as much as he after an especial manner Romans 8.30.
calls, justifies, and sanctifies them, but not all; and further Philp.
2.13.
works in them both to will and to do, of his good pleasure, and further
says, 2 Cor. 2.16.
I will dwell in them, but Acts 14.16.
not in all; and at length brings them unto everlasting life, but suffers
others in his just judgment to walk in their own ways, and run on headlong
to destruction. Whereupon we are commanded to 1 Pet. 5.7
cast all our care upon God; for he) after a peculiar manner) cares for us.

DOCT. III. That God ordinarily governs the world by second causes.
ANd this we learn also out of holy Scripture, That, although God by himself
without any coadjutor, yea sometimes contrary to ordinary means, brings to
pass many decrees of his divine Providence; yet there are far more, which he
ordinarely uses to bring to pass by the ministry of second causes, both in
the government of whole world in general, and the Church in special: For, Hos
2.21.22.
I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the
earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they
shall hear Iezreel.

DOCT. IV. That the means unto the end are not to be neglected: and, that God
in his Providence wills the one as well as the other.
FRom hence we gather, That, although we are certain God cares for us: yet the
means which God has appointed for the salvation of the soul and body are not
to be despised, neither must we tempt God; but follow the Apostle, who,
although he was fully persuaded of the saving of all that were in the ship with
him, when the sailors began to think how to shift for themselves, said to the
Centurion, and to the soldiers, except these abide in the ship, Act. 27.31.
ye cannot be saved. For God, which has appointed to every thing it is own end:
he also has appointed the beginning and the means by which to come unto that
end.

DOCT. V. That in respect of God all things come to pass necessarily; and in
respect of us many things contingently.
WHereas God in his Providence does conserve, and also move the second causes,
which he is wont to use in the government of the world, every one in it is own
nature; and some of these are destinated by their own nature to the producing
of certain effects, and again some are not: We understand and confess, that,
although in respect of God: Matt. 10.29.30. Exodus 21.13.
without whose foreknowledge and will nothing in the world comes to pass, all
things are necessary: yet in respect of us and the second causes they are not
all necessary, but most of them are contingent. For what can be more casual
and contingent then this, That Deuteronomy. 19.5.
when a man is hewingwood, the head of his axe should fly out of his hand, and
kill the traveller that passes by? And yet the Lord says, that it is he which
killed him. And again, our Lord Jesus Christ died for us voluntatily: and yet
it is, said, It was necessary, or, Luke 24.46
Thus it behoved Christ to suffer. In like manner Herod and Pilate condemned
Jesus with full and free consent of will: And yet the Apostles say that Act.
4.28.
they did no more then what the hand and counsel of God had determined before
to be done.

DOCT. VI. That God is not the author of sin which is committed in the World.
ANd from hence also we understand and confess, That, although many
wickednesses are committed in the world, whilst God moves all things: yet they
cannot be imputed to him and his Providence: For Acts 17.28.
God moves indeed all things, and gives power unto every thing to work; but
he instilleth no sinful quality unto any man, whereby he works after an
evil and sinful manner. As therefore the earth, which affords sap to the bad
trees as well as to the good, is not to be blamed, if a bad tree bring forth
bad fruit: So much less can God justly be said to be the author and cause of
our sins; although he Heb. 1.^.
by the hand of his providence, sustain, support, move, and govern all things,
yea the very ungodly themselves. Acts 17.28.
In him, says the Apostle, we live, and move and have our being: To wit, such
as we are, such are we moved by him, unless he of his grace do alter and change
us.

DOCT. VII. That the secret counsels of God in the governing of the world, are
by us to be adored with reverence, and not with curiosity to be inquired into.
BUt as concerning the secret and wonderful counsels of God, whereby we see
innumerable things to be done, whereof we can neither give nor know any reason:
Let us admire and adore them with what reverence we ought, being assured of
this, That Matthew. 10 29, 30
nothing in the world is done, without the will of God; And, that the will of
God is Romans 9.14.
so just, that it is the most certain rule of all justice. And therefore we
must always keep in mind that saying of the Apostle uttered with great
admiration, Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! And again,
Romans 9.14.
Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. And yet, Romans 11.36.
Of him, and through him, and to him are all things: To whom be glory for ever.
Amen.

DOCT. VIII. Errors condemned.
THerefore we condemn all impostors and deceivers and all those Philosophers,
which either quite take away Gods Providence out of the world, or else deny
that he looks after humane affairs, and small matters. And those also we
condemn, which abusing Gods Providence, contemn and neglect the means which
God has ordained for the salvation of soul and body: as likewise those, which
contend that all things come to pass by such an absolute necessity, that they
take away all contingency, and leave man no liberty at all: and lastly those
which will have God so to work all in all, that they stick not to commit
blasphemy, in making God to be the author of sin, and to have a part in it.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Fall of man, and original sin and the fruits of it.
DOCTRINE. I. That Adam voluntarily and of his own accord sinned against God by
his disobedience.
WE believe, That Adam the first man, considering that he was Genesis 1.27.
created after the Image of God, and Eccl. 7.29.
made just and upright, and endued with free will in such sort, that if he
would he might have not sinned, and so never died: considering this, I say, we
believe, that he Gen 3.1, etc.
at the devils persuasion, God not hindering him, but leaving him Eccl. 15.14.
to follow his own counsel, of his own accord, with true freedom of will
sinned against God by his disobedience: so that he can neither translate the
fault upon God, nor his own nature as he received it from God, nor any other
creature, but ought and must attribute it only unto himself, because he would
so.

DOCT. II. What the nature and quality of Adams sin was.
WE understand, That Adams sin was his voluntary Genesis 3.6.
transgressing the Genesis 2.17.
commandment of God, in eating the forbidden fruit (as Moses sets it down) and
(as the Apostle speaks) his Romans 5.19.
disobedience: which consisted not so much in the outward act, as in his
voluntary purpose of mind, in that he would not obey God.

DOCT. III. What and how manifold death followed upon Adams sin.
SO we confess, That man being destitute of the grace of God, by his own fault
lost that life by which he did live holily unto God, having his understanding
blinded, his will depraved, and the integrity of his whole nature perished, as
concerning things belonging unto God, and a life well-pleasing unto God: That
he became Ioh 8.34.
the servant of sin, and the slave of Satan, and truly Ephesians. 2.1.
dead unto God: That Romans 5.12.
he incurred death, both that of the body which is common to all men together
with all bodily calamities, and also, and that especially, that of the whole
man, which is eternal, that is to say, most miserable, most grievous, most
unhappy, to live with the devil in everlasting torments, a life beyond all
comparison worse then any death: from which he could never have been 1 Cor.
15.22.
delivered but by Christ.

DOCT. IV. That in Adam all men sinned.
NOw, for as much as all mankind, which by natural generation was to be
propagated from Adam, was in the loins of Adam; whereupon the commandment
joined also with a commination belonged not to Adams person only, but to all
mankind: Therefore we believe with the Apostle, and confess that Romans 5.19.
in Adam sinning all men sinned; so that the disobedience was not so much
proper to him as common to all mankind: because his guilt descended upon all
his posterity whether born already, or yet to be born; as the Apostle plainly
teaches, and most firmly proves by opposing ibid.
the disobedience of Adam, and the obedience of Christ, the one to the other.
For if the obedience of Christ be as well ours by imputation, as it was
Christ's own by his proper action; because we are born again of his
incorruptible seed, and of his spirit: then likewise it follows, that the
disobedience of Adam is imputed unto us, and his guilt becomes ours; because
according to our carnal generation, we are born of his seed, who is the Father
of all men.

DOCT. V. That presently upon Adams disobedience, there followed the corruption
of his whole nature, in all men.
ANd, as upon Adam's actual disobedience, there followed presently in the just
judgment of God, the corruption of his whole nature, which is by the Apostle
called Romans 7.7. August. Tom. 7. contra Iul. Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 3.
lust or concupiscence, which is both a punishment for sin foregoing, and a
sin it self, and the cause of other sins: So also all men which by natural
propagation are descended from him, are infected with the same contagion, and
corruption of nature. This we believe as we have been taught out of Holy
Scripture, and and this we confess with the whole Church. For in Adam all men
sinned, and the guilt of his disobedience came upon all.

DOCT. VI. What we properly call Original sin.
WHerefore we say, that this hereditary stain and corruption of nature, is so
in all men a sin, and therefore commonly called Original sin; that yet
notwithstanding we in no wise separate it from the guilt and imputation of that
first disobedience. As on the contrary we doubt not to affirm that the
righteousness of Christians consists, not so much in the regeneration of
nature, which is the work of Christ's Spirit, and commonly called by the name of
Inherent righteousness, as in the imputation of the perfect obedience and
righteousness of Christ, whose members we are*

DOCT. VII. That the contagion of our nature is truly a sin.
ANd although this contagion did overspread Adam and all his posterity, and
was inflicted as a just punishment for that first transgression of Gods
commandment. Yet thus much we know as certainly as can be, out of holy
Scripture, that it is not only a punishment for sin, but also the cause of all
other sins, and likewise a sin it self, and such a one as is alone
sufficient to condemn us.

DOCT. VIII. That concupiscence even in the regenerate is of it is own nature a
sin.
ANd we have learned, that concupiscence of it is own nature is so far forth a
sin, and so repugnant to the Law of God, making all men subject to eternal
damnation, unless they be redeemed by Christ: that yet we make no manner of
doubt but in the very regenerate themselves, although it be not imputed unto
them any more, for as much as the guilt thereof is taken away by faith in
Christ, it is truly and of it self a sin, and such a one as deserves
eternal death, seeing that it is, as the Apostle also teaches, 1 John. 3.4.
the transgression of the Law, and is condemned by the Law of God.

DOCT. IX. That from our natural and imbred concupiscence as from a fountain
there flow forth continually streams of actual sins and transgressions.
WE believe further, that this our natural pravitie is such a fountain of all
evil, and so inexhaustible, that from thence there spring forth continually the
most filthy waters of evil passions, wicked cogitations, and ungodly desires,
which unless they be restrained and kept in by the Spirit of Christ, will
break forth outwardly into wicked and ungodly actions, some more grievous then
other: so far forth that there is not any one godly man living, which carries
not about with him this sink of sin, and feels not from thence filthy vapors
and exhalations always ascending, and is not contaminated and defiled with the
pollutions thereof. Iam. 1.14.
Every man (says St. James) is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust,
and enticed. 15.
Then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin: and sin when it is
finished brings forth death.

DOCT. X. That God is not the Author of sin.
BY all which we are confirmed in this faith, that we believe, that God is in
no wise the Author of sin, seeing that he neither created Adam evil, nor with
an inclination to evil, but just and upright; so that he sinned of his own
free will and accord, not moved, much less forced by God. 1 John 2.16
Neither was this pravitie any corruption of his nature as he was created by
God, but by Gods just permission followed as a punishment upon his disobedience
having wilfully lost his Original righteousness.

DOCT. XI. Errors condemned.
THerefore with Ireneus, and all the Church we condemn all those which make
God the Author of sin: and likewise all Pelagians both old and new, which
either deny that all men sinned in Adam, and so are guilty of Original sin; or
else dispute that this imbred lust or concupiscence is only the punishment of
sin, but not truly sin indeed; or else in the regenerate at least will not
have it to be called by the name of sin. We condemn also those, which have
taught or do teach, that Original sin is a substance: because this opinion
either makes God to be the Author of sin, or else denies him to be the maker
of every substance; and because it serves also to confirm the Doctrine of the
Manichees concerning two causes or Originalls of all things, to wit, one chief
and prime good, and another chief and prime evil, so that all things which are
good have proceeded from the beginning unto this present, and still do proceed
from the good, and all evil from the evil one. We condemn also all stoics,
and those that are like unto them, which teach that all sins are equal, and
not one greater then another. And last of all those, which contend that there
may be some one found in this world, which is altogether void of sin.

CHAP. VIII. What free will was left unto Man after his Fall.
DOCTRINE I. What we understand by the name of free- will.
SEeing that all men since the Fall and by reason of the Fall of Adam are
Psalm. ^1.5.
conceived insinne, and are Ephesians. 2.^.
by nature the children of wrath, having no inclination at all to that which is
good, but Genesis 6.^.^.21.
altogether prone to that which is evil: This is our belief and confession
concerning the free will of a man not regenerate. By the name of free will, we
understand the will of man so to be free; that from it we do not separate the
faculty of understanding, by which we judge, what is good, and what bad; what
to be chosen, and what to be refused.

DOCT. II. That the question concerning free will is twofold; either
concerning the nature, or else concerning the power thereof.
IN the question concerning free will we distinguish between the power and
strength of free will, and the nature of man's will. The nature we call, the
natural and essential property thereof created in it by God, that whatsoever
it wills, whether it be good or bad, it wills freely, voluntarily,
willingly, and free-from all manner of coaction. By the name of power we
understand a power or faculty either innate, that is by nature; or else
conferred, that is of grace, by which we are enabled by our understanding to
know, what is good, and what evil; and by our will to choose the good and
refuse the evil.

DOCT. III. That free will is always free from coaction.
AS therefore the substance of free will perished not by reason of sin (for
the understanding, and will, and the whole substance of the soul remained) so
neither do we believe that the nature thereof perished, that whatsoever it
wills, as well evil as good, it wills it freely, and without all manner of
coaction. That it is true which Augustine says, That free will is always free
(that is from coaction) but yet that it is not always good.

DOCT. IV. That there are three ranks or sorts of things and actions about
which the power of free will is exercised.
COncerning our power in choosing of good, and refusing evil, we are of this
opinion. We distinguish good and evil into three kinds those which pertain to
the Animal or natural life, the rational or humane life, the divine or
Christian life. Of the first kind are those which are common to us almost with
beasts, and belong to the soul by which we live and increase, and have sense
and motion: Of the second kind are those, which are proper to man, and belong
to man's understanding; as Arts as well Mechanical as liberal, virtues moral
and political, and last of all sciences of all sorts, and all Philosophy: The
third kind contains only those things which are good, and good actions, which
are ordained for the kingdom of God, and a Christian life; As the true
knowledge of God, faith, and the effects thereof, regeneration, obedience,
charity, and others of the like kind.

DOCT. V. That the power and strength of a man unregenerate is very weak, even
in things belonging to this life.
TO say nothing then of the power and strength of man since the Fall, in
knowing and desiring such things as make for the preservation of this present
life, and living here happily, as also in making choice of them and pursuing
after them, if they be offered unto him; and in eschewing and avoiding the
contrary: To say nothing, I say, of this; because it nothing belongs to
religion and manners (although as concerning even this, daily experience
teaches us, how great a depravation of judgment and appetite is in man,
following as a punishment upon the Fall) We believe, that, although by the
mercy of God there is yet left some light in man's understanding, partly in
discerning between right and wrong, good and bad in humane affairs; and partly
in acquiring the knowledge of many things, arts, sciences, and diverse other
virtues: Yet the light, that is in the understanding, is so little, and the
will so depraved, that unless the one be enlightened from above, and the other
be inclined by Gods special grace to choose the good propounded and to refuse
the bad, he cannot acquire the knowledge of Arts and sciences, and other
virtues, which may be in men even unregenerate. And not without cause says St.
Augustine, August. Tom. 7. cont. Iul. Pel. lib. 4. cap. 3.
That all the Arts sciences and other virtues, or rather shadows and
resemblances of virtues, which were in the Romans, and others not converted
unto the faith, were in them the singular gifts of God.

DOCT. VI. The Confirmation of the foregoing opinion.
FOr all infidels or unbelievers are not endued with the same or alike equal
virtues and sciences: That even from thence it may manifestly appear that they
are not the gifts of nature, but the gifts of God added unto nature.

DOCT. VII. That in things belonging unto God and true piety the unregenerate
man can do nothing.
BUt as concerning things belonging unto God; true piety and religion and a
Christian life, we believe that the mind of an unregenerate man is so blinded,
and his heart so depraved, and all his powers and faculties so weak or none at
all, that he can neither truly know God, nor the things of God; neither love
him, nor desire things pleasing unto him, much less obey his will as he ought.
For according to the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not the things of God; neither can he perceive or
understand them: How can he then of himself either will or do any thing? John
15.5.
Without me, says our Savior, ye can do nothing.

DOCT. VIII. The confirmation of the foregoing opinion.
FOr, even as a man dead to men and nature can perform no action belonging unto
men and nature: So neither can he, which is P^^. 2.^.
dead to God in trespasses and sins, truly know those things which belong
unto God and true piety, much less can he do them; but he lies rotting and
stinking in his sins, unless he be delivered from them by the grace of God
through Christ, and so be restored again unto life. But all men that are
without Christ, and not regenerated by the Spirit of Christ, are truly dead:
and therefore they are truly said to be John ^.21.
quickened, to be raised from the dead, and to be regenerated, or born again,
whosoever are by faith in Christ delivered from their sins, and ingrafted
into Christ.

DOCT. IX. Errors condemned.
THerefore we condemn all Pelagians, which teach the contrary, lifting up the
power and strength of free will against the grace of Christ: And we detest and
abhor the opinion of the Manichees and all others, which will have a man to
be like a stock, as if he had no judgment or liberty of will at all in civil
matters.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Promise of Redemption and Salvation through Christ.
DOCTRINE I. That Christ the heavenly man was of grace promised to save us.
WHen 1 Cor. 15.47.
the first man, which was of the earth earthy, was Genesis 3.17.
fallen into such a miserable estate and condition by his own fault through
disobedience; and not he only, but together with him all his posterity, which
sinned in him, and were to be Psalm. 5^.5.
conceived in sin, and to be born Ephesians. 2.3.
the children of wrath: We believe, that God of his mere grace and mercy to
Adam and Eve, and in them to all mankind, Gen 3.15. Matt. 1.21.
promised another man 1 Cor. 15.47.
from heaven, of the true substance of man indeed, but to be Luke 1.34.
conceived without the seed of man, and therefore to be Isa. 7.14. Matt. 1.23.
Luke 1.34.
born of a Virgin Heb. 4.15.
without sin: in whom as in another head of mankind, consisting of a divine
and humane nature, being the true and Heb. 1.3.
express image of God the Father, and filled with the holy Ghost that might be
fulfilled, which in the first head succeeded not through his own fault, that
is, That he the second man in our name and for us, which were to be Romans
6.5.11.7.
grafted into him by his Spirit, and by spiritual generation to be Ephesians. 5.29.
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, might most perfectly Romans 5.19.
obey God the Father, and by his Phil. 2.8.
obedience and death take away sin, appease the wrath of God, redeem us,
justify us, sanctify us, rule us by his Spirit, set us at liberty, give us
grace and strength to that which is good, and finally save us unto everlasting
life and glorify us.

DOCT. II. That the Promise, Concerning the Redemption by Christ, was
necessary.
FOr Adam, not as a private person, but as the parent and root of all mankind,
as he was endued at the first with righteousness, that he might propagate it
unto all his posterity as in an inheritance; for which cause it is commonly
called Original righteousness: So by his disobedience, he has transmitted
unto all men great unrighteousness in stead of righteousness, and eternal
death in stead of life eternal. Necessary therefore was it, that there should
be another head, that is, Christ from whom by reason of his obedience there
might be derived on all his members true and heavenly righteousness,
holiness, and life.

DOCT. III. To what end the Promise was made presently after that the sin was
committed.
WE believe, That therefore the promise was presently after the sin
committed, made from the beginning of the world, and afterward by the holy
fathers was often repeated, expounded, and confirmed, by diverse ways signs
and seals. That not only we, which have been since the coming of the Messiah;
but also all others from the foundations of the world, as many as should
believe this promise, and by true faith embrace Christ to come: might also be
made partakers of redemption, justification, and salvation.

DOCT. IV. That, from the beginning of the world, as many as believed on Christ
to come, were saved.
WE believe, That from the beginning of the world as many as believed on Christ
promised and to come, they were grafted into him by faith; they were made
partakers of his future obedience, passion, death, and redemption; they did
eat his body which was afterward to be delivered, and drink his blood which
was afterward to be powered out; and last of all, they were all Christians
endued with the Spirit of Christ, and saved unto everlasting life, no less
then we are.

DOCT. V. Errors condemned.
ANd further we condemn and detest their opinon which hold that no man was
saved before the coming of Christ; and that the Fathers which were before,
received no promise of eternal salvation, but only of things temporal.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Law.
DOCTRINE. I. That the Law of Moses came between the promise of salvation by
Christ, and the fulfilling thereof; and to what end.
BUt between the Promise of Redemption by Christ, which was first made unto
Adam, and afterward more manifestly declared unto others, but especially unto
Abraham, sealed by the Sacrament of Circumcision, and as it were confirmed by
the death of Isaac the first born offered for a sacrifice, and established by
an everlasting covenant: Between this promise, I say, and the fulfilling
thereof, the Law which was delivered by Moses came between: the people which
descended from the seed of Abraham (of which Christ was to come) being gathered
together, and wonderfully increased, and being after a miraculous manner
delivered out of the bondage of Egypt, that God might have a certain and
visible Church, separated from all gentiles, and gathered together in one
place, in which the promise, made unto the Fathers concerning Christ might be
kept, and God might be worshipped after such a manner as was best pleasing unto
him, even unto the coming of the true Redeemer promised: Between these two, I
say, the promise and the fulfilling thereof, the Law which was delivered by
Moses came between, and contained in it three kinds of precepts: Moral, for
the right ordering of a private life in the course of piety; Cermoniall,
according to the prescript rule whereof the Church was to be governed; and
Judicial concerning the government of the whole commonwealth in civil matters,
and concerning the ordering of private families in household government: That
by this means the people of God, of whom Christ was to come, might be kept
from idolatry, and from following the profane customs and manners of the
wicked gentiles; That they might be kept within the compass of their duty and
service to God, and obedience to Gods will; and, to conclude, That they might
be supported and upheld through says and hope in the promise, concerning true
Redemption to be wrought by Christ, which was to be fulfilled; and that so they
might be prepared every day more and more for the receiving and entertaining of
Christ: and all to this end, That God might be glorified in his people.

DOCT. II. That whatsoever is necessary unto salvation is contained in the Law
of God.
BUt, as for the two latter parts of the whole Law, which belong nothing unto
us, to say nothing of them; but only of the former: We believe that in this
Law, as it is delivered unto us in the books of Moses, he Prophets, and
Apostels, 2 Timothy 3.16.
all things necessary unto our salvation, are so perfectly and completely set
down unto us, and the will of God which he would have us to do here in this
world is so far forth revealed: that Deuteronomy. 4.2. b 12.32.
nothing can be added thereto, or diminished from it.

DOCT. III. That the Law of the Decalogue, or ten Commandments, is the
exposition of the Law of Nature, and the Map of Gods image.
FOr we believe, That this Law is is the exposition of the Law of Nature, which
was perfectly wrote in the hearts of our first patents, but in others
imperfectly, and but in part: and, therefore by this is condemned whatsoever is
repugnant to that image of God after which man was at the first created; and
contrarily, That is commanded, whatsoever is agreeable unto it. For it was Gods
will by this Law to declare, both what man was in his first estate; and what he
was made in his second, and what he ought to be; and further, What he should be
in the third, in part; and in the fourth, perfectly, by Christ. That the Law of
God is nothing else, but the true, lively, express draught or Map of Gods
image: by which we are put in mind what we were; what we are; what we should
be; and what we shall be, if we believe on Christ.

DOCT. IV. That the sum of the Law is reduced to these two heads; the love of
God, and our neighbor.
WE believe and confess, according to the Doctrine of Christ, That the sum
or substance of the whole Law is contained in these two Commandments, Matt.
22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and 39.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: The first of which is the sum of
the former table; and the other is the sum of the latter.

DOCT. V. That, if God alone is to be loved with all the heart, He alone also
is to be worshipped.
NOw, if the sum of the first table, which contains in it the whole worship
which is due unto God, consists in the perfect love of God alone: from hence,
beside the express Commandments of God in other places, expounding this
Commandment, we gather thus much; and believe, That God alone is to be adored,
invocated, and worshipped with religious worship, and that we are to swear
only by his name; because these things are contained in the Commandment
concerning the loving of God with all the heart: To omit this, that the image
of God, whereof the Law it self is a draught or map, taught Adam the very same.

DOCT. VI. That concupiscence it self, and the corruption of nature is a sin.
ANd, if by the Law of God, that is condemned for a sin, whatsoever is not
agreeable unto the first image of God, that is, in righteousness, holiness,
and uprightness, wherein man was created: we gather from hence, that not only
the actions done with consent of will contrary to the will of God, but also the
very inward motions of concupiscence, and therefore concupiscence it self, and
every corruption of nature is a sin, and so condemned by the Law of God:
because it is repugnant to the rectitude, or uprightness, and righteousness
in which man was created, and in which he might have continned and stood, if he
would.

DOCT. VII. That the Law, although it cannot be perfectly kept and fulfilled,
was not yet given in vain, or to no end.
BUt, although the Law of God is so perfect, that Romans 7.15.
no mortal man has been able, or is able to keep it wholly, always, and in
such a manner as it ought to be kept: Yet we believe that it was not given in
vain, or to no end or purpose; for as much God does nothing in vain, but all in
infinite wisdom, for his own glory, and for our profit and salvation.

DOCT. VIII. That there is a threefold use and profit arising from the Law of
God.
FOr, First of all by the perfect Revelation of Gods will by this Law, men
might in former times, and may now come the better unto the knowledge of God,
and what is pleasing unto him; what is good, and what bad; what to be done, and
what to be avoided: better, I say, then by the mere relics of the Law of
Nature which was left in man's mind: and so, all pretense of ignorance being
quite taken away, the Jews were made more unexcusable then other nations, for
not keeping the Law of God: because from thence men are given to understand,
that the judgments of God against us are most just. Secondly by the curses
which are added against the transgressors of the Law, men are better bridled
as it were, and kept in, that they run not into sin; and again, by the
blessings promised unto the observers of the Law, men are incited and spurred
on, as it were to run in the way of Gods Commandments, and keep his Law, though
not wholly and perfectly, yet at least in part as concerning outward works: and
so they were the better kept within the compass of their duty: which how
profitable it is for the commowealth in general, and for every man in
particular, who knows not? Thirdly, and lastly, whereas men found by daily
expeperience that they did always sin against this perfect Law, and did feel
that they could not keep it as they ought, and so became more and more, every
day, subject to the wrath of God; and guilty of eternal death: From hence it
came to pass, that despairing in themselves, and of their own strength, they
did the more ardently desire, and long for the coming of their Redeemer and
Deliverer. and therefore the more they came to the knowledge of their sins, and
their own weakensse, and the more sensibly they felt the wrath of God by the
Law: the more they did hunger and thirst after righteousness, and fitted and
prepared themselves for the receiving of Christ by faith: So it is most true
which the Apostle says in both places, Romans 3.20.
By the Law is the knowledge of sin, and, Gal. 3.24.
The Law is our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ.

DOCT. IX. That the Law at this time has the same uses even in those which are
regenerate.
ANd we believe, that the foresaid uses of the Law abide and continue as long
as we live in this world: not only in the unregenerate, as was said before,
but even in the regenerate also. For, whereas our minds are overclouded with
darkness, and our memories are slippery, that we cannot, either perfectly
understand the things of God, or understanding them, keep them in remembrance:
Need we have of the Law of God to be our glass, wherein we may every day
behold and see, and certainly understand what is the will of God that we should
do. And again, Whereas our hearts are not perfectly purged from all corruption,
So that they are not fully bent to do the will of God, but still Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit: Necessary it is for us to have the Law
of God, by the tenours and comminations thereof to keep us from falling into
sin, and by the promises thereof to incite us unto obedience, and to follow
after righteousness. And thirdly and lastly, For as much as there is 1 Io^^ ^8.
no man so far forth sanctified, but that he sins, and has sin dwelling in
him, which makes us weak and feeble to every good work, and always prone to
that which is evil: Therefore the Law is useful, and profitable for us, that
thereby coming to the knowledge of our sins and manifold weaknesses we may more
and more every day acknowledge, how impossible it is that we should ever by our
own works be justified and saved; and further so much the more ardently-hunger
and thirst after Christ's righteousness, and embrace him by faith. And so the
Law, although it can never justify us, yet it may bring us every day nearer and
nearer unto justification, by bringing us unto Christ that justifies.

DOCT. X. That the Moral Law, as concerning the substance thereof, was not
abrogated by Christ.
FOr we know and believe, that the Law as concerning the substance of Doctrine,
and those wholesome and saving uses whereof has been spoken, was not be
abrogated by Christ, and therefore was not abrogated; but only as concerning
the curse and condemnation: For, Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. Yet further, in respect of the curse and
condemnation it self the Law always was, and still is, useful and profitable
unto them, which yet are not in Christ, for as much as it drives them unto him,
that they be not condemned.

DOCT. XI. Errors condemned.
WE therefore condemn those, which cast out of the Church this Law as
unprofitable and not useful, nor belonging unto Christians: And again those
which teach that a man may either totally or partially, in whole or in part be
justified by the Law: whereas the Law rather was given, Gal. 3.22.
to conclude all under sin, and to bring them unto Christ, who alone John
1.29.
takes away the sins of the world. And this is our brief confession
concerning the Law, which was delivered by Moses, and expounded by the
Prophets, which fitteth, prepares, disposes, and brings men unto Christ,
who is Romans 10.4.
the end of the Law, as the Apostle witnesses.

CHAP. XI. Concerning Christ our Redeemer.
DOCTRINE I. The sum of our faith concerning the Person and Office of Christ
our Redeemer.
THerefore Gal. 4.4.
When the fullness of the time was come, in which the promise of Redemption
which was made unto the first man, was to be fulfilled by the second: God sent
forth, The eternal Father, his Son, only begotten and eternal, and
therefore true God of the same nature with the Father, made of a woman, alone
without the seed of man, and therefore true man; but without sin, and
therefore true Christ, made under the Law, and therefore also circumcised, that
he might with most perfect obedience fulfill the Law for us all, becoming
obedient unto his Father even unto death, to wit for us: (for being without
sin himself, 5.
he deserved not to die) To redeem them that were under the Law, them that
were, etc. Therefore all the elect: To redeem them, to wit by his obedience,
death, and Act. 10.28.
blood shed, that is, a sacrifice of infinite virtue, and a price of redemption
of the greatest efficacy (for it was the blood of God) To redeem them, I say,
from their sins unto the former image of God, and so unto the former image of
God, and so unto perfect righteousness; and from death likewise unto eternal
life; and from the kingdom of Satan unto the Kingdom of God: That we might
receive the adoption of sons, and so at length be received unto the full and
perfect possession of an heavenly inheritance, as sons and lawful heirs;
and to conclude, Ephesians. 1.10.
That he might gather together in one head all things both which are in heaven,
and which are on earth, and that he might make them cleave fast unto him, Ephesians.
1.12.
to the praise of his glory.

DOCT. II. That Christ our Redeemer is both true God and true Man.
WE believe therefore that Jesus Christ is John 1.14.
the only begotten Son of God, and therefore his Son by nature, coessentiall
with the Father, and Mic. 5.2.
coeternall, true God and Lord Jehova: and we believe that the same Jesus
Christ is also true man of the seed of Matt. 1.1.
Abraham and David, conceived of the holy Ghost without the help of man, in the
womb of the Virgin Hebr. 4.15.
without sin: born of her, having a true humane soul and mind, being made
like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. So that he is true Athanas.
in Symb.
God of the substance of his Father begotten before all worlds, and man of the
substance of his mother born in the world.

DOCT. III. That the Son only is both God and Man together.
BUt, so do we believe that the Son of God is both true God and Man together,
and therefore true Christ, that we confess him only to be so, and none
besides: For we read not that the Father or the holy Ghost, but John 1.14.
the Word only was made flesh: And the Apostle says that the Gal. 4.4.
Son was made of a woman, and so he only suffered: although to the creation of
the nature assumed by the Son, not only the Son, but the Father also and the
holy Ghost concurred.

DOCT. IV. That the Son was made Man without any change in himself by assuming
only the humane nature unto himself.
BUt we believe that the Son of God was made Man, not by any conversion of
himself into flesh, not by any mutation in the flesh, not by any confusion of
the divine and humane nature, but by the assuming only of the humane nature
into the unity of his Person. And, as Athanasius speaks, Athan. in Symb.
Not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by taking of the Manhood into
God: So that he in no wise lost what he was, but assumed what he was not,
according to what the Apostle says, Hebr. 2.16.
He took on him the seed of Abraham: whereby he teaches us, That, as the Son
assuming was not changed into the thing assumed (for God is altogether
unchangeable) but remained what he was, being truly distinguished from the
thing assumed: So the seed assumed was in no wise converted into the thing
assuming, but was united only with the divine nature into the unity of the
same Person, according to what the Evangelist says John. 1.14.
The Word was made flesh. Therefore the flesh remained flesh, and was not
changed into the Word.

DOCT. V. That neither one nature assumed another, nor one Person another, but
the Person of the Son of God the humane nature.
FRom whence we understand that the divine nature which is common to all the
three Persons, yea one and the same in them all, assumed not unto it self the
humane nature, nor one Person another, but nature only. For the Son of God
took not upon him any son of Abraham: but the seed of Abraham, that is, the
humane nature propagated from Abraham: and therefore we acknowledge not two
Persons in Christ, but that one only, by which all things were made, and which
was so perfect before the assuming of the seed of Abraham, that by the assuming
thereof it became not another from what it was, neither yet a more perfect
Person, nor any way else imperfect.

DOCT. VI. That the humane nature was not by Christ assumed to constitute any
new Person, nor to make the Person that was before, more perfect then before it
was: But, that it was assumed only into the society and unity of that
eternal and most perfect Person.
FOr, although in Christ we acknowledge two natures, the divine and the humane:
Yet we do in no wise grant that the humane nature was therefore assumed, that
either of this and that as of the parts there should be constituted any new
Person unto Christ, or that the eternal Person which was before should be made
more perfect then before, by the access of a new nature; but this only, That
the humane nature being assumed into the unity of that Person, which was
existent from all eternity, and also most perfect, the Son of God remaining
what he was, might become what he was not, and might have what to offer to his
Father for us. And therefore we do not absolutely and simply like it, if any
man do say, That, as of the soul and body there is constituted the person of
every man, so also of the divine and humane nature was constituted the Person
of Christ. But we like the phrase which is used in the Church, That Christ
clothed himself or was clothed with our flesh. Whereupon says St. Augustine,
August.
That Christ descended from heaven, like a naked man from the mount; and that
he ascended up again, clothed with our flesh as with a garment. For this
phrase, Although it do not perfectly express the Hypostaticall union, yet it
makes a manifest difference between the Person of the Son of God assuming, and
our nature assumed. For the same reason also we like the manner of speaking
which is used by the Fathers, That the humane nature is born by the Son of God,
and again, That it does subsist in the Person of the Son of God, and such like,
discerning the Person of the Son of God assuming from the nature assumed, and
teaching moreover that the Person of the Son of God was not made another from
what it was, nor more perfect then before it was, by the access of the humane
nature.

DOCT. VII. The confirmation of the foregoing opinion together with the
exposition of that place of Athanasius.
WE confess indeed, That, As the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God
and man is one Christ: that is, That there is but one Person, although there be
two natures in him. But not thus, as if of the two natures, as of the parts
thereof, (to speak properly) were constituted the Person of Christ; as to the
constituting of the person of man, the body as well as the soul does concur
necessarily, as an essential part: For as much as the Person of Christ was
existent, and most complete and perfect before the manifestation thereof in the
flesh; but the person of man, suppose Adam, was not, before the conjunction of
the soul and body: and again, for as much as neither the soul of man assumed
the body, nor the body, the soul; as the Son of God assumed unto himself the
seed of Abraham into the unity of the fame person: and further, for as much as
the body and soul are two substances, as it appears in the creation of Adam;
but the humane nature of Christ never subsisted by it self alone, but only in
the Person of the Son of God. From whence it appears, how unjustly some abuse
the godly saying of Athanasius, to prove their own dreams and phansies. For it
is altogether necessary that he which manifested himself (that is, the Person
of the Son of God) should be different from the flesh in which he manifested
himself; and that not only before, but also after the resurrection, and his
session at the right hand of the Father: which (as St. Augustine says) brought
glory indeed into the flesh, but took not away the nature thereof.

DOCT. VIII. How Christ can be one only Person, and that eternal and
immutable, and yet in it two natures: and how he can be said to consist of them.
WE therefore acknowledge and confess, against Nestorius, That in Christ there
is one only Person, and that eternal, most simple and most perfect, and
remaining the same for ever, to wit, the Person of the eternal Son of God:
and, that unto this eternal Person there was added in time, not another
person, but another nature, that is, the humane; but yet not as a part of that
Person, by which it was assumed, but a thing far different from it, and yet
assumed into the unity thereof. And further in the third place, we confess
that in one and the same Person of Christ there are now two natures: the divine
and humane, in which we doubt not but it subsisteth, lives, and works.
Wherefore we are not afraid to say, that Christ now consists of the divine
and humane nature being assumed into the unity of person; and that he is after
some sort compounded of them, as we may so speak.

DOCT. IX. How the two natures are united into one Person, without either
conversion or confusion: the properties and actions of each remaining still
safe, and distinguished.
ANd we believe and confess, That the two natures of Christ are so truly and
inseparably conjoined and united into one Person: that yet notwithstanding we
doubt not to say, that each still remains entire and perfect, and truly
distinct one from the other, and each still retains it is own distinct
essential properties and operations, without all manner of confusion: so that,
as the divine retaining it is own properties, remained uncreate, infinite,
inmense, simply omnipotent, simply wise: So also the humane retaining it is
properties, remains created, finite, and terminated by certain bounds. And
again, as the divine has it is own proper will and power, by which Christ as
God wills and works the things which are of God: So likewise the humane
has it is own, by which the same Christ as man wills and works the things
which are of man: So far forth, that, as Christ, as he is God; neither
wills nor works by his humane will and power: So neither as man wills or
works he by his divine will and power: As it is well determined by the
Fathers against Eutyches, and against Macarius. Therefore we like well that
saying of Leo the first, who writing unto Flavianus concerning this matter
says thus, Leo Epist 10. cap. 4.
He which is true God, is also true man; neither is there any lie in this
unity, whilst there is in Christ both the humility of the humanity, and the
sublimitie of the Deity. For, as God is not changed by showing mercy and
compassion: so neither is man (that is, the humane nature in Christ) consumed
by being dignified. For each form with the communion of the other works that
which is proper unto it self: the word still working that which is of the word;
and the flesh that which is of the flesh. So far goes Leo: and what he says,
he afterward illustrates by some examples, by which he demonstrates, that, as
the natures in Christ are indeed united, but yet remain still distinct, and not
confused: So likewise the actions, both were and are: because the flesh, and
not the Word, did the things belonging to the flesh; and, the Word, and not the
flesh, did the things belonging to the Word. To raise up Lazarus, was a work
proper only to the Word; but to cry, John 11.43.
Lazarus come forth, belonged only to the flesh: yet to the raising up of
Lazarus, both actions were united; because they were from one and in one
Christ, and tended to one work; and yet they were distinguished. So again, to
forgive sins, was an action proper only to the divine nature; but to say,
Matt. 9.2.
Thy sins be forgiven thee, this was proper only to the humane. To restore
sight unto him that was blind from his birth, was an action proper only to the
divine nature: but to put clay upon the eyes of him that was blind, and to say,
John 9.7.
Go and wash, this was proper only to the humane. Therefore the Hypostaticall
union, as it confounded not the natures, so neither did it confound the
actions, but retained them distinct: and therefore neither are the properties
of the natures confounded, but remain distinct. For there are three things in
one and the same person of Christ, The Natures, the Properties and Faculties of
the Natures, and the Actions of the Properties and Faculties: and as the
Natures and Actions are in Christ, in such manner also are the Properties of
the Natures. As therefore it is manifest that one Nature is not transfused into
another, nor the actions confounded one with another: So also is it manifest
concerning the properties.

DOCT. X. That, from the union of the Natures, the true and real transfusion
of the divine properties into the humane nature of Christ, can in no wise be
proved.
FOr we like and approve of that most true saying of the Fathers against the
Eu^ychians, and Monothelites (to wit) That they which have the same essential
Properties, have also the same Natures and essences: and they which have their
Natural Properties confounded, have also their Natures confounded. Which as it
is true in all, so in God especially, in whom his Essential Properties are
nothing else really, but his very Essence: From whence it follows upon
necessity, that, if they can truly and properly be communicated unto any
created substance, so that it can become as God is, as for example, Simply
Omnipotent; then also Gods very Essence may be communicated unto it: so that,
if it can become equal unto God for Power or any other Property, then may it
also become equal unto God for Essence, and so Co-essentiall with God. Which
to say, were to commit two grand errors: One, in making the creature equal to
God, by attributing and communicating unto it those things which truly and
properly belong only unto God. Neither does the exception help, in saying,
That God has them from himself, but the humane nature in Christ has them from
the Godhead: For even the Son himsef, is not from himself, neither has he his
divine essence from himself, but from the Father; and yet he is equal to the
Father and has the same nature with the Father. The other error is committed,
in attributing divine, and so infinite properties, as infinite power, unto the
humane nature; and so taking from it the finite properties thereof: Even as the
great light of the Sun takes away the light of a candle; or as the glory which
shall be communicated unto our bodies at the resurrection, shall take from them
all their dishonor and corruption. For where an infinite power is an Agent,
and works; there a finite power is idle and none at all. But this Heresy
has been so fully and perspicuously refuted by many learned men in our age,
that for our parts being here to set forth a brief and simple confession of our
faith unto the Church of God, and all posterity; we will not add any thing
more to that which has been said.

DOCT. XI. How great the force of the Hypostaticall union is.
YEt we believe and confess, that the force of the union of natures in Christ
is so great, that first indeed, What Christ is, or does according to his divine
nature, that is all-Christ the Son of Man said to be, or to do; and again, What
Christ is, or does, or has suffered according to his humane nature, That is
all-Christ, God, Son of God, said in holy Scripture to be, to have done, and to
have suffered: As in that place, where it said, Acts 20.2^.
God (that is, Christ Man and God) has purchased the Church with his own
blood: whereas the force of the purchase pertains unto the Deity, or
Godhead; and the pouring out of blood only unto the humanity or Manhood: Yet
both these Actions are joined together in one, and both are attributed unto the
whole Person of Christ; although they were and are distinguished: For although
the natures be distinguished, yet are they coupled together in the Person of
Christ, which is but one. Yet further, Christ as Mediator, never did or does
any thing according to his humanity, whereunto his divinity did not and does
not cooperate, or work together: and again, he did nothing according to his
divinity, whereunto his humanity did not consent and willingly agree. And
therefore well did the Fathers in calling the operations or actions of Christ
as Mediator, operatious Theandricall, that is of God and Man. In the second
place, As the force of the union which is between the Father and the Son is so
great, that he does nothing, neither communicates unto the world any good but
by the Son: In like manner, so great is the force of the Hypostaticall union of
the two natures in Christ, that there flows unto us no grace, no salvation, no
life, from the Deity, but by the humanity apprehended of us by faith: so that
it is altogether necessary that he be coupled unto the flesh of Christ,
whosoever will be made partaker of eternal life: according to that of our
Savior, John 6.13.
Except eat the flesh of the Son of Man, the have no life in you. And in the
last place, by the force of the said union it is effected, that we cannot
worship and adore the Deity in Christ, without worshipping and adoring also
the humanity in him: and again, That both the humane and divine nature are to
be worshipped and adored of us altogether with one and the same manner of
worship, and adoration: according to that, Hebe 1.6.
And when he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let
all the angels of God worship him; him, that is, the whole Person, God and Mau
together: whereas yet the humane nature by it self, and in it self merely
considered, neither can, nor ought to be worshipped: For God only is to be
worshipped. But it is not any union, but the Hypostaticall union of the divine
and humane nature which effects this, that we have said. Wherefore, although
God dwells in his Saints; yet are not they to be worshipped or prayed unto,
as is the Man Christ. Great therefore surely, we confess, is the union whereof
we speak: but yet such is the union, that it excludes all confusion, and
transfusion. For, if the union between the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
in one essence, then which union there neither is, nor can be imagined a
greater, take not away the distinction of Persons: neither can this union of
natures, and so of properties, and actions, in one Person, take away the
distinction, or bring in a confusion thereof.

DOCT. XII. That unto Christ as Man, was given indeed the greatest power that
could be; but yet finite: as also other gifts.
WE believe further, that, as Christ, as he is God, is simply omnipotent, and
simply wise, and so also in his other Atrributes: So as he is man, there was
given unto him power and knowledge, far surpassing, yea almost by infinite
degrees, the power, and knowledge of all creatures both in heaven and on earth;
but yet finite: and so likewise all other gifts and virtues, as charity,
prudence, fortitude, justice, grace, truth, and the rest, whereof the Prophet
Isaiah speaks, Isa. 11.2.
And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, etc. and John the Evangelist,
who testifies that he was John 1.14.
full of grace and truth, (and Luke) Luke 2.25.
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and Man.
For which cause he is by the Apostle said to be Ephesians. 1.20.
set at Gods right hand in the heavenly places, 21.
Far above all principalities and powers; and again, John says, John 3.34.
God gives not the Spirit unto him by measure; and again, the Apostle, Coloss.
2.3.
In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Whence it comes
to pass that, as he is Man, he knows all things, and can do all things which
belong unto his office: but as for those things which no created substance can
do, but God alone; those he does by the power of the Deity, yet not without
the consent, and as it were the supplication of the humane nature: insomuch
that to all the actions of Christ, as he is God, concerning our salvation, his
soul in some manner is always added, by the love, desire, and will thereof. As
likewise in all which he did as Man the Deity always concurred, even in his
death and passion; not that the Deity suffered, but that it willed the death
and passion of Christ, and gave unto his death and passion infinite power and
efficacy to expiate and purge away our sins. To conclude in a word, concerning
the natures of Christ, together with their union, and properties, we believe
whatsoever was set down, and concluded by the Nicene Council, and that of
Constantinople, and that of Ephesus, and that of Calcedon, against Arius,
Apollinaris, Nestorius, Eutyches: as also what was defined and determined in
the sixth Synod against the Monothelites.

DOCT XIII. That the actions of Christ are of two kinds: and that what we read
that Christ did or suffered; was all done and suffered by him according unto
truth, and not according to outward appearance only.
NOw, to pass from the Person of Christ, and his natures, and the union of the
natures, unto his actions and office peculiarly: We believe first, as there are
two true natures in Chrst, whereof each had, and has it is own true and
essential properties, conjoined indeed, as the natures also are united, but
not confounded: So likewise that there are two kinds of actions, which we read
that our Lord Jesus Christ, partly has already performed, and partly does not
yet cease to perform; and that some of these actions flow from the Deity, and
others from the humanity; and that they were partly, and partly are so
conjoined, and yet so distinct, that each form (as Leo speaks) does always
work with the communion of the other, The Word still doing that which is proper
to the Word, and the flesh exequuting that which belongs unto the flesh. And
again, as the works which Christ either did or does by the virtue and power of
the divine nature, are true and not feigned; for he reconciled us truly unto
his Father, he pardons and forgiveth sins truly, he truly sanctifies and
regenerateth: So also whatsoever we read that he either did or suffered for us
according to his humane nature, all that we believe that he both did and
suffered in deed and in truth, and not in show, and (as they speak) appearance
only.

DOCT. XIV. The explication of the foregoing opinion.
THerefore we believe that Christ, as he was truly conceived of the seed of
David, as he was truly born, and true Man, as he did truly eat and drink,
and perform other outward actions of a man: So also that he truly fulfilled
the Law for us, that he truly 1 Pet. 4.1.
suffered in the flesh, that he Matt. 27.50.
truly Romans 5.3.
died, that he 2 Cor. 5.15.
truly rose again from the dead, Luke 24.39.51.
in the same flesh, that he Act. 1.9.
ascended with his visible, palpable, true humane body being terminated by
certain dimensions, into the true and created heaven, Ephesians. 4.10.
far above all the visible heavens, that he there remains working according
to his own free will, until he shall come again from heaven in the same
visible body, to judge both the quick and the dead, that in heaven he truly
wills our salvation, that he has a care of us, Ephesians. 1.22, 4, 16.
that he sends down the influences of Spiritual and vital sense and motion
into us as unto his own members, and that he governs his whole Church.

CHAP. XV. The fruits of Christ's obedience, passion, death, and resurrection.
ANd we believe, that Christ by his perfect obedience merited not only for
himself, but for us also, eternal life; That he by his death and passion has
expiated and purged away all our sins in his own flesh; That he has redeemed
us out of the hands of Satan, from the tyranny of death, and from the slaverie
of sin; that he has reconciled us unto God in himself, and made us beloved
of him, that we might be accounted righteous in him before God the Father; that
by his resurrection, and ascension into heaven he has obtained for us a
twofold resurrection, Revel. 20.5.
the first and 6.
the second, as John speaks; that he has taken possession of an heavenly
inheritance for us; that he sits at the right hand of the Father, that is,
That Matt. 28.18.
All power is given unto him in heaven, and in earth: So that as he is
Mediator and Man he has the second place from the Father; being constituted
the head of the whole Church, both that in heaven, and that on earth: that from
him, and from his flesh there may be derived unto us by the holy Ghost, unto
us, I say, who as members are joined unto him as unto our head, there may be
derived whatsoever pertains to our vivification, and Spiritual life. And
therefore we acknowledge, believe, and confess that in Christ alone, all our
Salvation, redemption, righteousness, the grace of God, and eternal life
consists, according to that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.30.
Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: and in another place, Ephesians.
2.14.
He is our peace: and according to the Prophet, Ierem. 23.6.
The Lord our righteousness: and again according to the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.7.
In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins: and
again, Coloss. 1.19.
It pleased the Father, that in him all fulness should dwell: and according
to St. John the Apostle, 1. John 5.11.
This life, (that is, life eternal) is in his Son. And hereby we understand
that the promise, concerning redemption, which was made unto the first man,
received it is complement and perfection in the second, the Man Christ Jesus: so
that he which will be made partaker of redemption must needs be made a member
of Christ, and be joined unto him as unto his head: For we have redemption and
salvation not only by sins as our Mediator, but also in him as in our head.
This is our faith and belief concerning Christ our Redeemer, concerning his
Person, Natures, Office, and concerning the salvation of mankind in him
complete and finished.

DOCT. XVI. Heresies and errors condemned.
THerefore we condemn all Heretics as well ancient as modern, old and new,
which ever taught or now teach the contrary; by name, Arius, Phornius,
Servetus and all others of the same stamp, which deny the true Deity of
Christ: as also the Cerdonians, Marcionites, Valentinians, Manichees,
Priscillianites, Apollinarists, and others, which oppugned the humanity of
Christ: Whereof some denied that Christ was come in the flesh, or that he had
true flesh, saying that he brought a body only in appearance from heaven, or
that he had a body conceived of the elements and not of the seed of Abraham,
and that he was not born of a woman; And others indeed granted that he had
humane flesh, but denied him to have a reasonable soul, putting the Deity in
the place of it. We condemn likewise the Nestorians, which denied the true
union of the humane nature with the Person of Son, and held two Persons in
Christ, and two Sons; the Son of God, and the Son of Man. We condemn likewise
the Eutychians, which contrarily as the Person of Christ is only one, so also
hold that there was in him but one nature only, to wit, the divine: teaching
that the humane nature which he assumed, was either converted altogether into
the divine; or else that it was so mixed and confounded with the divine, that
they made no difference at all between the properties and actions of the divine
and humane nature. We condemn likewise those that came from them, Macarius
with his followers: which held that there was but one only will in Christ, to
wit, the divine; and so acknowledged no proper action of the humane Will in
him. We condemn also the Cerdonians, in this that they said, that Christ
neither suffered truly nor died truly; but seemingly only, and in outward
show and appearance: and together with them we condemn also all those, who
heretofore have taught, or at this time do teach the like; saying, That Christ
either rose not again in the same flesh wherein he died, but in another and
that of a diverse nature; Or if he did rise in the same, yet that he ascended
not truly into heaven, and carried it in thither with him. We do also
following the judgment of Ierom, Cyrill, and the rest of the Fathers, condemn
the Origenists, and such like as they were, which held that Christ rose with a
body like a Spirit, most subtle, and of it is own nature invisible, and not
coming under the judgment of humane sense. And last of all those, as Jews and
Turks which deny that the world is redeemed by the benefit of Christ's death:
together with all them which place their salvation in whole or in part in any
other thing, but Christ only; or blasphemouslly say that sins are expiated and
taken away by any other sacrifices beside that of Christ's. For we acknowledge
one only Redeemer Jesus Christ, without whom, as there is no God, so there is
no salvation: and we acknowledge but one only sacrifice, by the oblation
whereof the elect were once expiated in the Person of Christ, but also are
daily pardoned unto all believers even to the end of the world.

CHAP. XII. Concerning the true dispensation of redemption, salvation, and
life: and therefore the necessity of our union and communion with Christ.
DOCTRINE. I. That salvation and eternal life is placed only in Christ that
from him it may be communicated unto us.
WE believe, that as the sin of Adam, and death which followed thereupon,
remained not only in Adam; but also from him, as from the head of all mankind,
Romans 5.12.
passed upon all men, whosoever are by common generation already come from him,
or are yet to come: So also that the righteousness of Christ and eternal life
which is only due unto him, remained not in him alone, but was derived upon
all men, whosoever are by regeneration of the holy Ghost made one with him, and
do as true members cleave fast unto him as being the head of all the Church;
and that Christ also came in the flesh to this end, and that all salvation and
life is placed in him, to be really and truly dispensed, and communicated unto
all the elect, which are united unto him.

DOCT. II. That indeed the grace of redemption, and salvation is seriously
offered unto all: but really communicated to none but the elect, which are made
one with Christ.
FOr we believe, that, although Mark. 15.10.
redemption, salvation, and life eternal, which are the gifts of God, be
seriously propounded, and offered unto all by the preaching of the Gospel
(for, that many are not made partakers of it, it is their own fault) Yet they
are really communicated unto none but those, which being from all eternity
elected and predestined in Christ as the head of all the elect, to be made
his members, and so partakers of salvation, and being afterward in due time
called by the preaching of the Gospel, and endued with faith by the holy
Ghost, are grafted into Christ, and so made one with him.

DOCT. III. To the true participation of salvation, how necessary our union or
communion with Christ is.
AS neither John 15.1, 2, etc.
the vine branch from the vine, nor the bough from the tree, can suck sap and
life, unless both the one and the other be united as a part unto the one and
the other: And again, as the members of the body can neither draw motion, nor
sense, nor life from their head, unless they be united to the head: So neither
can men receive life and salvation from Christ, in whom they are alone, unless
they be truly ingrafted into Christ, and be united unto him by a true and
real union, and being united do also remain and abide in him.

DOCT. IV. That we cannot be united unto Christ, unless he do first unite
himself unto us.
SEeing then the participation of true righteousness, salvation, and life,
depends wholly upon the most necessary communion of us with Christ: and
hereunto both the preaching of the Gospel, and the administration of the
Sacraments, and all the Ecclesiastical ministry is referred: For this cause,
what our faith and belief is concerning this matter, briefly and plainly, as
near as we can, we thought good to declare and testify unto all the Church of
Christ, in certain Theses, or Positions here following. And first we believe,
that, as 1 John 4.10.
we love Christ, as John speaks, because he first loved us; and therefore we
come unto him with our Spirit, because he first came unto us by his; and
therefore we embrace him by faith, because he first embraced us by the virtue
of his Spirit and begat faith in us: So neither can we be joined and united
unto him, unless he first join and unite himself unto us. For one is the cause
of the other: the former, of the latter. Wherefore we are to pray, that he
would be pleased to John 14.23.
come unto us, and make his abode with us,

DOCT. V. That Christ's union with us, and ours with Christ is threefold: and
what their order is.
FUrther we acknowledge a threefold union of Christ with us, and us with
Christ; The first, in our nature once made; the second, which is every day made
in the Persons of every one of the elect, but as yet absent from the presence
of the Lord; and the last, which shall be with the Lord in our own Persons,
when we shall be personally present with him, when God shall be Coloss. 3.11. 1
Cor. 15.2^.
all in all. And the first of these is referred unto the second; and the
second, unto the third: As nature was ordained unto grace; and grace, unto
glory. For the first was made by the assumption of our nature, into the unity
of the Person of the Word. The second is made by the assumption of our Persons
into grace, and into one Mystical body with him, and so unto the 2 Pet. 1.4.
participation of the divine nature, as Peter speaks. The third and last
shall be made by the assumption of us all into glory everlasting with Christ.
And we doubt not but Christ's will was, to show unto us before the second by the
first, and the third by the second: that by what is done already we might be
confirmed in hope of that which shall be hereafter.

DOCT. VI. That, as the first union was made, to expiate and take away sins; so
likewise the second, to make us partakers of that benefit.
WE believe therefore (to omit things that are impertinent to our present
purpose, and to come nearer to the matter) we believe, I say, that the Son of
God, according to the eternal will of the Father, of himself, and of the holy
Ghost, as to expiate and take away our sins, he assumed into the unity of his
Person which was conceived in the womb of the Virgin by the power of the holy
Ghost, and in it fulfilled the Law of God perfectly for us, and became obedient
unto his Father even unto death, and by the same flesh offered up for a
sacrifice for our sins, purchased in himself eternal salvation for us: So
also to make us really partakers of the salvation purchased for us by the
sacrifice of his own flesh, after another manner of union he takes and kuits us
unto himself in such sort, that we are united unto him, though not into one
Person, yet into one true mystical body, whereof he is head, and all we are
members, whereby we become partakers of the divine nature.

DOCT. VII. As the first union, so likewise the second is made by the power of
the holy Ghost.
NEither doubt we but that the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, as in the
first union, by the power of his Spirit, he assumed and took upon him our flesh
and blood (for he was conceived man by the holy Ghost, and that without sin:
for which cause also he is called the 1 Cor. 15 4^.
Heavenly Man) so also in the second he gives us his flesh and his blood, and
communicates himself wholly unto us, and by this communion so knits, conjoynes,
and incorporates us unto himself by the efficacy of his Spirit, that still the
bond that knits Christ unto us and us unto him, is the same Spirit, which
Spirit as it effected in the womb of the Virgin, that the Son of God became
flesh of our flesh and bone of our bones: So also by working in our hearts, and
incorporating us into Christ, it effects likewise that we by the
participation of the body and blood of Christ, become flesh of his flesh and
bone of his bones, especially when it stirs up faith in us whereby we
embrace, and lay hold on Christ, and acknowledge him to be true God and Man,
and so a perfect Redeemer and Savior.

DOCT. VIII. That our union with Christ is in such sort Spiritual, that it is
notwithstanding true and real.
SO believe we this other union also, no less almost then the former (if I may
so speak) to be Spiritual, that yet it is true and real: For by the Spirit of
Christ we, though here on earth, are really and truly joined with the body
blood and soul of Christ now reigning in heaven, and with his divine nature
abiding in us: insomuch that this mystical body which consists of 1 Cor.
12.12.
Christ as the head, and the faithful as the members thereof, is sometimes
simply called Christ. So great is the conjunction of Christ with the faithful,
and the faithful with Christ, that it is not amiss in some sort to say, that,
as the first union was of two natures in one Person, so also this of many
Persons as it were into one nature, according to these texts of Scripture: 2
Pet. 1.4.
That you might be partakers of the divine nature; and, We are members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones.

DOCT. IX. The Confirmation of the opinion foregoing: How close and near this
union is.
FOr as in man, the soul which is one and the same and all in every part, as
well in the head, and every particular member, as in the whole body together,
causes all the members to be united, and grow together into one body under one
head. So also by the power of Christ's Spirit which is one and the same in
Christ, and in all the faithful, it comes to pass, that all of us being both
in body and mind knit together into one Spiritually, become one and the same
body with Christ our head, one body, I say, mystical, and Spiritual; because
it is connected, and compacted together by the most secret bond of the same
Spirit.

CHAP. X. That this union, forasmuch as it is made by the holy Ghost, cannot be
hindered by any distance of place.
FRom whence it follows, that this true and real union (though Spiritual) of
our bodies and souls with the body and soul of Christ, cannot be hindered by
any, no not the greatest distance of place; because it is made by the efficacy
of that Spirit, which reaches from earth even up to heaven, and higher then
so; and knitteth together the members of Christ here on earth, with the head in
heaven sitting at the right hand of the Father, conjoyning them together in one
so closely and nearely, as the soul of man does the arms and legs, hands and
feet, and the other members with the head into one body, though the man should
be so great and tall for stature, that having his feet set in the Center of the
earth, his head should reach to heaven even to the ninth spheere. So great is
the virtue and power of the soul. How great then is the virtue, and power of
the holy Ghost, who is true God, and omnipotent!

DOCT. XI. That the holy Ghost, by whom this union is made, is given by Christ,
at the preaching of the Gospel, and the administration of the Sacraments.
WE believe further, that this Spirit, by which Christ knitteth himself unto
us, and us unto himself; his flesh with ours, and ours with his, is
communicated by Christ at his own pleasure, and according to his grace, when,
and where, and after what manner it pleases him, but ordinarily at the
preaching of the Gospel, and the administration of the Sacraments. A visible
testimony whereof there was, in the infancy of the Church, when, as we read,
those which received the Gospel, and were baptized, or on whom hands were
laid, beside the invisible grace of regeneration, received also sundry and
sensible gifts of the Spirit.

DOCT. XII. That this union is the principal end of the Gospel and Sacraments.
FRom whence we easily gather, what is the principal end of the preaching of
the Gospel, and the administration of the Sacraments: to wit, this: Our
communion with Christ the Son of God, who for us was made flesh, who suffered
and died for us, but now reigns in heaven, and communicates salvation and
life to his elect and chosen: Our Communion with Christ, I say, here inchoate,
and begun, but hereafter to be perfected and finished in heaven: that further
by this our true and real connection and conjunction, with his flesh and blood,
and his whole Person, we may at length be made partakers of eternal life,
which was purchased by him, and resideth or abides in him.

DOCT. XIII. That this union is not imaginary, nor made by participation of
gifts only, but also by communication of substance.
BUt, for this cause do we call this our present incorporation with Christ,
true, real, and substantial: to meet with the error of those which think
that the union which we hold is but only imaginary; and therefore false: or
if true; that then it is only by the participation of Spiritual gifts, and
the grace of Christ, without the communication of the substance of his flesh
and blood.

DOCT. XIV. That this union is made by no other means, but only by the holy
Ghost and by faith.
BUt again, lest any should falsely imagine, that we hold this union to be made
with the flesh of Christ, either, as if it were here really present upon earth,
by any Physical or natural contact, whether gross or subtle, as all
siensible things are united with the sense; some after a more gross, and
others after a more subtle manner: Or else with the same flesh, as it is
abiding in heaven, by Species in the mind, which the Philosophers call
Intelligible, as all things Intelligible are united with the Intellect, which
receives them by certain images, and mental representations: Therefore we
add further the manner how this union and Incorporating is made, to wit, by
the Spirit of Christ really communicated unto us, and abiding in us, and
kniting us unto Christ, and stirring up faith in us to embrace and lay hold on
Christ.

DOCT. XV. The confirmation of both: To wit, that this union is essential; and
that it is made by the holy Ghost only and by our faith.
BOth these, to wit, that this our union is essential, and that it is made by
the holy Ghost only, and by our faith; the holy Scripture does fully and
clearly show unto us. The Apostle writing to the Ephesians. ^.14, 15, 16.
Ephesians, forasmuch as, Christ, having abolished enmity, and broken down the
wall of partition, has reconciled both unto God, and one with another, two
most diverse people, both Jews and Gentiles; and forasmuch as all are ingrafted
into Christ, and regenerated by the holy Ghost: Therefore doubted not to say,
that both were made, not One people (as one would have thought) but, to show
how near this union is, One new man, even in Christ. Therefore, seeing that we
are all regenerated by one and the same Spirit and live as it were by one and
the same soul, and are united unto one head, which is Christ: Not without just
cause are we all called, One new man. And again in the same Ephesians. 4.15.16.
Epistle describing our most near and essential incorperating into Christ, he
compateth him unto the head and us unto the members compacted and joined
together unto the head by joints, nerves, and ligaments: which draw their life
and motion from the head. This similitude is very ordinary and frequent in
the Scripture: so that from hence we may easily and cloarly understand, what
and how great this our union is with Christ, by reason of his Spirit which
dwells in all the regenerate. For the same cause also, the same Ephesians. 2.20.
etc.
Apostle compares Christ unto a soundation; and all the faithful unto stones
(but living stones, as it likewise the soundation, that they may grow up, and
receive increase from him) built upon the foundation: (...).
In whom all the building fitly framed together grows unto an holy Temple in
the Lord 22.
through the Spirit. Which also, before the Apostle, Matt. 16.18.
Christ himself did more then once, making himself the foundation; and his
Church, the building: which rests really upon the foundation, and is
unseparably joined unto it. Hither also pertains that place, where Christ
calls himself John. 15.1, etc.
the vine, and us the branches: which drawing life and sap from the vine do
both live and bring forth good fruit. The same thing also is declared by the
similitude of an Romans 11.17.
Olive Tree, into which the faithful, being as boughs cut off from the
wild-olive-tree, are grafted; that they may bring forth good Olives. And this
ingrafting is by the holy Ghost and by faith: whereupon in the Epistle to the
Philippians it is called the Phil. 2.1.
fellowship of the Spirit; and in the Epistle to the Ephesians Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by faith. Neither is it obscure that the
Apostle calls the incorporating of the Church with Christ, and Christ with the
Church, and every faithful member thereof, a Spiritual marriage, speaking
after the manner of the Prophets, in which two are made one flesh. Genesis 2.24
They two shall be one flesh, said God: But the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.32.
This is a great Mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. And
this we often meet with all which John writes concerning this union, and the
Spirit whereby it is made, and known. 1 John 4.17.
Hereby (says he) know we that we dwell in him and he in us: because he has
given us of his Spirit. Therefore he dwells in us, and we in him by the same
holy Spirit, which is in him, and in us. Hither may we add also That to the
Romans, Romans 2.9.
If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Now the Apostle
understood those to be Christ's, which are his true and lively members.

DOCT. XVI. A conclusion, that this union is essential; and, that it is made
only by the holy Ghost, and our faith.
BY these and the like places of holy Scripture we are persuaded, and doubt not
but Christ and his Apostles would signify unto us, That the communion which
all the faithful, both great and small, have with Christ, and with his flesh
and blood, is true and real: and yet not made any other way but by the power
and bond of the Spirit. And therefore, although it be secret, full of
mysteries, and Spiritual; because it is made by the Spirit and by faith: Yet
we are not to doubt but by reason of the same Spirit it is as true and
essential, as that is between the man and the wise which are made (...) flesh;
and that, between the foundation (...) the stones which are built thereupon;
and that, between the tree and the boughs; between the vine and the branches;
and last of all that, between the head and the members which are knit together
with ligaments and sinews* and live and work by one and the same soul:
Insomuch that we can have no greater union with Christ, whilst we are in this
mortal flesh.

DOCT. XVII. The confirmation of the same by another similitude, and even out
of Philosophy it self.
CErtainly, If one and the same soul were in all men: it would cause
innumerable Persons to be but one man: As from one and the same essence in
three divine Persons, divines conclude that there is but one God. And this
would appear much more to be true, if those many men should have but one head,
whereunto to be annexed, and from whence alone to derive sense and motion. What
wonder then if the holy Spirit, which is but one in Christ and in all the
godly, knit us so really together, that we become one with him, and with our
selves; Yea, that we all become one new man in Christ our head? For in two
respects says the Apostles that all the faithful are One new man, to wit,
Epes. 2.15.
in respect of one Spirit by which, and one head unto which we are annexed and
knit.

DOCT. XVIII. That from our union with Christ the participation of the benefits
of his death and resurrection are derived unto us.
FRom this our communion with Christ follows, and thereon depends the
participation of his benefits, and salvation which he has purchased for us,
and has residing and abiding in his flesh and blood: For, as vine branches
cannot suck their nourishment from the vine; nor boughs from the tree; nor
members of the body, from the head; nor living stones from the foundation,
unless they have a true and real dependence and connection with their
foundation, head, tree, and vine, and abide in them: So neither can we, from
Christ our head, foundation, tree, and vine; unless we be truly ingrafted
into him by the holy Spirit, and be made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones. And they do us great injury, that therefore say we deny the true
participation of Christ's flesh and blood, and hold only the participation of
his gifts and benefits: because we do not admit, that which ought not to be
admitted, that Christ true body does really pass through our mouths into our
bodies. As if the communion which is made by the holy Spirit and by faith, were
not true and essential; whereas nothing can more nearely join diverse
substances and natures together into one, then the holy Spirit: As we see it in
the incarnation of the Son of God; and the creation of man compounded of soul
and body. Certainly, if the communion with the body and blood of Christ, which
is made by the Spirit only and by faith, be not true and saving, unless the
body and blood pass through our mouths into our bodies: Christ has not
provided well for his Church. And further he would have the same to be made at
the receiving of the Gospel, as also in Baptism; As 1 John 1.3.
John witnesses of the first; and the 1 Cor. 12.13.
Apostle, of the second. This is our confession concerning communion with
Christ in general, and concerning the dispensation of salvation and life,
which is in Christ Jesus.

DOCT. XIX. Errors condemned.
WE therefore disallow and mislike the error of those, which teach that by the
( opus operatum, or) performance of the outward work, without faith, and true
union with Christ, remission of sins may be obtained, and salvation
communicated unto men. But we condemn for blasphemy the doctrine of those,
which teach that remission of sins, and salvation may be obtained by works
not commanded by God, but invented by men; and those such as are full of
superstition, and idolatry. We condemn likewise those, which making no
account of the ministry of the Word, teach that salvation may be had, as well
without, as by the hearing of the Word and the receiving of the Sacraments: and
likewise those which contend that the children of infidells as well as the
faithful in their mothers wombes, are made partakers of Christ's benefits.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning the Gospel, and the abrogation of the Law by the
Gospel.
FOrasmuch as the Gospel in the first place, and then also the Sacraments, to
wit, Baptism and the Lords supper, are the outward instruments and means, by
the lawful use and administration whereof, our Redeemer and Lord Jesus Christ
is wont to offer and dispense unto the would the benefit of redemption, and
remission of sins, and communicate himself unto us his chosen by the power of
his Spirit; and likewise incorporate us into himself and so make us really
partakers of salvation and life which he has in himself: Therefore we have
studied and endeavored briefly and plainly to declare unto the Church of God,
what is our faith, and belief concerning them.

DOCTRINE I. What the Gospel is.
AS concerning the Gospall then, according to the signification received and
used in the Church, we believe that it is none other but the heavenly Doctrine
concerning Christ, preached by Christ himself and his Apostles, and contained
in the books of the New Testament, declaring unto the world most welcome and
joyful tidings: to wit, that mankind, by the death of Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, is redeemed: so that for as many as repent and believe in
Jesus Christ, free pardon and forgiveness of sins, salvation, and eternal
life is prepared. For which cause it is worthily called by the Apostle, the
Gospel of our salvation. Ephesians. 1.13.


DOCT. II. That the Gospel was indeed promised by the Prophets, but published
by the Apostles.
FOr though this mystery was revealed unto the Fathers, even from the
beginning of the world, and the Prophet also spoke concerning it: yet they
preached promises Evangelicall, that is, of the Gospel, which the Jews
retained amongst themselves, rather then the Gospel it self, which was to be
published to all nations. For they prophesied and foretold that which was to
come, but did not declare any thing present or past: As the Apostle teaches in
the Epistle to the Romans 1.2.
Romans; and Peter in his first 1 Pet. 1.10.
Epistle.

DOCT. III. That the Fathers, by faith in the promises concerning Christ the
Redeemer to come, were saved: as well as we, which now believe the Gospel.
YEt we doubt not, but that the Fathers which believed the promised of the
Gospel concerning the coming of Christ, and his breaking the Serpents head,
were saved: as well as we which now are saved by faith in the Gospel declaring
unto us that Christ is come, and that he has redeemed the world. As the
Apostles abundantly teaches both in other places, and especially in the
Epistle to the Romans 4.3.
Romans, concerning Abraham; and in the Hebr. 11.1.
Epistle to the Hebrews, concerning all others. That it is high blasphemy to
say that the Fathers had only promises of earthly things, and that they
received them; but not heavenly, as remission of sins and eternal life. For
what the Gospel is to us, properly taken: the same were the promises of the
Gospel to them; that is, Romans 1.26.
The power of God unto salvation to every one that believes.

DOCT. IV. That the Doctrine of the Gospel for the substance thereof, is most
ancient; yea eternal.
FRom whence we understand, that the Doctrine of the Gospel as concerning the
substance thereof, is not new, but most ancient, being preached to the Fathers,
even from the foundation of the world: That the Gospel not without good reason
is called by John the Revel. 14.6.
Everlasting Gospel.

DOCT. V. What the parts of the Gospel be, and how many.
THe Gospel may be reduced to three heads concerning our duty: The first is,
Act. 20.21.
Repentance, toward God: The second, faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: The
third, care Matt. 28.20.
to observe all things whatsoever Christ has commanded us.

DOCT. VI. The explication of the opinion foregoing.
FOr the Gospel propounding and setting before us Christ with the full grace
and mercy of God, with full expiation and remission of sins, with perfect
salvation and eternal life, requires only three things of us. The first is,
that grieving heartily and truly for the sins committed in the whole course of
our life past, we desire of God even from our hearts and souls to change and
renew our minds, wills, and affections, to the obedience of his divine will,
earnestly studying for it and begging it of him by our prayers. The second is,
that by faith laying hold on Christ with all the treasure of his merits, we
believe certainly and without all manner of doubting, that all our sins, of the
grace and mercy of God for Christ's sake only, are pardoned and forgiven for
ever; that we are received into grace, and made the Sons of God, and heirs of
eternal life. The third and last is, that being persuaded of the free pardon
and forgiveness of our sins and eternal salvation, for Christ's sake and
merits, we afterward labor to keep and observe all things whatsoever Christ
has commanded us, for the glory of God, and the salvation of our neighbor:
keeping faith always even unto the end, and steadfastly believing that
whatsoever sins we commit in our new obedience are not imputed to us, and that
for Christ's sake only: as also, that, by the imputation of Christ's most
perfect obedience, righteousness, and holiness, unto us; our imperfect
obedience is made perfect, and so reputed, and accepted for most perfect, in
the sight of God. The commandments of Christ may be all reduced unto three:
That denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live SOBERLY (in
respect of our selves) RIGHTEOUSLY (in respect of our neighbor) and GODLY Tit
2.12.
(in respect of God) in this present world: 13.
Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our savior Jesus Christ. This we believe to be the sum of all. that Christ
requires of us in the word of his Gospel: and therefore, that they are true
Gospellers* and Christians indeed, whosoever with studious care and diligence
give themselves wholly to the observation hereof.

DOCT. VIII. In what things most especially the Gospel differs from the Law.
ANd it appears sufficiently by what has been said, That we confound not the
Law with the Gospel: For, although we confess that God is the Author of the
Law, as well as the Gospel; and again, that Romans 7.12.
the Law of it self is holy and just, and good, as well as the Gospel: yet we
believe that there is a great deal of difference between them; and that not
only, because that was delivered to the Jews only; whereas the Gospel
belongs unto all nations: nor yet only, because that was temporatie, and to
last only until Christ; whereas the Gospel is everlasting: not yet only,
because, that was delivered by Moser, and expounded by the Prophets, whereas
the Gospel was brought unto us by Christ, and published unto the whole world by
the Apostles: Not for these reasons only, I say, but more especially for these
which follow: First, because the matters of the Law consists in commandments,
with curses irrevocable added thereunto, if they be broken in the least part.
It has indeed the promises not only of earthly and temporal blessings; but
also of heavenly and eternal: but yet they are all with a condition of most
perfect righteousness and obedience, and not of free grace. But the Gospel is
properly the message of glad tidings, freely setting before us Christ our
Redeemer, freely pardoning and forgiving sins, and saving us: not requiring any
thing at our hands for the attainment of salvation, but only true faith in
Christ, which we cannot have without repentance together with a care to do Gods
will, as we declared before. Secondly, because the Law did not enable us for
the doing of that which it required; for it gave us no power whereby we might
be saved* and so was insufficient, and 1 Cor. ^.6.
a killing letter, and 7.
the ministration of wrath and death, rather stirring up sin, then taking it
away. But the Gospel requires no more of us, then it enableth us to perform,
and so communicates really unto us what is offered: forasmuch as the holy
Ghost works thereby in the elect, at the preaching thereof, stirring up in
them true faith, whereby to lay hold on Christ when he is offered unto them,
and together with him everlasting salvation. For Romans 10.17.
faith comes by hearing of the Gospel: but obedience comes not by hearing the
Law: For the holy Ghost at the hearing of the Law did not enable them to keep
it, whosoever heard the same: whereas it does stir up faith in the elect at
the hearing of the Gospel. For which cause, as the Law is called the killing
letter, so the Gospel is called the quickening Spirit, or the 2 Cor. 3.6.
Spirit giving life: And therefore it is a true and effectual instrument and
means unto salvation to every one that believes. From whence follows a third
difference, which is this, that the Law was not wrote in the hearts of men: but
in tables of stone, so that there was not any change in men wrought thereby:
But the Gospel is wrote in the hearts of the elect by the holy Ghost, and
works in them 2 Cor. 3.18.
a change, and true renovation, being used by the holy Ghost as an instrument
of our sanctification and salvation.

DOCT. VIII. That by the Gospel, the Law of Moses is partly taken away, and
partly not.
IT appears manifestly by what has been said, what our faith is concerning the
abrogation of the Law, by the Gospel. We believe first, that by the Gospel,
forasmuch as it declares unto us the fulfilling of all things, which were
foretold by types and figures in the old Testament, concerning Christ (as we
showed before in the 11. Chap.) The Law concerning Ceremonies and sacrifices,
and all the external Mosaicall worship is absolutely abrogated, according to
that of the Apostle teaching, that they were Hebr. 9.10.
imposed on them until the time of reformation: and that of the Evangelist,
that John 1.17.
the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ. Secondly,
Forasmuch the Gospel is one instrument of the holy Ghost, whereby we are
ingrafted and united unto Christ, and made partakers of redemption and
salvation (as we showed in the 12. Chap:) In that regard we confess that even
the Moral Law also, as concerning the curse denounced against the
transgressors thereof, is by the Gospel of Christ abrogated: according to that
of the Apostle, Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. A sign whereof,
this is, that they ibid.
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. But forasmuch as the Doctrine
of the Gospel requires repentance of us, and sanctity of our whole life, and
that we live soberly, righteously, and godly: In this regard, I say, it takes
not away the Moral Law: For it agrees altogether with the Doctrine of the
Gospel concerning eschewing vices, and following after virtues. Thirdly, and
lastly, forasmuch as Christ by his Gospel has not taken away the Political or
civil Laws, by which commonwealths are governed, which are agreeable to the
Law of nature: Therefore we leave it free to Magistrates to use the Laws which
were delivered to the commonwealth of the Jews, and to govern their people
thereby, considering that there are none more equal and just then they,
Wherefore, if there be any one that dare presume to say that by the Gospel of
Christ the government of commonwealths is overturned or troubled, he offers
great injury to the Gospel of Christ. Concerning the Gospel of Christ, this is
our faith.

DOCT. VIII. Errors.
WE therefore hold, that the Antinomi, or the professed enemies of the Law are
to be condemned, and whosoever do dislike the Moral Law, and banish it out of
their Churches, as if it were either contrary to the Gospel, or nothing
pertaining unto Christians: and further those, which mislike and find fault
with Magistrates forgoing about to bring in Political Laws of Moses into their
commonwealths.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the Sacraments of the New Testament.
BEcause God, for the perfecting of our communion with Christ, wherein the
participation of salvation wholly consists, has been pleased to use not
only the word of the Gospel alone by it self, but also enternall signs fit
for that purpose, and joined together with the word, which two are required to
the constituting of a Sacrament: Therefore in the next place, after our
confession concerning the Gospel, we think good to add a brief, and
perspicuous Sacraments, and that agreeable unto the holy Scripture, and the
first principles of our Christian faith.

DOCTRINE I. What we understand by the name of Sacrament.
WE know that a Sacrament is properly an holy oath, or promise on both parts,
that is, made between God and his people: not simply; but also established by
certain holy rites and ceremonies: As it appeared manifestly in the Sacrament
of circumcision, between God and Abraham; and in Baptism, which succeeded in
the place of circumcision, between Christ and us. So a Sacrament is by the
Fathers taken often for the whole Sacramental action, whether of Baptism, or
of the Lords Supper: in which there goes before a promise on both parts,
confirmed after an holy manner by external rites, signs, and seals, and also
by the blood of Christ. But in after time by the name of Sacrament, they
understood by a figure called Synecdoche the rites only, or the visible signs
added unto the word. And this is another signification which prevailed and had
place in the Church. Now we, according to the signification and use of the word
in the Church, call a Sacrament, not the word only, nor the outward element
only, but the element, or the visible signs, joined with the word of the
Gospel, according to Christ's institution. Whereunto agrees that of St.
Augustine, Augustine.
The word is added unto the element, and so it becomes a Sacrament.

DOCT. II. Whereof the Sacraments are Sacraments.
NOw, because every Sacrament is the Sacrament of some thing: we say that this
thing is that, which the word of the Gospel does signify; to wit, the grace of
God in Christ, or rather Christ himself together with grace and salvation
placed in him. For Christ is the sum of the Gospel: and, that we may have
communion with him: as was the word, so likewise were the Sacraments instituted
and ordained, to put us in mind of him, and to raise up our thoughts unto him.
And so, what is outwardly exhibited unto us, we say, it is a sign of that
which is inwardly proposed and set before us to be received: and, that which is
done without, is a sign of that which the holy Ghost inwardly works in our
hearts.

DOCT. III. What the parts are whereof a Sacrament consists.
FRom hence also we come to understand what the parts are, whereof a Sacrament
is properly said to consist, to wit, the word and the sign, or outward visible
element: but yet with a relation unto the thing by them signified, and
represented, and whereof they are a Sacrament. For the thing, whereof any thing
is a Sacrament, is not it self neither can it be a Sacrament, or any part of a
Sacrament: Forasmuch as every Sacrament is a Sacrament of another thing which
is different, and diverse from it. But yet we do not simply and absolutely
separate the thing it self from the Sacrament: neither do we deny, but that the
Fathers, and many other learned and godly men do in the name of Sacrament
comprehend the thing it self, whereof any thing is a Sacrament: As by the name
of Baptism is not only the outward ablution or washing of water understood;
but also therein is contained the inward purging of the conscience from sin,
and likewise regeneration: Therefore we embrace that saying of Ireneus
concerning the Eucharist, or the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that it does
consist both of an earthly and heavenly matter: neither do we, when we speak of
the Sacraments, abstain from such manner of speaking: yet in this sense, not
that the thing signified is properly a part of the Sacrament; for it is rather
that, unto the participation whereof the Sacraments do lead us: But, because
the Sacrament has a mystical relation unto it; so that by the tie of this
relation the earthly matter is knit together with the heavenly. And thus we
reconcile the sayings of diverse Fathers, and many other learned men, which may
seem to jarre one with another: whereas they were all of one and the same mind
every where: some calling the Sacraments simply by these and the like names,
Signs, Figures, Resemblances, or Representations, Types, Antitypes, Signets,
Seals, Ceremonies, and the Visible Word; others saying: that they consist of an
earthly and heavenly matter: which how it is to be understood we have declared
already, all of them oftentimes after the manner of holy writ, calling them by
the names of those things, whereof they are Sacraments: whereas yet
notwithstanding they understood and professed that there were three things to
be considered in the Sacraments, that is to say, the Word, the signs added
unto the Word, and the things whereof they are signs.

DOCT. IV. The reasons why the Lord would have signs also added to the Word of
the Gospel; and why they are called the Visible Word.
WE believe also, and confess ingenuously, that the visible signs by Gods
institution were added unto the word, and that they were to be added, for the
better and surer confirmation of the word in our minds: it being the manner
and custom almost in every nation, to affix and set to their seals to their
last wills and Testaments, as also to diverse other writings. Which also is the
reason, why the outward signs, which fall under our sense, are called by St.
Augustine the Visible Word: to wit, because they were instituted and ordained,
and likewise added unto the word to this end, that they should do the same
thing which the Word does, that is to say, that, what the Word signifies unto
our ears, the same also should they represent unto confirm unto us the Word
and promises of God: And that, as by the Word faith is stirred up in our minds,
so also by them as outward signs, and seals, it might be confirmed, sealed,
and every day more and more increased: And last of all, that as the Word, so
also the holy signs might become as instruments for the holy Ghost to use for
the bringing us to have communion with Christ, or for the making us to grow
together in it. And we make no doubt or question at all, but all this was
instituted and appointed by God for our weakness and ignorance, and for the
imbecillitie of our faith: that it might be supported not only by the Word,
but also by the outward signs: Forasmuch as faith it is, by which properly it
comes to pass that we embrace and lay hold on Christ, and grow up together in
him.

DOCT. V. That where the Words of institution are not recited; there is no
Sacrament: And, that without the use thereof, the outward signs are no more
then what they are of their own nature.
ANd, as we believe, that the signs are added unto the Word, not for
superstition, but for the greater confirmation of our faith: so also we
confess, that the Word is necessary in the administration of the Sacraments,
not for incantation, but for to stir up faith in our hearts. And thereupon,
when the Words of Institution are not so recited or rehearsed as that they may
be heard and understood, for the stirring up of faith: There, we deny any true
Sacrament to be; and conclude, that without the due and lawful use thereof,
the outward signs are no Sacraments, but merely that, which they are of their
own nature, and no more. For by the Word only are the outward elements or
signs set a part for an holy use, which setting apart is by many called the
Consecrating, or Sanctifying thereof: And so they become Sacraments; according
to that of St Augustine, August.
The Word is added unto the element, and so it becomes a Sacrament: But yet so
must it be added that it may be understood and believed.

DOCT. VI. That the Sacraments are not bare and naked signs.
THerefore we believe that the Sacramental signs are not only bare notes or
marks to distinguish us from all other people, which are aliens and strangers
from the true Church; nor yet only badges or cognizances of Christian
society, by which we may make profession of our faith, and give thanks unto
God for the great benefit of our redemption: But also that they are instruments
by which, whilst the actions and benefits of Christ are represented unto us,
and recalled unto our memory, the promises of God are sealed unto us, and
faith also stirred up in our hearts: the holy Ghost also ingrafting us into
Christ, and preserving us being once ingrafted, and making us every day more
and more to grow up into one with him: that so being endued with greater faith
toward God, more ardent charity toward our neighbor, and the gift of true
mortification of our selves, we may lead a life, as near as it is possible,
according to the most perfect pattern of Christ's life, in all Spiritual joy
and gladness: till at length we received up to live with him in heaven a most
holy, happy, and blessed life, for ever and ever.

DOCT. VII. What the Sacraments of the New Testament are.
WE confess also with St. Augustine, August. De Doctrine. Christ. lib. 3. cap.
9.
that the Sacraments by Christ delivered unto us are for number, few; for
performance, most easy; for understanding, most full of majesty: First, For
number, few; because they are but two only, Baptism, and The Lords Supper.
Secondly, For performance, most easy; because there is nothing in Baptism, or
in the Lords Supper, which may not easily be performed and received, nothing
troublesome, nothing unpleasant, nothing strange, or abhorring from the manners
of men. Last of all, For understanding, most full of majesty; because,
although the things which are seen with our eyes, are vile; yet the things
signified and represented unto our minds, to be understood thereby, and to be
considered, are most full of majesty, divine, and heavenly, pertaining unto
everlasting salvation.

DOCT. VIII. That for the worthy receiving of the Sacraments there is need of
faith and understanding.
FRom whence also we come to understand, that for the worthy receiving of the
Sacraments, the action of the mind also is required, attention, and faith:
whereby we may understand and apprehend what is thereby signified, and
exhibited unto us; as also Christ himself teaches, where concerning his Supper
he says, Luke 22.19.
This do in remembrance of me. And the 1 Cor, 1.42.
Apostle duly waighing and considering with himself the Words of Christ,
expounds them at large. Whereunto belongs that also, Lift up your hearts: For
there are set before us things majesticall, heavenly, and divine, to be
understood by the mind, and to be received by faith.

DOCT. IX. That the thing it self of the Sacrament is seriously and truly set
before all: although all do not truly partake thereof; but the elect and
faithful only.
BUt, although all men come not to the receiving of the Sacraments with true
faith and understanding: Yet, as the visible signs are exhibited unto all that
do profess the name of Christ, so also we believe that the things themselves
which by the Sacraments are signified, are also seriously and truly by Christ
offered unto all; and therefore, that by reason of the infidelity, and
unbelief of those which receive only the visible signs nothing at all is
detracted from the integrity and perfection of the Sacraments: Forasmuch as
that depends only on Christ's Institution, and the truth of his Words.

DOCT. X. That, whilst the Sacraments are administered, the holy Ghost works
effectually in the faithful: and therefore, that they do not only receive the
bare visible signs; but also partake of the thing thereby signified.
BUt again, although, whilst the Sacraments are administered, the Spirit of
Christ works not effectually in all men, as neither does he whilst the Word
is preached; but all through their own fault, because they bring not with them
faith and understanding: Yet we believe nevertheless that he works
effectually in all the elect and believers; forasmuch as he conferreth and
bestows faith upon them by the preaching of the Word, and every day more and
more confirms them in it by the receiving of the Sacraments, and brings
them to have communion with Christ, and causes them to grow up together in it:
And therefore we confess that they are in Baptism truly washed from their
sins, and purged by the virtue of Christ's blood; and, that in the Supper they
are nourished and fed with the body and blood of Christ.

DOCT. XI. That Christ is the Author and true dispenser of the Sacraments.
ANd, as we acknowledge only one Author of the Sacraments: So also we
acknowledge one only true dispenser of the same, to wit, our Lord Jesus
Christ: who dispenses indeed the outward elements and visible signs by the
ministry of man, Instrumentally; but himself does truly and properly
communicate the matter it self of the Sacraments, or the thing signified, by
himself and his holy Spirit efficiently. According to what John the Baptist
said, that he indeed did Baptize Matt. 3.11.
with water; but Christ with the holy Ghost. And therefore as it is lawful for
no man to institute and ordain new Sacraments, so neither can any man boast
that he does truly and properly either purge the Consciences of men from sin,
or feed them with the true body and blood of Christ; but only (as they use to
say) Ministerially.

DOCT. XII. That the Sacraments received by the faithful are not vitiated and
polluted by the ill lives and conditions of the Ministers thereof.
BUt, if Christ alone be not only the true Author, but dispenser also of the
Sacraments: From hence it is easily gathered, that the Sacraments received by
the faithful are not vitiated and polluted by the corruptions, and ill lives
of those whose Ministry God uses; but, that they receive them worthily, and
are made partakers of the thing signified and offered by the Sacraments. For,
T^it. 1.15.
Unto the pure all things are pure and, Ephesians. 3.17.
By faith Christ with all his treasures dwells in the hearts of the believers.

DOCT XIII. That grace is not tied and bound to the Sacraments.
UPon the same grounds and foundations we are confirmed in the opinion which is
received and maintained by all the godly, That grace is not tied and bound unto
the Sacraments, to wit, so that he which receives them, does necessarily, yea
though he want faith, receive also the thing it self thereby signified and
offered: as if ( ex opere operato as they speak) upon the outward act of
receiving the Sacraments barely considered a man might attain unto the
signified. For Christ does not absolutely say, Mark 16.16.
He that is Baptized shall be saved, but he says in the first place, He that
believes and is, etc. And Act. ^.13.
Simon Magus also was Baptized; but yet he attained not unto the thing it self
signified by Baptism: For, as Peter witnesses, he was still 23.
in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, being held entangled
in diabolical malice, and so having no part in the Kingdom of Christ. And
August.
Many there are which eat the bread of the Lord, but not the bread the Lord.
For as they which hear the Gospel preached unto them are not made partakers of
remission of sins, unless they repent them of their sins past, and believe in
Christ: so neither are they which receive the Sacrament made partakers of those
things which are thereby represented and offered unto them unless unto to
outward receiving there be also added repentance and faith.

DOCT. XIV. That by the unworthiness of the receivers, the power and virtue of
the Sacraments is neither taken away nor diminished.
NEither yet do we therefore take away or diminish the power and efficacy of
the Sacraments given thereunto by God: Forasmuch as we confess that it depends
upon faith, and the power of Christ who instituted, and ordained the
Sacraments; and, that it is neither taken away nor diminished by the
unworthiness of the administers thereof, or the receivers. For, as the Gospel
by it self retains always it is own power, efficacy, and signification,
although all men do not understand it; and again, as it has power to exhibit
what it offers to be received, although all men be not made partakers
thereof: So also is it with the Sacraments, which are the visible Word. For, as
the Word by it self always is the power of God unto salvation, but not so to
every one that hears, unless he also does believe: So also the Sacraments
are instruments which the holy Ghost uses always efficacious unto salvation,
although none partake of the efficacy thereof, but only those which do truly
believe. For which cause the Apostle is not afraid to say that all those which
were Baptized, were 1 Cor. 6.11.
washed, sanctified, and justified, although he knew that there were many
hypocrites amongst them. For by such manner of speaking is signified, the
efficacy by God given unto the Sacraments, and what we are to believe
concerning the efficacy thereof, unless perhaps our own hypocrisy be an
hindrance and impediment thereunto. In which sense if any one shall say that,
whosoever eat the bread of the Lord, they are made also partakers of the Lords
body, that is, as concerning the power and efficacy of the Sacraments, and the
Author and distributour thereof, there is no impediment or hindrance, but that
the receivers of the Sacraments are made parkers of the thing thereby signified
and offered unto them: We cannot dislike such manner of speaking, if so be that
there be added thereunto such explications and expositions as these, for the
instructing of the ruder sort of people, and for the rooting up out of their
minds the false opinion, which has been along time conceived concerning the
Opus operatum, or the outward work performed at the receiving of the Sacraments.

DOCT. XV. That between the signs and the things signified there is a
Sacramental union: And, what that is.
ANd, although we say, that the thing it self of the Sacraments is not tied and
bound unto the Sacraments, nor included in them either Naturally, or Locally,
or Corporally, or by tie of obligation, as if God simply and absolutely had
promised to give even the things themselves to all the receivers of the
Sacraments, though wanting faith; and further as if he were bound to give them
even unto the impenitent and unbelievers: Yet we do not hereby take away all
manner of conjunction and tie between the things signified and the signs: For
we acknowledge and confess a Sacramental, that is, such a union as may stand
with the Sacraments and the things of the Sacraments. Now this Sacramental
union consists in a kind of mystical and holy relation: inasmuch as the
signs do both signify the things and also offer them to be received; and
again the things are signified by the signs, and exhibited also to be
received: As likewise there is a union between the word signifying and
exhibiting, and the things by the word signified and exhibited. But this
conjunction or union as well of the Sacraments, as of the word with the things
themselves, depends on the will and counsel of God, who did institute them.
For when he instituted the preaching of the Gospel, and the administration of
the Sacraments, he did it to this end and purpose which we have declared: and
that we hearing the word, and beholding and receiving the signs should
presently lift up the eyes of our minds unto the things thereby signified; and
that by the hand of faith we should receive them being offered: and that we
might truly and really be united unto Christ, who by the word is preached unto
us, and by the signification of the Sacraments is as it were pointed at with
the finger. As therefore our conjunction or joining together with Christ is
altogether mystical, as the Ephesians. 5.32.
Apostle teaches: So also we hold that the union as well of the word as of the
Sacraments with the things whereof they are signs and Sacraments, is mystical
and Spiritual.

DOCT. XVI. The Definition of the Sacraments.
TO comprehend therefore much in few words, our judgment is that The
Sacraments are outward signs, and such as fall under our senses; whith are
added unto the word of the Gospel, according to Christ's institution, by reason
of our ignorance and weakness, and for the better stirring up and confirming of
our faith: whereby all men are seriously called; but the elect only and
believers by the holy Ghost inwardly working in their minds, and drawing them,
are brought unto Christ to have true and real communion with him, and with his
flesh and blood, and so are made partakers of all Christ's benefits, which by
the word and outward visible signs are signified and offered: that being
incorporated into Christ they may at length make up the body of the whole
Church according as the Father has preordained unto the praise and glory of
his grace and their eternal salvation.

DOCT. XVII. In sum, what community the Sacraments of the Old Testament have
with the Sacraments of the New.
COncerning the Sacraments of the Old Testament we need not say much; forasmuch
as they are abrogated: But this one thing must not be omitted, to wit, that the
Fathers of old, forasmuch as they had the same God that we have, the same
promises, the same Mediator, the same Spirit regenerating, the same faith, and
the same hope: They had likewise the same Sacraments that we have, if we have
respect unto the substance thereof which is Christ; although for ceremonies
different from ours: And this we the rather hold; because theirs were delivered
to them to the same end that ours are delivered unto us, to wit, that they
might be confirmed in the faith of Christ, and grow up together in communion
with him. To prove what we have said these places of Scripture are very
pertinent, he was, Revel. 13.8.
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. 1 Cor. 10.4.
They did all drink the same Spiritual drink: (for they drank of that
Spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ) And again, Heb.
1^.8.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day, and for ever.

DOCT. XVIII. That there are only two Sacraments of the Christian Church.
WE acknowledge only two Sacraments properly so called, which were always
common to all the Christian Church, by name, Baptism and the Lords Supper:
whereof the one belongs to the beginning of our communion with Christ; and
the other unto the increase thereof. Whereupon the one is called the Laver or
washing of regeneration; and the other, the holy Feast, or the Lords Supper.

DOCT. XIX. Errors condemned.
WE cannot therefore but dislike those, which will have a Sacrament to be even
where no word is heard, but only some visible sign seen. And those likewise,
which make no distinction between the thing of the Sacrament, and the
Sacrament; but will have it to be received into the mouth, as well as the
Sacramental sign: Whereas the thing of the Sacrament is that, which the sign
coming under the judgment of our sense brings unto our mind, but lets
not fall into our hand or mouth. Neither yet do we like those, which in the
Sacraments consider nothing else but what they see with their eyes: Nor yet
those, which will have them to be only badges and cognizances to distinguish
us from other people; or else but bare signs, and no instruments of the holy
Ghost by which he works in us effectually, and confirms us in the communion
of Christ. But we condemn those, which institute new Sacraments, beside those
which Christ himself has instituted: And those also, which tie the grace of
God and the things signified by the Sacraments, unto the Sacraments; in such
manner, as if every one that receives the signs, might truly be said always
to partake also of the thing it self.

CHAP. XV. Concerning Baptism.
BEsides what has been said of the Sacraments in general: we further believe
and confess, as follows, concerning the Sacrament of Baptism in special.

DOCTRINE I. What Baptism is: and what the effects thereof.
Matt. 21.19.
Baptism is the first Sacrament of the New Covenant: by which both all they,
which either having made confession of their sins, and profession of their
faith in Christ, and so likewise in God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, or such as at least we believe for the piety of their 1 Cor. 7.14.
parents do belong unto the Covenant; and they more especially, which truly
belong unto the Covenant, are Ephesians. 1.1^.
sealed in Christ, being as it were 1 Cor. 6.15.
incorporated into him by the holy Ghost, in such manner that they are 1^.
no longer their own, but his, by whom they are said to be received unto the
fellowship of the Covenant, and so become one body with him and all the Saints,
and are made partakers of all Spiritual and celestial benefits: being by this
Baptism as the laver of regeneration Ephesians. 5.26.
cleansed from their sins by the blood of Christ, and Romans 6.4.
buried with him into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by
the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life: For
which cause it is usually called, the Sacrament, or Mark 1.4.
The Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, The seal of faith, the
seal of the Covenant, the laver of regeneration, the washing away of sins, and
the Sacrament or seal of newness of life.

DOCT. II. That the power and virtue of Baptism has only place in the elect:
and that they alone are Baptized not only with water, but also with the holy
Ghost.
BUt yet, notwithstanding such excellent things are said of Baptism, and are
truly attributed unto it as an instrument used by the holy Ghost, and so
Sacramentally, all they which are Baptized, are truly said to be made, and to
be such: We believe that it is fulfilled really only in the elect, which are
endued with the holy Ghost, forasmuch as they only do truly believe, and
truly belong unto Christ and his mystical body. And therefore, that all
indeed are Baptized with water, but the elect only with the holy Ghost; and,
that all receive the sign, not all the thing signified and offered by
Baptism, but that the elect only are made partakers thereof.

DOCT. III. What be the integrall parts of the Sacrament of Baptism.
WE believe that, for the making of the Sacrament of Baptism to be entire,
those two things are sufficient which Christ has instituted, to wit, the
simple element of water, with which men are Baptized whether by way of
immersion, or dipping in the water, or aspersion, and sprinkling on the water;
and that form of words which Christ taught his Apostles to use when they
Baptized, Matthew. 28.9.
to wit, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. And
we are fully persuaded, that they neither used any other form of words, nor
added any thing else unto the water.

DOCT. IV. That infants being the children of believing parents are to be
Baptized.
WE believe also with all the ancient Church, that to the Sacrament of Baptism
are to be admitted, not only those which are of ripe years, which repent and
confess their sins, and make profession of their faith in Christ: but also
infants being the children of such parents, forasmuch as we are to judge that
they also belong unto the Covenant, according to the Apostles saying to this
purpose, 1 Cor. 7.14.
That the children of believing parents are holy: especially, considering that
Christ in no place has changed Gods commandment made unto Abraham, concerning
the sealing of the children also of the faithful and believers with the seal
of the Covenant; yea more, considering that Christ has said expressly, Matt.
19.14.
Suffer little children, and forbid them not to come unto me: for of such is
the Kingdom of heaven.

DOCT. V. How far forth Baptism is necessary in the Church, and how far forth
necessary for every one unto salvation.
WE believe that Baptism is altogether necessary in the Church, as a
Sacrament instituted by Christ; and so far forth necessary, that where it is
not when it may, there we cannot acknowledge the Church of Christ to be. But in
such manner do we think it necessary for every one unto salvation, that yet, if
it so happen that any one for defect of a Minister, and not out of contempt, do
depart out of this life without Baptism, we do not therefore believe that he
is damned, and swallowed up of eternal destruction. For the children of the
faithful, and believers are therefore saved, because they are within the
Covenant of God, and so holy. But they which are of ripe years are saved by
true faith in Christ, which certainly cannot stand together with the contempt
of Christ's commandments.

DOCT. VI. That Baptism once rightly administered ought not again to be
repeated.
WE believe farther that, as circumcision was made in the flesh but once only,
so Baptism also, which succeeded in the place of Circumcision, once duly and
rightly administered ought not again to be repeated. Now we understand that it
is duly and rightly administered, when as according to Christ's institution,
first the Doctrine of the Gospel is premised, concerning the true God, Christ,
and his office: and then men are Baptized with water, and that by a lawful
Minister, Matt. 28.19.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. For Christ
also died but once, and was buried: and we are Romans 6.3, 4.
Baptized into his death, and Col. 2.12.
buried with him by Baptism. Neither do we read that the Apostles ever
rebaptised any, but only Paul: and these were such as before had Act. 19.5.
not rightly been Baptized.

DOCT. VII. That the power and virtue of Baptism lasts for ever.
ALthough we come unto the Sacrament of Baptism but once: Yet we believe that
the thing it self of the Sacrament, and the power and virtue thereof lasts
for ever, that is, our ingrafting into Christ, and so the participation of his
benefits the washing away of sins, and regeneration, which every day is more
and more perfected in us by the holy Ghost. For the Apostle says, that Ephesians.
5.26.
Christ has cleansed the Church with the washing of water by the word, 27.
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle. 1 Ioh 1.7.
And the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us [eyery day] from all sin. And
therefore we think that the faithful and believers being content with the
Sacrament of Baptism once received, ought daily, to be put in mind thereof,
and recall it to their memory: as also, into whom they are Baptized, and what
God has conferred upon them by Baptism; and again, what they likewise have
promised unto God: That we may be all every day more and more confirmed in our
faith, and grow up together in our communion with Christ, and be made more
studious and diligent in the performing of our duties. Neither is Baptism
ordained for the remission either of Original sin only, or the sins of
our life past; but also for all the sins of our whole life: As our plucking
out of the water is a sign of new life, not for one day only, but for all the
days of our life, according to the saying of the Apostle, Romans c. 4.
We are buried with him by Baptism [for ever] into death, that, like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk [for ever] in newness of life. We were but once washed outwardly with
water; but the blood of Christ is an everliving spring which daily washes and
cleanses us from all sin.

DOCT. VIII. By whom Baptism ought to be administered.
WE believe, that by whom the Gospel is preached, by the same also ought holy
Baptism to be administered: For to whom Christ said, Mark. 16.15.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel: to the same also he said,
Matt. 28.19.
Go and teach all nations, Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost 20.
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.

DOCT. IX. Errors condemned.
WE therefore condemn all heresies as well old as new, which are or have been
spread abroad concerning Baptism, contrary to sound Doctrine; either by
Seleucus and Hermias, which Baptized with fire; or the Cerdonians and
Marcionites, which used another form of words then that which was prescribed by
Christ, and that in the name of another God then in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: Those which Baptized in the name of John or
any other: The Cataphryges which Baptized even the dead; together with the
Donatists, and Anabaptists, which rebaptised all that come unto them: Those
likewise which deny that infants are to be Baptized; and those also which deny
that Baptism to be true, whereunto there is not added Exorcismes, Spittle,
Salt, and other ceremonies which are the mere inventions of men.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning the Lords Supper.
BY what has been delivered by us, concerning our communion with Christ, the
word of the Gospel, the Sacraments in general, and Baptism in special, it
may be easily known what our faith and belief is concerning the Lords Supper.

DOCTRINE I. That the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is an instrument used by
the holy Ghost for the furthering of our communion with Christ and his Church.
WE believe, that the Sacrament of the Supper is not only a testimony of our
communion with Christ, and so with his flesh and blood, and also with the whole
Church: but also an instrument used by the holy Ghost to confirm and further
the same. The Apostle says as much, 1 Co^. 10.16.
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? The
breaking and the receiving the blessed bread, he calls the communion of the
Lord's body: because, they which eat thereof with actual faith in the Lord
himself, grow up together in communion with the Lord himself, and with his
flesh and blood: Even as they also, which with faith embrace the word preached
by the Apostles, 1 John. 1.3.
have also fellowship with the Apostles; and that fellowship is with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

DOCT. II. A confirmation of the former.
FOr as Baptism is an instrument to inchoate and begin this communion; because
thereby we are born again in Christ: So the Supper was instituted to perfect
the same; because therein we are fed with the flesh and blood of Christ, that
we may grow up in him. 1 Cor. 12.13.
For, as the Apostle says, by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one body,
and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.

DOCT. III. That the furthering and increasing of our communion with Christ, is
the chief end of the Lords Supper.
THe Lords Supper was, indeed instituted for many other ends: to wit, that
being admonished both by words and signs representing the Lords death and the
effusion of his most precious blood, we might call to mind and thankfully
acknowledge the great benefit of our Redemption. For what says the Apostle? 1
Cor. 11.26.
As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death
till he come. To these ends therefore serves it, that we may be confirmed in
our faith about the remission of our sins, that we may be nourished unto the
hope of a blessed resurrection, that we may be stirred up to give thanks unto
God for so great a benefit, and to repent us of our sins, and last of all to
renew our covenant made with God, openly and in the presence of the whole
Church. But because all these tend to no other end but this, that we may be
more and more united unto Christ: and become one with him, and that Gal. 2.20
he may live more effectually in us, and we in him, Ephesians. 5.^0.
being made flesh of his flesh and bone of his bones: Therefore we doubt not,
but the Supper was chiefly and principally instituted, for the increasing and
furthering this our union and communion with Christ, in which is perfected and
consummated our salvation. Whereunto also serves the bread and wine, being
bodily nourishments: That we may know it for certain, that, what the bread and
wine is for the nourishing of our bodies, and the preserving of this natural
life, such also is the flesh and blood of Christ for the feeding of our souls,
and the maintenance of our Spiritual life.

DOCT. IV. Why the bread is called the body of Christ.
FRom whence also we may learn, why Christ calls this bread his body: Not so
as if it were either properly his true body; or as if his body were included in
it: or so, as if it were but a bare and naked sign of his body which was
broken and crucified for us: But because it is a Sacrament thereof (and
Sacraments, as St. Augustine says, are often called by the names of those
things, whereof they are Sacraments) and so is made an instrument of the holy
Ghost, for the communicating unto us the true body of Christ, and for the
confirming us in the communion thereof. As also the Apostle for the same
reason, speaking of Baptism, called it not a sign of regeneration, but the
very laver of regeneration: without doubt, because Ephesians. 5.26.
with the washing of water by the word, as by a fit and convenient instrument,
Christ by the effectual working of his Spirit, does inwardly wash, cleanse,
and regenerate us.

DOCT. V. That the bread is but improperly and figuratively called the true and
substantial body of Christ.
WHerefore we doubt not but in the words of the Supper the true and natural
body of Christ is predicated of the bread: especially, seeing that for
explication sake there is added, Luke 22.19,
Which is given for you: So that this is a most true saying, the bread is
Christ's body, to wit, that true boby which was given for us: but this is
improperly and figuratively: seeing that in very deed the bread was given for
us, but the true body of Christ, whereof the bread is a Sacrament.

DOCT. VI. That the body of Christ is not in the bread really and properly.
FRom hence also we are confirmed in our opinion, that as the bread is not
properly the very body of Christ, but a Sacrament thereof, so likewise the body
of Christ is not really and properly in the bread. For in Sacraments the things
themselves whereof they are Sacraments, are not really included, although they
sometimes receive the names thereof: As it appears plainly in Baptism
without all controversy: in which no man says that either the blood of
Christ, by which we are washed from our sins, or regeneration it self is
included: For neither in the word of the Gospel are included really those
things, which thereby are declared. Now the Sacraments are the visible word.
But neither did Christ say, My body is in this, that is, in the bread; but he
used another far different manner of speaking, to wit This, that is, This
bread is my body. Now if any one list to be contentious, and say that the sense
is all one: It will follow, that if the body of Christ be really in the bread,
the bread likewise is really, properly, and substantially the body of Christ:
which if it be impious once to affirm; then cannot the other be affirmed
without great impiety. And yet we deny not but that Sacramentally it may be
so, according to the sense in which we say, that in the word of the Gospel is
remission of sins, life, and salvation, which thereby are declared and offered
unto us. But, forasmuch as by such manner of speaking the vulgar sort are
commonly drawn to superstition, we judge it fitting to abstain altogether from
them, and we hold it most mete to use such forms of words as we find recorded
in the sacred Scripture.

DOCT. VII. That in the Supper not only the signs? but also the things
themselves signified, are distributed.
NOw without all manner of controversy this we hold for a sure position, and a
certain truth, that, although the very body and blood of the Lord are not, that
is, exist not in their own substance, and really and properly in the bread and
wine, but in heaven: Yet together with the distribution of the bread and wine,
the very flesh and blood also are truly offered unto all to be eaten, and to
be drunk. But how? Not simply, but as the one was delivered unto death for us,
and the other poured forth for the remission of our sins. For the words of
Christ in John 6.51.
John are manifest concerning the eating of his flesh and the drinking of his
blood, if any man will have life in him: and consonant and agreeable unto the
words of Christ are the words of the Apostle also saying, 1 Cor. 11.27.
Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the [true] body and blood of the Lord. Neither do we doubt
but, as Christ openly commanded the bread to be eaten, so also not long after
where he said, this is my body, he secretly commanded that also to be eaten no
less then the bread; but yet each after it is own manner.

DOCT. VIII. That none but the faithful do truly eat the true flesh of Christ.
BUt yet, notwithstanding the flesh of Christ is in the Supper offered unto all
to eat, we believe that they are the true faithful only which do truly eat
thereof. And that for these reasons: First, because they only have communion
with Christ, and so also with his flesh and blood; but others have not; neither
are they made partakers thereof, when they receive the bread. Secondly, because
they only have the Spirit of Christ, by the power of whom alone the flesh of
Christ is truly communicated. Thirdly, because they only bring faith with
them, without which there can be no true receiving and eating thereof. For
neither does Christ himself truly and really exhibit his true body, but to
them who as truly believe that his body was delivered unto death for them, and
his blood poured forth for their sins, as they believe that those words are
true, THIS IS MY BODY.

DOCT. IX. That Hypocrites eat the body of Christ Sacramentally.
MEan while we deny not but that even Hypocrites themselves void of true and
justifying faith, when they receive and eat the bread as the Sacrament of the
Lords body, may be said in some sort to eat the true body of Christ, to wit,
Sacramentally, but not truly and really. As the Apostle in like manner says,
that all the Corinthians, which were Baptized with water, were also sanctified,
and justified, to wit, Sacramentally, as we declared before: although they were
not all truly made such.

DOCT. X. That, of those that eat there are three sorts, and so diverse manners
of eating.
FRom whence we are taught that there are three sorts of men, of whom there may
a question be made, whether they eat the flesh of Christ, or no. The first is
of the^, which receive the bread as common bread, and not as a Sacrament: And
these eat not the body of Christ in any sort; but are true Capernaites: and
their eating is merely carnal. The second is of them, which contrarily eat not
the bread at all (but yet not out of contempt) but believe the Gospel only,
and their eating is merely Spiritual. The third and last sort is of them,
which not content only with believing the Gospel, receive the bread also: not
simply, as the first, as if it were bare and common bread; but as the Sacrament
of the Lords body: whereupon they may be said also to receive and eat
Sacramentally. But, forasmuch as this may be done by the true Godly as well as
by those which are hypocrites and ungodly, but yet after a different manner:
the one sort eating also by faith, and the other without true faith: Therefore
also we say, that the ungodly and hypocrites eat only Sacramentally, but the
true Godly both Sacramentally, and truly, and Spiritually, and so unto
salvation.

DOCT. XI. That by faith only the true body of Christ is eaten.
BUt, whereas we say that the faithful only receive the true body of Christ,
not Sacramentally only, but also truly: we understand it of eating, not with
the mouth of the body, but the mind and Spirit endued with faith, and that by
the operation of the holy Spirit effectually working in us, and applying Christ
wholly unto us. For it is the food of the mind, (as Cyprian. Sermon. de Coena.
Cyprian speaks) and not of the belly. And (as Christ speaks, and St.
Augustine expounds it) Ioh. 6.36.
It is the Spirit that quickens: the flesh profits nothing. And the Apostle
teaches, That 1 Cor. 12.13.
by one Spirit we are all Baptized into one body, and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit. And if all our true union with Christ is by the holy
Spirit, although he with his body be in heaven, and we on earth: It is
necessary also that the eating be after the same manner. For what is it to
eat, but to receive and unite the food unto thee for the nourishment of that
part, for which it is appointed? Now the flesh of Christ (as we said before) is
the food of the mind, and not of the belly. Neither truly do we eat the body
of Christ any otherwise, but as it was delivered to death for us, and made
without blood, as the words do sound, and the breaking of the bread does
represent unto us, and also as the passover and other sacrifices were wont to
be eaten. But now the body lives, and cannot be without blood: As at the first
Supper it was neither dead, nor without blood. To say then, that properly that
body does pass into our bodies, and that by the mouth, it is no less then
sacrilege. To what end also is this, that as the bread is distributed without
the wine, and the wine without the bread; so also the body without the blood
and the blood apart without the body is given in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. But that we may understand, that the body and blood in their very
substance, and as they are in heaven, do not pass through our mouths, but are
received only by a faithful remembrance stirred up in us effectually by the
holy Spirit? For this is the thing which the Lord required, saying, Luke 22.20.
This do in remembrance of me. And again, 19.
This is my body which is given for you. For in so speaking he required faith
of them by which they should believe this, and by believing eat: that is, apply
it to themselves for the food and life of their souls. Wherefore we are verily
persuaded, that they do truly, and not imaginarily, eat the flesh of Christ,
whosoever believe that it was delivered unto death for an expiatorie sacrifice
to cleanse them from their sins, and so believing, embrace with a faithful
mind, and apply it unto themselves. And whosoever thus eat the body of Christ,
as dead, we doubt not but they are more and more joined and knit unto it now
being living and quickening, according to the promise of Christ, who having
first said, Ioh. 6.56.
He that eats my flesh, afterward added; dwells in me and I in him.

DOCT. XII. That the opinion concerning the eating of Christ's body corporally,
is not to be admitted, as being vain and improfitable.
Furthermore, forasmuch as this manner of eating the flesh of Christ, to wit,
by faith, is certain and saving; and that other feigned manner of eating, by
the mouth of the body, cannot be demonstrated unto us out of the holy
Scripture: and again, Though we should grant that there may be some
probability for it, yet it is neither necessary nor behoofull for the soul;
but contrarily does bring with it many mischiefs into the Church, as monstrous
heresies, idolatry, worshipping of idols, stirrs, contentions, schisms,
dissipation of Churches, and so exposes our Christian Religion to be derided by
infidells. We believe that true piety requires, that we rest contented with
that manner of eating, which is by the Spirit and faith, not troubling our
selves about the other, but taking our leave of that, embrace after a godly
manner, and entertain brotherly charity and peace one with another; for which
end also the holy Supper was instituted: For last of all that manner of speech
cannot be granted in any other sense, but as we are wont to say that we have
received with our ears, what we understand by hearing the word with our ears.
But we are altogether against bringing in into Christian Religion such phrases,
or manner of speaking as is strange and not used in holy Scripture, especially
if it be not only unprofitable, but also pernicious.

DOCT XIII. That in the Lord's Supper the flesh of Christ is truly present, but
yet after a Spiritual manner.
FRom what has been said both concerning the true union, and also the true
eating, is easy to be gathered what our belief is concerning the true presence.
We believe then, that if we be truly and really united with Christ, and so with
his flesh and blood; and if we eat his flesh and drink his blood indeed, the
same Christ is present with us, not only by his Deity, but also by his flesh
and blood, to as many as are united with him, and eat his flesh and drink his
blood. For what can be more present to thee then that which thou do truly
eat and drink, and whereunto thou art conjoined by thy substance, and which
again is coupled unto thee by it is substance; and from whence as from the head,
life, sense, and motion is derived unto thee as unto a member?

DOCT. XIV. That as the union and eating is, such is the presence, to wit,
Spiritual.
ANd, as the union as well as the eating is wrought by the Spirit and faith: so
also we are taught and believe that the presence is only Spiritual and in
such men as are endued with the Spirit of God and faith; And therefore that it
cannot be hindered by any distance of place though never so great.

DOCT. XV. That a thing is so far said to be present or absent as it is
either received or not received.
FOr it is not the nearness or distance of place that makes a thing to be
present or absent, but the partaking thereof or the not partaking. The Sun,
we know, although it be far remote and distant from us, is notwithstanding
said, and truly said to be present to our eyes, forasmuch as we are made
partakers of the light thereof: and again, it is said to be absent, when as it
is either by the interposition of clouds concealed from us, or else is gone
down to the other Hemisphere that it cannot be seen of us. August. ad vol.
Epist. 3. Col. 10.
With the blind man the Sun is never present, although it shine upon his eyes
never so much: As the case is likewise with the deaf man as concerning Musical
Harmony; and with the unskilful and unlearned man, as concerning the
understanding of an unknown tongue or scholarlike oration. God also is said to
be far from the ungodly; because he is not received of them by faith:
although by his essence he is not far from any one of us. For in him we live
move and have our being. As far forth therefore as a thing is received or not
received by us, whether it be by way of nutrition, or by the senses, or the
understanding or any other way: so far forth it is said either to be present
or absent.

DOCT. XVI. What manner of presence it is that we deny, and what it is that we
admit.
WHerefore, although we deny that either the substance of the bread is changed,
or annihilated and reduced into nothing, and that the true flesh of Christ
succeeds in the place thereof, and so is made present, that the true
substance of the body of Christ lies hid under the accidents of bread: and
again, Although we deny that the flesh of Christ is really and substantially
present in the bread, which has no union with it but only Sacramental, which
is sounded in the mystical relation: and again, Although we deny that it is
present to the wicked and ungodly which have not that Spiritual communion with
Christ, neither can be said truly to eat his flesh. And further, Although, we
do not admit of such a presence of the body of Christ by which, as at the first
Supper it was present to the Apostles after a visible manner, Yet now it is
present to the faithful upon earth at the time of the Supper, though after an
invisible manner, and not coming within the compass of sense; because this is
not only contrary to the nature of Christ's body, but also manifestly repugnant
to the holy Scripture. And to conclude, Although we detest and abhor that
manner of presence, after which some feign that the flesh of Christ is really
and substantially every where present: Yet we believe and confess such a
presence, as by reason of the things which are truly present to us (because we
are truly made partakers thereof) is no less essential, then it is
Spiritual, and that both for the things which are truly present to us,
(because we are truly made partakers thereof) and also for the manner after
which they are present, and and truly communicated unto us. Moreover, we do in
no wise deny that the flesh of Christ is present in the bread, and his blood in
the wine: but yet we would have it to be understood in such manner, as we are
wont to say, that whatsoever is preached and offered unto us in the word of the
Gospel, the same is also present and contained in it. For the Sacraments are
the visible word: and every thing signified is after some manner in it is sign,
and is wont to be exhibited together with it.

DOCT. XVII. That the presence of Christ's body in the Supper depends not on
ubiquitie, but on the words of Christ.
FRom whence it is manifest that the presence of Christ's body in the Supper,
depends not on ubiquitie (as some have dreamed) but on the words of Christ
working in us to whom it is made present, by the holy Spirit. For had the
Apostles eaten the bread which they received from the hands of Christ, before
they had heard and received by faith these words of his THIS IS MY BODY: they
had certainly received and eaten nothing else but bread: So that for the
establishing of the real presence in the bread, that monstrous and prodigious
opinion concerning ubiquitie, a thing odious to God and his Church, fetched out
of the distinction of the Schoolmen but contrary even to the opinion of the
Schoolmen, had then nothing at all helped them.

And this is our belief and confession concerning the communion, the true
eating, and the true presence of Christ's body.

DOCT. XVIII. What rites and ceremonies are to be used at the celebration of
the Lord's Supper.
COncerning the rites and ceremonies to be used at the celebration of the Lords
Supper, this only we say, That those are most to be approved, which come
nearest to the practice of the Apostles.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning faith, hope, and charity.
DOCTRINE I. That faith is very necessary unto our communion with Christ, and
so that we may be made partakers of salvation.
FOr the ingrafting us into Christ, and the furthering our communion with him,
the holy Spirit indeed uses external means and instruments, to wit, the word
of the Gospel, and the Sacraments: But yet, unless by the same Spirit there be
stirred up in us faith, whereby we may embrace Christ offered unto us with all
his treasures, we must confess that those outward means and instruments are
not at all profitable unto us to salvation. And therefore we doubt not to say
that faith is necessary to unite us unto Christ, and to make us partakers of
his benefits.

DOCT. II. What is understood by the name of faith.
BY the name of faith we understand, not any humane opinion, or persuasion
concerning God, and concerning Christ, Ephesians. 1.^.
but the gift of divine wisdom and prudence stirred up in our hearts by the
holy Spirit upon the hearing of the word: whereby, giving assent unto all the
word of God revealed in the holy Scripture, and the Gospel most especially
which brings us joyful tidings of our redemption wrought by Christ, we do
therein truly understand God and his will, Christ our Mediator and his
benefits; we do certainly know, and most lovingly embrace them; we do upon a
firm confidence which we conceive of the mercy of God, and his infinite love
toward us, call upon him; whereby we are as it were set on fire, and inflamed
to love him again; and are forced as it were to perform faithful service unto
him, and constantly throughout the whole course of our life glorify him by our
good works, and deeds of charity toward our neighbor.

DOCT. III. The confirmation of what has been said concerning faith.
FOr true faith is not from the wit of man, or natural ingenie, but it is the
Phil. 1.29.
gift of God: neither is it given unto all, but to Tit. 1.1. Act. 13.28.
the elect only: neither is it only an opinion uncertain and doubtful but
Heb. 11.1.
the substance of things hoped for firm and sure; and a most certain evidence
of things not seen: neither comes it by the hearing of humane reason, but Romans
10.17.
by hearing the word of God, and relyes only on the authority of Gods word
and promise: neither is it an hypocritical and feigned assent, but sincere and
^ Tim. 1.15.
out of a pure heart: neither is it a temporary persuasion Matt. 13.21.
during for a while, but constant and perpetual, although it be often weakened
by our sins: neither is it blind and rash, but the only Ephesians. 1.8.
wisdom whereby we know God and Christ and heavenly things; and Christian
prudence, whereby we are taught not to abuse that knowledge of God, but to use
it to a right end: neither is it Iam. 2.20.
dead but living and Gal. 5.6.
working by love.

DOCT. IV. That faith comes not all at once, but has it is increase from time
to time.
BUt although the faith of the elect never fails totally and altogether, but
ever lives: yet we never knew it so perfect and complete in any, but that
every day it stands in need of increase: for which the Luke 17.5.
Apostles themselves prayed, and we also at all times ought to pray.

DOCT. V. That confession of the truth cannot be separated from true faith.
WE believe also that true faith cannot consist without a willingness and
readiness to confess the truth ingenuously, as occasion is offered. Romans
^0.10.
For as the Apostle says, With the heart man believes unto righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Wherefore we condemn
libertines and others of the same mold and stamp, who think that it is free for
them in every place, and in all company to dissemble the truth, and to fit
themselves for all religions.

DOCT. VI. That hope arises from faith.
WE believe also that hope arises from faith, and that faith is the foundation
thereof, according to the Apostle, Heb. 11.1.
Faith is the substance of things hoped for. For therefore do we hope for
things to come, and through patience assuredly expect them: because we have the
promise of God which we believe, and whereon we rely.

DOCT. VII. What hope is.
NOw hope is the gift of God, whereby what good things God has promised though
yet neither had Romans 8.24.
nor seen, we do through patience waiting on the mercy of God, for the only
merits of Jesus Christ so assuredly expect as we do certainly believe.

DOCT. VIII. From whence arises the certainty of hope.
FOr the hope of us Christian men arises not from humane promises, neither is
it nourished by humane merits, nor relyeth it thereupon: but being supported
and upheld by the only truth of divine promises confirmed unto us many ways,
and sealed in our hearts; as likewise by the almighty power of God which
promises, declared in general toward all believers, but most especially
manifested in Christ, at what time he raised him up from the dead, and exalted
him above all heavens to sit at his right hand; and again by the obedience of
Christ alone, on whom we believe, and in whom we trust, it does certainly and
constantly expect the complement or accomplishment of our salvation, to wit,
the resurrection from the dead, the glorious coming of the great God, and our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and a full and plenarie possession of an
heavenly inheritance.

DOCT. IX. That from faith arises also love and charity.
WE believe also that true charity arises from true faith: for faith works
by love, and thereby is declared the efficacy of faith. St. Paul teaches that
the Gal. 5.6.
faith in Christ, which is most available is that which works by love: and to
this purpose says St. John, 1 John 4.2.
He that loves not, knows not God. Therefore we do not acknowledge them for
brethren whosoever boast of their Iam 2.15, 16
faith, and yet have not charity: For 26.
faith without works is dead.

DOCT. X. That charity is the gift of God.
WE believe also that even charity it self is the gift of God, whereby we are
so affected that with all our heart we both love again and also glorify God
the Father, and Christ our Redeemer; that we are inclined and moved to good
will and bounty toward all men in general, yea even toward our enemies, but
especially toward the Saints, and those which are of the household of faith.
Therefore we condemn all those, which say that a man by his own natural
powers may love God above all things. 1 John 4.7.
For Love is of God, as says St. John.

DOCT. XI. The signs and tokens of charity.
BUt we do not believe that to be true Christian charity, which agrees not
with that description set down by St. Paul in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, which is after this manner, 1 Cor. 13.4.
Charity suffers long, and is kind: Charity envyeth not: Charity vaunteth
not it self, is not puffed up, 5.6.
Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
7.
thinks no evil; Rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth,
Bearethall things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things, etc.

DOCT. XII. That our communion with Christ and his Church is cherished and
maintained by love and Charity.
WE believe that by true love and charity our communion with Christ and his
Church is very much cherished, increased, and maintained: Forasmuch as love
joyneth together in one the persons loving and the persons loved. For St. John
says, 1 Io^. 4 16.
He that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

CHAP. XVIII. Concerning Repentance.
ALthough all these, faith, hope, and charity, repentance, justification, the
study of good works, and a holy life cannot really be separated one from
another: Yet forasmuch as they depend one upon another, we know that in this
regard they are to be distinguished, and we are to take them into consideration
each apart, and enquire what they are, and what their efficacy is. We think
good therefore briefly to set down our opinion and deliver our judgment
concerning each of them, beginning with Repentance which is the perpetual
individual, and inseparable companion of faith: For, although after
Justification it is perfected every day more and more: yet because no man is
justified without Repentance, and the beginning thereof goes before
Justification it self; Therefore in the first place we are resolved to declare
what our faith and belief is concerning this.

DOCTRINE I. That Repentance is necessary to our Justification and so also to
our Communion with Christ.
WE believe that, to our true partaking of Christ's righteousness, and our
communion with him, Repentance is necessary, whereby, turning from sin and
from the world by change of mind and will, we may turn unto Christ, cleave unto
him, and obtain in him and from him remission of sins, and be endued with his
righteousness and holiness. For the first thing that Matt. 1.4, 15.
John the Baptist and our Savior preached was the Doctrine of Repentance, for
the remission of sins. And Except ye Repent (says our Savior) ye shall all
likewise perish.

DOCT. II. What we understand by the name of Repentance.
BY the name of Repentance we understand two things more especially. The first
is true and serious grief and sorrow for sins committed against God; and that
not so much for fear of punishment due unto sin, as that we have offended God
himself the chiefest good, who is our Father and Maker. The second is a true
change of heart and mind, will and purpose, and of our whole life: This part of
Repentance, which properly is by Christ called Resipiscence, and by the
Prophets, Conversion unto God, and Circumcision of heart, according to the
Doctrine of the Apostle proceeds from the former: for he joyneth both
together, saying, 2 Cor. 7.10.
Godly sorrow works Repentance to salvation not to be repented of.

DOCT. III. That Repentance is the gift of God.
WE believe that Repentance is the gift of God, proceeding from his mere grace,
not due to any meries or preparations of ours: according to what the Apostle
says, 2 Timothy 2.25.
If God peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledgement of the
truth, 26.
And that they may recover themselves out of this snare of the devil: and
according to the Prophet, Ier. 31.18.
Turn thou me; and I shall be turned: For thou art the Lord my God.

DOCT. IV. That, for the stirring up of Repentance in us, God ordinarily uses
the word of the Law and Gospel: and, That the hearing of them both in the
Church is therefore necessary.
GOd, to stir up Repentance in us, does ordinarily use the expounding of the
Law, which discovers our sins unto us, and Gods wrath against sin; as
likewise the preaching of the Gospel, which declares unto us remission of
sins, and the grace of God in Christ: As it is manifest to every godly man
which looks into the holy Scripture: And therefore we judge that in the
Church both are necessary, both the expounding of the Law and the preaching of
the Gospel.

DOCT. V. The sum of the Doctrine concerning Repentance, and in all every
where, and always necessary unto salvation to as many as are of years.
THe sum then of our belief concerning Repentance every where and always
necessary unto salvation to as many as are of years, is this; That Repentance
is the change of heart and mind wrought in us by the holy Spirit, by the word
of the Law and of the Gospel: whereby, Forasmuch as our sins and corruption of
nature are (as the Law teaches) things repugnant to the will of God, and so
stand in need to be purged away (as the Gospel preaches) by the death of the
Son of God; We from our souls lament and bewail them, detest and abhor them,
humbly confessing them before God, and begging pardon for the same, resolving
upon amendment of life, and a constant study of innocence, and all Christian
virtues, and therein exercising our selves diligently all the days of our
life, to the glory of God, and the edifying of the Church.

DOCT. VI. That simply and absolutely we condemn not those parts of Repentance
commonly so called, viz. Contrition, confession of sins and satisfaction.
COncerning the parts of Repentance before spoken of, we list not much further
to dispure, being thoroughly persuaded out of the holy Scriptures that in brief
it consists in a serious and earnest mortyfying of the old man and quickening of
the new: the former whereof has force and efficacy from the death of Christ,
and the latter from his resurrection; the holy Spirit communicating both unto
us. Yet simply and absolutely we condemn not that long ago received and yet
retained distinction in the Schools, of the parts of Repentance, into
contrition, confession of sins, and satisfaction: with this proviso that they
be examined at the rule of the holy Scriptures, and not found to decline from
the godly customs of the ancient Church. As concerning contrition, and
confession of sins likewise both before God, and our brother whom we have
offended; and before all the Church also, when it is expedient; they are not
without testimony in the holy writ. Moreover if any man oppressed with the
weight of his sins, and perplexed with tentations, is desirous to receive
counsel, instruction, and consolation privately, either from a Minister of the
Church, or any other Christian brother that is exercised in the Law of God: we
dislike it not. Neither condemn we those Ecclesiastical satisfactions, of
which Tertullian, Cyprian, and other Fathers speak, which consisted only in
this, that the persons delinquent and offending should give unto the Church
publicly some certain outward testimony of their true Repentance, which they
called doing of penance. But we condemn those superstitions which having since
been superadded, butchering of consciences, and wicked and ungodly opinions:
whereby the benefit of the death and satisfaction of Jesus Christ, who alone
has purged away our sins, and perfectly redeemed us from guilt and
punishment, is much impaired.

CHAP. XIX. Concerning Justification.
DOCTRINE I. That whosoever are endued with the gift of Repentance, are endued
also with the gift of faith, are ingrafted into Christ, and in him justified.
WHosoever Isai. 56.2.
is poor and of a contrite Spirit, and detesteth his sins from the bottom of
his heart, and repents him truly of the evil course of his life past, and
Psalm. 32.6.
prays unto God with sighs and groans for remission of his sins, and Matt.
5.6.
hungreth and thirsts after the true righteousness of Christ: we believe
that, as he is endued by the holy Spirit with the gift of true Repentance
toward God, so also that he endued with the gift of a lively faith, and knit
unto Christ his head as a member thereunto ordained from eternity: and that
therefore in him he obtains remission of sin, and is endued with the perfect
righteousness of Christ, and so reputed just, and absolved from all guilt, for
the merits of Christ into whom he is ingrafted; For thus says the Apostle,
Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, and again, 1 Cor.
1.30.
Who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption.

DOCT. II. That whosoever for Christ, into whom he is ingrafted, is reputed
just, is also endued with the gift of inherent righteousness.
FUrthermore we believe that, whosoever is for Christ, into whom he is by the
holy Spirit ingrafted, reputed righteous, and is also righteous indeed, having
already obtained in Christ remission of sins and the imputation of his
righteousness, he is presently endued with the gift of inherent righteousness
in such manner that he is not only most perfectly and fully righteous in
Christ his head, but has also in himself true righteousness; whereby he is
made truly conformable unto Christ: Although, whilst we are in the flesh our
righteousness can never be so perfect, but still by reason of our corruption
it will be blemished with many stains of sin. Concerning which kind of
righteousness thus says St. John. 1 Ioh. 3.7.
He that does righteousness, that is righteous works, is righteous. And both
these kinds of righteousness the Apostle St. Paul always joyneth together
both in the Epistle to the Romans, and also in other Epistles, and further
teaches that by Christ they are both bestowed on the faithful: which also he
confirms in his Epistle to the Philippians. Phil. 1.1^
Concerning he latter kind of righteousness, whose fruits are made manifest
unto men, we say that it is so evident a testimony of the former, that where
it is wanting, we profess with the holy Apostles there can be no place for the
former: So far are we from loosing the raines to all impiety, by teaching
the Doctrine of justification by faith alone apprehending remission of sins,
and the righteousness of Christ.

DOCT. III. That, forasmuch as our inherent righteousness is always very
imperfect through our fault, therefore before God we are justified by the
righteousness of Christ only.
BUt notwithstanding what has been said, we confess that this inherent
righteousness is through our pravitie so imperfect, that by the righteousness
of Christ alone, whereby our sins are not imputed to us, not only at the
beginning of our conversion, when as of ungodly men we are made godly, but
afterward also even to the end of our life, we are justified before God, and
accounted for righteous. The Prophet David says as much, and the Apostle
subscribes unto it, Psalm. 32.1. Romans 4.7.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and again, Psalm. 32.2.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity; and again, Psalm.
143.2.
In thy sight shall no man living be justified. Therefore we conclude, that our
true justification before God consists only in the remission of our sins, and
the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us.

DOCT. IV. That by faith it is felt and found whether a man be justified in
Christ, and that therefore he is said to be justified by faith.
BUt because justification is not without the knowledge, sense, and assent of
him that is justified (which is spoken and to be understood of those which are
come to ripeness of years) and that sense is the sense of faith: Therefore we
say that then at length a man is justified by faith, when he is ingrafted into
Christ, and upon a sense and feeling thereof is persuaded, that of the mere
mercy of God, for the only obedience, satisfaction, and sacrifice of Christ,
into whom he is ingrafted, his sins are so remitted, that he is absolutely
freed from all guilt and punishment due unto the same; and so persuaded that
the perfect righteousness of Christ is in such manner imputed unto him, that
thereupon he finds and feels that eternal life is as due unto him as it was to
Christ; and so comes to understand that justification is merely and truly of
grace and not due unto his good works.

DOCT. V. The confirmation of what was last said; and what it is to be
justified.
FOr first, in holy Scripture, as well in the Old Testament as in the New, but
especially according to St. Paul, where he speaks professedly concerning this
matter, to justify signifies to remit sins, and so to absolve from all guilt
and punishment, to receive into grace and favor, to pronounce one righteous,
and to account him for righteous; not such a one that is simply and absolutely
unrighteous, but one that is no longer unrighteous, by reason of remission of
sins obtained. And further, although whomsoever God in Christ has from
eternity elected to be his Sons, he does acknowledge the same to be his in
Christ, and of his mere grace makes them acceptable unto himself in the
beloved: Yet, because we are never truly in Christ, until such time as we are
by the holy Ghost ingrafted and incorporated into him, and that cannot be
wrought in us as many as are of years, until we be first endued with faith,
and acknowledge Christ to be our righteousness, and so embrace him: therefore
then at length and not before are we justified (as the holy Scripture
witnesses) and that by faith without our works, when we believe all this with
true faith, that is, when we are thoroughly persuaded that our sins, as once
expiated and purged away by Christ, are no more imputed unto us, but are
pardoned of Gods mercy for the only merits of Christ; and likewise, that
Christ's righteousness is imputed unto us for our own, wherewith being arrayed
we appear righteous in the sight of God: An effect and manifest testimony
whereof is (as I said before) our inchoate and inherent righteousness; which
consists in the hatred of sin, and the love of righteousness, and the study
of good works.

DOCT. VI. A confirmation of what it is to be justified by faith.
FUrthermore, when we say A man is justified by faith we understand not that
the virtue of faith is either that, whereby we are justified formally (as the
Schools speak) and by a true and proper righteousness; or that, for which we
merit remission of sins and justification; or that, which as the first
original and fountain of other virtues and all good works, draws along with
it other virtues as charity, cleanness of heart, internal righteousness, and
good works whereby we are justified: But, because it is as it were a light,
whereby looking into the glass of the Gospel, we see what we are in Christ by
the free will and mere goodness of God, for the merits of Christ himself; and
again, Because it is as it were an hand whereby we apprehend and embrace the
free grace of God, and the benefit of Christ, declared unto us in the Gospel,
and in the Person of Christ exhibited unto us: or, to speak all in few words,
we are said to be justified by faith, that is, when remission of sins, and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness is apprehended by faith; so that faith is
taken for the thing it self which is apprehended by faith: As it is Genesis 1^.6.
said concerning Abraham, Romans 4.3. Gal. 3 6. Iam. 2.23.
Abraham believed God; and it was counted unto him for righteousness: to wit,
that which he believed concerning the seed which was promised unto him, that
is, Christ. For he is the righteousness of all the elect, and true believers,
and Sons of the promise, as the Scripture speaks.

DOCT. VII. That by faith alone a man is justified.
HEnce also it is easy to be understood, what it is that we with the sacred
Scriptures, and holy Fathers have always confessed and do constantly confess,
when we say that by faith alone we are justified. For inasmuch as to be
justified by faith before God is nothing else, but to be reputed and accounted
righteous upon the forgiveness of sins, and the righteousness of Christ
apprehended by faith; which is our only true righteousness: (For whatsoever
inherent righteousness is in us, and what good works soever are done by us,
such they are as will not abide trial before Gods judgment, according to that
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant: (o Lord:) for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified: and again, Psalm. 130.3.
if thou Lord, should mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand?) It
manifestly appears that our belief concerning justification by faith alone,
is most certain, and most true.

DOCT. VIII. That not only at the beginning of our conversion, but also
throughout the whole course of our life even to the hour of death we are
justified by faith alone.
HEreupon we cannot but believe and constantly confess, that not only at the
beginning, when of unrighteous we are made righteous, but also in the whole
course of our life afterward even to the end thereof, we are justified by
faith alone and that on Christ: so that our righteousness is always from faith
to faith. For there is no man that sins not every day: insomuch that we have
all need to say, Matt. 6.12.
Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors: and holy David says, Psalm.
32.6.
For this, that is for forgiveness of sins, shall every one that is godly pray
unto thee: and Christ not once but always ^ Cor. ^.30.
is made unto us righteousness, sanctification, redemption; 1 Ioh. 1.2.
And he is the propitiation for our sins.

DOCT. IX. That justification by faith alone is not fictitious and imaginary.
BUt let no man think that we feign a kind of imaginary righteousness, having
in us no foundation and efficacy. We repeat what we professed before. First,
that the faith whereby we say that we are justified, is a true faith, and a
faith that works by love. Again, that God does not justify us only by
remitting of our sins and imputing the righteousness of Christ unto us, but
also by making us partakers of his divine nature, by regenerating, reforming,
and sanctifying us, by endueing us with inherent righteousness, and making us
conformable unto the image of his Son. And, that this inchoate righteousness
is a manifest testimony of the other true and perfect righteousness which we
have in Christ alone, and that they are both knit together by the bond of the
holy Spirit, according to the Apostle saying, that not only Romans ^.15.
the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ,
bath abounded unto many. For, as not only the disobedience of Adam was imputed
unto us, but also the corruption of his nature was derived upon us: So likewise
not only the obedience and righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us as many
as are ingrafted into him, but also his holy nature is truly communicated unto
us, so that we become 2 Cor. 5.17.
new creatures, righteous and holy in our selves, followers of good works.

DOCT. X. That inherent righteousness is increased by good works.
AS concerning the former righeousnesse, we say that it is neither due unto our
works, nor begun or increased thereby: But as concerning the latter, we
confess that, although it be not due to our foregoing works, not begun thereby
(for all those are sins, forasmuch as good works do not go before
justification, but follow after) yet by the works following, and exercises of
piety, it is conserved, promoted, and increased. For it is the Doctrine of the
Apostle that the gift of God bestowed upon us is by such like exercises, as
fire, stirred up, cherished, and increased. 2 Timothy 1.6.
Concerning which increase of righteousness St. John says. Rev. 22.12.
He that is righteous, let him be righteous still. And therefore if we speak of
this inherent righteousness only: we deny not but even by good works, and not
by faith only, a man is justified, that is, made more and more just and
righteous.

DOCT. XI. That, to speak properly, a man is justified by that righteousness
which consists in remission of sins and the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, and not by works: although by them is declared that a man is
justified, and righteous.
BUt if the question be moved concerning the former, our answer is, that a man
is never justified by his own works, but always by faith alone properly: yet
this we say, that by works it is declared whether or no a man he righteous as
well by the one as by the other; forasmuch as no man is justified by the
former, but he is also endued with the latter; and both are declared by good
works: In which sense we do not doubt but St. James did speak.

DOCT. XII. Errors condemned.
WE therefore condemn all Pelagians, whose opinion it is that infants are
conceived without sin, and therefore have no need of remission of sins, and the
benefits of Christ, to their salvation: we condemn likewise those which teach
that, although they have need of remission of sins, yet it may be obtained
without faith on Christ: and likewise those which although they grant that
there is need of faith on Christ, yet hold that not sufficient, but require
also our works as merits, and those necessary for the obtaining of remission
of sins; but especially we condemn those which have taught that this is done
by their impious adorations, worshippings, and superstitions. Neither like we
those which have delivered, either by word or writing, that we are not
justified by any other righteousness but that which is inherent and within us:
But yet again neither like we those whosoever have thought that remission of
sins can consist without inward renovation and righteousness. We further
condemn those, which think, that they may be justified by that faith
concerning Christ which is commonly called historical, but by St. James no
better the a dead faith, which is none at all. Last of all we condemn the
opinion of those which have taught that a man is justified not by remission of
sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness, but by the very essential
righteousness of Christ, as they call it, really communicated unto us.

CHAP. XX. Concerning the Free Will of a man regenerate, and his power unto
that which is good.
DOCTRINE I. That those which are justified in Christ, are in him also
regenerated, and from him receive power unto all that which is good.
WE believe that as many as are ingrafted into Christ, as they are in him
justified, so also they are in him regenerated, and become new creatures, by
the participation of his divine nature: and therefore, that they are made free,
and receive from Christ himself, as members from the head, and vine branches
from the vine, both power to eschew evil, and to follow that which is good: For
the Lord himself says it, Ioh. 8.^6.
If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. And then are we made
free, when we are ingrafs;ted into Christ, and regenerated by his Spirit: For
the Apostle says it, 2 Cor. 3.17.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

DOCT. II. That Christ lives and works in those which are regenerate.
FOr we believe that Gal. 2.10.
Christ lives in us, as many as are regenerated by his Spirit; and that he
lives not idle, but Pila. 13.
works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure; and by his Romans
8.36.
Spirit also helps our infirmities.

DOCT. III. That the man regenerate even in actions pertaining to the natural
and humane life, carries himself more worthily then the unregenerate, and
therefore is more free.
SO the regenerate man, besides that he retains his will, always free from
coaction (as even the unregenerate man himself does) he does in all actions
pertaining to the natural and humane life, wherein the man unregenerate has
any power, carry himself far better, and more worthily then the unregenerate
does: forasmuch as even in these actions he is moved by the holy Spirit
illuminating his understanding, guiding his will and cogitations, and drawing
forth actions out of a good fountain, that is, a good heart, and directing them
to a good end, that is, to the glory of God. The holy Apostle teaches us thus
much where he says, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And
therefore even in this kind of actions he is more free then the unregenerate;
because he is not by his own lusts and concupiscences carried away unto these
actions, as the unregenerate is: but being moved by the holy Spirit, whatsoever
he thinks, wills, works, he does all more circumspectly, more prudently,
and more religiously, being always wholly intent upon this, that all may be
done to the glory of God, his own salvation, and the good of his neighbor.
For he always keeps in mind that of the Apostle, Romans 14.7.
None of us lives himself, and no man dies to himself. ^.
For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto
the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's. And therefore
he commends all his actions to the divine providence, and says with St.
James, or at least thinks thus with himself, Iam. 4.15.^
If the Lord will, I will do this or that, I will go to such a place or such a
place; but always, If the Lord will.

DOCT. IV. That for the attaining unto moral virtues also, the regenerate man
is more free, and has more power then the unregenerate.
MOreover, although we confess that a man unregenerate by Gods especial aid
and assistance may attain unto moral virtues: Yet we believe that this
especial aid and assistance is far more excellent in the regenerate, and
that for the presence of the holy Spirit, whereby he is illuminated, guided and
governed. So that the b Fathers have justly demonstrated against the vain
boasting of the Gentiles, that even those virtues which they call Moral, are
in Christians far different from those which have been or can be in Infidells
Tertull. Apolog. cap. 45. August. contra Iul. Pel. lib. 4. cap. 3. At de Civit.
Dei lib. 19. cap. 25. Orig contr. Cells.
and unbelievers: because in them they are no more but the mere shadows of
virtues, but in true Christians virtues in deed truly so called.

DOCT. V. That for the understanding, choosing and performing the things of
God, and which pertain unto his Kingdom, the regenerate man only is truly
illuminated, guided, and governed by the holy Ghost.
BUt we believe that for the understanding, choosing and performing of such
things as belong to the true Kingdom of God, the regenerate only are so
guided and governed by the Holy Ghost, that they only understand them, will
them, and perform them. For the Apostle says it, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he
know them. But concerning the regenerate man he adds, c But he that is
Spiritual, judges, or discerns, all things, and another place, 15.
It is God which works in us both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure.
Phil. 2.13.


DOCT. VI. That the regenerate man is not only moved by the holy Ghost to
work, but is himself also an Agent.
OUt of the writings of the Apostles, and by other testimonies of the holy
Scripture, we are taught, and confess that the regenerate are so moved by the
holy Ghost, that yet themselves also are Agents; and that in them God so
works both to will and to do, that yet they themselves are those which both
will and do. For they are not stocks, or beasts, but men endued with a mind
whereby they understand; and a will whereby they will; and whereby they command
other faculties and power both of soul and body, to put in execution those
things which are good.

DOCT. VII. That the power of Free Will in the regenerate is still infirm and
weak; in such sort, that we continually stand in need of Gods fresh supply and
assistance, and cannot do all that we would.
BUt, because our regeneration is but only inchoate or begun, and not as yet
perfect, so that whereas we before were flesh altogether, but now consist
partly of Spirit, and partly of flesh, which still fight within us one against
the other, in such manner that the good which we would that we cannot do, but
do serve with our mind the Law of God, and with the flesh the Law of sin:
Therefore we believe, what also we find by experience, that there is still much
slaverie in the regenerate; much blindness in the mind and understanding,
much pravitie in the heart and affections, and many weaknesses and infirmities
in all the powers of soul and body: So that we daily stand in need of a new
supply of Gods grace, whereby our minds may be more and more illuminated, our
wills corrected and reformed, and our powers to that which is good increased
and perfected. And therefore as long as we are here in the flesh, our Free Will
is never truly and perfectly free, that is, having by it is self sufficient
power to eschew that which is evil, and do that which is good: especially when
as the events also of all things are not in our power, but in the hand of God;
and it is further necessary that all those things come to pass or be done,
not what we have thought upon, but whatsoever Act. 4.2^.
his hand and his counsel have determined before to be done.

DOCT. VIII. That God does so rule and govern the minds and wills of the
godly, that even in the conflict of temptations and the flesh he suffers them
not altogether to fall away from him.
YEt still this we hold, that as many as are truly ingrafted into Christ, they
have their minds and wills endued already with the holy Spirit, and that for
Christ his sake they are by God so ruled, governed, and sustained, that
although he suffers them to be weakened sundry ways, and by diverse tentations,
yet he never suffers them Ier. 32.40. Luke 22.32. Romans 8.35.
totally and finally to fall away sinking under their tentations, and so at
length perish everlastingly.

DOCT. IX. Errors Condemned.
WE therefore condemn all those, whosoever either deny or extenuate
Regeneration, holding that a man regenerate is as impotent, and unable to that
which is good; and as mere a slave to sin, as he was before his Regeneration,
contrary to diverse and those also most clear testimonies of Scripture,
concerning the freedom of the regenerate from the slaverie of sin, and their
freedom also to that which is good, to say nothing of the injury which is
done unto the holy Spirit, which both dwells and also works in us. And
again we condemn those which will have a regenerate man so to be freed from
all the slaverie of sin, but he cannot sin any more at all: We condemn
them I say, because they hold that which is contradictorie unto the word of God
throughout the whole Scripture, and contrary also to daily experience: For,
although we are not suffered to sin unto death, yet it is most certain that we
commit many sins which of their own nature are worthy of death. Neither do we
like their opinion, which in the regenerate man do so far forth extenuate the
power of the Spirit, and again do amplify the relics of the flesh: that they
say, the operation of the Spirit is oftentimes by the strength of the old man
quite extinguished; and further teach that even the regenerate man himself may
altogether fall away from the grace of God, and so perish everlastingly:
Whereas God by his Prophet contradicts them, saying, Ier. 32.40.
I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: and
the Apostle affirms that 2 Timothy 2.19.
the foundation of God stands sure, etc. And again, Philip. 1.6.
He which has begun a good work in you will perform (or finish) it until the
day of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXI. Concerning good works.
DOCTRINE I. That those which are ingrafted into Christ, have also from thence
both to live themselves, and also to show forth the works of life unto others:
and that this is the chief end of being ingrafted into Christ.
AS the vine-branch from the vine draws not only for it self sap and
nourishment, whereby it self lives; but also that, whereby it brings forth
fruit unto us: So also we believe that the Saints and godly upon earth have
also from Christ, into whom they are ingrafted, not only life whereby they
live themselves, but also wherewith all to show forth the fruits of good works,
to the glory of God, and the edifying of the Church: For the Lord himself
says, Ioh. 15.5.
I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth match fruit. Whereunto also is very pertinent that of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2.10.
We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has before ordained (or prepared) that we should walk in them.

DOCT. II. What we understand by the name of good works.
NOw by the name of good works we understand all those actions and works, which
according to the prescript of the will of God revealed in his word, out of a 1
Pet. ^.5.
lively faith in Christ, and so 1 Timothy 1.5.
out of a pure heart, are performed of the regenerate by the holy Spirit: For,
as Romans 14.25.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin; so whatsoever works are done out of a 1 Timothy, 1.5.
lively faith, and a pure heart, and a good conscience, good works they are
necessarily. Wherefore we hold that the works which are done by the ungodly,
without faith and the word of God, and the leading and guidance of the holy
Spirit, howsoever they may have a glorious Coloss, 2.18.23.
show of much piety, and divine worship: yet, they are Matt. 15.8, 9.
not to be reckoned in any wise amongst good works, and such as are pleasing
and acceptable unto God.

DOCT. III. That good works are not done of us as of our selves, but by the
virtue and power of Christ's spirit.
AS vine-branches, or olivebranches bring not forth fruits of themselves, but
by virtue of the vine, or olive tree whereinto they are ingrafted: So we
likewise do not of our selves do good works, but by virtue of Christ's Spirit,
into whom we are incorporated, and from whom we draw even that life, by which
we live; Christ himself working in us by his Spirit Phil. 2.13.
both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Ioh. 15.5.
For without me, says he, ye can do nothing.

DOCT. IV. That good works are not the cause, but the effects of our union with
Christ, and our justification, and our life.
ANd further, as vine-branches or olive-branches do not therefore bring forth
good fruit, that so they may be ingrafted into the vine or olive tree, or
themselves receive life; but therefore fructify, because they are already
ingrafted into the vine, or olive tree, and live therein: from whence it
follows, that their good fruits are not the cause of their ingrafting, or
life; but the effects and manifest signs thereof. Just after the same manner,
do we believe that the case stands between Christ and us; as St. Augustine
sufficiently teaches, August.
where he says, That good works do not precede, or go before, a man that is
yet to be justified, but follow after a man is justified. And therefore we
constantly believe and confess, that by works (to speak properly, and
concerning justification of life) a man is not justified, but declared to be
justified.

DOCT. V. That, although we by our good works are not justified, yet others
thereby oftentimes are edified unto salvation.
BUt yet this we add, that as trees themselves are not nourished, nor receive
life from their own fruits, and yet others are nourished and live thereby, as
men and other living creatures: So, notwithstanding we by our works are not our
selves justified, yet others thereby are very much edified, and by our example
excited and Matt. 5.16.
stirred up to glorify God, and to seek the true righteousness and life in
Christ, and are thereby saved: For the Apostle himself Romans 11.13.
says that he did therefore magnify (or illustrate) his office among the
gentiles (viz. by his diligence and sanctity of life) that he might provoke to
emulation those which were his flesh, and so save some of them: and in another
place he 1 Cor, 7.16.
says that it may so come to pass that the unbelieving husband or wife may be
saved by the wife or husband which believes, that is, which performs a
Christians duty in leading a godly and holy life: and again writing to Timothy
he says that if he look diligently unto his office, that is the office of a
Bishop, he shall both save himself and others.

DOCT. VI. That we do not condemn good works, although we deny that a man is
justified thereby.
WHerefore, although we deny that good works are to be done of us to this end,
that we may be justified thereby; forasmuch as this would overthrow the
righteousness which is the free gift of God, and the whole benefit of Christ:
we do not therefore condemn the study of holy life, and good works; yea we
commend the same, and exhort thereunto with all vehemency, upon all occasions.

DOCT. VII. That there are many, and those very weighty reasons why we ought to
be exercised in the study and practice of good works.
FOr there are declared unto us in holy Scripture many, and those very weighty
reasons, why we ought diligently to exercise our selves in the study and
practice of good works, although we are not justified thereby: Of which reasons
some have reserence immediately to the glory of God; others belong to the
salvation of our neighbor, and the good of the Church; and others tend to our
thankfulness toward God, as likewise to our own salvation. 1. Matt. 15.16.
They are commanded by God: And him we must absolutely obey. 2. a God is
thereby glorified: And we must by all means promote this glory. 3. God has
therefore elected, created, and redeemed us, Tit. 2.12.
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world: And we must not disappoint him of
his end. 4. They please God; Act. 10.35. Col. 1.10.
for he c loves righteousness and hates iniquity: And whatsoever pleases
God we ought to do, although there should come no profit thereby either to our
neighbor or our selves. But unto our neighbor, and the Church especially,
comes much profit thereby, not only as concerning the body and external
things, but the soul also and eternal salvation; whilst by our example (to let
pass other things) the elect are Heb. 10.24.
provoked to the like study of piety, and practice of good works. And, as
concerning our selves, they are profitable unto us many ways. I. 2 Pet. 1.10.
Because by our good works, as the effects of our election and vocation, we
make them both sure, both to our selves and others. 2. Tim. 1.6.
Because faith does not only demonstrate and show forth it self by good works
as the fruits thereof, but also is exercised, stirred up, strengthened, and
increased thereby; as also all Moral virtues receive strength and increase by
daily exercise. 3. Because, as we Ephesians. 4.30.
grieve the holy Spirit by our sins; So by our good works we make him glad, and
are our selves filled with spiritual joy and gladness in our hearts and
consciences, and resist the devils temptations. 4. Deuteronomy. 28.1. etc.
Because, as by eschewing sin we escape many punishments; So also following the
study and practice of good works we obtain of God manifold blessings, both in
this life, and in that especially which is to come. 5. and lastly, Ephesians. 2.10.
because they are the way by which God ordinarily leads this elect unto
eternal life: and Ioh. 15.6.
unless the vine-branch bring forth fruit, it shall be cut off and cast into
the fire.

DOCT. VIII. That unto our good works a reward is promised and given, but yet
of grace, and for the merits of Christ.
FRom whence we understand that although by our good works we Luke 17.10.
cannot (to speak properly) merit unto our selves the possession of a
celestial inheritance (for Romans 6.23.
The gift of God is eternal life:) Yet we may Matthew. 5.7.
obtain it as reward; but yet of the mere mercy of God, and for the merits of
Christ.

DOCT. IX. Errors condemned.
WE therefore condemn all those, who standing upon the condignitie of their
works, do teach either that remission of sins, or eternal life, or any other
good whatsoever is due unto them. For Luke. ^^.10.
though we should perfectly keep all Gods commandments, yet even then should we
be but unprofitable servants: But there is no man, no though he be ingrafted
into Christ, and justified, that does keep the commandments of God, as he
ought. And yet we find no fault with the Fathers for using the name of Merit,
so far forth as they use the word in this sense as signifying a good work
done in faith, which is recompensed with a reward, and that of grace, and for
the merits of Christ. But again we like not those, who dispute of good works as
if they were things indifferent; and further say that they are so far from
being necessary, that they make nothing at all unto our salvation. For ^eb.
11.6.
how can a man be saved without faith? and, Iam. 2.20.
How can faith be lively without the study and practice of good works? and, 1 Timothy 1.19.
How can a man hold faith unless also he keep a good conscience? and, How can
a man keep a good conscience, unless he hold a constant resolution to eschew
sin, to practice good works, and to compose and frame his whole life to the
will of God? But we absolutely condemn all libertines, to whom it is all one
without difference, either to keep God's commandments, or not to keep them; to
do well, or to do ill. We condemn likewise those, who teach that our good
works are profitable for the souls of the dead, in I know not what fire, which
they call Purgatory: forasmuch as the Scripture says that every man shall be
judged according to the works which he has done in his body; and that, as
concerning the dead, their own works, and not other men's, do follow them.

CHAP. XXII. Concerning Invocation and Swearing.
BEcause amongst good works commanded by God Invocation is none of the last,
but is often taken in holy Scripture for the whole worship of God, whereunto
also is added an Oath as being a part of divine worship: Therefore we thought
good here in brief to explicate and declare what is our belief concerning both;
and that the rather, because even amongst those that profess the name of
Christ there is some controversy concerning them both.

DOCTRINE I. That Invocation is due to God only, and therefore also to Jesus
Christ.
AS concerning religious Invocation, we believe that it is Deuteronomy. 6.13.10.12, 20.
due only to the true God (that is the Father; the Son, and the holy Ghost)
and therefore to Jesus Christ our Advocate, and to none besides. Matt. 4.10.
That Invocation is due to God only, it is made manifest by many places of
Scripture: Because God alone is to be worshipped and adored. And that it is due
unto Christ as our Mediator and Advocate, we have sufficient testimonies in
the Acts of the Apostles, in the Epistles, and in the Revelation. And as we are
expressly Coloss. 2.18.
forbidden to worship and adore, any creature whatsoever it be, whether in
heaven, or on earth: So likewise are we forbidden to invocate and call upon
them. And if whatsoever is not of faith, is sin; much more that which is
committed against the express word of God: For the very gentiles themselves
did not judge it fit to call upon any with a religious worship, whom they did
not acknowledge for a God. And (as the Apostle says) Romans 10.14.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? But we must believe
only in God and in Jesus Christ, as we are taught in holy Scripture, and all
the true Catholic Church confesses in the Apostles Creed which is daily
recited.

DOCT. II. That a Christian man may swear lawfully.
WE believe likewise that a Christian man may swear lawfully, to wit, in truth,
Ier. 4.(...)
in judgment, and in righteousness (as the Prophet teaches) so that his oath
be neither false, nor rash, nor unjust. For the taking of the name of the Lord
in our mouths, is not simply condemned; but the taking of it in vain, and
falsely. And it is a received custom amongst all nations from the foundation of
the world to take an oath, when it makes for the glory of God, and the benefit
of a neighbor. And (to say nothing of the perpetual consent of the Church in
all ages) it is likewise confirmed by Gods own example, as also by the example
of Christ, and his Apostles. Wherefore the Doctrine of Christ in Matt. 5.24.
St. Matthews Gospel, and Iam. 5.12.
St. James in his Epistle is not repugnant to ours. For their purpose was to
show the true meaning of the commandment concerning swearing, and they spoke
only against the abuse thereof.

DOCT. III. That, when we swear, we are to swear by God only, and by no other.
WE believe that, when we are to swear, no other is by us to be called upon as
the witness of our consciences but God alone; and therefore that we are to
swear by none but God: For God alone is the beholder and searcher of our
hearts, and he alone has power over our souls. And therefore to him only is
this honor and worship due, to be appealed unto by us as unto a witness, and
avenger on our souls, if we observe not what by oath we have promised.

DOCT. IV. That such oaths as are just, and lawfully Or taken.
made, are to be kept and observed by us.
HE reupon we confess that such oaths as are lawfully Or taken.
made are by us to be kept and observed also, and that for the glory of God,
whose name we do as it were lay to pledge as often as we swear by it: As it is
also commanded in the law; for we are not to take the name of God in vain, or
falsely.

DOCT. V. That oaths concerning Unjust, Or unlawful.
wicked and ungodly matters, that is, such as are repugnant to the Law of God,
are not to be taken; or if taken, yet not to be kept.
AGain, forasmuch as we are to promise nothing which is Unjust, or unlawful.
wicked and ungodly, that is to say, repugnant to the Law of God: Therefore
much less ought we to confirm any such thing by an oath, interposing the name
of God. But if any such oath of it self unlawful be taken, we affirm that it
ought not to be kept: for in keeping it the sin is doubled; as we read in the
Matt. 14.7, 8, 9, etc.
Gospel concerning Herod.

DOCT. VI. That such oaths as cannot be kept without trangressing Gods Law, are
not to be kept; although some of them of themselves be not unjust or unlawful.
ANd this also we add, that such oaths as cannot be kept without transgressing
Gods Law, are not to be kept, although the things themselves be not of
themselves unjust, or unlawful. And therefore (to instance in a particular) If
any man has bound himself by an oath, never to marry; which oath he cannot
keep without manifest transgressing of the divine Law: we determine that he is
in no wise to keep that oath.

DOCT. VII. Errors condemned.
WE therefore condemn all those, whosoever invocate or adore, call upon or
worship either idols, or dead men, or any thing whatsoever without life: As
likewise all Anabaptists, who simply and absolutely condemn all manner of
oaths, contending for this, that it is not lawful for a Christian man to swear
in any kind: And again, those who call upon any other besides God, to be
witness to their souls and consciences: And to conclude, all those whosoever
contend for this, that vows and oaths, though of themselves impious, and such
as cannot be kept without wickedness, are yet notwithstanding to be kept.

CHAP. XXIII. Concerning the Church of Christ in general.
BEcause the Church of Christ, which is his body, is known to consist of such
as by the bond of the holy Spirit are knit unto him, as members unto their
head; And again, the word and the Sacraments are the means by which men are
knit unto Christ, and these means no where to be had but in the Church; And
further, whosoever are endued with the gifts and graces of Hope, Charity,
Repentance, Study and care to exercise good works, do belong unto the Church:
Therefore we judge it worth the pains, to declare what is our belief concerning
the Church, especially seeing that there be very great controversies about this
article above all the rest. And first we will speak of the Church of Christ in
general: and so we make confession of our faith with all the Church.
Afterward we will speak in special of the Church Militant, and what
pertains thereunto.

DOCTRINE I. An Article of faith concerning the Church out of the Apostles
Creed.
WE believe the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints.

DOCT. II. What we understand by the name of the Church, and the description
thereof.
BY the name of Christ's Church we understand a certain number and company
known unto God, both of Angels, and Men which are not only predestined and
elected to have perpetual communion with Christ, and mutually one with
another, as also to worship the true God perpetually according to his will and
commandment, and to love one another with sincere and perpetual love and
charity; but are also in time effectually called by the holy Spirit out of the
number of others, and nearly united unto Christ, and so true Saints indeed:
begun from the foundation of the world, and by a continual succession even
unto these times gathered together and continued by the bond of the holy
Spirit; and to be continued even unto the end of the world, yea to all
eternity: in part already triumphing with Christ in the heavens, and in part
as yet militant on earth for Christ, with sundry enemies, preaching and hearing
the word of the Gospel, administering and receiving the holy Sacraments, and in
public and private looking to the observing and keeping of Christ's
commandments.

DOCT. III. That the Church is a company consisting of many.
THat the Church is a company consisting of many, and as it were a body
compounded of diverse members, we are taught in holy Scripture; where it is
called Ephesians. 1.23.
the body of Christ which is distinguished by diverse members; as also John
10.3, etc.
a flock of sheep, and the Kingdom of God, and Heb. 11.10.
a City, which consists of diverse Citizens; and by other such like names.

DOCT* IV. That the Church consists only of the elect which are already
incorporated into Christ.
ANd that these many, whereof the Church consists, are none other but the
elect, which are already ingrafted into Christ, and endued with sanctity from
him, we are likewise taught abundantly out of the said holy Scripture, both in
other places, and especially in the Epistle to the Ephesians, where the Apostle
speaking of the Church and the members thereof, says that we are Ephesians. 1.4.
chosen in Christ, 7.
to have redemption in him; 13.
being sealed with that holy Spirit of promise: 22.
that Christ was given to be the head over all things to the Church, and e that
the Church is his body. Such a body therefore it is, whose members are every
one, by one and the same Spirit both knit unto Christ their head; and likewise
one together with another: from their head they receive life, and from him they
are endued with sanctity, so that the whole body of the Church is truly holy,
and therefore is called the holy Church.

DOCT. V. That the holy Angels are not excluded from the body of the Church.
ANd yet from this body of Christ, which is the holy Church, we do 23.
not exclude the Angels; and that for these reasons following. Heb. 12.22.
1. Because the Apostle speaking expressly and plainly of the Church,
includes therein even the Angels also. 2. Ephesians. 1.10. Coloss. 2.10.
Because they together with us under one and the same head, which is Christ,
are gathered together into one body; and Christ is manifestly by the Apostle
called the head of the Angels. 3. Rev. 22.9.
Because they call themselves our fellow servants, and have with us the same
Father, and worship the same God; and we are all to be together for ever in the
same City Heb. 12.22.
the heavenly Jerusalem. 4. And lastly, Because they are holy. And the Church
is the communion of all Saints.

DOCT. VI. That reprobates and hypocrites, although they be in the Church, yet
they are not of the Church.
WE therefore upon good grounds do believe and profess that reprobates and
hypocrites, although they have their dwelling in the Church, and converse with
the Saints, yet they are not of the Church, nor any members thereof; forasmuch
as they are not truly united unto Christ the Head, nor endued with his Spirit,
and therefore not truly holy: For the Apostle St. John speaking of certain
hypocrites says thus, 1 Ioh. 2.19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us. They are not therefore of the
Church, whosoever do at length revolt from Christ, and not retain perpetual
communion with Christ and with all the Saints: howsoever they may for a time
seem great and worthy men in the Church, either bearing rule and authority in
a Christian Commonwealth, or being set over the whole Church. For they are the
members of Satan and not of Christ, whosoever have not the Spirit of Christ,
but of Antichrist.

DOCT. VII. That the Church of Christ always was and is but one only.
ANd we confess that the Church of Christ always was and is one only:
because the body whereunto Christ was given by his Father to be the Head
thereof, always was and is but ^ph. 4.4.
one; one only Spirit, whereby all the members of the body have their
connection together with the Head; 6.
One only God, to worship whom and to glorify him for ever, we are all
elected and called; 5.
one faith of all believers, one salvation, and one celestial inheritance: in
regard whereof Christ always called his Church one, and his flock one. We do
not therefore make the Church which was from the beginning of the world, and
before the coming of Christ, to be another from that which now is, and ever
shall be even to the end of the world; but we hold it to be one at all times
and in all places and of all persons truly joined unto Christ. And therefore
we say that the communion of all Saints is one; and we are persuaded out of
holy Scripture that whosoever do make a final revolt or departure therefrom,
they do not belong unto this one body.

DOCT. VIII. That there is but one Head of the Church, to wit, Jesus Christ.
FRom hence are we confirmed in the faith, that, seeing the Church of Christ,
which is his body, is but one, therefore the Head thereof is and always was
but one. Now by the name of Head we understand him, who from the beginning of
the world was by God given unto the Church to this end, that he should be at
length made partaker of the same nature with it, and redeem it, and closely
unite it unto himself, and quicken it, and illuminate it with the splendor of
his wisdom, and inflame it with the ardent heat of divine love, and
effectually move it unto all good desires and good works, and perpetually
guide, govern, and preserve it. For besides daily experience in nature, we are
caught it out of the holy Scripture, that these are the proper operations of
the Head in respect of the body. But we acknowledge none that does or can
perform these for the Church besides Jesus Christ: not denying in the mean
time, but there may be one head of all the hypocrites which are in the Church,
and consequently of a hypocritical Church it self; forasmuch as the Prophets
did foretell thus much, and the Apostles also have confirmed it. But we believe
and confess with the holy Apostles that the Ephesians. 1.22.4.15.5.23. Col 1.18.
Head of the true Church is but one only, to wit, Jesus Christ.

DOCT. IX. That this Church is truly holy.
FRom whence also it follows, that this Church is truly holy, and that for
these reasons. 1. Because it has a most holy and sanctifying Head. 2. Because
no sins are imputed to it. 3. Because from the Head it draws the Spirit of
Sanctification. 4. Because, whatsoever sanctity is in the Head, all the same
is imputed to every particular member.

DOCT. X. That the Church is also truly Catholic.
WE confess also, that it is truly Catholic, that is, Universal: Because
the Head thereof is Catholic and eternal; at all times from the foundations
of the world even unto the end thereof, out of all sorts of men, and nations,
and places, gathering and knitting unto himself the members of the body, and
governing', guiding, and preserving them unto himself unto eternal happiness.

DOCT. XI. That this one only Church is partly Triumphant in the heavens, and
partly Militant on the earth.
BUt yet we acknowledge, that this Church, although it be and for ever has
been but one only, yet it is so distinguished, that one part thereof is
Triumphant in heaven together with Christ who was raised from the dead, and now
sits at the right hand of the Father; and the other part on earth, fighting
still with flesh and blood, with the world, and with the devil. From whence is
received amongst all the godly that distinction of the Church into Triumphant
and Militant.

CHAP. XXIIII. Concerning the Church Militant.
ALthough from what we have confessed concerning the Church in general, there
is none but may easily gather and perceive what our belief is concerning the
Church Militant in particular: Yet that it may the easier and better be
understood, we purpose to declare and explane our opinion apart concerning it,
partly by a brief repetition referring hither what has been said concerning
the whole, and partly adding what is proper hereunto.

DOCTRINE I. A Description of the Church Militant.
WE believe then, that the Militant Church is a company of men Ephesians. 1.4.
chosen unto eternal life in Christ, before the foundation of the world, out
of every nation and kindred: who in time by the Matt. 28.19 Mark 16.15. Romans
10.14.
preaching of the Gospel, and the holy Spirit, being called out of the world
unto Christ, and out of the kingdom of the Devil unto the kingdom of God;
gathered into one body under one Ephesians. 1 22.
Head which is Christ, and so truly justified and sanctified, wheresoever they
be, and how many or how few soever they be; do heartily and with one consent
profess the same faith in God and in Christ, the same hope of a celestial
inheritance, and that for the only merits of Christ, the observing and keeping
the same commandments given by Christ, and therefore brotherly love one toward
another, and charity toward all: who preach and hear the word of the Gospel,
administer and receive the holy Sacraments according to Christ's institution,
and use all care and diligence that all men may live soberly, justly, and godly
in this present world; as long as they are in the flesh ever Ephesians. 6, 12, etc.
fighting for the kingdom of Christ, against sin dwelling in the flesh,
against the world whether alluring them unto sin, or persecuting them for
Christ's sake, and against the devil; waiting through patience for the coming
of Christ, and for eternal happiness: Amongst whom there are also many
reprobates, and ungodly Matt. 13.5, etc. and 21. 1 Ioh 2.19.
hypocrites professing the same Christ: But as they are themselves nothing
less then of the Church, so neither does their hypocrisy and ungodliness
take away the Church, or extinguish and blot out the name of the Church. For we
deny not but under the name of the Church hypocrites also, which are in it, are
comprehended: because the Lord himself says that it is like unto a flour in
which there is wheat and chafe; unto Matt. 13.24.
a field wherein is wheat and tares, into a net in which are fishes good and
bad; unto ten Matt. 25.1, 2.
virgins, whereof five of them were wise and five foolish: But yet we deny them
to be of the Church. For the Lord again taught as much in that place where he
said that he would Matt. 16.18.
build his Church in such a manner that the gates of hell should not prevail
against it; and St. John confirmed it in his Epistle, where he said thus, 1
Ioh. 2.19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us. This we believe to be a true
description of the Church Militant: for it has manifest testimonies out of the
holy Scripture.

DOCT. II. The differences between the Church Triumphant and the Church
Militant.
ALthough the Church Triumphant and Militant are but one and the same Church;
yet it is easy to be understood what a great deal of difference there is
between them. For (besides that this Militant Church does consist only of men,
whereas the Triumphant has the blessed Angels also annexed and present) here
we have need of the preaching of the word, the administration of the
Sacraments, and discipline concerning life and manners; which things have no
place in heaven. Again, from that are excluded all the ungodly, and hypocrites:
but in this there are good and bad mixed together. And again, those our brethren
which are in heaven being now at liberty, do triumph over their enemies, and
rejoice with exceeding great joy, being present with the Lord, and beholding
him face to face: But we must still wrestle with flesh and blood, with the
world, with sin, and with Satan the Prince of this world; and we see here but
darkly as in a glass, being absent from the Lord. And last of all, it is so
always one and the same, that it is neither divided into parts, nor subject to
any change; neither of which can be said truly of the Church Militant.

DOCT. III. That the Church Militant is in such sort one and the same, and that
Catholic: that yet notwithstanding it is not with it always after one and the
same manner; and besides, it is distinguished into diverse particular Churches.
WE therefore acknowldge that, although the Militant Church always was and is
one and the same, and that Catholic; because it always had from the
foundation of the world and in all places one and the same Head, which is
Christ, who knitteth and uniteth unto himself into one body all the elect
gathered out of every nation: Yet it neither was nor is with it always after
one and the same manner; and besides, it is distinguished into many particular
Churches, being as many and diverse members thereof, according to the variety
of times, places and people. For in the earthly Paradise before sin, it was
with it after one manner; after sin, and before the flood, and in the time of
the Patriarchs, after another; under the Law, after another; and under Grace,
after another; and in the time of Christ amongst the Jews only, after another;
and after Christ's glorification after another, being by the Apostles gathered
out of Jews and Gentiles, and that not in one place, but in many; nor out of
one people, but many; nor retaining at all times and in all places the same
ceremonies. In which respects we are wont to say, that it was one before
Christ, and another after; and that the Church of the Old Testament, but this
of the New; and that again we read was wont to be called the old people, and
this the New. And as concerning particular Churches, we read of one at Rome,
another at Corinth, another at Ephesus, and others in other places.

DOCT. IV. That the Catholic Church being but one consists of many particular
Churches.
AGain, although for many and diverse respects already signified there always
have been and yet are many, and diverse, and particular Churches: Yet we
acknowledge, that, as concerning the substance, there always has been but one
and the same, consisting of them all; and that Catholic, and Apostolic, and
Holy. One; Because it always was and is gathered into Ephesians. 1.23, and
one body under 4.4 Ephesians. 1.22.
one Head Jesus Christ, by Ephesians. 4.^.
one and the same Spirit; And, because there is 5.
one faith of all, and one confession of the faith. Catholic; Because it is
extended to all times and places, and consists of all kinds of persons and
people. Apostolic; Because it was Ephesians. 2.20.
founded upon the foundation which the Apostles laid, that is Jesus Christ; and
built upon the doctrine of the Apostles, which was also the doctrine of the
Prophets, from the foundation of the world: and Holy; Not as if it had no sin;
but because, inasmuch as it is ingrafted into Christ, and endued with the gifts
of repentance and faith, therefore no sins are imputed unto it, but it has
obtained free pardon of them all: and again, because it is made partaker of
Christ's Spirit sanctifying, and regenerating: and further, because the
righteousness and holiness of Christ is imputed unto it; in which regard it
is said to be Ephesians. 5.27.
without spot or wrinkle, that is, in Christ her 23.
Head and husband.

DOCT. V. How it may be known concerning particular Churches whether they be
true Churches or no.
AS concerning particular Churches, we believe that it may be known whether
they be true Churches gathered together in the Lord; by this, if they have
their building according to the will of the Lord Jesus, that is, on the Matt^.
28.19.
preaching of the Gospel, the administration of the Sacraments instituted and
ordained by Christ, and the 20.
keeping and observing of his commandments. We therefore acknowledge those for
the true Churches of Christ, in which first of all the pure doctrine of the
Gospel is preached, heard, and received; and so received and that only, that
there is neither place nor care given unto any other which is contrary
thereto. For both these are the properties of the flock or sheep of Christ:
both to Ioh. 10.4.
hear the voice of their own sheepherd, and 5.
not to follow a stranger. And again, in which the Sacraments instituted by
Christ, are as far as it is possible to be done, rightly and duly
administered and received, that is, according to Christ's institution; and where
also such Sacraments as are but the inventions of men are not received: And
last of all, in which the Discipline of Christ has place, that is, where both
publicly and privately by Matt. 1 8, 15, etc. Tit. 1.9.
admonitions, corrections, and where need shall require, by excommunications
also, but yet out of charity, care is taken for the keeping and observing of
Christ's commandments: that so all men may live a sober, righteous, and godly
life, to the glory of God, and the mutual edification of one another. For
where wickedness and all manner of uncleanness in life goes openly
unpunished, and notorious offenses, contrary to the doctrine of Christ, escape
without censure, there we believe that some good and godly men may be found;
but that a godly and Christian congregation is there, we believe not. For this
the Lord himself says, John 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another.
But what love can be there, where no care is had that according to the doctrine
of Christ, when brethren sin they may be corrected, and repent, and be gained
unto the Lord, and saved.

DOCT. VI. From what succession of Bishops it may be demonstrated, that some
Church is Apostolic.
SO also we acknowledge, that from the perpetual succession of Bishops in a
Church, yet not any succession be it what it will, but such as has also the
continuation of the Apostles doctrine; We acknowledge, I say, that it may be
truly demonstrated from such a succession, that such a Church is Apostolic:
As of old the Church of Rome, and the succession of the Bishops thereof even
unto the times of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, and some other: insomuch that
those Fathers did not without cause appeal thereunto, and to other such like,
in their accustomed citations of the Heretics of their time. But as on the one
side, as concerning those Churches in which the Apostles doctrine together with
Christian discipline, and the right administration of the Sacraments is
retained pure, although they were not planted by the Apostles, neither can show
the perpetual succession of their Bishops without interruption even from the
Apostles time, yet we do acknewledge them for Churches truly Apostolic, and
say with Tertullian and others of the Fathers that they are so to be
acknowledged: So on the other side, what Churches were planted and watered by
the Apostles themselves, although they can demonstrate unto us the continual
succession of their Bishops without any the least interruption, yet if they
cannot demonstrate unto us as well the continuation of the Christian and
Apostolic doctrine, as the succession of their Bishops, we may acknowledge and
confess that they have been indeed Christian and Apostolic Churches, but that
they are such now we cannot acknowledge. For as it is not the cap or the hood
that makes a Monk (as it is in the proverb) but piety and sanctity of life:
So neither is it the succession of Bishops, but the doctrine of Christ, and
Christian Religion, that makes a Church truly Christian.

DOCT. VII. That, not any consent whatsoever, but only that which is in the
doctrine of Christ, suffices to evidence that some are true and Christian
Churches.
SO also we conceive, that it cannot be evinced from any kind of agreement of
Churches amongst themselves that they are the true Churches of God; seeing
there has been the greatest unity and concord even in the Synagogues of the
Jews, and the assemblies of the Turks, as also heretofore in the conventicles
of the Arrians and Donatists: but we judge them only to be demonstrated as
such, from their consent in the purity of Christian Doctrine and true piety.
For when the Apostle says, I beseech you, 1 Cor. 1.10.
brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind and in the same judgments: he means in that
Lord Jesus Christ, by whose Name he did request them to that unanimitie.

DOCT VIII. That the being of Churches is not destroyed by every kind of
dissension that may arise in them.
Nevertheless we are not so unjustly rigid against those, wherein there is not
a perfect harmony, and the same judgment concerning all particulars, as
therefore to deny them to be Christian Churches. Because, as any kind of
concord does not constitute a Church so neither does every dissension
whatsoever destroy it; provided this fundamental principle, that there is such
a person as Christ, true God and true Man, the true and perfect Savior, be
firmly acknowledged, and so the whole sum of Apostolical Doctrine, which is
delivered in the Creed, be received with universal assent.

DOCT. IX. The same further asserted.
FOr as reprobates and hypocrites do not hinder Churches from being truly
such, by their being members of them; so likewise those dissentions in the
Churches, which are raised either by wicked men, or amonst the godly themselves
through the weakness of the flesh or ignorance, are not sufficient to abolish
them: which is attested by the Apostle, when speaking concerning the ministers
of true Churches, he says, that upon the same foundation some do build gold,
silver, precious stones; but others, wood, stubble, hay. And in the Epistle to
the Philippians, Chap. 3. verse. 15.16.
having first explained the sum of Christian Doctrine, and exhorted them all
to prosist in the same, he subjoines, But if any thing ye be otherwise minded,
God shall reveal even this unto you: Nevertheless whereto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. For
otherwise, if where ever discords happen to arise touching Religion, there are
not to be acknowledged any true Churches, then were not the Corinthians, in the
time of St. Paul, the Church of Christ, since not only many schisms
distracted them, while one professed, I am of Paul; another, I am of Cephas;
and a third, I am of Apollo: but also strange contests and controversies about
Religion had filled them with feuds and animosities. So also will it follow in
Galatia: for in those Churches, soon after they had been excellently planted
and constituted by St. Paul, there crept in many seducers, by whom diverse
heresies were sowed among them. In a word, it must be concluded from thence,
that there never were any, either in the East or West, that could be truly
said to have been Churches; because they were never free from contentions, not
only raised between the Catholics and Heretics (which had degenerated from
Catholics) but even among the holy Fathers themselves, as Histories abundantly
witness: insomuch, that the Christians, by reason of those dissensions and
sects, used to be derided and mocked by the unbelieving gentiles upon their
Theaters; as we have experience of the like usage at this day from the Turks
and Jews upon the same cause. But as in the primitive Church, it did not follow
from those disagreements of the Christians, that they were not therefore the
people of God; so neither can it with equity be otherwise reputed of us, but
that we have reason to affirm the contrary to be thence deducible; it being
the property of the good wheat, viz. of the Gospel, by which the Churches are
gathered to Christ, that where that is sown, the enemy (Satan) should soon
after scatter his tares in the same field. Neither indeed were the champions of
darkness, as Simon, Menander, Ebio, Cerinthus, Valentinian, and other the like
plagues, heard of any where more, or sooner, then in the Church, and that upon
the first preaching of the Gospel of Christ. Besides, that the Church at
present in the world, could not truly be termed the Church Militant, had it
not enemies both within and without, wherewith perpetually to encounter.

DOCT. X. That the peace of the Church is not to be disturbed, or schisms
raised upon every difference in doctrine or ceremonies.
MOreover, we do not approve, that any man should make a separation from his
own Church, or disturb the peace of the Churches, and infringe brotherly love;
much less that one Church should condemn another, for every difference in
doctrine or ceremonies, where the foundation is retained: as heretofore Victor,
Bishop of Rome, when he went about to excommunicate the Churches of Asia,
because they dissented from him in some rites, was deservedly reprooved by
Irenaeus Bishop of Lions. For the Apostle would not have schisms caused in the
Church, or the Churches condemned, because of building stubble or hay upon the
foundation, seeing the Church does not cease to be a Church, and that holy, and
the beautiful spouse of Christ, although she be black, or have a few wrinkles
and moles. In brief, Ca^t. 1.5. and 2.10. Ephesians. 5.27.
although errors and defects are not to be connived at; yet wheresoever the
foundation and principles of the Apostolical Doctrine are firmly held, and so
no manifest idolatry admitted, we conceive that peace and communion is to be
embraced with those assemblies, as with the true Churches of Christ: so great
is the regard we ought to have of the unity of the Churches.

DOCT. XI. That we ought to endeavor the unity of the Catholic Church.
THerefore forasmuch as that one whole, and Catholic Church now Militant on
earth is composed of several particular Churches as of it is parts; if we ought
to seek unity in the Lord with every particular, then we cannot but
acknowledge it much more our duty to endeavor the unity of the whole Catholic
Church.

DOCT. XII. What is to be understood by the unity of the Catholic Church.
BY the unity of the Catholic Church we understand the conjunction of all the
elect and regenerate, in what parts of the world soever with Christ their head,
and amongst themselves in one body, wrought by the holy Ghost; which in the
Creed we call the communion of Saints.

DOCT. XIII. What is meant by the unity of the Catholic Church.
BY the unity of the Catholic Church we understand that conjunction made by
the Holy Ghost of all the elect and regenerate, in what parts of the world
soever, with Christ the Head, and amongst themselves into one body; which in
the Creed we call the communion of Saints. For the Apostle also describing this
unity, teaches that the Church is a body, Ephesians. 1.12. 1 Cor. 12 12. Col. ^.18.
Ephesians. 4.12. Ephesians. 2.15. Romans 8.11.
consisting of diverse members, whose head is Christ, building up all believers
into one man by his Spirit, quickening, acting and preserving them. Therefore
the unity of the body and all the members with the head, and amongst
themselves, is the unity of the Church, as St. Augustine has also defined it
against the Donatists, T. 7. de unitat. Ecclesiae c. 2.

DOCT. XIII. That the unity of the Church does summarily consist in the same
faith in Christ, and in love toward the brethren.
BUt insomuch as God uses both our faith in Christ, which is implanted in our
souls by the word of the Gospel and by the Sacraments, and also our charity
with the duties thereof toward our neighbor, as the means to preserve and
cherish this conjunction; yea further, since these are the manifest testimonies
of the communion of the Saints and their conjunction with Christ, therefore we
confess in sum, that the unity of the Catholic Church consists in the unity
of faith, and in the bond of brotherly love: that is, that we do all embrace
with true faith the same doctrine which the Prophets and Apostles have
delivered us in their writings, and profess it in the purity thereof; that we
retain the same Sacraments, which Christ has instituted, entirely, and no
other; that we do not neglect the discipline appointed and commanded by Christ;
in which mutual affection is exercised, and the salvation of an offending
brother is aimed at; and lastly that we love one another, and practice all the
duties of charity.

DOCT. XIV. A confirmation of the former doctrine.
FOr we conceive, that by what means diverse people are gathered into one body,
by the same also they are preserved in union, and become more and more
established therein. Wherefore since the gathering of the Church is neither
effected nor preserved properly by ceremonies; but by the holy Ghost, by the
word, by faith, charity, and the observance of Gods commandments; it can not be
doubted but that the unity thereof is retained and cherished by the same. Which
is also attested by the Apostle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.2, etc.
where treating of the Churches unity, he teaches it to consist in these
things, without making mention at all of ceremonies.

DOCT. XV. That, although unity in ceremonies be not requisite in all places
and times, yet wherever it is embraced it ought not to be disturbed.
Nevertheless we deny not, but that unity also in the ceremonies and rites of
every Church ought to be retained and endeavored as far as possibly may be
with safety of conscience. For there are two kinds of things wherein the unity
of the Church may be; namely, in some which are delivered in the word of God,
and in others which are not so; of which last sort are many Ecclesiastical
ribes and ceremonies. In which respect as we believe unity in the former to be
every where and always necessary; we conceive that although it be not
absolutely necessary as to these latter, but profitable to have several
distinct rites according to the diversity of places, and various conjuncture of
times, yet where any of these particular matters is certainly ordained and
admitted, there unity ought to be retained in these kind of rites, and
Ecclesiastical orders not to be disturbed; according to the rule of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.40.
That all things be done in the Church decently, in order, and to edification.
Concerning which matters we likewise very much approve and commend two Epistles
of St. Austin to Ianuarius, Epist. 118, and 119.

DOCT. XVI. The conclusion concerning the unity of the Church.
THerefore, seeing Ecclesiastical unity is of two sorts; one essential, and
so of it self always and every where necessary, and consequently proper to the
Catholic Church; the other accidental, and mutable according to the diverse
occasions of times and places, and thence proper to particular Churches: we
believe it is not lawful for any person to separate from the former at any
time or for any cause, it being no less then to depart from Christ and God, to
renounce the holy Ghost, and divide himself from the whole body of Christ;
which is altogether a perfect and execrable Apostasy. But we are of opinion
that to desert that which is accidental, in consideration of returning to and
maintaining that which is essential, is not only lawful but necessary for
every man; and the rather, if those rites and ceremonies, wherein the unity
was, be corrupted with several superstitions: but especially, if even the
Sacraments instituted by Christ be perverted or wholly abolisht, so that a good
conscience cannot partake of them. And how much more, if the heavenly truth be
banished from them, and the doctrines of devils preached and desended in stead
of them? and further, when you shall not be allowed so much as to be silent,
but compelled either to renounce God's truth, and subscribe to diabolical
lies, or pay your life for your refusal?

DOCT. XVII. That, whosoever has departed from the Roman Church, has not thereby
broken the unity of the Church, and forsaken the body of Christ.
FOrasmuch therefore as we are accused of Apostasy from the Catholic and
Apostolic Church of Christ, and censured to have broken the unity thereof, in
regard we refuse to communicate any longer with the assemblies of the Roman
Church in their wicked superstitions and Idolatrous worship; but choose rather
to follow the old doctrine, worship and discipline, revived through divine
mercy by the servants of Christ; we protest before God and his Angels and the
whole Church to the end of the world, that they do a high injury not to us
alone, but even to the holy Ghost and all the primitive Church; since we have
neither done not do any thing in this particular, whereunto we have not been
commanded by the holy Ghost, and taught by the Fathers, and likewise informed
of by the Popish Doctors themselves.

DOCT XVIII. The same confirmed.
FOr our Lord gives particular advertisement, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Cor. 6.14, etc.
Tit. 3.10. Romans 16.17.
that weeschew communion with idolaters and obstinate apostates and heretics
in their idolatries and heresies. C. 24. q. 1. c. 24, and 26. and q. 3. c. 9.
Nor have the Fathers taught otherwise (as they are produced for witnesses
hereof even in the Decree it self, then that if, not only any man, but any
Church do reject the faith, and retain not the principles of Apostolical
Religion preached by the Apostles, nor persist in the doctrine of Christ, it is
to be deserted. And it is certain, C. 24. q. 1. c. 9.
the Roman Church, which flourished in the days of the ancient Fathers, was
then extolled so much by them, and styled the holy Church, and the Mother of
the Churches; for no other cause then for that it held steadfastly the doctrine
received from the Apostles, when most part of the rest had departed from it.
But in these days what doctrine and worship they profess, and how much they
have in many particulars degenerated, is sufficiently known: Wherefore we again
protest that we have separated from the present Roman Church only upon
inducement from the word of God, and in obedience to the command of God
therein; and in that respect deemed it necessary to depart from the idolatries
of this most corrupted Roman Church, that we might no longer continue in
apostasy from the Catholic and Apostolic Church, but at length return into
her bosom.

DOCT. XIX. That we have not absolutely departed from the Roman Church, but
only in some particulars.
FOr we have not forsaken the Roman Church generally and in all regards; but
only in those things, wherein she is fallen from the Apostolic Church and
from her self, the ancient and pure Church. Nor have we departed from her with
any other mind, then of returning to her, and renewing communion in her
assemblies, in case she would reform and resume her former purity. Which that
it may at length come to pass, we pray unto the Lord Jesus with our whole
souls. For what can be more desirable by every pious man, then that where we
were born again by Baptism, there also to live unto the last; so it be in the
Lord?

I Hierome Zanchie with my whole family do declare this to the whole Church of
Christ, to all eternity.

DOCT. XX. That the whole Catholic Church is not suffered to fall into error,
but that all particular Churches may err.
BUt we believe and acknowledge, that this Catholic Church, which we have
described above, is so governed by the Spirit of Christ, that he will never
suffer all of it to err at the same time: because he always preserves the
light of truth in some pious persons, and by their ministry keeps it pure to
the end of the world and propagates it to succeeding ages. Whereunto we do not
doubt to apply that of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3.15.
that the Church is the pillar and ground of the truth; because there is no
truth out of the Church, but it is constantly preserved in it; seeing there is
always some assembly found great or small, in which the word of truth is
preached. But we conceive the matter is far otherwise in the case of
particular Churches, which are always mixed of good and bad. For first, in
these assemblies, either the pure word of God is preached, or errors are
taught with it. But where there is no ministry of the word at all, there we
acknowledge no Church. If therefore false tenets be preached together with the
truth, how can it be affirmed that such assembly cannot err, when it erres
manifestly? But if the pure word of God be taught, yet the hypocritical
reprobates who believe not, do always err, seeing they reject the light of
truth, and walk in darkness; and of such there is almost ever the greatest
number in all places. Nevertheless the godly, although they are never suffered
by Christ so to err as to persevere in error and perish; Mat, 24.14.
since Christ says the Elect cannot be seduced even by the miracles and
wonders of Antichrist, namely to the end unto destruction: yet they may err,
both severally, and many together, and that not only in point of manners but
also in the doctrine of faith; as is apparently evidenced by the holy and
Ecclesiastical histories, and what has happened even to the godly and religious
Bishops, and to their Churches in the East and West.

DOCT. XXI. The confirmation of the precedent assertion.
St. Peter indeed erred at Antioch, and sundry persons in the Church of
Corinth; and very many in those of Galatia, being seduced by false Apostles
fell into heinous errors; although they were not long after reclaimed from
their errors by the Apostle. Gal. 2.11, etc. 1 Cor. 11, etc. Gal. 1.6, etc.
Psalm. 119.176.
David also teaches that even the sheep of Christ may err, when he says, I
have gone astray like a lost sheep, And why is the ministry of the word in the
Church necessary for all the faithful, if they are not liable to error?
Therefore since all, even godly men, have often erred severally, and do
frequently err, in some particular Church, and that true and pure too, and
that hypocrites never have the gift of true faith, by which to understand that
which is right; with what reason can it be said of any particular Church, that
it is impossible for it to err? And with much less can it be affirmed of
those which are estranged from the truth, and in which lies and the Spirit of
iniquity and gross darkness do prevail. Certainly they that are so
qualified cannot be the true Churches of Christ, if the Church be the pillar
and ground of truth. Wherefore we conclude, 1. Tim. 3.15.
that every particular flock and all the several sheep thereof, are so far
incapable of erring, as being lead by the holy Spirit, they give ear only to
the voice of Christ their shepherd; but as soon as they cease to attend to
him, and listen to the voice of strangers, from thence forth they can do
nothing else but err. John 10.5, 27.
But forasmuch as even in the greatest dissipation of all Churches the divine
goodness reserves some to himself whom he retains in the truth, and by whose
ministry he will again propagate it to the end of the world; therefore we
confess, That the whole Catholic Church is not permitted err, etc.

DOCT. XXII. That there is no salvation out of the Catholic Church.
FRom hence also by consequence we understand and believe this Catholic Church
so to be the only holy one, and to be saved, that out of it there is no
holiness, no salvation: and since the truth so shines in her alone, without
which salvation belongs to no man, that there is none out of her; and lastly
since none besides the body of Christ can be saved, For no man has ascended up
to heaven, John 3.13.
but he that came down from heaven, even the son of man which is in heaven,
viz. the whole son of man, with his whole body, which is the Church; so that
St. Peter has not unfitly compared the Church to the Ark of Noah, 2 Pet. 2.5.
in which alone mankind was saved, and as many as were found out of it perished
in the waters, Genesis 7.23.
But what we confess to be most true of the whole Church, we cannot grant the
same of every particular Church, namely to affirm that only in this or that
Church, in the Roman or Constantinopolitan, truth and salvation are to be had,
so as there is none without it, and consequently that it cannot be departed
from, but truth, and salvation and Christ must be forsaken too. For some Church
may be so qualified, that unless you renounce communion with it, you cannot
have part or communion with the Catholic, and the head thereof.

DOCT. XXIII. That the Catholic Church is not tied to certain persons or
places.
FUrthermore we confess that this Catholic Church, in regard it is Catholic,
is therefore tied to no certain places or persons and nations; so as, if any
person would be of this Church, it should be necessary for him to betake
himself either to Rome or Wittenberg, or to depend on the authority of those
Churches, their Bishop, and Ministers: seeing Christ is in all places, and
every where the word may be heard, the Sacrament of Baptism administered, the
precepts of Christ observed, and communion had with all the Saints. But
wheresoever these are exercised, there is the Church; in which consideration
the Donatists were worthily condemned, who circumscribed the Church of Christ
in Africa alone; and that not in all, but a part of it, namely where themselves
dwelt, and would not admit it to be any where else. Nor with less reason are
they to be condemned, who will not allow any Churches of foreigners to be true
Churches, but only those which consist of men of their own nation.

DOCT. XXIV. That the Catholic Church is partly visible and partly invisible.
LAstly we believe that this Church is indeed partly visible and partly also
invisible, but in diverse respects: to wit visible; in as much as it consists of
men, who visibly handle and hear the word of God, administer and partake the
Sacraments, call upon God both privately and publicly, exercise the offices of
charity toward their neighbor, and glorify God in their whole conversation;
which indeed cannot be performed without falling under the perception of the
senses: And if it were wholly invisible, how could it be discerned from the
Synagogues of the wicked? Again, we say it is invisible; first, because, being
it contains a great number of hypocrites, acting all the same outward things
with the elect, we cannot know how are the elect (of which alone the Church
consists) but it is known only to God, according to that, The Lord (alone)
knows them that are his. To which also belongs that of the Apostle, Romans
2.28, 29.
He is not a Jew which is one outwardly; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly.
Moreover, because that to the external appearance the Church is always
oppressed with calamities in the world, the number of those that profess the
faith of Christ is sometimes so diminished, and all the Christian Churches
driven into those streights, that there may seem to be no longer any remaining,
namely when there appear no more public assemblies in which the name of God is
called upon, as both the holy and Ecclesiastical histories do manifestly and
at large testify to have often happened; notwithstanding it is certain, God
always preserves a Church to himself upon the earth, as the Lord says, Matthew.
16.18. Matthew. 28.20.
And the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; also, Behold, I am with
you even to the end of the world: which is the same with what we confess with
the whole Church in the Creed, saying, I believe the holy Catholic Church, to
wit, to have been from the beginning, to exist now, and to endure to the end of
the world, upon the earth. For properly we always believe those things which
we do not always see. Heb. 11.1.
This is our confession concerning the Church Militant: 1. What it is. 2. How
it differs from the Triumphant. 3. How it is often diverse from it self. 4. How
one Catholic consists of many particular. 5. By what marks the true may be
distinguished from the false. 6. What succession of Bishops, and what kind of
consent is sufficient to demonstrate a true Church. 7. That the unity of the
Church is not to be violated upon every difference, although it be in doctrine
it self. 8. What is to be understood by the unity of the Church, and wherein
it consists; also how great account is to be made of it. 9. How far it may
err, and how far it may not; and how out of the Church there is no
salvation. 10. And lastly how far it is visible, and how far invisible. It
remains that we speak of the government of it.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Government of the Church Militant, and of the
Ecclesiastical Ministry.
DOCTRINE I. That the Church is governed by Christ.
WE believe, that as all things were made by Christ, are preserved and governed
by him, Colos. 1.17.
so likewise the Church, which is his kingdom and body, is governed by him as
the author, Ephesians. 1.13.
king and head of the same, after a more peculiar manner then all other things
are: which is confirmed by that saying of the Angel concerning Christ, Luke
1.31.
And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and that of the Apostle,
^eb. 3.6.
He, as a son, is over his own house, which house are we, that is, the Church;
and in another place, Ephesians. 5.13.
He is the head of the Church, and gives life unto the body.

DOCT. II. That Christ does govern the Church partly by himself, partly by the
ministry of others.
BUt we understand a double sort of government, whereby Christ rules his
Church; one, by which he by himself, and by his Spirit, without any cooperation
of men reigns internally in the minds of believers, and works in them both
to will and to do, Phil. 2.13.
and consequently all in all, Ephesians. 1.23.
and leads them to what is good, and defends them from evil against Satan, the
world and all their enemies; Another, by which he so governes the Church, as
not to disdain to make use of the ministry and care of others, as Angels, and
men especially, to the well fare of the Church; according to the Apostles
saying concerning Angels, That they are ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14.
sent forth to minister for them that shall be heirs of salvation, and
likewise concerning men, 1 Cor. 3.5.
We are the Ministers of God, by whom ye believed. For even as in man the head
of it self, by the power of the mind, which principally resides and acts in it,
does rule the whole body in such manner as yet to make use of every member for
the benefit of the whole; so also Christ performs the office of head of the
Church in the government thereof, and that not for his own sake, or that he
has need of our ministry, but he does it in regard of our necessity, together
with the manifold advantages and honor it receives thereby.

DOCT. III. The difference between the ministry of Angels and men.
BUt we admit a difference between the ministry of Angels and that of men; in
that they are not sent either to teach in the Church, or to administer the
Sacraments, but to perform other offices, and those for the most part
invisible, and not always or ordinarily, nor to all, but when and to whom it
seems best to God: but the ministry of men is both manifest and perpetual, and
belongs to all.

DOCT. IV. That it is not without great reason that Angels are not appointed to
teach in the Church, but men.
MOreover we conceive, that it is not without great reason and wisdom ordained
by God, that Christ should teach in the Church not by Angels, but by men;
as well because we are more ready to suffer our selves to be familiarly
instructed by such as our selves, then by spirits of a strange nature, and
unwonted majesty; as for that, we might otherwise be with more ease deceived by
Satan pretending a mission from God, and transforming himself into an Angel of
light: which two reasons are not the least in our judgment, why the Son of
God, when he assumed the office of a Teacher in the Church, would be made man,
our brother and familiar, Heb. 4.15.
and like unto us in all things, sin only excepted; whereunto that may be
referred also; Heb. 2.12.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church will I
sing praise unto thee; and that, Heb. 1.1.
In these last days he has spoken unto us by his son, to wit, when he was
made man, and conversed familiarly in the Church.

DOCT. V. That there are two sorts of men chiefly, whose ministry Christ uses
to the government and protection of his Church.
ALthough in all this great body of the Church there is no member, which Christ
does not employ to some benefit of the other members, and consequently of the
whole body according as St. Paul teaches; 1 Cor. 1^.7.
yet in the mean while we confess there are two principal sorts of men, whose
ministry and help he uses to the government and preservation of the Church; as
in the first place, the Teachers and other ministers of the word and Sacraments
and charges Ecclesiastical; and next pious Princes and Magistrates:
Nevertheless we do not confound their functions one with another, but
acknowledge them to be not only distinct but of a much diverse nature; amongst
whose differences this is not the least, that the ministry of Teachers is
always necessary for the Church, but that of the civil Magistrate is not so,
since the Church never was destitute of the former, but has oftentimes wanted
and may want the latter.

DOCT. VI. In what things the Ecclesiastical ministry is principally employed.
BUt as the sum of Christian Religion confists in three things; namely, in
faith in Christ; in continual repentance, that is, in the mortification of our
flesh and lusts, and in the quickening of the spirit; and lastly in love toward
our neighbor: so also we conceive there are three principal parts of the
Ecclesiastical ministry; first, to teach and preach the word of the Gospel,
and likewise to administer the Sacraments, and offer the public sacrifices of
praise to God; next, to watch over the flock, to observe the conversation of
every one, to be diligent in the correction of wickedness, and to take care
that every one, as a true Priest, present himself a living sacrifice, Romans
12.2.1
holy and acceptable to God; and lastly, to undertake the care of the poor, and
sedulously to endeavor that nothing be wanting to any one.

DOCT. VII. That according to the three parts of Ecclesiastical ministry,
there are appointed three orders of Ecclesiastical ministers,
SO likewise according to these three parts of Ecclesiastical ministry
abovementioned, we see in holy writ three especial orders of Ecclesiastical
ministers appointed by the Lord: the first whereof is chiefly employed in those
things which appertain to the exciting and cherishing of faith in Christ; such
are the Teachers and Pastors which administer the word and Sacraments in the
congregations of the faithful: the second in those things which are peculiarly
ordained for the exciting of repentance in the brethren; such are the Elders,
and Overseers of manners, who undertake the care of discipline, and use all
their endeavors that every one live Christianly and piously, to the glory of
God and edification of the Church; of which the Apostle treats in several
places, but chiefly in the Epistle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.17, 19.
according as that place is expounded by St. Ambrose and all the best
interpreters: but the third especially manageth those things, which appear to
belong to charity, as the taking care of the poor and sick; Romans 16.1. 1 Timothy
3.2, 12. Phil. 1.1.
such are the Deacons spoken of in the Acts, and otherwhere frequently by St.
Paul.

DOCT. VIII. That some ministers are ordinary and perpetual; others
extraordinary, and called only for a time.
MOreover of Ecclesiastical ministers, especially of those which are to preach
the word, and undertake the care of the whole Church, we understand there are
two principal kinds: One of those which the Lord Jesus does ordinarily adjoine
fellow laborers with himself, in the gathering, teaching, and ruling of his
Church; and consequently as his will is, should be perpetual in that charge,
who are wont to be called ordinary ministers; such were the High Priests and
Levites in the Church under the Old Testament, and in the new the Teachers and
Pastors: The other, those whom the Lord raises up extraordinarily, calling and
sending them into the Church; that when the ordinary neglect their duty, and
destroy the Church, they may both reduce them to good order, and reform the
Church to it is pristine estate and preserve it; such were the Prophets in the
Old Testament, raised out of other tribes besides that of Levi; and in the new,
the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, which the Lord peculiarly chose to
himself, that, when all was destroyed in every place, as well amongst the
Israelites as Gentiles, he might gather, teach, and preserve Churches to
himself in all places by their ministry. In the number of these extraordinarily
called, we cannot but place many and heroical and courageous men, and true
servants of God in our times; who, when all was destroyed, were excited by the
Spirit of Christ to oppose themselves against the Catholic Apostacy, and to
restore anew the ancient doctrine, worship, and discipline in the Church; and
that notwithstanding the vain resistance and rage of the ordinary Bishops,
Kings, and most powerful Princes, and all the world.

DOCT. XI. That only five orders of ministers of the word were constituted by
Christ.
BUt we do not acknowledge that more orders of ministers of the word were
instituted by Christ in the Church, then those which the Apostle has expressed
in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers: Ephesians. 4.11.
of which the first three he would not have confirmed to any certain places, to
but to be now here, now there, either to gather Churches to themselves, as the
Apostles did, or to water, cherish, and confirm those which were already
planted by the Apostles, as the Prophets and Evangelists did, who for that
reason ought not to have been perpetual. Act. 20.28. Phil. 1.1 1 Timothy 3.2.
Tit. 1.7. 1 Pet. 2.25. 1 Pet. 5.1. Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.15. Iam. 5 14. Heb 6.1. 1
Pet. 5.1.
But the two latter, he would should be consecrated for the governing and
preserving of some certain Churches, namely Pastors and Teachers, and that to
the end of the world; whom therefore we use to call the ordinary and perpetual
ministers. For whereas as the Apostles often make mention of Bishops, Elders,
and Catechists, that does not evince them to have been distinct orders of
ministers of the word; because they that were Pastors, were always the same
with those which were signified by the name of Bishops, and very often with
that of elders: besides, the Apostle Peter styles himself an Elder. The office
of the Catechists was performed not only by the Pastors and Teachers, but
likewise by the Apostles themselves and the Evangelists.

DOCT. X. That we do not blame the Fathers, for adding other orders of
ministers.
BUt to omit such whose ministry was to endure but for a time, and who we said
were called extraordinarily, let us speak only of those which are ordinary
and perpetual. Although we read in the Apostle but of two of these orders
given to the Church by Christ, Ephesians. 4.^^.
namely, Pastors, and Teachers; of which these did only teach, and those
administer the Sacraments also and were encharged with the discipline and
government of the Church: Yet we do not blame the Fathers, for that according
to the various occasions both of dispensing the word and governing the Church,
they did also multiply diverse orders of ministers; since it was free for them
so to do, as likewise for us; and since it is manifest, that it was done by
them for Religious intents, touching order and decency, and at that time to the
edification of the Church.

DOCT. XI. The same opinion confirmed, with an explication of some of the
Ecclesiastical orders in the primitive Church.
FOr we know that our God is the God of order, not of confusion; and that the
Church is preserved by order: but ruined without it: for which reason he
appointed many distinct orders of ministers, not only heretofore in Israel,
but also afterward in the Church gathered of Jews and Gentiles, and upon the
same reason likewise left it free to the Churches, to add or not add others,
so it were unto edification. Therefore, whereas at first all ministers of the
word were called both Pastors, Bishops, and Presbyters, and were of equal
authority, till afterward one began to preside over his colleagues, although
not as a Lord, but only as a Ruler in a University over the other colleagues,
and the care of the whole Church became especially committed to him, and so by
way of eminency he alone was called by the name of Bishop and Pastor, the rest
of the ministry being contented with the title of Presbyters (or elders,) so
that in every City there was one Bishop and many Presbyters; this we disapprove
not in our judgment. Concerning which the relation and opinion of St. Hierome,
(as well in other places, as in his Epistle to Euagmis, and in his commentaries
on the Epistle to Titus, Tit. c. 10.
is received by us, where he says, all this has proceeded rather from custom
then from the direct appointment of our Lord, that the occasions and nurseries
of dissensions and schisms might be taken away. And in this respect we
conceive, Did. 93. c.23.
that what has been constituted also as to Archbishops, yea and the four
Patriarchs created before the Council of Nice, may be excused and defended;
although afterward in process of time all has been changed into the greatest
tyranny and ambition. Which is the cause that by how much the more the
simplicity of the Apostolic times, in those orders of ministers, is followed
and approached unto, by so much the more it has our approbation; and we do
judge it convenient that care be taken in all places to conform the government
thereunto.

DOCT. XII. That one person, as head, can by no means be set over the whole
Church.
BUt that one person should be set over all the Churches in the whole world, as
head of them, and have authority and full power over them all, is a thing we
can in no wise admit of; but contrarily, do no less then abominate it, and
much rather if that person arrogate so much to himself by divine right. Lib. 4.
Regist. Ep. 21. and lib. 6. Ep. 30.
And we embrace the saying of Gregory the first to Mauritius the Emperor,
Whosoever calls himself Universal Priest, or desires to be called so, he
usurps that name to himself contrary to the precepts of the Gospel, and the
decrees of the Canons, and is the forerunner of Antichrist.

DOCT. XIII. That not every one, but he only that is sent by Christ, is to be
admitted into the ministry.
WE believe also that it is necessary to the true and safe governing of the
Church, that not every one, either obtruding himself, or sent by others, ought
to be admitted into the ministry; but that he who undertakes the ministry must
be first known, whether or no he be called and sent by God, or Christ the head
of the Church, to the Ecclesiastical function; and next that he be in a
lawful manner chosen and ordained by the Church it self; according to the
saying of the Apostle, Heb. 5 4.
No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron, etc.

DOCT. XIV. Who are called to the ministry by Christ.
BUt we believe them to be called by Christ to the ministry, whom he has
enabled and made fit to undertake it; and those fit, to whom, besides the
desire of propagating the Kingdom of God, and glorifying God by a holy life,
he has given the knowledge of sound doctrine, and ability to propound it to
the people for their salvation, as the Apostle teaches, both otherwhere and 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 2.6.
in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus. For whom God chooses and calls to any
function, he endues them with gifts necessary to the performance of the same;
since he calls us rather in deed, then by words. And therefore they who hold
not the sound doctrine of the Gospel, nor teach the same to the people, but
rather that which is contrary unto it; whether they run of their own accord,
or are sent by men, entrusted with the ordinary authority of sending; yet we
acknowledge them not for ministers called by Christ, and consequently do not
account them fitting to be heard: as St. John says, 2 John 10.
If there come any unto you: and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into
your house, neither bid him God speed, and God also by the Prophet Jeremy
describes those Prophets which were sent by him, and those which were not, in
these words, Ier. 23.21.
I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet
they prophesied: where explaining the former clauses by the latter, he teaches
that those are not sent by him, who speak not out of the mouth of God; and on
the contrary, that they who bring the word of God, are sent by him. And we are
not to seek for the reason hereof: For seeing Ephesians. 4.12.
ministers are sent of God for the edification of the Church, which is rather
destroyed by the doctrines of men, but built up by the word of God; certainly
they are not sent by God, who bring not his word with them.

DOCT. XV. That Christ calls men to the ministry two ways.
FUrthermore, seeing all truly ministers are called by Christ, we believe that
he calls men to the ministry after a double manner; namely either Gal. 1.1.
immediately by himself alone, or mediately by men, that is, by the Church; and
therefore they are both equally to be heard, and accounted the true ministers
of God.

DOCT. XVI. How Christ declares to the Church those that are sent by him, to be
sent by himself alone.
WHereas those whom Christ himself calls, he declares to be sent by himself
by rendering them all fit for that charge, he does it more especially in them
whom he calls and sends immediately by himself and by his Spirit
extraordinarily. For he is wont to endue them largely with peculiar and
excellent gifts, and chiefly with the holy Ghost in abundant measure, with
ardent zeal of the glory of God, singular knowledge of the word of God which
they bring, a profitable and perspicuous manner of teaching, and consequently
with happy success of their labors: whereby they are enabled with more speed
and efficacy to reduce the Churches to the ancient, that is, the Apostolic
frame; and their lawful and divine calling is more easily and certainly made
known to the Churches. Ephesians. 4.12.
Because all that Christ gives to the Churches as ministers, he gives them to
the edification thereof: from whence the conclusion is easily consequent, that
by whose means we observe the Churches to be edified, they are such as are
called by Christ, and their ministry is divine and lawful.

DOCT. XVII. That the calling of those ministers whom Christ sends
extraordinarily and by himself is not always confirmed by miracles; nor is it
needful it should be so.
FOr we do not believe that miracles are always necessary to the confirmation
of the ministry of this kind of ministers; since we do not read that the
mission of all the Prophets was confirmed by miracles, but only by the Spirit
of God, and the zeal of his glory wherewith they were enflamed, and especially
by the truth of the divine word which they preached not without advantage to
the Saints, that is, the elect in the Church: whereas on the other side some
even false Prophets did perform signs and wonders; 2 These. 2.9.
which also the Apostle has foretold should be done by Antichrist; and Matt.
24.24.
Christ before him. Which, notwithstanding, because they brought not the word
of God; but lies, and exhorted the people to go after strange Gods, the Lord
forbad them to be heard; yea, Deuteronomy 3.2, 10.
he commanded they should be stoned to death.

DOCT. XVIII. That the Churches which Christ restores by ministers
extraordinarily sent, are true Churches, and consequently there is a lawful
ministry in them, and they have lawful authority of calling and ordaining
ministers.
COnsidering the truth of what we have already delivered concerning ministers
extraordinarily called by Christ, we believe likewise that the Churches which
Christ by their means and ministry restores and happily reformes, in setting
up the preaching of true doctrine with the lawful administration of the
Sacraments, and purging the worship of God from idolatries and superstitions,
and recalling the true forms of discipline, as much as is possible to be done,
and consequently communion with the Apostles; that they are true Churches. And
from thence it follows that they have authority of calling and ordaining
ministers in a lawful manner, and by that means to continue the succession of
ministers amongst themselves: So that there remains no doubt, but that
ministers do there lawfully succeed, and are the true ordinary ministers of the
Church: namely, so long as, together with the personal succession, as it is
called, they likewise succeed and persist in the preaching of sound doctrine.

DOCT. XIX. That, as where true doctrine is, there is a true Church; so where
it is not, there is neither a true Church nor a lawful ministry.
FOr we are well assured that as where the true doctrine only, even without a
continued succession of Bishops from the beginning, can be shown, there is a
true Church, and likewise a true and lawful ministry; so, on the contrary
where only a personal succession is boasted of, but the purity of doctrine
truly Christian is defaced, there is no lawful ministry: since as the Church,
so the Ecclesiastical ministry, is not tied to persons but tot he word of God.

DOCT. XX. That the authority of ministers extends only to those things,
whereunto themselves are called by Christ.
WE believe also that great authority is given by Christ to lawful ministers,
namely, as to the performance of those things whereunto they are called; Matt.
28.19.
to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 12.10.
to expound the holy writ according to the analogy of faith, Heb. 6.1.
to catechize, Gal. 6.6.
to teach the people what is the will of God, 2 Timothy 4.1.
to reprove and admonish both great and small, John 20.21.
to remit and retain sins (ministerially) Matt. 18.18.
to bind (the impenitent) and to loose (those that repent;) also to administer
the Sacraments which Christ ordained, and according to the manner Matt. 28.19.
1 Cor. 11.23, etc.
delivered by him, and exercise discipline; as it is commanded by Christ and
likewise 1 Cor. 5.4.
explained by the Apostle; lastly, to all those things which, though not
expressed in the holy word, do notwithstanding appertain to order and decency,
and tend to edification, not to destruction, according to the general rule
delivered by the Apostle, That 1 Cor. 14.40.
all things should be done in the Church in order, decently, and to
edification. For we do not believe that any authority is given to ministers to
any other end then for the edification of the Church, or that is of greater
extent then the word of God. And therefore we deny that any Bishop, or even
altogether, have authority to constitute any thing against the Scriptures, to
add to them or detract from them, or make any alteration in them, to dispense
with the commands of God, to make new articles of faith, to institute new
Sacraments, to induce new kinds of worship into the Church, to make laws which
may bind the conscience or be of equal authority with the divine Law, to
domineer in the Church and over the consciences of the faithful, to forbid
what God has licensed and left free, or lastly to command any thing as
necessary to salvation not contained in the word of God; seeing not even the
whole Church can with truth be said to have this authority.

DOCT. XXI. That we do not deny the civil authority of such Bishops as are
also Princes.
Nevertheless we do not gainsay, but that Bishops who are also Princes beside
their Ecclesiastical authority, have their political rights and secular
powers, (as well as other Princes have authority in ruling over temporalls) the
power of the sword, some a right of electing and confirming Kings and
Emperors, and of constituting and administering other civil affairs, to
compel the people that are their subjects to perform their obedience to them:
And therefore we confess that their political commands which can be observed
without transgressing the divine law are to be obeyed by their subjects not
only out of fear, but for conscience sake. For we know Romans 15.1, 2.
that all power is from God, and whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God; also that 1 Pet. 2 17, 18.
Kings are to be honored, and that we ought to be subject to Princes and Lords
with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward and
perverse.

DOCT. XXII. That matrimony ought to be as free for ministers of the Church,
for for as for others.
BUt we believe that this is necessary to the good deportment and salvation of
ministers, and to the honor of the ministry, and so to the right governing of
the Church, to wit, that marriage be as freely permitted to them as it is to
all Laypersons; seeing Christ has not forbidden it to any sort of men: yea,
speaking of single life, he says Mat. 19.11.
All men cannot receive this saying, namely, that commends singleness of life,
intimating that which the Apostle has in plain terms expounded, namely 1
Cor. 7.9.
If a man cannot contain, he ought to marry. Heb. 13.4.
For we confess with the Apostle that marriage is honorable in all, and the
bed undefiled.

DOCT. XXIII. That it is good and commendable for any one that is endued with
the gift of continency to abstain from Marriage.
NOtwithstanding we deny not, but such as have received the gift of continency
from God, have greater advantage to exercise the holy function, and to serve
the Church, then such as are joined in matrimony; by reason of the many weighty
cares and troubles which marriage is attended with, whereby they are oftentimes
even unwillingly drawn away from their divine contemplations to domestic
affairs and the incombrances of the present life: according to the saying of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.32, 33.
He that is unmarried, cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he
may please the Lord; But he that is married cares for the things that are of
the World, how he may please his Wife, and is divided. Wherefore, as they are
not unworthy of praise, who therefore take a Wife, that they may live unto God
with a clean and pure conscience; so they are highly to be commended, who the
better to employ their endeavors in the Church, choose a chaste single life,
and continue therein so long as is possible for them.

DOCT. XXIV. That marriages are to be contracted in the Lord, and religiously
observed.
MOreover we know and confess that all marriages are to be contracted 1 Cor.
7.39.
in the Lord, according to the divine law and that of nature; and that they are
also holily to be observed according to the honest and good customs of places;
and that it is unlawful for any man to put away his Wife: Matthew. 19.9.
saving for the cause of fornication: but if an unbelieving woman refuse to
cohabit with her believing Husband out of hatred to religion, she is not to be
retained by force; 1 Cor. 7.15.
for the faithful Husband is not under bondage in such cases; but God has
called him to peace.

DOCT. XXV. That it is no less lawful for him that has divorced an
adultresse, or is forsaken by an unbelieving Wife, to contract new matrimony,
then for him whose Wife is deceased.
WE believe also that it is not less lawful for him who has either lawfully
repudiated an adulteress, or is deserted by an unbelieving Wife, to enter into
marriage anew, then for a person whose former Wife is dead. For that saying of
the Apostle concerning all unmarried persons and Widows is perpetually true
and wholesome, 1 Cor. 7.8, 9.
It is good for them if they abide even as I. But if they cannot contain, let
them marry; for it is better to marry then, etc.

DOCT. XXVI. That some ought to be appointed in the Church to judge of
controversies touching Marriage.
BUt we do not approve that any of these things be done in the Church without
the lawful cognizance, judgment and opinion of the Church and the Christian
Magistrate, where there is any; and therefore we conceive that there ought to
be constituted some pious, knowing and prudent persons for the cognizance and
judgment of masters touching matrimony, so that nothing be done rashly and
imprudently therein, or every man make his own pleasure his law; but that all
things be done in a due manner, 1 Cor. 14.26.
to edification and without injury to any, whilst Romans 2.24.
the name of God be blasphemed through us among the unbelievers.

DOCT. XXVII. That they who are set over the Churches ought to take care that
the children of believers be brought up in Christian Religion, and instructed
either in good literature or an honest profession.
TO what we have already said is conjoined the care of children. Therefore we
believe it necessary for the perpetual preservation of the Church, that, not
only every private person do endeavor the education of their children in true
piety, and Christian manners, and either to good learning or some honest
profession, but also that the Church do undertake the cure of this a Fair, to
the end they may be in time rendered profitable both to Church and Commonwealth;
to which effect do conduce as well public Schools of literature, and the
exercising honest professions, as Ecclesiastical Catechizing and institutions.

DOCT. XXVIII. That Ministers with their families are to be supported with
competent and befitting stipends.
WE also believe that the Church cannot be rightly governed, unless the
Ministers be liberally supplied with all things necessary to a seemly sort of
living both for themselves and their families; seeing no man is able to
discharge his duty unless he be provided wherewith to live; and our Lord says,
Math. 10.10.
The labourour is worthy of his reward, as the 1 Cor. 9.7, etc. 2 Timothy 2.17.
etc.
Apostle writes largely of this matter in sundry places, demonstrating to the
full, that Ministers who serve the Church ought to receive from the Church it
self whatsoever they have need of for this present life, and that they have
right to demand the same; so far it is from a sin in them to receive them, as
some do unreasonably pronounce it. Nevertheless 1 Timothy 3.8.
with the Apostle we highly condemn coveteousnesse in all persons, and
especially in Ministers; as likewise on the contrary we disapprove prodigality,
teaching that neither of these vices is to be cherished or endured.

DOCT. XXIX. That the goods of the Churches are not to be imbezell'd, but
distributed to the support of Ministers and other godly uses.
MOreover whereas many gifts have by the liberality of Princes and other good
men been heretofore, and are still in some places conferred on the Churches, we
judge it meet, that where Churches are possessed of such gifts, diligent care be
taken that they be not wasted nor converted to profane, much less to
sacrilegious uses; nor, when so converted, be permitted and connived at: but
that they be distributed only to the ends they were intended to, namely to
pious uses.

Yet we approve that Deuteronomy. 14.
ancient partition of Ecclesiastical goods, so as one part thereof go to the
godly Bishops, that is, the Teachers and Ministers of the word and their
families; another part to students deputed to the Ministry of the Church, and
to all that serve therein; a third part to poor people and strangers; and a
fourth to the reparation of Churches and Schools; to which part belong not only
the houses of Ministers, Teachers and Students, with their Libraries, and all
instruments and necessary to Churches and Schools; but also Hospitalls and
houses of charity for stranger, and other like places where those persons
dwell, of whom the Church ought to take a peculiar care.

DOCT. XXX. Of the manner of Christian Temples; what tongue, habit, and
ornaments are to be used in them; what Festivals ought to be observed; to whom
Prayers are to be made: and that rites and ceremonies ought to be arbitrary and
free, saving those which have been appointed by Christ or his Apostles.
BUt for that this reason is not the least, why believers do and ought to live
together in the same Cities, Towns and Villages, as far as possible they may,
namely to the end they might not only cherish their commou faith by holy
communication daily amongst themselves in private, and exercise mutual charity
in Christian offices, but also that they might in certain places and times
assemble together to praise and call upon God publicly, to hear his word,
partake the Sacraments, and perform the public works of charity toward the
poor; which things cannot be done without speech, and rites, and ceremonies:
therefore we declare our opinion of them also in brief after this manner.
Seeing it is out of all doubt that all things ought to be done in the Church to
edification, all appearance of superstition removed from it; we conceive that
true piety and the edification of the Churches do require, First, as concerning
Places, that if old and profained Temples be allowed of, they should be purged
from all Idols, and from the relics and footsteps of all idolatry and
superstition. For 2 Cor. 6.16.
what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Secondly, that no Language
be used, but such as is understood by the whole Church. For what edification
can arrive to the Church from an unknown tongue? The Apostle also expressly
commands 1 Cor. 14.21.
them to keep silence in the Church who speak in an unknown tongue, unless
the interpretation be added thereto. Thirdly, that all loosnesse in apparel,
all vanity, and every such ornament which is more beseeming the profane
Theaters of the Gentiles then the sacred Temples of Christians, and condure
more to the delighting of the flesh then edifying of the Spirit, be abolished:
But that all things be performed in the Churches with the highest reverence and
modesty, as in the sight of God and Angels. And although we conceive not that
the form of apparel which Ministers ought to wear either in or out of the
Ministry, is to be so much Contended about as thereby to disturb the peace of
the Churches: yet where the simplicity of the Apostolic times is nearest
approached unto and immitated, those Churches are judged most worthy to be
commended. Fourthly, that every Lordsday the Church be assembled into one holy
Congregation; since we see that even from the times of the Apostles to these
present, that day has been consecrated and sanctified to a sacred rest. Next
to the Sabbathday we cannot but approve the sanctifying of those days wherein
the remembrance of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, of his Circumcision,
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension into Heaven, and sending of the holy Ghost
upon the Apostles, was celebrated by the old Church. Upon other days, as every
Church shall judge it expedient they may congregate the people to an assembly
to hear the word, and receive the Sacraments, etc. Col 2.16.
But this with care, that all superstitious observation of d^^es be avoided.
Fifthly, that prayers be poured forth to God alone and to Jesus Christ, without
invocation either of Angels or Saints departed, as the Prophets and Apostles
and all the old Church did, as is evident in their ancient Collects; to say
nothing of the command of God, who will have Heb. 13.15.
the Sacrifice of praise and the fruit of the lips offered to himself alone.
Sixthly, concerning rites and ceremonies to be observed in the Church, the same
true piety and edification of the Churches requires that debates and disputes
concerning them be not too sharp and passionate, as if life and salvation
depended thereon; but that they be left free to the sense of every particular
Church, as we read in Socrates and other Ecclesiastical writers it was wont to
be in the ancient Church. In reference to which matters in general we approve
the Tow. 2. Ep. 118, and 119.
two Epistles of St. Austin to Ianuarius For these things conduce to the
edification of the Church.

DOCT. XXXI. That public Fasts are sometimes to be appointed, being most
profitable and commendable; but no man ought to be compelled thereunto.
TO the same effect, namely to the well governing of the Church, it is
requisite, that as private Fasts are free, so also that all be invited to join
in public, but no man constrained. The benefit of Fasts is beyond all
commendation; and it does not seldom happen, that there is a necessity for
them: so that the pious Magistrates and Ministers of the Church, are induced to
injoin public Fasts to the whole Church for diverting the heavy anger of God;
as we find it to have been usual both in the Old Testament and in the Primitive
Church. Not as if we merited remission of sins thereby, and a mitigation of
the divine wrath; but for that the flesh being subdued, the spirit is excited
to call upon God more ardently, and to appease him by our faith full
supplications. Nevertheless it is of importance to the edification of the
Church; that no man's conscience be forced and compelled to these kind of Fasts;
being they ought to proceed from a free, voluntary and truly humbled Spirit;
according to what the Apostle writes of distributing alms to the poor, that it
is not to be done with relenting or out of necessity, but as every one is
disposed in his own breast.

DOCT. XXXII. That at no time, not even that of public Fasts, any sort of food
is to be prohibited the Faithful.
HEnce likewise it follows, at no time, either of Fasts or not, any fort of
food is to be forbidden to any person soever; since Matt. 15.11.
nothing of that kind defiles a man, but all things are pure to the pure; and
the Apostle Tit. 1.15. 1 Timothy 4.1.
calls their doctrine of Devils which commands to abstain from meats upon the
account of Religion; how then can it conduce to the edification of the Church.

DOCT. XXXIII. That the Sick ought to be visited, comforted, and confirmed in
the Faith; and that dying persons be accompanied with our prayers and commended
to the Lord; and that the bodies of the departed are to be buried with decency.
NOr ought the Church to have less care of the Sick then of those that are in
heath, or of the deceased then the living, seeing they are all members of
Christ, and their bodies temples of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore we look upon it
as pertaining to the right governing of the Church; that there be godly and
prudent men appointed for the visitation of the Sick, to comfort them out of
the word of God and confirm them in the Faith, and if it be so, that the Sick
be called out of the world by the Lord, to encourage them in their departure:
showing them that the souls of the faithful, as soon as they forsake the body,
do instantly go to Christ in heaven, being carried thither by the Spirit of
Christ, and accompanied with his Angels; and that they are blessed which die in
the Lord. Moreover they may join in Prayer, and so go along with the expiring
persons even to the haven, and commend them to Christ. And for their bodies we
judge it meet that they be carried to the Sepulcher with decency as our
Churches teach both in words and practice, plainly testifying that they were
the temples of the Holy Ghost, now indeed cast down, but to be raised again in
due time and restored to eternal life. In the mean while their Sepulchers and
Dormitories are to be decently and reverently preserved; as is used amongst us.
Furthermore the children or parents, kindred and relations are to be comforted;
and we do both teach and endeavor to perform all Offices of humanity toward
them after the utmost of our power. And if a portion of the Psalms concerning
the resurrection of the dead be any where sung in the solemnity of the Funeral,
or some kind of Sermon or exhortation, made to the people, after the body is
committed to the earth, wherein an honorable mention may be made of other also
who have piously slept in the Lord; this we in no wise disallow: seeing it is
not intended for the benefit of the dead, but for the comfort and good of the
living, and the edification of the whole Church. For we believe that the souls
of the faithful, being separated from their bodies, do immediately depart unto
Christ in Heaven, and so have no need of our suffrages; but that the
edification of the Church is to be always promoted upon every occasion.

DOCT. XXXIV. That the Church cannot be rightly governed without lawful, free,
and Christian Assemblies and Synods of Ministers.
MOreover we are of a full persuasion, being taught both by Scripture and daily
experience, that the Church cannot be rightly governed unless at certain times
there be Assembles of Ministers as well private in every particular Church,
which are termed Consistories and Convocations, as public in every Province
and kingdom, which for this reason use to be called Provincial Synods; and
Universal (as far as may be) of all Nations in the whole Christian world, which
were called Oecumenicall Councils: in which it may be deliberated concerning
all things that belong to the safety, preservation and edification of the
Churches, every ones judgment freely heard, and determinations made by general
consent out of the word of God, and other the most approved Councils; as we
read to have been done by the Apostles and the whole ancient Church.

DOCT. XXXV. The same further comfirmed; and also of Ecclesiastical discipline.
FOr the Church is governed by discipline and cannot be rightly governed
without it. Discipline is the Method and institution, whereby we, as disciples
of Christ, learn in his School to live unto God, and to do all things according
to the doctrine of the Gospel both privately and publicly, to the edification
of the Church and our own salvation. So that it comprehends the whole sum of
Religion, the beginning, progress, and end thereof.

DOCT. XXXVI. That Discipline is twofold.
MOreover this discipline in the Church is of two kinds; one general and common
to all Christians, called by many the discipline of the people; the other is
proper to Ministers and persons designed to Ecclesiastical offices, which is
therefore wont to be called the discipline of the Clergy.

DOCT. XXXVII. The particulars of general Discipline.
THe common and popular discipline consists chiefly in these particulars; First
as to the groundwork, that when any one is received into the Church, that he
learn to know God and Christ, call upon him, and understand what his commands
are; This is performed by Catechizing, whereby the sum of Christ an
Religionis taught: being thus instructed, he is to profess his faith before
the whole Church, and to promise obedience to Christ and his Church according
to the doctrine of the Gospel. Romans 10.10. Mat. 28.20.
Secondly, because not to proceed in the way of God is to relapse, therefore to
the end the godly may make good progress in piety, they ought to meet together
in holy Assemblies at appointed times and places, and apply themselves to the
hearing of the word of God, to join in Prayer with others, and exercise charity
toward the poor by contributing their offerings liberally. Thirdly, in regard
that in this progress we oftentimes fall, some more grievously and with
greater scandal to the Church others less hainously, therefore there is
another particular consisting in the Censure of manners; Matt. 18 15. etc. 1 Timothy 5.20.
to wit, that every one do submit himself to their Censure, even to the end of
his life, and admit of brotherly correction. And if any one happen to fall into
some notorious offense manifest to the Church, and being reproved, do not
repent thereof, for which reason he deserves to be suspended from the Sacrament
for the time, until he give public testimony to the Church of his true
repentance; such a brother is to be excommunicated from holy things and bound;
nevertheless upon his repentance he is to be loosed, received again into
favor, and be admitted to communion. This is the first kind of discipline; the
end whererof is, that every one might live unto God, and at last die in the
Lord Jesus.

DOCT. XXXVIII. The particulars of Clerical Discipline.
ALlthough all persons, as well Ministers as Laymen (as they call them) be
subject to this kind of Christian discipline; yet amongst the Fathers there was
added to it a certain peculiar discipline of the Clergy; who are concerned not
only to guide for others with the word, but with the example of their lives
and diligent dischargeing of their duty. The particulars thereof are chiefly
these: First, that they abstain from many things, which otherwise may in some
manner be tolerated in the laity: Such are diverse delights of the flesh,
splendid equipage, costly banquets, rich household stuff, wicked servants, and
the like. Secondly, that they withdraw themselves from all those businesses of
this life, which hinder them from performing their charge, which principally
consists in the due officiating in holy duties, preaching the Word, and
exercising the discipline of manners; such businesses are Warfare, Merchandise,
Law-imployments, bartering, keeping of public Victualling-houses, and all
sordid professions and courses. Thirdly, that they give themselves more
diligently then the laity to the reading and study the holy Word, and endeavor
to attain such arts and languages as are advantageous to the understanding of
Scripture, and moreover bestow their time in prayer and holy contemplations.
Fourthly, that they promise obedience in all honest matters to the Bishop, and
his Metropolitan. Fifthly, that they use more vigilance and care not only to
the discharge of every their particular places, but in all those things that
appear to import the edification of the Church.

DOCT. XXXIX. That from the necessity of discipline is confirmed the necessity
of Synods.
THese are the principal parts of discipline, without which there is no
appearance how any Church can be duly governed and upheld. But how is it
possible this discipline can be in such places, where the Ministers never
convene together, to know what is wanting, or what irregularities are committed
in the Church, to denounce against evill-manners, to judge of doctrines, if any
new happen to spring up, and lastly to deliberate of all things which concern
the welfare of the Church? Wherefore we affirm that Assemblies of Ministers,
and Ecclesiastical Synods are very necessary to the right and safe government
of the Church; seeing no Polity, no Commonwealth nor Kingdom, can consist
without their Senates, Councils, Parlaments and other conventions. And it would
be very acceptable to us if the ancient custom of the Churches, which was
ratified by a new constitution of the Emperor Justinian, were recalled into
practice, namely, that Synods should be assembled in every Province at least
twice a year, and at fit times a Council gathered of the most learned, modest,
and prudent Ministers, and Ambassadors of Princes in all the Provinces that
profess the Gospel; which if ever, is certainly extremely necessary in these
calamitous times, wherein so many and such abominable heresies are brought back
again from hell. Wherefore with all our Soul we pray unto God the Father
through our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would raise up pious and valiant
Princes, such as Constantine, Valentinian and Theodosius, who by their
authority may assemble such a Synod wherein themselves being present and
ordering the same, there may be brotherly and friendly consultation touching
the happy agreement, peace, and safety of all the Churches out of the sacred
Word and by the Spirit of God, to the glory of God and the name of Christ, and
the safety and welfare of all the Elect.

DOCT. XL. Errors.
THerefore we disapprove all such things as are repugnant to the aforesaid
doctrine confirmed by holy Scripture; and chiefly these following particulars.
1. That the Church consists of men only, and that Angels do not at all belong
unto it. 2. That the true Church, which is the body of Christ, consists not
only of the elect, but also of reprobates and hypocrites, and that these are
true members of the Church. 3. That the Church does so consist of the elect and
truly holy, that no hypocrites are contained therein, and that they are never
in the holy writ included in the appellation of the Church. 4. That the Church,
which was before the coming of our Savior, was not the true Church of Christ,
but only the type of that which was to be gathered by Christ and his Apostles.
5. That the Church of Christ has two heads; one invisible and residing in
heaven, namely Christ; and another visible, and ruling upon earth, the Bishop
of Rome; with whom whosoever agrees not in all things pertaining to Religion,
nor obeys him in all things, he has no place nor name in the Church, and cannot
be saved. 6. To affirm of any particular Church that it cannot err in matter
of faith. 7. To confine the Church so to certain places and persons, as to
say, There only is the Church. 8. Not acknowledge them for Churches of Christ,
which although they had the fundamentals of faith, yet do not wholly accord in
ceremonies or some point of doctrine with us. 9. To make a separation from the
Churches for every kind of error, or by reason of the bad life of some
persons. 10. To maintain that where the true doctrine, right manner of worship,
and pure administration of the Sacraments, is excluded, there is
notwithstanding a true and Apostolical and pure Church, because a continued
succession of Bishops from the times of the Apostles can be demonstrated
therein; and contrarily, to deny those to be true Churches, which although they
retain the pure doctrine, the Sacraments entire, and the right discipline, yet
cannot show a personal and uninterrupted succession and continuation of
Bishops. 11. That the authority of any Bishop, as such, does extend beyond
those things whereunto he is called by Christ. 12. That the Church has
authority to alter something in the holy Scripture, or to dispense with the
commands of God, or frame new laws binding the conscience. 13. That it is not
lawful for Ministers of the Word to contract matrimony, or at least to marry
twice. 14. That it is not lawful for Ministers to receive a certain stipend.
15. That it is lawful to use an unknown tongue in the Church though no
interpretation be added. 16. That besides God and Jesus Christ the Mediator,
it is lawful for men to call upon Saints departed, and to direct prayers and
the sacrifice of thanksgiving to them. 17. That it is not lawful for
Christians, during the Fast of Lent, and certain other days, to eat some
kinds of food. 18. That the Church does well in praying for the Souls of
persons deceased that they may be delivered from fire of Purgatory.

CHAP. XXVI.
Having spoken of the first sort of men, whose Ministry God uses in the
government of the Church, namely, of Ecclesiastical Ministers, their functions,
and other matters appendant there unto; it remains that we deliver in brief,
what our belief is concerning the other, viz, the civil Magistrate. For the
Lord is wont to make use of his Ministry also, especially if he be a Christian,
for the protection and preservation of his Church.

DOCTRINE I. That every Magistrate, whither godly or wicked, is from God; and
that therefore no Magistrate is (simply) to be resisted.
WE believe that every Magistrate as well wicked as godly, is from the Lord
God, and that he is the Minister of God 1 Pet. 2.14.
sent for the punishment of evil doers and the praise of them that do well;
and that in that respect he is to be Romans 13.^.5, 7.
feared and honored, and obedience given to his commands as far as may be
with a good conscience, and without transgressing the divine law; and that not
only out of fear, but also for conscience sake, because God commands it; so
that as he is the Minister of God, he is not to be resisted, because Romans 13.2,
5.
Whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and God himself.

DOCT. II. That the Magistrate is not to be obeyed when he commands any thing
contrary to the will of God.
Nevertheless if the Magistrate injoyns us any thing contrary to his will by
whom he is sent, and whose Minister he professes himself to be, we do not
doubt (with the Apostles) but that we ought to deny obedience unto him, and
say, Acts. 5.29.
We ought to obey God rather then men; since such a Magistrate is not the
Minister of God in that particular. Wherefore, Romans 13.5.
if it behooveth us to be subject to and obey the Magistrate for conscience
sake and not only out of fear, then we conclude that in whole we cannot obey
for conscience sake, therein we ought not to obey for fear. In other matters,
we know that Romans 13.2.
he that resists the power, resists God, and receives damnation to himself.

DOCT. III. That we ought to pray for all Magistrates that they may faithfully
discharge their duties: and what the duty of every Magistrate is.
MOreover, because it is the duty of every free Magistrate both in making of
laws, pronouncing of judgments and likewise in punishing offenses, to use all
care and diligence that their subjects live according to virtue and nature, and
the laws of God, (the sum whereof is, that Tit. 2.12.
we live soberly, and so chastely and decently, righteous, and so quietly with
our neighbor, and godly in this present world;) and that they cannot perform
this duty of themselves, unless they be endued by God with the knowledge
thereof, and Phil. 2.13.
stirred up both to will and to do: therefore what we our selves do by the
precept of the Apostle, the same we teach others to do also; namely, that they
pray for the Magistrates, whatever they be, that they may become both willing
and able to acquit themselves of their charge, that thereby we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all honesty and godliness, that is, that we may
live commodiously and in peace together, that the honor of the public be
regarded, and true piety and religion maintained and promoted.

DOCT. IV. That it is the chief duty of a Christian Prince to undertake the
care of Christian Religion.
BUt if the Magistrate be a Christian and godly person, we believe that it does
especially belong to him to take a peculiar care of the Christian Religion,
besides their endeavors for the public and civil benefit and maintaining the
peace and honor of the society over which he is placed; seeing the Lord has
made him keeper of both Tables, and commands him, that as a Prince, Ios. 18.
he always have the Law in his hands, that he may as well Deuteronomy. 13.5.
punish idolaters, blasphemers, false prophets and seducers, etc. As murderers
and adulterers: and this according to the examples of the godly Kings in
Israel, and the Christian Princes, Constantine, Valentinian, Theodosius,
Justinian, and others, abundantly confirming the same; who according to the
command of God, did serve the Lord not only as private persons, but as Kings;
as St. Austin has most prudently observed concerning their duty out of the
second Psalm, and expounded the fame. Epist. 50. Ad Bonifacium Comi^em, Tom. 2.

DOCT. V. That the duty of a godly Prince is twofold; and wherein the first
part thereof consists.
MOreover, seeing the duty of a pious Prince, (that is, of such a Magistrate as
has a free power over any people, and authority to institute or reform
religion in his jurisdiction) which he owes to Christ and the Church is
twofold; whereof one consists in things pertaining to religion, and the other
has regard to to the persons under his jurisdiction and subject unto him. We
believe as to the first, that it is his duty in the first place to take
diligent care that religion be established, or being established be preserved
pure, in his principalities or kingdom; or if corrupted that it be restored
and reformed, and this according to the pure Word of God expounded by the Word
of God it self, and understood agreeably to the first principles of faith, (or
as they say, according to the analogy of faith) to the glory of God, and
salvation of his people. For so we find it commanded by God and Moses, and to
have been observed by all godly Princes.

DOCT. VI. The explication of this opinion in particulars.
FIrst, therefore we believe it the duty of a godly Magistrate to know out of
the Word of God in general and the sum of the principles of faith, what the
true and Christian religion is, and what the Apostolical doctrine whereunto the
Churches are to be reformed; to the end he do not any thing or presume to do
any thing by the judgment of others only, but of his own certain knowledge in
a matter of so great importance. Secondly, when this is known to take care that
Ministers fit for that office be chosen, called and ordained, not guided
therein by his own fancy and pleasure but by the rule of God's Word and
examples Apostolical. Thirdly, to cause that by them the doctrine of Salvation
delivered in holy writ be preached expounded and inculcated, that the
Sacraments be administered according to Christ's institution, and also that the
discipline ordained by Christ be exercised. Fourthly, to see that schools be
erected, in which laudable arts and languages may be diligently taught, and the
students instructed in the sum of Christianity. Fifthly, to the end that
Ministers and teachers may perform their charges, and so true religion be
preserved by them in the Church, to take order, that besides ordinary and
private conventions, there may be provincial Synods assembled at least twice a
year. Sixthly, to have careful oversight of the goods of the Church, that
they be laid out faithfully to their proper, that is, to truly pious uses? and
that all things necessary be supplied to the Church and the Ministers of the
same.

DOCT. VII. That a pious Prince ought not to use all sorts of men of a
different religion after the same manner.
TO proceed to the remaining duty of a pious Prince; since there are diverse
sorts of men which a Prince may have under his dominion, namely either
absolutely unbelievers, or such as do indeed profess the faith of Christ, but
are nevertheless manifest Idolaters and apostates in many things from the
Apostolical Church, or obstinate Heretics in some article of faith, or only
seduced into error, or lastly of sound opinions throughout,; We conceive a
Prince ought not to proceed in the same manner toward all these distinct
orders of men: for some are to be accounted dear, cherished and honored, some
tolerated, others not; and some also even to be punished with death; but none
are to be suffered to blaspheme Christ, or worship Idols and retain impious
ceremonies.

DOCT. VIII. That all men ought to be subject to the higher powers; and all
powers, even the highest, to Christ and his word.
LAstly we believe that Romans 13.1.
every soul, that is, every man, none excepted, and so every inferior power
ought to be subject to the superior, and higher; but that the higher power, no
less then the inferior, and all other men, to Christ the Apoc. 17 14. 1 Timothy
6.15.
King of Kings and Lord of all Lords. For if it is the will of God that all
should Psalm. 2.12.
kiss the Son, and submit their neck themselves to his yoke and discipline.
Wherefore we believe that it belongs to the true government and edification of
the Church, that Princes render themselves especially to be instructed,
admonished and corrected by the Word of God; by which others may be encouraged
to do the same; and in case they refuse, the Prince may with more freedom
punish them, and retain all in their duties.

DOCT. IX. Errors.
1 WE therefore condemn all despisers of Magistrates, rebels, seditious, and
enemies to the State they live in, and whosoever either openly refuse or
craftily detract to perform all duties they owe unto the Magistrate. 2.
Particularly we condemn the error of the Anabaptists, who affirm it unlawful
for a Christian man to be a Magistrate, much less to use his authority over
his Subjects in point of religion; and that it is free for every one to follow
what religion he pleases, and consequently that no man is to be compelled to
the faith. 3. We disapprove their judgment who attribute only the shadow of
authority in religion to Magistrates, and deny them the power to convocate
Synods, to deliberate touching religion, to reform Churches, and to ordain
according to the word of God such things as belong to the welfare of the
people; making them only impoured to execute the decres and determinations of
the Bishops. 4 But neither do we approve of such magistrates, who, without
sufficient understanding of matter, change religion at their pleasure,
condemning, spoiling and prescribing the dissenters though unheard, and who
introduce Canons concerning religion, not out of the Word of God, but rather
against it, behaving themselves in the Church of Christ as Lords of the
Churches, not as the servants of God, and refusing to submit their necks, to
the yoke of the Son of God; whom we beseech God the Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ to indue with more knowledge of God and a better rectified understanding.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the perpetual remission of sins in the Church of Christ.
DOCTRINE I. That there is in the Church a perpetual dispensation of remission
of sins, and that a perpetual Ministry of the Word is ordained to that end.
WE have confessed above, that as soon as any person is ingrafted into Christ
by the holy spirit, he does immediately obtain forgiveness of all sins
committed, and partakes a new life from Christ the head, and so becomes a
living member of the Church. But because even such as are the most holy in this
militant Church, do nevertheless sin daily to the end of their lives, and
consequently have always need of new pardon for their offenses, as likewise of
new repentance and new faith apprehending remission of sins through Christ; and
because faith and repentance use to be stirred up by the ministry of the Word
and Sacraments; therefore we believe that remission of sins is perpetually
dispensed in the Church, and that the whole Ecclesiastical ministry which is
perpetually in the same, is ordained in reference thereunto.

DOCT. II. What we understand by the remission of sins.
WHereas there are three things to be considered in sin; the transient action,
the irregularity or deformity of that action, and the fault remaining upon the
sinner with the guilt of punishment coherent thereunto; we understand that sin
is then forgiven us, when not only the fault and irregularity is not imputed
unto us, but also the punishment and condemnation due unto us for the same is
pardoned, and we are acquitted from such guilt and liablenesse to justice;
seeing we are not said to forgive the offenses of our brethren, but when we
free them from the satisfaction and performance due from them; and that most
certainly we are not commanded to ask any thing of God, but what God is willing
to grant; and Christ has cancelled the obligation of our whole debt, having
made perfect payment and satisfaction thereof in our behalf.

DOCT. III. That the afflictions, wherewith the Saints are exercised after the
pardon of their sins, are not punishments or satisfactions for sins past, but
fatherly chastisements to restrain from future.
BUt for that God uses to afflict and scourge his children in sundry manners
after forgiveness of their sins; we believe that he does it not to that end
satisfaction, either in whole or in part, might be made thereby to his justice
for sins committed, since one full satisfaction of Christ imputed unto us is
more then enough thereunto; but that by them (as by the strokes of a father)
which conduce much to the morification of sin dwelling in us, we may be rendered
more cautious hereafter, and suffer not our selves so easily to fall into sin
any more: T. 7. de pecc. mer. and rem. l z. c. 33. and 34.
wherefore with St. Austin, we style them the combats of faith, and exercises
of the Saints, but not the punishments of sin, and accordingly teach them to be
really so.

DOCT. IV. That properly sins are forgiven by God, alone freely and through
Christ the Mediator.
Isai. 43.25.
WE believe also that sins are properly for given by God alone, by by grace and
through Christ the Mediator: since it is he alone against whom properly sins
are committed either mediately or immediately, when we transgress his Law; and
it lies in the power of the Creditors only to show kindness to his debtors,
and remit their debts. Whence also Christ, as man Luke 23.34.
prayed the Father in behalf of those that crucified him, that he would forgive
them and pardon their sins; and moreover, for that the Jews said, Luke 5.21.
Who can forgive sins, but God alone? he confirmed the same partly by being
silent, and partly by doing a miracle. Wherefore inasmuch as Christ did forgive
sins by his own authority, we believe with the Fathers, that it is evidently
inferred that he is the true God; seeing this cannot be done by any mere
creature, unless ministerially (as they say) and in the name and by the
authority of God: which we know to be given not to one only, Mat. 18. John
20.23.
but to all the Apostles equally and consequently to all lawful ministers of
the Gospel.

DOCT. V. That Christ, being both God and man, does indeed forgive sins; but
after a different manner, as he is God, and as he is man.
FRom whence flows this consequence, which we confess, that Christ, both God
and man, together with the Father and the holy Ghost does forgive sins; but
this he does after a different manner, as God, and as man. For, as God, he does
it properly, by his own authority, truly and effectually; but as man, he does,
and did it in the flesh, as a cooperatour with the Deity, by his humane will
consenting with the divine, and pronouncing the words, Thy sins are forgiven
thee. And the same is attested by the exposition of Leo the first in an Ephesians.
10. cap. 4.
Epistle to Flavianus in these words, Either form (viz. of God and man) acts in
communion with the other, what is proper to it; namely, the word working that
which is proper to the word, and the flesh doing that which belongs to the
flesh. To remit sins was an action proper to the divine nature; but to say, Thy
sins are forgiven thee, was humane.

DOCT. VI. That remission of sins is offered in Christ alone, and obtained by
the elect alone endued with faith.
BUt as in Christ only, the Mediator and Redeemer, as head of the whole
Church, Ephesians. 1.7.
we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, so that there
is none without him; so also we believe that the elect only, being endued with
true repentance and true faith, and ingrafted into Christ by the holy Spirit,
as members into their head, are made partakers of the same: wherefore, although
forgiveness of sins be pronounced to all men by the Gospel, yet they are never
forgiven to reprobates, such as are impenitent and unbelievers; but do always
remain upon them through their own fault and defect.

DOCT. VII. That to the believing elect all their sins together are forgiven.
WE believe also, that as Christ by once offering himself satisfied, not for
some, but all our sins; so also, when we truly repent, forgiveness, not of
some only, but of all out sins together is offered unto us by Christ, and
through Christ in the Gospel, communicated by the holy Spirit, and received by
faith: seeing God has declared by a parable that he does forgive the whole
debt and not a part thereof.

DOCT. VIII. That remission of sins is dispersed only in the Church, received
by faith alone, and that only in this life.
LAstly, to conclude we believe, that as in Christ only remission of sins is
to be found, so also is the same dispersed in his Church alone; and that as it
was purchased for us Mat. 18.23, etc.
by the merits and blood of Christ alone, so also it is received without our
merits by a true faith only in Christ; and that as in this life only the Gospel
is preached, and pardon of sins declared to those that repent and believe, so
also that we can only be made partakers of the same in this life: seeing after
it there is no place for faith and repentance, and consequently the Church
cannot longer by any ministry advantage those that are deceased toward the
obtaining pardon for them; according to that of St. Cyprian to Demetrius, After
departure from hence, there remains no place for repentance, no effect of
satisfaction. Here life is either lost or gained, here provision is made for
eternal salvation by the worshipping of God, and believing in his mercy.

DOCT. IX. The confirmation of the same doctrine from the order observed in the
Creed.
WE expound the article of forgiveness of sins in the Creed according to these
three heads; namely, first, that this article is placed next those of the
Church and the Communion of Saints, to the end we might understand that
remission of sins is not dispensed and has no place out of the Church
Secondly, that it is placed after the confession of our faith in God the
Father, in the Son and in the holy Ghost, and after that faith whereby we
believe the Church of Christ to be holy and to consist of the society and
Communion of Saints, to the end we might declare that we do obtain remission of
our sins continually, not by reason of our own merits, but through faith in God
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and because we are in the Church and
have Communion with all Saints. And lastly from this order of the articles of
faith we believe and confess that after pardon of sins obtained in the Church
Militant here, there remains nothing else to be expected by the dead, but the
resurrection of the body and life eternal.

DOCT. X. Errors.
WHerefore we condemn 1. that error, by which some teach that the offense
being forgiven, there yet remains the debt of punishment to he paid; and that
this punishment, being no other then eternal death, is by repentance changed
into temporal punishments, which are to be undergone either in this life or
after death in Purgatory, unless we be discharged from them by the help of
Masses, Indulgences, and other suffrages. 2. We condemn also their blasphemy,
who seek remission of sins, and teach it to be sought otherwhere then in
Christ: Also such as maintain it possible to be really applied and partaken by
them, any other way then by a true faith, and by the holy Ghost. 3. We likewise
condemn their sacrilegious doctrine, who teach, that all sins are not always
forgiven to believers by God, but that some are oftentimes retained, which are
further to be expiated by fastings, alms, prayers and other works of ours, or
by the oblations of others and sacrifices of Priests.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the state of souls after death, and of the resurrection of
the dead.
DOCTRINE I. That souls die not with the bodies, nor do they sleep being
separated from them, or rest any where beside in Heaven or hell, neither are
they tormented in Purgatory.
WE believe that our souls do neither die with the body, nor sleep when parted
from them, or remain waking in certain hidden places, besides Heaven and hell,
nor that they are tortoured in that purgatory fire; but that the souls of all
men live even out of their bodies, understand, and will; and that the souls of
the godly do reign in heaven with Christ, and those of the wicked are tormented
in hell with the Devils; as the Lord teaches of the first, Luke 16.5.
When godly and merciful men fail, that is, departed out of this life, they,
that is, their souls, are received into everlasting habitations, and in another
place, that they are Luke 23.43.
with him in Paradise; but of these last, by the Luke 15 ^5
example of the rich Glutton, that they go into hell, that is, a place
destinated to everlasting burnings (as also we Acts 1.25.
read of Judas) and are there tormented.

DOCT. II. That the places are different where the souls of the faithful, and
where those of unbelievers live after the death of their bodies.
BUt seeing the state of faithful and unbelieving souls is so different, we
believe that the places are different also into which they go; namely, the
eternal tabernacles in heaven, and paradise appointed for the godly, and 2
Pet. 2.4.
hell or the bottomless pit prepared for the wicked; since the holy Scripture
attributes unconceivable light to the one, and the greatest darkness to the
other, which Christ Mat. 8.12.
calls utter darkness; and since the Lord says, that his will is, that
where himself is, there those that believe in him be also, apparently
signifying, that in that place where he is now with his body and soul, there
also shall be the faithful, first with their souls, and in due time with other
bodies also, but unbelievers never with either: so that we judge it the highest
impiety to say that heaven is every where, whereas it is in no place of
Scripture assigned to the wicked, but frequently to the godly alone as their
proper and eternal habitation; and for that it is necessary that bodies be
circumscribed in some space after the resurrection, and that souls be contained
somewhere definitively, as the schools speak.

DOCT. III. That the end of this world will certainly come, and all things
shall be changed, although the time it self be unknown.
MOreover, although the time when the end of this world shall be, is so unknown
to us, Mat. 24.36. Act 1.7. Isa. 24.23. and 65.17. and ^.22. Ps. 102.27. Dan.
12.2. Mal. 4.1. 2 Pet. 3.13. Apoc. 21.1. Jude 14,15. Mat. 24. Luke 21.5, etc.
that it is not possible to know it, yet we believe that it will most certainly
be, and then not only the earth but likewise the heavens shall be changed, and
there shall be a new heaven and a new earth, and all the dead, even the wicked
shall rise, when Christ shall call to judgment the voice and trumpet of an
Archangel: and to the certainty of these things belongs that method of our
Lord Jesus, in having first foretold the desolation of Jerusalem, and thereunto
subjoyning a discourse concerning these matters, to the end that by those
things which we have seen befall Jerusalem, we might believe that those which
he then foretold of the end of the world will come to pass with the same
certainty, etc.

DOCT. VI. That all dead men shall at last be quickened, and rise from their
sepulchers.
WE believe therefore that 1 Cor 15.2.
as all men die in Adam, so in Christ all, even the wicked as to the body,
shall be made alive, every ones soul resuming its proper body; although we
confess some shall arise to eternal happiness and others to eternal
damnation; Ioh. 5.29.
according to the saying of Christ, and they shall come forth that have done
good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation; whence also the order of the resurrection is
confirmed, which the Apostle delivers in these words, These. 4.16.
And the dead in Christ shall rise first and then the rest.

DOCT. V. That there shall not be new bodies made for our souls, but the very
same shall rise which died.
FUrthermore we believe that there shall not be a new body framed to every
soul, but the same of every particular person, that died, as to the substance
shall rise again, but different in some qualities; according to the Apostle's
doctrine concerning the bodies of the godly, 1 Cor. 15 36.42.
showing by the example of the same grain, that they are sowed one thing and
arise another, that they are sowed obnoxious to corruption, but raised
incorruptible, etc. and Job testifyeth concerning his hope in this manner; Job
19.25, 26, 27.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall rise again in the latter day
upon the earth, and that in my flesh I shall see God; Whom I shall see for my
self, and not another, and wine eyes shall behold him. For we shall see Christ
with our corporeal eyes in the clouds returning to us with his body, and also
reigning in heaven.

DOCT. VI. That from the example of our bodies after the resurrection, it
appears that the body of Christ is not every where.
WHereas the Apostle says Phil. ^.2^.
Christ shall change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, we believe that if the body of Christ by virtue of the glory it
received after his resurrection, received the power of being every where; then
ours also will by reason of the same glory be every where; which seeing it
shall not be, neither do we believe that the body of Christ, however full of
glory and majesty is now every where with its substance, since it is finite,
and the glory thereof also finite; especially for that he has said, that Io^.
17.24.
he will that where he is, there we should be also; but we shall not be every
where with our bodies.

DOCT. VII. Errors.
FIrst we condemn the wicked dotage both of those Philosophers who taught the
humane soul is mortal, and 2. of those heretics who imagined that the souls
of men separated from their bodies did either sleep in certain secret places,
that is, are deprived of all sense and operations of the mind, or that they are
awake indeed, but rest until they resume their bodies, and then are either to
be admitted into heaven, or thrust into hell. 3. Moreover, we condemn those who
dream that the souls of many of the godly are purged in a certain purgatory
fire from the relics of their sins, and undergo temporal pains. 4. We
disapprove their opinion who do not distinguish heaven, where the godly shall
be, from hell where we read the wicked shall be; but make the difference to
consist only in this, that some are made happy and others miserable, although
all be in the same place. 5. But neither can we assent to them, who say that
the certain time month or year, if not the the certain day and hour, may be
determined and known, Act. 1.7.
in which the Lord will come and put an end to to this world; seeing Christ
has said, It is not for you to know the times. 2 Pet. 3 3.
6. We detest those Scoffers whom St. Peter mentions who think the world shall
endure thus for ever, and deny and deride all life to come, 7. We also condemn
all those who reject the resurrection of the dead: and also those who fancied
we shall not have the same, but other new bodies. 8. We likewise condemn them
who taught that bodies after the resurrection shall be so spiritual that like a
spirit or air, they can neither be seen nor felt; such as some have attributed
to Christ after his resurrection, and others also impudently feign to have been
changed into the divine nature, so that it cannot be any longer termed a
Creature.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the glorious coming of the Lord Jesus to judge the living and
the dead.
DOCTRINE. I. That the dead being raised and the living changed at the coming
of the Lord Jesus from Heaven, Christ will immediately show himself in the
Clouds to be seen by all, and all the faithful shall go meet him in the air.
WE believe that at the coming of the Lord Jesus, the resurrection of the dead
being performed by the ministry of Angels, they that are then alive shall not
die, but shall be instantly changed into the same condition with them that are
raised; and then Christ, being returned from heaven to the Clouds to judge and
pass sentence upon all, will exhibit himself to be seen by all men; and being
attended with his Angels and appearing in his majesty and glory; all the godly
shall be translated from earth even to the heaven of the Clouds to meet him,
Mat 24.3. and 25.31. 1 These. 5.1. etc.
according as Christ himself and the Apostles have taught and left a recorded.

DOCT. II. That Christ will visibly move from place to place, and so with a
visible, local and finite body.
THerefore we believe that Christ will so return visibly, as before he ascended
from earth to heaven in the sight of his Apostles, and that he will return from
that heaven wherein he now is, and which is consequently distant from the
Clouds to which he shall descend, and from the earth: and so we believe he will
descend with his natural body, that it is necessary the same should be local
and finite and therefore not ubiquitary; seeing such a descending is by the
holy Ghost described to the simple people, as is not possible to be made
without mutation of place.

DOCT. III. That the reprobate unbelievers shall not go unto Christ sitting in
the clouds, but remaining upon the earth shall hear the sentence of the Judge.
BUt whereas the Scripture pronunces only of the godly, that they shall be
snatched up into the Clouds and go meet Christ in the air, we believe that
the wicked shall not go unto Christ but remaining under his feet, hear the
sentence of the Judge, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
Go ye Cursed into eternal fire; all the Saints which shall be in the air
with Christ approving the sentence according to the opinion of the Apostle a
that the Saints shall judge the world and the Angels.

DOCT. IV. For what Causes that universal judgment is appointed.
WE believe that that judgment, wherein Christ shall judge all, being made
visible to all, is appointed chiefly, for two reasons; first, to the end that
those things which are now hid unto men, as well innocence faith and good
conscience of the godly as the hypocrisy and crimes of the wicked may be laid
open to the whole world, and thereby it may most evidently appear at the last
how just the judgments of God have always been: whence that day is called by
the Apostle Romans 2.5.
the day of revelation. Secondly, that the recompense of good works promised to
the good, and of bad to the bad may be rendered fully to every one, according to
that of the Apostle, We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 2
Cor. 5.10.
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad: whence it is called by the same Apostle
Romans 2.5.
The day of the righteous judgment of God.

DOCT. V. That eternal life, which is given to the elect, is called, and is a
reward, but al together fully bestowed, and in no manner due to us, saving
through Christ.
FOr although what the elect shall then receive is the mere gift of God
obtained by the merits of Christ alone, yet we are not ignorant that it is, and
is truly called a reward seeing; the Lord Jesus has daigned to give it that
term, namely a free reward, and seeing even the good works of the godly, and
all the causes from whence they proceed, are the free gifts of God, free
election, free redemption, free calling, faith, justification, regeneration,
forgiveness of sins, and lastly the pardoning of the defects and weaknesses
wherewith our good works themselves are attended, and on the other side the
free imputation of the perfect obedience of Christ, by which our imperfect is
clothed and rendered most acceptable to God; so that it follows, that if we
will speak properly, the reward is not due to us, for our own works sake
considered in themselves, but only for the imputed merits of Christ.

DOCT. VI. That judgment being ended, the godly shall immediately be in heaven
with Christ, and the wicked in hell with the Devil and his Angels.
MOreover, we believe that immediately after that judgment the godly shall
follow Christ into heaven, and the wicked with the Devils shall be thrust into
hell: Christ saying unto those, Come ye blessed of my Father; but to these, Go
ye cursed into fire everlasting.

DOCT. VII. That that day shall be most joyful to the godly, and therefore to
be desired; but to the wicked most sad, and so intolerable to them even to hear
of it.
SO we believe that last day will be to them who are grafted into Christ most
happy and joyful, and that therefore it is beloved and wished for by them, and
so ought to be desired and loved by us, but the most unhappy and sad of all to
the wicked; whence it is no wonder that they hate that day, 2 Timothy 4.8.
and cannot endure the mention of it.

DOCT. VIII. Errors.
1. WE condemn those who deny that Christ is truly and really in his humane
body to descend from heaven to the clouds, and from thence to return into
heaven with the elect, but maintain that all this shall be without any mutation
of place, only by a sort of appearance, as they call it, and disappearance; who
are contradicted by sayings of Angels to the Apostles, Acts 1.11.
As ye have seen him ascending into heaven, so shall he come. 2. We dissent
from those who teach that works of godliness considered in themselves are the
true cause for which eternal life is given, and are the true deserts of the
same; the Apostle being of the contrary opinion, and saying, Romans 6, 2^.
The gift of God is life eternal. Neither do we approve the opinion of the
C^iliasts concerning a thousand years, wherein after judgment Christ shall
converse with his elect in this world, who shall live in the delights of the
flesh, but such as are seemly, and shall beget issue, but holy, and at length
be translated into heaven. 4. We condemn and abominate their error, who hold
that the fire into which the wicked are sent, shall be in time extinct; so that
even all the devils that live happily in the kingdom of God, contrary to the
express words of Christ, Matt. 25.41.
Go into eternal fire.

CHAP XXX. Of life Eternal.
DOCTRINE I. That all shall receive eternal life who by their good works shall
have testified that they were truly ingrafted into Christ, and believed in
Christ.
THerefore we believe that at last, eternal life, that is, a full and perfect
possession of life eternal, shall be given in that last day to all who by the
evident works of true faith and piety shall be openly declared before all
Angels and men, most clearly demonstrated and by the sentence of Christ the
Judge, be pronounced to have been truly ingrafted into Christ by the holy
spirit, and so to have believed in God the Father, in his Son Jesus Christ and
in the holy Ghost, to have been living members of the holy Church, and to have
had communion with all the Saints, and to have obained remission of their sins;
the Lord himself teaching this, who says, Mat. 25, 34, etc.
that he will say unto those that are on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father enter into the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world: For I was an hungered and; ye gave me to eat. etc.

DOCT. II. The foregoing doctrine confirmed, and that life eternal is given
not in consideration of our works, but through Christ, in whom we are freely
elected, blessed, and made the sons of God.
FOr in these words the Lord seems to have declared unto us that our good
works are the evidences of our election, blessing, adoption, and so of right an
inheritance; but that the cause for which we shall obtain life eternal and the
possession of the kingdom of heaven, is, partly for that even before the
foundation of the world, that is, before we had done any good, that kingdom
was freely prepared for us through Christ, Ephesians. 1.3.
partly for that we a have been blessed by the Father, with all spiritual
blessing in Christ, and so called by grace, justified, obtained forgiveness of
our sins, sanctified, and adopted to be the sons of God through the same
Christ, and regenerated by his spirit, whereby we are made coheirs of that
kingdom.

Therefore forasmuch as the Lord will remember works of piety, we do not
question but he does the same that it may be manifest to the whole world, that
we have truly been blessed, elected, just children of God, to whom the
inheritance was due, according to that of the Apostle, If children, then heirs:
but that we are the children of God is declared by regeneration, and
regeneration by the effects of regeneration, which are the works of faith and
piety.

DOCT. III. That as the life of the godly shall be eternal, so also the pains
and fire of the wicked shall be eternal.
BUt as we believe that the children of God shall obtain life eternal, so also
we confess that hypocrites and all the wicked shall go into eternal fire,
never to be extinguished, Mat. 25.48.
and there be tormented for ever, when Christ shall openly say, Go ye into
eternal fire.

DOCT. IV. That it can neither be expressed nor conceived how happy that
eternal life shall be.
BUt what that life is, and after what manner and how great the felicity which
is signified by the name of the kingdom of heaven, we confess ingenuously
with the Apostle, that neither eye has seen it, 1 Co^. 2.9.
nor ear heard it, nor has it entered into the heart of man, being a thing
greater and of more excellency then that it can be comprehended by human
understanding, and of such happiness that greater cannot fall within our
desires. Therefore we simply believe, we who are of Christ, we are ruled by his
Spirit, who depend on his word, and who place all our confidence of salvation
in him, that all shall be most happy, and all shine like the Sun in the sight
of God, Mat. 13.43. 1 Cor 11 12. Phil. 1.23.
that we shall see God as he is, and all live a heavenly and divine life with
Christ and his Angels, freed from all sin, all misery, all evil, without any
more sorrow, without fear, with out want or desire of any thing, because God
will be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Apoc. 22.3, 4, etc.
and we shall see his face, and in that city there shall be no night, nor shall
there be need of any candle or light of the Sun, because the Lord God shall
give us light, and we shall reign for ever and ever with Christ Jesus our head
Spouse, Savior. Lord, to whom praise, honor and glory for evermore. Amen.

FINIS
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAPTER. I. Concerning the Holy Scriptures which are the foundation of all
Christian Religion. Page 1. Chap. II. Concerning God, the divine Persons, and
Properties. Page 13 Chap. III. Concerning Gods foreknowledge and
Pradestination. Page 19 Chap. IV. Concerning Gods Omnipotency and will. Page 26
Chap. V. Concerning the Creation of the world, the Angels, and the first estate
of man. Page 29 Chap. VI. Concerning Gods Providence, and his governing the
world. Page 37 Chap. VII. Concerning the Fall of man, and original sin and the
fruits of it. Page 44 Chap. VIII. What free will was left unto Man after his
Fall. Page 53 Chap. IX. Concerning the Promise of Redemption and Salvation
through Christ. Page 61 Chap. X. Concerning the Law. Page 65 Chap. XI.
Concerning Christ our Redeemer. Page 77 Chap. XII Concerning the true
dispensation of redemption, salvation, and life? and therefore the necessity
of our union and communion with Christ. Page 108 Chap. XIII. Concerning the
Gospel, and the abrogation of the Law by the Gospel. Page 131 Chap. XIV.
Concerning the Sacraments of the New Testament. Page 143 Chap. XV. Concerning
Baptism. Page 169 Chap. XVI. Concerning the Lords Supper. Page 178 Chap. XVII.
Concerning Faith, Hope, and Charity. Page 201 Chap. XVIII. Concerning
Repentance. Page 209 Chap. XIX. Concerning Justification. Page ^16 Chap. XX.
Concerning the Free Will of a man regenerate, and his power unto that which is
good. Page 232 Chap. XXI. Concerning good works. Page 242 Chap. XXII.
Concerning Invocation and swearing. Page 252 Chap. XXIII. Concerning the Church
of Christ in general. Page 258 Chap. XXIV. Concerning the Church Militant. Page
259 Chap. XXV. Of the Government of the Church Militant, and of the
Ecclesiastical Ministry. Page 307 Chap. XXVI. Concerning Magistrates. Page 361
Chap. XXVII. Of the perpetual remission of sins in the Church of Christ. Page
372 Chap. XXVIII. Of the state of souls after death, and of the resurrection of
the dead. Page 383 Chap. XXIX. Of the glorious coming of the Lord Jesus to
judge the living and the dead. Page 392 Chap. XXX. Of life Eternal. Page 400

