Mercurius Cambro-Britannus, THE BRITISH MERCURY, OR THE WELSH DIURNALL.

Communicating remarkable Intelligences, and true News to awle the whole
Kingdom, from Ian. 6. to the 13. of the same, 1643.

1. Of the taking the Town of Newcastle by her prethren of Scotland, and of
Sir Thomas Glenham his going to York, and who it was that brought this warm
news to the City. 2. Of the enemy retreating backward from Plymmouth, her hope
to take it the clean contrary way. 3. A description of the taking of Sir
Thomas Holts house, by Colonel Boswels forces, and was since fall upon Bewly,
(with pretty observations thereon.) 4. Of the pressing in the West Country, and
of the pressed soldiers running from the Lord Hopton to assist the Parliament.
5. Of creat divisions and discords at Oxford, that aul the Cavalliers are
turned Roundheads. 6. The Bishop of Canterbury coming to hic haec hoc, lay
her on the block; and bring her first to trial. 7. The Governor of Oxford
Aston wounded, and a great many of the Kings soldiers wounded in the eyes. 8.
the Scots are coming with a powder, and of the Marquess of Hamiltons four or
five supposed Deaths. And of the Lord Louthian. 9. Of a divevellish plot
against the City, and her description of the matter, and the ill manners of it.
10. Of Prince Ruperts taking an Ague upon the report of the surrender of
Arundell Castle. 11. Of the taking of Grafton house, her pillage and the
weakensse of Belvoyre her Garrison. 12. His Majesty's Proclamation, and his
Majesty's forgetful promises, and undeserved pardons. 13. Of the present bad
condition of Oxford, and of four Kraves that disturb the whole Commonwealth.
Printed by Bernard Alsop, And published according to Order.

THE BRITISH MERCURY COMMUNICATING Remarkable Intelligences, and true News to
awle the whole Kingdom, Monday January the 13. 1643.
THe increase of misbegotten pamphlets has made the Welsh Mercury to be almost
excluded out of their number, although her was always careful without favor
or affection to deliver the most true and remarkable passages, as they fall
within the compass of her weekly Intelligences, and in this Orb of truth (if
her may obtain leave to appear again in the in the world) her will move
forward with the returning of the Sun, and begin the new year with such
passages as her do know are most worthy to be preferred to your observation.

And to give her the better content, her will begin with her warmest and best
news first. Her hear of a certain truth, that the prave Sea-cole Town of
Newcastle is taken by our brudders of Scotland, and that Sir Thomas Glenham
has quit the Town, and is gone to York; but how, when and in what manner it
is taken, her shall at this time forbear to relate, till her has better
information. But peleive her, it is very true, for her heard a pird sing so in a
printed paper on Friday last, and for her part, her will give credit to it
unless her hear to te contrary.

From Plimmouth we hear that a work which much annoyed the town is taken from
the enemy, was took an hundred prisoners, and Prince Maurice Trumpeter. The
enemy has now raised her siege four or five miles back, and does mean to
give back until her run away. The Cavalliers in their retreat was miserably
pillage awl the Country, drove away awl Beasts, and cattles, and fired awl hay
and corn, so that the Town though, freed from besiegers, is in want, and if no
relief sent them come by Sea, was have hungry bellies, and was at last starve.
Her know the miseries of War, and especially of this uncivil war, killing was
now great mercy, the Cavaliers like Canibals eat up the Kings subjects, and
the King looks on without Compassion, but O mis^reri tui Rex Regni indigna
serentis:
O King, the Kingdom and the City.
Unworthily oppressed, now pity.


We hear that Collonell Boswell with eight hundred horse and foot, was go on a
design against Sir Thomas Holis house, near Birmigham, when her came near the
Knights forces was found a challenge, the house was then demanded for the use
of the King and Parliament, but they answered her would not yield while they
had a man alive. Then Cannon played on them unhurt, being in low rooms. After
the Church was taken, being defended by 40. stout French men and Irish men, who
was taken prisoner and one woman, afterward they assailed their works,
stormed the house, and entered in at the windows, afterward was cry for
quarter, which granted they shot two in the mouth coming in the window, and
thereupon our soldiers killed many of the Enemy. Was take in awl fourscore
prisoners, and great store of rich pillage, goods, money, and plate, good
booties and good breakfasts are good for soldiers, and those that win gold
should wear it, as the Proverb says of old.

And the same Collonell Boswell was since then fallen upon Bewly, between
Worcester and Warwickshire, and was take it and the Garrison, and great store
of wealth and pillage, these forces and papists malignants will be driven out of
their dens, if her be closely followed as her do with those in her Country, her
may be soon taken; her do daily catch prisoners, which are kept in several
prison; but in their papist charity they starve them at Oxford.

In the West Country (as her do hear) they press very violently, but in vain,
eight hundred pressed men after they were completely armed to assist the Lord
Hopton, run away, and are awl gone to Poole Lime, and Dorchester, to fight for
her King and Parliament, a good resolution and fit to be imitated; it is valor
in her to run from the King to the Parliament, her Country men did so, and by
often running away got more honor then by fighting: The Irish soldier and the
Welsh soldier agree in this, they love eating better then fighting.

From Oxford her do hear and be informed, that there are great divisions there
between the French faction, the Spanish and the more moderate party at Oxford,
her do hope these divisions will bring them at last to confusions, factious
persons are only kept together by dissembling, but being offended, like
Hoop-sticks in a saggot, they soon fall out.

Her be informed also from Oxford that awl the Cavaliers are turned Roundheads,
and that indeed there are no other Roundheads but them; For first, they ride
round about the Country, and plunder their round money, nay her round pottage
dish and round washing Bowl, and now in a circular course of wickedness, they
have brought the year round, and begin again to fall roundly about their
business, they are Popes Roundheads, for they thought to bring in Popery very
roundly; and by their drinking, swearing and drabbing, they run roundly to
hell, where the Devil shall make them dance round about his Coal fire, and
these are the true Royal Roundheads.

The Beshit of Canterbury his trial is deferred till Monday next, it is the
Parliaments mercy to give him time of repentance, he thought to be Englands
Pope, but his pride is fallen: He came lately to the Parliament House, with a
dejected countenance, and his favor that could raise dimnesse to dignities,
and put in pillory the true professors, was turned pale, as if he looked for
death, which he deserved.

The Governor of Oxford Collonell Aston is dangerously wounded, the Kings
forces are indeed or may be all wounded, wounded in heart for infidelity to
their Country, in conscience for advancing blind Popery, in the head for
setting up tyranny under the title of Prerogative, these bullets if they felt
them would both hurt and heal them of their malignancy, but the Kings soldiers
have their eyes in their pockets, they see nothing but plunder, an pillage, and
popery, which does lead them on to fight against the Parliament.

Her do understand that the Scots have entered this Kingdom, but they are wise
and come on lento pede, marching in winter is difficult. At Oxford to revenge
their coming, they imprisoned the Marquess Hamilton, and the Lord Louthian,
and the Marquess in thought to be strangled, poisoned, or removed to Bristoll.
Lords be merciful unto your selves and forsake Oxford, and come to the
Parliament as the Earl of Bedford has lately done, and as Collonell Hinderson
the Scotchman Governor of Newark, grown weary of service, endeavors by
Letters to some Scotchmen of note in London, to make her peace with the
Parliament; so do you malignant Lords show her grandeur and greatness, in
humble submission to the Parliament.

Her be informed of the discovery of a new conspiracy plotted by Sir Basil
Br^oke, a papist and prisoner in the Kings Bench, Read a Jesuit, Master Riley
Scout-Master General of the City, and one Violet a malignant Goldsmith, who
under pretense of peace conf^terated to raise sactions in the City, to impede
the Parliament, and the Scots coming into the Kingdom: These men are of
Oxford Tribe, and though tey be no Jews, yet her be Shutasses, that would
betray this City not for money, but for malice, but let them take heed that
after trial they come not to Judas his end; was have no cood memory, else they
might remember Challoner, and the other, whose plots condemned them to the
Gallows.

Arundell Castle was taken by Sir William Waller, and was take there Sir Edward
Ford High-Sheriffe of Sussex, Sir Edward Bishop, Collonell Banfield, Lieutenant
Collonell Rolls, Major Massey, Major Moulins and other Gentlemen, but Sir
Edward Dering was not there. Was took also fifty Reformadoes, 1200. prisoners,
and their Arms, diverse Ensigns, four thousand pounds in money, and great
store of rich prize and pillage. Upon the taking of this Castle, Hopton has
betook himself to Chichester or Winchester; and upon the report thereof Prince
Ropert has took an ague, and te Cavaliers are sick of Sir William Waller, and
the Cavaliers at Oxford curse him with Bell, Book and Candle; for Castles are
now like Barbers Chastes: The Kings Soldiers are no sooner out, but the
Parliament soldiers are got in, was fery true caparison.

After Grafton house was took, her was hear that Collonell VVait was make
diverse encounters with the Garrison of Belvoir (whose name does signify in
French a fair prospect, but now her saw nothing but soldiers) who of late
peaten them, and killed rivers Gentlemen of quality, and was hurt Collonell
Lucas their Governor, and was by taking 40. horse at one time, and twenty at
another very weak, so that her Garrison of Belvoir may be easily stormed. The
Kings party does still decline, and was go Westward, they are driven from Town
to Castle, and know not whether to run, but run abroad they do, and shark in
comers and pillage. The Devil and the Cavaliers knowing their time is short,
do continually go about seeking whom they may devour.

Was hear of his Majesty's proclamation, calling the Members of the Parliament
to Oxford, in which his Majesty makes great promise of oblivions or
forgetfulnesses, which he need not do, for her know that the King has too much
forgot the Parliament, which he would now without fault forgive, and therefore
does promise her pardons, and creat satisfactions, in settling matters of
Religion and Liberties, and to persuade her to this, it is intimated that a
factious malignant party has called in the Scots, who are coming to conquer
the English: For the Welsh Mercuries part, he had rather that England should be
conquered by the S^gts who are Protestants, and men of conscience, then be
conquered by Papists, Spaniards, French, Irish Rebels, Digby, Cottington, the
Priests, Jesuits, Bishops, Deans, and the Devil and all.

From Northampton was lately go out a troop of horse, and was take prisoner
General Rivers; and killed his Sergeant Major who was not have quarter, and
was take more seven or eight Gentlemen, yet AULICUS says we take no prisoners
of worth, for he thinks none are worth taking prisoners but Kings and Princes,
and therefore the Popish malignants keep the King prisoner at Oxford.

Her do hear Mistress Powell who was condemned to be hanged for harboring
of Father B^ltaker the Augustine Friar formerly executed at Tiburne, is now
honored by great Commanders at Oxford, indeed most of the Cavalliers are
thieves and robbers, and therefore they may justly favor whores and thieves
that come out of Newgate.

Oxford is now strangely metamorphosed, brazen faced Cavalliers do lie in
Brazen nose College, blood thirsty soldiers in Al-souls, Commanders in
Corpus-Christi College, the King and the Queen are students of Christ-Church,
and the Bishops and Jesuits are their Tutors; while there is more massing then
dining and supping, especialy among the common soldiers. But the truth is,
they have not bin very merry this Christmas, for their losses have come very
fast upon them, and in the Game of war the King has lost more this Christmas,
then in half a year before; and how can he shun it, when he will not cast out
of his pack, the knaves of Diamonds, or ill counselling Courtiers, the knaves
of Hearts, or the cunning Clergymen, with the knaves of Spades and Clubs,
which are the country and city malignants, let his Majesty therefore break up
this game of war and come to his Parliament, for he can win nothing but daily
he looses the lives and hearts of his Subjects.

Was hear also that the Newcastle powers that were in Derbyshire, are drawing
to the North to stop the progress of the Scots, to whom her was believe that
the Irish will join, and other forces about Cheshire, her know that Malignants
and the Irish will hang together in their designs, although her be taken and
hanged together on Giblets.

Her hear the States of Holland are landed, they came on Wednesday last to
Deal: they came as Ambassadors to treat with her Parliament, their Message her
shall know hereafter, for her cannot know their minds till they have delivered
it; but her is confident they come for good.

Her will now desire her Countrymen and all Welsh Britains, to look upon her
Welsh Diurnall, which does represent taking of Towns, prisoners, pillage,
bloody onsets, and killing of men: and thus her Diurnall is a bloody picture of
the weekly proceedings of this war, which her wish may end in Peace, for her
be weary of writing bloody truths, and therefore her will now conclude with a
merry jest. One thing her had almost omitted in her Diurnall; and that is,
Prince Ruperts white dog pissed one night in his Masters shoe, whereupon he
was by a counsel of war condemned, but afterward reprieved again, you
shall find it reported in the next AVLICVS, for he is an old dog at such lies.

FINIS.

