Zion's sad Tears, FOR Ninevehs Just Fears.

OR, Hours of Mourning, FOR Years of Sinning; Being Some few directed
OBSERVATIONS OF Divine Mercy, and Sinful Returns: With an humble Offering
toward Regulation of Land and Maritime affairs.

By an humble Seeker of Truth and Peace.

Fools, because of their transgressions, because of their iniquities, are
afflicted; their soul abhors all manner of meat, and they draw near unto the
gates of death. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, he saves them
out of their distresses. He sent his Word, and healed them, etc.

Psalm. 107.17, 18, 19, 20. Then said I, Woe is me; for mine eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of hosts,

Isai. 6. Read the whole: for the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.

To sigh and mourn for what we cannot do,
Is to come short: yet we must do it too.
Printed at London, 1653.

To the great God of wisdom, and sole Essence of Power.
O Thou holy one of Israel, and preserver of men; I the worst of thy creatures,
all sullied with the dirt and blood of my own, and the sins and Transgressions
of my poor Family, do here offer up to thee the sacrifice of thy beloved Son,
and dejection of my sinful heart, begging of thee humbly, but earnestly, not to
mark strictly what is done amiss (being of purer eyes) but on the former,
being an Oblation sufficient for the sins of the whole world. O great God of
wisdom, and Lord of Hosts, renew thy holy Spirit in me, purify me throughout;
and as thou have preserved me to this, teach me, not only to glorify thy
Sacred Name, but also as thou have (at first faint desire upon occasion) taught
my hands to War, and fingers to Fight; so now teach my heart to indite a good
matter, and make my Pen the Pen of a ready Writer: and whereas formerly a
Petitioner to earthly gods, whose breath is in their nostrils, so now to thee
only, that it may turn thine eyes from my sin, to thy own righteousness. O
thou that art my only true beloved now in the Cloud, proclaim thy holy Name as
in former days, The Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, long suffering,
and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin: O reserve yet a good proportion of mercy
for thy Israel: why should they be destroyed by worse then themselves? make
them all, O God, seek and find thy Kingdom, and then administer to them all
good things: Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Thus begging of
thee to hasten all that is convenient to thy poor afflicted people, and thy
most unworthy servant, I desire to render to thy blessed Name but what is most
due; all honor, praise, glory, Power, and Dominion, now and ever.

To the Right Honorable O.Cromwell Esquire; General of all the Landforces under the
pay of the Parl. in England, Scotland, and Ireland; Member of the same Parl.
and Council of Sat.
Sir.
YOu may justly challenge that impudence, which from Rags presented a great
person with a Cup of cold water, when the Conquer or without peradventure could
have commanded choice Liquors; yet that escaped not unrewarded, though another
with a higher Present from a more gallant hand, through a covetous end, did.
Truly, Sir, I can only say, I am yet a living Monument of mercy, having
sometime been a small Atome of a Soldier under your happy conduct; and
considering our enemies pressure now at our Walls, to be great, as once at
Haddington, before that approaching glorious Deliverance and Victory, I should
be ungrateful to God, as sometimes I am, my Country, and your Honor, if I
should not bewail the present conditon of affairs, and cast my small Mite into
the Public Treasury, toward support of a Christian interest, though shaken,
and never more threatened. Would my tears prevail, I should desire to weep to
death; that so a day of Jubilee might cover the face of this place of my
Nativitie, now near her extremity, wherein her Faith, Patience, and Meekness
will not only be tried, but must be extended; The God of glory give the
blessing. Indeed, Sir, your known greatness and worth, must give me leave
(though a low, simple, despised fellow) to be plain with you; for albeit a
Raven bring you bread and flesh in the morning of this accomplished New-year,
and water from the Brook, despise it not; your former favors to me (when
clouded in carnality) have induced me to this weak Oblation: I must acknowledge
it with thanks to our Creator, the love of his dearly beloved Son, and sacred
Spirit resting in his Saints; but withal confess (as I have said) in my heart,
that as he was just by afflicting me by so bad as my self, (though externally
my Superiors) so likewise in admitting some to be punished by worse then
themselves, and to shake their body Politic, who first touched my Oeconomick;
yet since it was to call forth my slender Candle, before hidden under a Bushel,
though lighted at a Divine Torch, and the Talent which before lay buried in a
dirty Napkin, I cannot deny my Countrymen a sight of those thoughts which may
trouble us all; if I am a Shimei, be you a David. Sir, I here bring you a Brat
called forth with Lazarus (I hope from the grave of corruption) and lay it at
your feet, because I am not so able as you to prefer or maintain it: you may do
well to take the grave clothes off, lest it stink too much, and dress it in the
attire you most desire to see it; though it cannot prattle, yet to call you
Excellent, or your Excellency at every word, yet in time it may be blessed, and
have occasion so to do. Truly Sir, I am heartily sorry I have no better
New-years-gift for you that have deserved it; but you (if you come to me) must
be content with what I have, not what I would have. I hope the Lord of Hosts
will sanctify your heart to the advancement of his glory, and defense of his
Saints; else, Sir, what shall be done to those late-rais'd Princes, who
continue to walk (without light in these days) in the steps of their
Predecessors? surely, so much War as attended the gate of them, must attend
theirs; yet is there an appointed time for Nimrod's ruin or safety. I hope it
was in your heart to build the Temple; well, it is enough, you shall live to see
the materials brought together that shall do the work. The Lord God of mercy
incline the Pillars and Members to seek his Face whilst it may be found, and
the Evil day crush us not altogether; be confident in your Maker, and he may
yet do much by you. The God of wisdom and innocence enrich your heart therewith
from his Fountain, that the Nations about you may have occasion to bless God
for and with you: So prays heartily him that is

December 20. 1652. A poor Fellow Laborer, a dead Dog. Sir, enquire not after
the Author of this, but that of us both.



To the Reader, of what sort soever.
PEradventure you (as others) may style me mad or otherwise (as some in other
cases have) in respect of the main disproportion of several things in this
parcel; but I shall not say you are so, if censorious. If I am mad, it is for
your cause; if sober, it is to God. I shall not invite you much to look on the
Infant, for its names or Fathers sake; but if you like it, or it you, it is
yours, not mine; I beg no customers or company now, being indeed never less
alone, then when alone. If you find the Child in the rushes, and preserve it,
in time it may produce better things; however, my travel in its birth, shall
not be lost, for I have gained what I in part desired to see. The God of Power
sanctify it, and then it shall be blessed, if not kissed by you. The piece is not
a nine days wonder, but some few void hours in that time; the matter I commit
to you, not the form, for have maks waste, and prevented me in putting things in
order, though my end was good, and my judgment I hope with my God; this is
only truly for an humbled people; I have no hard words or Aenigma's to
Christen it with; but what I have, you are welcome to; if you be a Christian,
it is well enough, it may receive the attendance of some vacant minutes; if it
make you weep to see it, do so, I cannot help it; rock it, perchance it may
gain sleep though the poor father little; if you shall curiously search his
Name, you may find it Homo: then seek no farther, unless you bring tears to
attend his Funeral, who had rather for you die, then read your Elegy. To deal
plainly with you, I am here called forth to show you part of what I have; but
it being ill Cooked, and dish'd with as bad sauce, if you can receive and
digest it, I am like to show you more; however, give me no occasion to answer
for it, lest you make me stark mad; and then (deprived of my senses) not be
able. An Infant, Idiot, or Lunatic (all which I am) is (as I take it)
excusable by the Law of the Land; Sed, si pereo, pereo; greater Pillars will be
shaken, when mine are so: yet this is my comfort, Cedars fall, when Mushrooms
will spring. One secret I must tell thee, that Part of my right hand, till I
extended it in writing, was shrunk up, and then again I found its use, yet not
able to write over again what I writ, or indeed remember it in former things of
late. The fruit of my gleanings I wish you, and to see better things from you;
contribute your talent with mine now in time, now in time of necessity; it can
do no hurt, but may enlarge my thoughts expecting it; and your bringing in what
you have to the Public: praying for the prosperity of all the friends of Zion,
I remain

Yours in all due respects, A Servant of Truth and Peace.

To Nineveh and its People.
O Nineveh, Nineveh, Nineveh, the former three most resplendent places in the
Nations about us; and this in particular, though I have been a Beggar for you:
What more could the Lord have done by and for you, then what was done? What
unthankful returns has he received from you? ye had need of 3000 Ionahs, so
many Trumpets, and as many years, to awaken and call you to true repentance.
Did Divine mercy raise you to the Empire over your sisters, to repay your
heavenly Father in the imperfect Coin of your own base ingratitude, or walk
after the carnal lusts of your own hearts? Could you be apt to Sign such
Oaths, Protestations, and Covenants of men's inventions, and never seriously
make one in your own hearts with the giver of all good things; to live soberly
and uprightly in this present life, to his glory and your own comfort, as also
the mutual defense and preservation of each other therein? But every one of
your hands is full of oppression and violence, and for your wicked desperate
Oaths (crucifying again the Lord of life) the Land now mourns and trembles
before the presence of the Lord. Must the God of Power deliver into your hands
your betters, even the declared Kings and Princes of the earth, and can you
continue still walking in their impious steps? Must you return as Dogs to the
vomit, or a blind people to the Onions and Garlic of Egypt? Surely the Lord
may yet reserve mercy for you, if you can but by Faith eye the Arm which has
(not long since) rendered it self bare for your preservation, and now contends
with a flaming sword against you; not only so, but threatening a Mortality
within your own Walls and Pavilions. O heavenly Father (if it be thy will) let
every individual Member of the people here and abroad, lay these things
seriously to heart, and let the crucified Image of thy Son be fixed in and upon
every soul and spirit, that shall read or hear these Funeral-Elegies, though
clothed in rags; preserve thy choice ones as the Apple of thine Eye, let them
not always be dying Sacrifices for worse then themselves: restrain the fury
and madness (O Father of spirits) of the Wolves and Bears of the Forest, which
now thou have called forth; and spare thy poor people, when thou shall deal
with them: And all this for thy dearly beloved Sons sake.

To the rigid Presbyters, and rude Pulpit-knockers of these times.
KNow ye not that holiest David, and wisest Solomon had their crimes; yet both
reproved, repented, and found mercy? Where is Pharaoh your Covenanted Idol
become? Is he not seeking all ways and means to destroy your hopes, and lay
them in the dust? Must you Idolize the sons of men, and even betray all
Governments that put you not in the room of Christ himself? Nor know ye, that
for the transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes thereof? Why cannot ye
submit to that Power the Lord has appointed, and vail your Plumes in the time
of sudden Calamity, and indeed join heart and hand with despised little ones,
to seek your Maker in humility and love? O condescend in time, lest else your
untempered Mortar suddenly make our Walls fall about our ears: let your
moderation be known to all men, and be you Serpent-like wise, but Dove-like
innocent; not Wolves in Sheeps clothing, to fleece the Flock and feed the
belly-gods, but study the peace of the Government and people, if you can do no
more; letting alone the Civil Magistrate to punish Turbulencies and Seditions:
Indeed you should more observe and proclaim the holy Name of the ever-living
God, his dearly beloved Son, and sacred Spirit, more and more; nay deny your
selves (if true Disciples) take up his Cross and follow him wheresoever he
shall call you, or into what condition soever. But it is to be feared you more
serve the god of the world, not preaching in season and out of season, fearing
not what man can do unto you, in persecution, and out of persecution. You may
observe, the first Horn of the Beast in the last unhappy Queens time, fell
immediately with it depending thereon, the Prelacy; the second, I must say,
comes too near your selves, and ye have had Power to procure the Image of the
Beast to speak, and some to be slain which worshipped not the Beast: But
beware, though you cannot see it, Babylon is fallen, is fallen in the hour of Gods
judgment, the great City; and the reason is rendered, She made all Nations
drink of the Wine of the wrath of her fornication. But let such as taste
thereof, take heed they drink not of the wine of the wrath of God and his
indignation poured forth without mixture. Your Hierarchy is even grown
threed-bare; and as it crushed the Bishops, it is but just yours be crushed.
You Will say I am a mad fellow to tell you Diana is falling. I am of your
opinion; yet not ashamed to maintain or write truth at any time: prosecute me
if you dare; you shall shortly be your own prosecutors, so well as I have been
mine; then read me some pretty Homily of your conversion to comfort me. But
lest I should make you so mad as my self, let me soberly advise you to join
your Prayers publicly and privately with the Saints, for the deliverance of a
justly-afflicted people; peradventure God may have mercy on you and them, if ye
unfainedly repent, amend, and advance Christ without private end.

To the Covenanters.
SUrely in 43 my Friend was an Infant at Law; yet having then a place by his
Master Gamliel's Excellency, in mundane affairs, worth more then 100 l per an.
he, according to the trust on, and duty in him, tendered the Covenant to many;
amongst the rest, viz. the Prelatical and Royal Clergy and Gentry, whom he
found (though silenced their imperfections) that after much trouble on their
own spirits, they could in humane eyes, embrace any thing to preserve their
large Revenues, without seeking first the Kingdom of heaven, and laying up
treasure there; notwithstanding, at that time some chosen ones refused to take
that earthly honor from the dust by such means. For Oh my friends, (if so to
God and your own spirits) tell me the Plot and issue; was it not more from
Northern Policy, then Southern Piety, that we should engage to preserve a
Nebuchadnezzars or Belshazzar's dying fate with yours, though then by those in
hostility against both, ye espied not the Vision and Handwriting on the wall?
Truly, I cannot but acknowledge my friend declined it, though his Master
brought forth more Law then Gospel for it; and suddenly his employment (God
calling him thence by his own hand to a more retired way, lest he should abound
and wax worse) fell from him, as several times since, on other occasions. Had
this Idol-creature and other things before and since entered into, been, or
savoured more of God then man, so much blood, treasure, and sweat surely had
never been extorted to serve the three Nations, and yet no deliverance: no (my
hearts) I doubt you yet but grope (as it is convenient) till true light appear;
but when it does or shall glorify the giver, reject not the means, but embrace
it, lest your condemnation in the great day be just; which asseveration I
believe you ignorantly took in the conclusion of the Covenant: hereupon I
entreat you (for Gods cause) to consider you have doted more on man then God;
seek Gods face more, man's ( viz. honor and carnality) less and less; write but
a new Covenant on your hearts, to serve the God of glory, promote Christ's
Kingdom, and seek the union and common defense of his people more now then
ever; never more need: then joining your constant prayers therewith, trust God
with the issue; it may be Crowned with everlasting success, if God once speak
the word; however, you shall have done your duty: for what is earthly, tends to
its Center; but what is heavenly in you, to a glorious Essence. Be wise in
time, and repent, lest ye all likewise perish, the Kingdom of heaven being now
close at hand.

The the moderate People of the three Nations.
O My beloved ones, though you may be styled Laodiceans, or worse, continue in
your Sphere Serpentine and Dove-like; God will do glorious things by his
despifed people, in this latter Act now in motion; stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord; be confident therein, and ye shall be hid in the great
day as the Apple of his Eye; nay, if ye be his, he will rebuke Kings and
Princes for your sakes; yea, he will crush them for the same: Therefore with
humble (but faithful) hearts, seek his Face; if you have not had your hands in
blood, ye may yet live to see Salomon's Temple builded; however, none truly
seeks his Face and returns unfatisfied.

You Will carnally object, We have laid forth our selves for the Public good,
and can do no more Give me leave to say, Your Prayers and Tears may be yet
enlarged; then sure contribution of relief to those that go forth for you, will
not be wanting; better do so, till the Almighty send you deliverance, then
become subjected to the Conquering Tyrant; when God shall by any means (though
externally despised) grant it, then you must embrace it. In the interim, The
Lord God of glory continue or give you his Peace, which passes all
understanding; so unfeignedly prays the whimsical, but submissive Author of
this his latter Piece.

To every Individual Member of the Army.
Have not thou been one of those, that God Almighty, the Lord of Hosts has
been pleased to bless in the trials of fire and smoke? Have thou not in thy
time sent, or endeavored to return Trophies of thy success to thy friends and
Brethren at home, to magnify thy self? Did thou, or thy Assistants, never
promise the people succor or assistance, to procure their Freedoms and
Liberties? What then did they pay thee for, to continue ever upon their charge,
and never endeavor it, or indeed to call thee to Maritime as well as
Land-affairs? Oh ye foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you to seek God
little, man and thy interest much; forbear seeking truth and freedom, and
pursue vanity!

Indeed, what fruitful returns have thou given to thy Preserver? You will say
you were a servant, (I hope not Mercenary) you might advise, nay truly urge
better Counsel when the House was declining; you must therefore now help to
support it.

Well, now it seems that the Lord (by some confiding more in War then Truth and
Peace) must call you or your Comrade once more forth, as well to qualify the
wickedness of the Mariners, (a spirit bad enough, and too too soon, though
lately raised) as to try once more to bring home victory from an insulting Foe,
even at the gate; Deny not when you are called, cast your selves into the arms
of your heavenly Father, he shall direct you and his chosen ones for ever, and
will even for ever and ever preserve. But in thy heart Covenant with God, or at
least wish an happyer Restoration to our Rights and Privileges now, then by
blood at Sea, and that from thy soul: which if thou heartily pursue, the God of
glory may Crown it with a blessing, and return the benefit into thy bosom.
Remember, that the greatest of Power was the Lamb of Peace, so well as Lion of
the Tribe of Judah; but the still commands all Powers.

To the Members of Parliament and State.
O The wisdom of the World! Oh that wisdom I will overturn, overturn,
overturn, says the Lord; not in have (though provoked) I hope: for Thou Lord
art gracious, full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy, and doing
good. It has not been hid from your eyes, that the Lord has overturned your
Predecessors twice, which without peradventure acted (or at least sought)
better things: Then what shall the Lord in the great day of his controversy do
unto you? I would know which of you has most in Bank now in the enemies power,
or if you could find no other ways to spend the sinews of the people and Army,
then in a Maritime War, delayed when victory was promised and answered; neither
friend or enemy, but the devouring Sea, like to be the better for it. Has God
even delivered into your servants hands the Enemies of the three Nations, to be
thus requited, in stead of seeking the face of his Divine Majesty with
unfeigned prayers and praises, doing good to the whole work of his hands, and
as a Deliverer of our Rights and Privileges from the incursion and subjugation
of Tyrants? Are not we, even we, that God has made Moses-like to stand in the
gap in the terrible day, when the deluge of your Enemies approached your
nearest confines, very sad now? Well, what reward? A new War, and bad
involvement in fresh Seas of sorrow. Nay, before the matter (as is supposed)
was fully stated, or materially ripe for action, and other creatures that never
appeared in the late-got victories, or in the least contributed thereto, must
first be preferred and promoted in the fruits of our bloody and dirty travels,
for your safeties and our own, even as Mercenaries or worst of men slighted. I
must acknowledge, it is just with God the searcher of hears, and tryer of the
reins, to cast sometimes the Rod into the fire, which proves dry, stiff, or
barren; yet will he keep mercy for those of them, that will yet look from vain
humane Powers, and to his Face alone for comfort and deliverance. How
seasonable would one years ease be, to a declining people, even almost
exhausted already, whose languishing Privileges have commanded my watchful eye
and weaker Pen to this sacrifice of some retired hours! Enquire not after my
name in the flesh, to persecute it, lest your own hearts meet with enough
within to judge your selves; not that I sear any other then my God, my
Deliverer, and Preserver; and that Angel he has appointed to attend me, and
minister unto me. Oh friends, I Will call you good Masters, when you by your
Christian, sweet, and good disposures, shall find true Religion and pursue it,
in relieving the Widow, the Fatherless, and Orphans; and easing the heavy-laden
of their burdens. You may say, The time is now past. But, O Sirs, let every
one of you enter into the privatest Closets of your hearts, and with tears
bewail those glorious opportunities God has put into your hands, though
rejected and neglected; and then draw a new Covenant with the great God of
Power, who deposes and sets up Princes at pleasure, now most cordially and
really to seek chiefly his glory, and the advantage of the Commonwealth, and
the mutual preservation, defense, and comfort of all his people in general;
especially those under your charge, if God may deliver you and them; and do you
your selves first sign it with your hearts and hands, then distribute it among
the people: also, unto a common Treasury to be appointed, do you your selves
advance what liberal sums you can possibly spare, to perfect or accommodate
this great work, that others may follow your example; and if you can lend any
of your persons to the work, do.

And here if I may produce two or three considerations from a piece entitled
Sir Walter Rawleigh's Maxims of Sat, I shall.

"Sometimes the Romans, for Public good, without respect of wealth, fetched
some of their Senators from the Plough, and some from the School.

Such would now be visible in the rooms of Achans, Achitophels, and miscarrying
Iscariots, if any such there be.

In another place thus, as touching a Political Prince.

" David being a most worthy and excellent Prince, for Wisdom, Valor,
Religion, and Justice, and so highly deserving of the Commonwealth, yet grown
into age, grow withal into contempt, and had many both of his Nobles and common
people that fell from him, first with Absalom, then with Adonijah, who affected
the Kingdom, and rebelled against him; for remedy whereof, he stirred up
himself to Public actions which might show his vigor and sufficiency to
manage the affairs of his Kingdom.

"After the victory of Absalom, he forced himself to forbear mourning, and
showed himself to his discontented Army, when all were like to fall from him.
He also sent kind messengers to Je. rusalem and other principal places, and men
of Judea, putting them in mind of their alliance with him, with these words,
That they were of his own flesh and blood, with protestation to provide for
them with the like kindness and affection of theirs to wards him. He assembled
a Parliament of his whole Realm, etc. He showed bounty and magnificence, in
congesting matter for building of the Temple, as Gold, Silver, etc. He revived
Church Government, and set it in right order. He ordained Solomon his Successor.

"By these and such like other means, he retained his Majesty and Authority in
his old age, and then dyed in peace.

I leave the application to the most Pious and Politic of you, with this
caveat, that when you use Policy, you never tender it more then as a handmaid
to true Piety; which then will make it more warrantable, and abide the test of
fire it self.

"O hear what Moses speaks: Thus says the Lord, I have surely seen the
affliction of my people, and I have heard their cry, by reason of their
Taskmasters, for I know their sorrows. Thus you may see God will take special
care of his low despised ones: and observe what Paul says, (O I could wish you
noble Senators to be so as the wise Bereans, who studied the Scriptures for
glorious ends, that I might join with him to you thus) Though I am absent in
the Flesh, yet am I present with you in the Spirit. But thus as to highest
glory, and lowest good; Come, come, learn to be perfect Christians, so well as
Morally honest; deny your selves, take up the Cross (now near you) and follow
him.

Clouds gathered, menace Rain, I wish not ruin, or that it spoil not you,
because you manage it no better; either take your hearts and hands to you, to
maintain Public interest, or draw aside, take Physic a while, and admit
others that you dare trust as Deputies with that, or part of that high trust in
you; commit your selves to the preserver of men, and let nothing be wanting in,
by, through, or from you, that may manifest your selves to be Patres Patriae,
advancers of the Kingdom of Christ, and the prosperities of his Saints: Which
that you may do, shall be the prayer of the Author, to the chief Author of
mercy.

To my honest Fellow-Commoners.
TRuly Sirs, I have nothing worthy to be called a present for you in this day
of your great Trial; but if you will accept it, I render you the sorrowful
countenance of a dejected heart, wishing it might sigh and mourn it self away
for your deliverance, which sure will approach: every night has its morning,
and that its perfect day. When God has afforded you mercies greater then ever,
putting your Trustees in fair ways of establishing your long-desired Rights;
have you been truly thankful, or have not your fresh sins still called and
renewed more judgments? Seriously I now fear your case, yet the Lord will (if
you trust him) not suffer poor souls for ever to groan under the Altar of
mercy, but give them a glorious issue of their desires. Patiently wait, stand
still, and see the salvation of the Lord. Man can do no more then God permits,
nor can Pharaoh with all his Chariots pass the Red Sea; but ye may escape, if
ye steer affairs by Divine direction. Well, this is further to try your
spirits, if not humble, and lay them in the dust.

If ye are perfect Christians, ye cannot refuse your Masters Cross. But say
you, We expected our Freedoms and external Privileges to be settled long
since. I bewail your want, I desire to mourn with you. When God had even
planted you in peace, and had pruned you, what fruit brought you forth? were
you not so bad as my self, a barren Fig Tree, which justly deserved this curse
upon all our hopes? or indeed brought ye not forth wild grapes, which
occasioned God to pluck down your walls, and leave you a prey to the Bears and
Wolves of the Forest? but those of you that are in Christ, shall be in safety;
if War and pestilence cover the Land, he will watch tenderly over his, and
preserve them from all dangers; Gog and Magog must fall, Truth only stand. Oh
Friends, be ye just and upright, then shall your path be as the shining light,
which shines more and more unto the perfect day; and be ye not as the wicked
which walk in darkness, who know not whereat they stumble. I shall desire you
to offer up your hearts in sighs and groans to the God of mercy, for an happy
restitution of your Christian Privileges now sinking, by reason of those
corruptions. Observe Divine Providence, let nothing be wanting toward support
of the Church yet Militant, for your sakes, I mean those that shall go forth
for you; for those must bring in Materials to build the true Temple, as David
did.

To all present Powers.
WHat God, or man by him shall dictate, observe and follow; lest God find you
so disobedient as your Predecessors, and accordingly afflict, though he may
love you; For God was once in the still voice: I wish the same may modelize you
(as it will) and manifest more to you then the poor Author.

I desire to be spent for you and my poor Country, I mean spiritually; that ye
may also taste and receive more excellent things, excellency waits at your
gates.

To the Mariners and Sea-Commanders.
Has God brought you to this for punishment or mercy, judge ye? Oh what
Blaspheming and Retrogade spirits have ye been! Oh Friends, judge your selves
in time, lest ye be now adjudged to torments. Shall I deal plainly with you? Ye
are the Vessels of Wrath, which the Omnipotent has appointed to scourge so bad
as your selves, though more numerous; some of you must fall for the rest, by a
Rod of your own gleaning, yet it shall preserve you, though ye cannot but by
faith epsy the hand that moves it. Oh in time (with me) bewail the Face of
affairs and Divine judgments, which your treacherous sins to God and man
has called upon our own heads.

Pray why was not victory pursued, when your Enemy fled before you? Was it to
betray your Country, or enlarge their fears, sorrows, and exhaust their
declining Sweat and Treasure? Well, for this I tell you, though the Lord of
Hosts (in whose Almighty presence we are always) will (notwithstanding, though
for your sins punishing you) let you by another hand more then yours, see
deliverance.

Then trust God and his pure Spirit in his Saints; leave Oaths and wickedness,
that ye may be converted and live, and indeed be Instruments yet of as much
glory and Conquests, as the God of Forces has made some of his Children by
Land, that you or yours may see Peace established in Righteousness, and so
Posterity have occasion to bless God for you, though wicked Instruments of his
glory; for now the ungodly will punish the wicked.

O let the Spirit of Christ reign in and over you, that it may not only
deliver you and us in the evil day, but confirm you to the enjoyment of the
great glory shall be discovered and made manifest in (though out of) the flesh;
then be ye conformable to the dictates of the same, walk humbly in his sight,
that ye may be bold as Lions in your Enemies, and they be crushed before that
greater invisible Power, in or with you; which I most heartily wish.

To all people of and in God.
I Suppose our Bears must not only destroy those without, but rob them of
their Whelps, if they make haste; and by or before the beginning of March next,
resolutely and unanimously attempt and persevere in it: then trust God with the
issue; two or three bouts will do the work, if you and they desire the Lord of
Hosts to do it for us: to further which, I wish a new Covenant written in every
ones heart and spirit, to seek Truth and Peace, and pursue it, immediately
after the deliverance, and in the height of our Conquest; that mercy may be
minded, and so burning Coals heaped on the heads of the Enemies; and I wish the
rigid Presbyters and Anabaptists ruin not themselves. Also, a Public
Treasury to be erected, for every one worth above 200 l. de claro, to advance
a twentieth part of substance toward the propagation of this great work, to be
repaid immediately after victory, (if our State can bear it) with interest at
8 per cent. with the voluntary contribution of others in that nature, toward
support of affairs, and of the Widow, Fatherless, and Orphans that must happen.
Also the Soldier and Mariner (when duly paid) will be humbler and bettter
servants. As to suppression of Tories, Moss-Troopers, and Vagabounds in Arms,
which must increase in Ireland and Scotland, That in the first place a
Marshall-General, and strict Advocate with Force, may continually (convenient
rest in a place allowed) be allotted to Quarter on their Landlords or Grandees;
and setting forth a Proclamation for every one of those Wolves to come in by a
due season, immediately else hang up every one at the next Tree they shall meet
in Arms; and all suspected disaffected disarmed.

As for the Navy, honest Commanders of the Army, joined with the Naval, to
qualify the Spirit, will crush the Enemy.

Had not Sol afflicted Merc'ry in Cancer,
Crabs to Rams had never found an answer.
Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS Coronat Opus.
Let Bears decay, Wolves fall, and Lions stand,
First gone, others wasting, lost, and last command;
When heaven once shall unfold this Mystery,
Heavens in earth receive a Jubilee.
Wake not my Love, when now wishes slumber;
Crush your Enemy though exceeds number.
The Author has been too busy for you,
Yet his pointed work he must do:
Let Babylon fall, that truth may flourish;
Then Peace, Joy, all blessings shall you nourish.

