TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, There or elsewhere scattered, for the faith of
the Church, and service of the Gospel; Grace and Peace be multiplied.
LEt me crave your Honorable patience, while your eye runs over this Epistle
and Preface: both as short, as possibly I could make it. For the Book it self,
it cannot crave, happily it may command your eye and ear both, for this Reason.
It is a CHRONICLE fully and wholly taken out of the Book of God. It treats of
Kings and Princes, Priests and Levites too, of common people also; their
several ways here on Earth, with several notes upon these ways, taken from
Gods mouth too.

I will take leave to tell you, how I fell upon this work. I heard a great cry,
and I was one, who helped to make it greater; we complained of the Times and of
you, not a word of our selves, and thus we spoke unadvisedly enough after our
manner; our expectation is clean frustrate: we looked for good, behold evil:
for peace, behold a Sword: Summer is come and gone, we are not delivered.
Delivered! never in worse case then now. That we thought would do us good, has
done us hurt. Then, as that stubborn people, never well full nor fasting,
called out Moses, Moses (he was in all the blame still) so we called out upon
you, and wished ten times, as they did, that we were, as we were, in Egypt
again. Thus we, poor simple ones, have done and do, standing all the while in
the bottom and upon the level of our own Imaginations.

By the good hand of God upon me, I did according to the charge, SEARCH THE
SCRIPTURES; they testify of the Lord Jesus Christ, yes, and of all that ever
was, is, or shall be done in the world, for, or against His Kingdom there,
wherein these times are eminently, very infamous and very glorious both.

I thank God, that I did search the Scriptures: for now I can give a full and
clear account of all the affairs now a days. 1. That they are what they have
bin, nothing NEW, that is now under the Sun. What is now irregular and our of
Rule is not new, but as it has bin done by these, whose will was their Bias,
so they run apace furiously, I had almost said, but very directly to their own
and their peoples ruin: And they that walked regularly after the line of
Heaven, obtained the Sabbath and port of all their labors, were a blessing to
themselves, and to the place where they lived. 2. I can reprove my own folly
now, and theirs, who are but a little wiser, That we have not a faith to live
upon, for we make haste; we ask and we have not, because we asked amiss; we
expected, and our expectation is vain, because we were too hasty, and expected
without the book: we would have God go our way, and do things just when and
how, we would have Him: as if wisdom were with us, and we could tell the
fittest time.

Our complaints are as wild as our thoughts; we complain as if some strange and
new things were done now, when indeed there is nothing now that is new; Man was
mad upon his Idols in ancient times; he is but mad now. And when his Idols Ier.
50 38.
were struck-at, he would strike too, and be in a rage; he does no more now.
The Nations were angry, when Christ had taken to Himself power Reve. 11. 18.
, then they made Tumults; they do but the same now: And in proportion to their
rage now, shall their judgment be anon, it shall reach unto Heaven, and be
lifted up even to the skies. Ier. 51. 9.
2 Chronicles. 28. 9.
They brake His bonds before and cast away His Cords, They are not more like to
Devils now. The Lord laughed at those furious fools then; He laughs now: He saw
their day was coming Ps. 37.
; we thank Him for His Eye salve, we see as much now. The LORD Christ has few
friends, that will own His cause, that will stand by Him, and that troubles a
few in the world: That is no new thing neither: Time was when all forsook Him,
Disciples and all: And then His Adversaries wrought their will on Him, but then
He wrought most gloriously, for from the Cross and the grave (the Adversaries
thought Him sure enough, they had their will on Him, when they had Him there,
but from thence) He has brought life and immortality to light, through the
Gospel. He is the same, and by the same 2 Timothy 1. 10.
crosse-ways and wills, can work as gloriously still; and there is nothing now
that is new.

3. But that, which pleases me most of all, is, I have found a price, and I
find it put into your hands, I mean, A way opened unto you, whereby to deliver
a Nation, brought even to the mouth of destruction; which you shall do, not by
commanding the Sword to be still, (for it is the Lords Sword, and out of your
command; you are no more able to stop it in it is way, then you can the Sun in
it is course) but by striking at the root, Idolatrous persons and things; by
removing them from before the eyes of His jealousy: and by casting them out:
If not, the Lord has sworn, and He will not repent, that He will do with you,
and with your Land (for it is yours now, and not the Lords, so long as Idols
are countenanced there, and they are countenanced, so long as they are not
thrown out, whether persons or things) as you should have done to the Idols
there; and as He has done to Israel and Judah, because of those Idols; They
did not cast them forth from before His Eyes; therefore they are cast out of
their own Land, and from being a Nation. Now the choice is easy; you must
cast-out these abominations, else you and your Land must be cast-out; it is at
your choice, choose you whether.

You are about it, you will say, you have made an Ordinance against Idolatry,
and we must be humbled for it, every man of us. Blessed be God for that, and
His blessings be upon your souls. But do ye consider what an engagement you
have laid upon your souls; or do we silly ones consider what it is, to be
humbled for this high provocation? To loath our selves, because of our whorish
hearts, and abominable Idolatries, wherewith we have broken the Lords heart
Ezekiel. 6. 9.
, as His Highness is pleased to express His loathing of that sin; This is to be
humbled; and then presently follows a casting-out, as we do that we loath, and
our stomach rises against Esa. 30. 22.
. But herein you must lead us the way, else, like Behemoths legs, we shall break
before we bow; we must see you humbled before us, as all the worthies of
Israel, before the Lord for this thing; but we shall never believe our eyes
neither, till we see you, as you may see them, casting-out Idols, and their
services, till they were all cast-out, I mean al these abominations; and so I
met with a 4h thing.

4. The exactest pattern of posturing a Kingdom that ever was looked upon; the
very work you are upon now. Shall it prosper? The Lord knows, I cannot tell,
and yet I have enquired of the Oracle. I can tell, it is your work, and woe
unto you if you do it not; but how you hand-it I cannot tell, nor by what line
and level you go; nor do I take upon me to judge thereof; but till you make
answer to God in that point, you will never be answered. Truly I cannot tell
what to say to men or their work. The Oracle (that is the word of God) tells
me, they are fickle, inconstant, preposterous too, they begin where they should
end, and end where they should begin, the manner of Men.

This only I can tell, for so the Oracle tells me, that when the Worthies of
Israel, Kings and Princes there, Priest and People too (in the Nonage of their
King) fell upon this great work, the Posturing their Kingdom, they began with
an Ordinance against Idolatry; That is the Land vvasting sin: nor did they mock
God, for whosoever lifted up his hand to a strange god, him they cut off 2
Chr. 15. 13.
. Then behold breaking, cutting, burning, drowning, casting out of Idols, all,
until they had utterly destroyed them all 2 Chro. 31. 1.
. Nay they cast down the talest person, and Image in the Land; The Queen
Mothers Image her son Asa the King did not spare her, no not her. Then the work
went on, and they prospered.

Now (as was said) I take not upon me to judge by what line and level, the
work is carried-on, if, as Iudahs work was, we can the more heartily wish your
prosperity in the name of the Lord, for our lives, to say no more, the life of
our lives is wrapt-up with it: if otherwise, and you work not as you have them
for an ensample, yet the work of the Lord shall go-on, that shall prosper; He
is vvorking now, to make His Church a quiet habitation: and He will bring His
work about through the straits and by the cross ways and wills of men, though
you should desert the work and vvith-draw your hands from should ring up the
Lord Christ to His Throne (He calls for your hand to honor you, and woe to you
if you withdraw, but I say, He needs you not) He can set Himself in His throne
without you, and His work shall go-on in despite of Devils or men. As sure as
the Lord lives, His work shall go on. What a proud word is that from a man's
mouth! Yes, if it were not from Gods mouth. Lift up thine eyes round about,
says the Lord; Esa. 49. 14.
now hearken what we say; what shall we behold, a company of Pillagers,
Robbers, Spoylers? It grieves our hearts to lift up our eyes round about and
behold. The Lord give us patience, that we may stand still and hear Him out,
and wait till He has done His whole work; for hearken what He says to stay
the heart; All these gather themselves and come to thee; what to spoil, and rob
the Church? No, to adorn and beautify her; The Church shall have many Vid
calv.
children; they shall flock-in unto her, as the Chickens to the Hen, as
Children to their Mother, and their graces shall abound, and there is the
Churches ornament. But shall this be? Yes the Lord has sworn it shall be, As
I LIVE, says the LORD, thou shall surely cloth thee with them Esa. 49. 19.
all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee as a Bride does: For thy waste
and thy desolate places and the Land of thy DESTRVCTION, (Mark that, this Land
shall be glorious for all this, it shall rejoice over her enemies, the Land of
thy destruction) shall even now be too narrow by reason of the Inhabitants, and
they that swallowed thee up shall be far away. As I LIVE, says the LORD. And
this work in His Hand shall be perfected in His time. Our time is now, His time
not yet, till His whole work be performed. Briars and thorns are now set
against the Lord in battle. Esa. 27. 4.
As sure as the Lord lives, He will go through them, and burn them together,
in His own time, when these thorns have bin to His people, as those were to
Manasseh, when they have humbled His people, been a sanctified means to purge
the iniquity of Jacob (for that is the fruit of thorns to the servants of God)
when their hearts shall be thereby prepared for the great work of Reformation;
then the Lord will go through these Briars and thorns, there shall be no more
fear of them. In the mean time, the Lord will help His people with a little
help, so much as shall revive their hopes, when they be fainting, and keep up
their spirits, in assured Confidence, That the work shall be done then, when
Jacob shall most rejoice, and Israel shall be right 1 Kin. 8. 59, 60, 61.
glad Ps. 53. 6.
.

Amen.
IT is this three and twentieth day of December, 1641, ordered by the Committee
of the House of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Book,
entitled, The Kings Chronicle be printed.

JOHN WHITE,

THE KINGS CHRONICLE: The Scope and purpose thereof: To show, What the Militia
is: That all Kings and Princes, and Nobles of the World have made it their
work, To promote the same (i. e.) To strengthen themselves, and set their
Kingdom in a Posture of Defense: But, willing contraries; and, not so much
missing, as crossing the way, They failed of the end, so became great Examples.
THE Militia of the Kingdom is now pressing-on and advancing, as great bodies
moove, or as we pass through a crowde, or through Thorns; now it
putts-on-ward, and then thrust-backe again; and yet, it must goe-on through
all oppositions, and the more victoriously, the greater the opposition is;
which must be great, All that the Devils can do to hinder it shall be done,
for it is a work honorable and glorious, of an immense weight and worth; All
conclude it to be so, and this is the short description, which all do give of
it; The setting a Kingdom (the King and People there) in a posture of defense.
We may give several descriptions of the same thing, so of this, though the
first contains all; It is the shutting in the Doors or Frontiers of a
Kingdom, and to shut them in so, as was the door of the Arc, by GODS own
Hand. Genesis 7. 16.
It is as the setting up of two Pillars, 1 King. 7. 21.
JACHIN and BOAZ, assuring the Land, That in the LORD JEHOVAH is Salvation and
strength. b It is, etc.

It is the maintaining the two staves Zech 11. 10. 14.
. 1. The staff of BEAUTY, which I will call the ETERNAL GOSPEL, being the
stay and staff of every particular Person; and GLORY of the whole Nation.

2. The staff of BANDS, The binding of a People fast to their GOD in the Bond
of a Covenant. More briefly; It is the Intiteling GOD to a Kingdom: The
writing His Salvation upon our Gates and Bars; Then they be strong holds
indeed; Then we may say, we have a strong City and Kingdom, when the LORD
appoints His Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks* Esa. ^6. 1.
. This is the Militia of a Kingdom; No other thing but this.

Then surely this work is like the Desire in the 4th. Psalm, suitable to the
whole Kingdom, and to every Person therein. No man is such an Enemy to his
own and the public Peace, as not to desire This with all his desire; The Lord
our King does say Amen to this; All His good People will say Amen also; and do
pray; The LORD GOD of our Lord the King say so too. 1 King 1. 36.
Who does not desire, that the doors of his house be shut-in upon him, and
himself shut-in as Noah was. If we could ask from one end of the Land to the
other, every man would tell us, This is his desire: He would rest at Night,
and sleep at quiet, which he cannot do, if his Doors stand open. It were then
a notorious solecisme in Policy; To command the Doors in private Houses to be
locked against spoilers: And to suffer Frontiers in Kingdoms to lie open to
invasion Therefore I said, It is every man's Desire, and the very same, that has
been ever since there was a Man upon Earth. Is there any thing whereof it may
be said, SEE THIS IS NEW? Yes that it is, you will say, The opposition Eccles.
1 10.
that is made against this Glorious work is NEW, there was never such a thing
like unto this, since man was upon the Earth. Like unto what? Like to this
opposition, an unparalleled, and most desperate opposition, managed against this
work by a most malignant party. An. Indeed I cannot say, and prove, That this
opposition can be paralel'd, that we can find the like to it, running-on and
holding pace with it all along. But this we find; That this opposition now is
not new: for Evil stood crossecentered to Good ever since there were two
Brethren upon the earth; and ever after that time, we shall find, if we
consult with the Records of Time, That all times of Reformation, of well
Posturing a Kingdom, have been vexatious and troublous Dan. 9. 25.
We shall speak more to this anon, we read on now. It has been already of
old time, which was before us. Kings and Princes and Nobles of the earth, have
in all ages, made this their great Prove. 8. 36.
work; To fortify themselves, and secure their Kingdom; So as they might be
secure at home, and feared abroad. I will keep my self to the Sacred
Chronicles, and observe thence. What the Kings of Judah have done touching this
great business; The different ways they went, yet all toward the same end,
and carrying all level to the same mark, The setting themselves and their
Kingdom in a Posture of Defense. Ob. But have I not spoken contradictories,
words and things crossing each the other? I said, That the Militia, the
Posturing of an House or Kingdom, is every man's Desire, he Wills it and can
take God to record, he Wills it heartily: and presently after we hear of an
opposition against it, as if a man could desire his own good, and with the
same breath refuse or oppose it.

Answ. Yes, all this a man may do; he may desire good, and yet cross himself
and his Desire in the way thereunto: he may will his own Peace, and yet oppose
it, as a man that hates Peace, and loves Death ^. Naturally there are cross
Desires and cross Wills in every man. Every man desires Peace, his soul
desires it, as it is said of the sluggard Prove. 13. 4. The sluggard wills with
his mouth, wills not or puts back with his hand, for it is not diligent. A true
desire of Grace and Glory sets all his powers of soul and body on work in
pursuance of the same, as an hungry soul desires bread and the thirsty water.
A new or regenerate will runs-on strait and even like a parallel line, with Gods
revealed will: And when it crook's or runs cross, it is not that will but his
other will is cross to himself, now that he is himself, for what that does,
he hates Ch^ys. Acts 27. 8.
. Grace which is but Glory begun; and Glory, which is but Grace perfected, it
is every man's Desire, he Wills it, he thinks, with all his soul; But he has
a Will crossing this Will; and a Desire standing in opposition and utter enmity
to this Desire, which unless taken away by an Almighty Hand, he shall never
have what he seems (for he does but seem) to Will and Desire. Note we this,
well;

That Rest and Peace here, and hereafter for ever with the LORD, is the SABBATH
and Port of all men's Labors, and Intentions, but with this difference: It is
seemingly so with the most, Really and indeed so with the fewest; and therefore
the fewest attain this Port; they only, who steer their course according to
the two Poles of motion safety and a fair haven.

It is indeed a natural desire, and the very end of every man's thoughts; The
preservation of himself, and to avoid whatever is contrary thereunto; Yet
(such is our darkness) nothing more ordinary then to miss of the end by
mistaking the way; whereof I shall give (anon) very great Examples, recording
days of old for the benefit and instruction of the present times; They are the
examples of those, who have willed contradictories, as men in all times have
done, and now adays do, and will to the worlds end. They will have the end;
and will none of the means: So with the sluggard (as Jerome translates it very
well Prove. 13. 4. ^ult and non ^ult piger.
) They WILL and they WILL NOT; They will command the end, yet not endure the
means; They will have Peace, and Grace, and Glory, they think they may have
what they will, they will not go the way, not tread the path, that leads
thereunto; We shall try the possibility of this, and see clearly what the end
will be (as cross to their expectation, as their wills were) in the ways and
wills of the Kings of Judah, taking the worst first; for the worst Kings are
the best examples to make all wiser that observe them aright; which no man
does, that presumes to go on in a wicked way: for the examples here will open
the pits mouth before him, and assure him it will close its mouth upon him, if
he goes on.

There is indeed a great seducement by wicked examples, for, through the
depravation of our natures, we rather imitate the worse then the better; and
too ordinary it is in ill to exceed; in good to come short of the example; But
this is for want of well weighing the example, because we do not look through
it to the end: we see what is done, but we do not see what will be the issue
of the act. Here, in this Chronicle, we may behold all together, The Proud Man
in his Throne, with his Princes about him, and presently after dwelling with
the beasts of the field, there eating grass as Oxen Dan 4. 32.
. We may behold him here drinking wine in bowls, the sacred vessels of the
Temple, and the same hour seeing a handwriting upon the wall; and, within an
hour after feeling the Sword in his bowels Dan. 5. 4.
; We may behold the Man here even as a wild-Asse Jer. 2. 24.
snuffing up the wind; or as the expression is, sowing the wind, and with the
same glance of the eye, behold him reaping the whirle wind Hose 8. 7, 12. 13.
: And then we can consider how gracious the proud Man will be in the eye of the
beholder at that time, when pangs come upon him, the pain as of a woman in
travel Jer. 22. 23.
: for then we shall see him ashamed and confounded for all his wickedness ver.
22.
. Of infinite use this, To look through the example to the end, and then
nothing better instructs then the worst examples, for therein we shall see
wicked ways, and Idolatious counsels leading to ruin and destruction, and all
this together.

Man's heart is desperately wicked, and so pursues his own way, as the two
Captains with their fifties 2 King 1. 9. 10, 11, 12.
, with the Sword in his hand, threatenings and menacies in his mouth, thinking
to command the end, which he has vainly conceited: But when he lookes-on
forward, and considers his way to be a perishing way, and that, not two
Captains with their fifties, but thirteen Kings with their people (so many we
shall read of) went traversing the same way, and fire from Heaven consumed
them: When he considers this heartily, it will check him in his way, and put
supplications in his mouth, not only to the Man of God (for he may be sought to
also,) But to GOD-MAN, The LORD JESUS CHRIST (whom we persecute marching in our
own way) so bespeaking mercy from the LORD in the words of that wise and
considerate Captain before him, Fire from Heaven has consumed these Kings
with their People, and their Land (once the Eden of the World,) Let my life,
and the life of Thy servants, and the peace of this Land be precious in thy
sight, Amen. We see the scope and purpose of this Chronicle.

I shall not now crave the Readers attention; I know the weight and excellency
of the matter will command it; for I shall set before Kings and People; what? I
must correct my self first, else I shall spoil all. What can I set before
them, which the meanest man will regard? Alas silly man! when he says what he
will do, he does but disadvantage himself and the cause. I should have said,
the LORD, the HIGH, the DREADFVLL GOD; He will this Day in the examples, which
follow, set before Kings and their People DEATH and EVIL, LIFE and GOOD. If
our hearts turn away, so that we will not hear; if we will be drawn away and
worship strange Gods; then behold Death and Evil! For surely we shall perish:
But if we will love the LORD our GOD, obey His voice, cleave unto Him, then we
choose Life and Blessing; for He is our life and length of our days. Behold
Death and Evil is set before us in the following examples of the Kings, who,
though dead, yet speak much to the Instruction of the l^ving; how destructive
Idolatrous ways are, and, he beaten paths of humane policies: as the other
tell us, how safe and good the holy way is, wherein never any man miscarried.

Before we read their doings, I would say this for the length of the
Chronicle, That when my thoughts were first upon it, I did not intend it so,
but more contracted and abrid ed into a narrow room. But then I considered
what a work I had in hand, and what my scope therein: My work was well to
ponder the ways and works of bad and good Kings, wherein nothing can be found
small or of light account: Then again,

The Scope is, as we heard, the Instruction of the living Kings and their
People all: I thought it then my duty to ponder matters yet more, and to look
over their History again and again: And the more I read, the more I found,
even mighty things, and whereon the LORD Himself had set a mark with His own
Hand, like an hand in the road-way, pointing the passenger; This way thou must
go for this is the strait way, and tends to life: And here thou must forbear,
for it is a destructive way and tends to death. Truly I find so many marks in
my travel here, that I could not tell where to pick and choose, finding all so
remarkable of so great and excellent use, to mark out the way of LIFE and
DEATH unto us all, whether high or low, great or small.

I would add this also. That the Chapters in this Chronicle are enlarged, as
the Story of the Kings there is continued; where through two whole books and
more, as is the Story of the two first Kings, there are the Chapters
lengthened: Where through three Chapters, as the Story of Asa; or four as the
Story of King Jehoshaphat and Hezekiah (for these wrought effectually to
edisie, strengthen and establish themselves and their Kingdoms, which is a
work evermore of difficulty, labor and time) accordingly are their Chapters
enlarged.

The Story of the bad Kings is begun in one Chapter, and there ended (except
the Story of Saul, which fills a Book, and of Rehoboam, which is continued
through three Chapters:) for a King in an Idolatrous way, does not go, but
run, and is quickly at the end, posting-on himself and his people to ruin
and destruction: Therefore, though the Story be short, yet the observations
thereupon, may be long and of infinite use.

It is our wisdom to set our hearts thereunto: And since DEATH and EVIL, LIFE
and GOOD are before us, well to consider, looking well before us, that we choose
the good way, the way of good men, walk therein and keep the paths of the
Righteous: That we love the LORD our GOD; obey His voice, and cleave unto Him.
For it Prove. 2. 20.
follows; He is thy LIFE, and length of thy Days: Deu. 30. 19, 20.
He is thy Praise, and He is thy GOD, That has done for thee the great and
terrible things, which thine eyes have seen: Therefore thou shall fear the
LORD Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
thy GOD, Him shall thou serve, and to Him shall thou cleave.

Amen.
THE KINGS CHRONICLE. THE ACTS OF SAVL.
SECT. I.
The Chronicles of the bad Kings of Judah are read, their mistakes about their
Militia. The contrary ways and motions to their own ends are recorded.

CHAPT. I.
A Change in the mind and ways of the Judges makes the Elders of Israel ask a
change of Government; they ask a King, are shown the manner of their King;
Saul is given them. He is well advised and ruled by Samuel, and is prosperous.
An Ammonite deals proudly with Israel, and is accordingly dealt with, and
confounded. GOD gives Saul a glorious victory over the Philistines, and his
son fullfills a Prophecy: He is charged concerning Amaleke, and does
contrary: Then he hears of his rejection. David gains him another victory, as
wonderful as the former, therein gives the Church assured confidence for ever,
he is ill requited for it, Saul envied him to the day of his death, bent the
strength of his Militia against David. Saul's life was all along contrary to the
rule of grace; and his death contrary to the light of Nature.

Samuel is Isreal's last Judge, and Saul their first King; called to that high
office, and enabled thereunto by GOD Himself, raised quickly in his thoughts
and disposition to the pitch of a King. Samuel does not rule now (though well
read and experienced in that Art) but orders and directs; gives Saul the honor
of that hardest work, The ruling of the people, but tells him how to do it.
Samuel speaks, and Saul hearkens, and all this while it was well: So long as
Samuel ruled-out the way of government to Saul, and he followed the Rule, it
was well with Saul and with all the people: The Lord made their Militia strong
and successful to a wonder: When he transgressed that Rule, his spirits fell,
and he from his princely dignity, thrusting himself besides the throne with
his own hands. Notwithstanding the LORD wrought a wonderful deliverance for
Israel by the hand of David, for which David was ill requited, for therefore
Saul envied him, and turned the edge of his Militia against him. Saul should
have fought the battles of the Lord, and have strengthened himself against the
Lords and Isreal's enemies, he does the contrary, fights against the Lord and
his servant David: Quickly after, his sin finds him out, and the Philistines
(who gathered strength, while Saul strengthened himself against the LORD)
drove Saul into the straits, and being there, he sought for Death from another
hands, and obtaines it not; his own hand shall do him that favor (since he
counts it so) and so is his own Executioner.

Thus I have, this once, for I shall do so no more, hudledup and crowded
together, a large and famous Story, which contains many Remarkables of infinite
use; That is it I intend: Therefore I will draw them out one after another, if
at more length then is expected, the intent is good, that we may put the more
observations upon them. The History begins,

AGe bath overtaken Samuel; and his careful government, which is a burden too
heavy for him, he puts off from himself, laying the weight thereof on his
Sons shoulders, Joel and Abiah 1 Samuel 8. 1, 2.
, who judged the people at Bersheba, the very utmost City toward the South of
Judea. The place was inconvenient and very remote; so were these two brothers,
no less removed from the justice and virtue of their Father; They turned aside
after lucre and took bribes. Bribes in the plural ver. 3.
number; he that opens his hand to a bribe once, seldom shuts it afterward:
for the thirst of covetousness, the more it swalloweth, the more it dries and
desires, finding taste in nothing but gain; and so for in-comes that way,
they set the Law at a price, and sold Judgment and Justice to the best
Chap-men, them that would give the best bribes for it: it follows, took bribes
and perverted judgment. This injustice in their Judges, makes the Elders of
Israel very earnest with Samuel to give ver. 4.
them a King: they might justly ask a King now (they thought) an alteration and
change in government, now that their Judges were so changed from what they
were, and so wicked, had quite perverted judgment and justice. And so
importunate they are, that they are resolved upon it, and will have no denial.
They might ask a King, but they should not have been so importunate; their
request was good, but it was too hasty, and then good things may be ill
desired. GOD purposed to raise up a King to his People; the People (after the
manner) out-pace GOD, they will have a King when they please. The government by
Judges was of GODS institution, and, at this time settled amongst them, they
shall have a change of government, but they are over-forward to a change, and
they shall be well checked for that. The Request is put up to Samuel with much
importunity; he knows what to do, he enquires of his Oracle, asks the LORDS
ver. 6.
mind in this matter. The LORD resolves, him saying; I was indeed their King
before, and it was well with them; They have rejected Me, and not thee, that I
should not reign ver. 7.
over them: Now therefore hearken to their voice, but tell them moreover the
manner of their King, he will know himself to be King, and then think he may
do what he lists.

The People must know this, then perhaps they will understand, that ever to be
the best kind of Government, which God appoints over a people; and that, if the
government be heavy, as an iron yoke upon the necks of the People, it is but
meet for their necks, which are stiff as an Iron sinnew: and because their
iniquity is heavy upon them, whereof they stand charged to complain, and not of
the government, which the Lord has set over them.

Samuel does according to his charge; speaks unto the people in the same
words: And they, like themselves, turned a deaf ear to all the persuasions
and threats, which Samuel used; and they said, Nay but there shall be a King
over us ver. 19.
. The people will not be denied: As before, so they might have a god of their
own choosing, and so soon as they pleased, if it were a Calfe they cared not:
They were as indifferent about their King, give them a King, that they may be
like the Nations, and then they were well enough: for the manner of their King,
no matter at all for that. Men like their own time best and their own choice;
then Samuel hearing the People say so, took a vial of oil, and powered it
upon Saul's head (who was gone forth to seek Asses, and (such was the
Providence) found a Kingdom) and said, The Lord has anointed thee to be
Captain over His inheritance 1 Samuel 10. 1.
. Then shortly after having well rebuked and disciplined the people ver. 18.
, he shows them their King openly; And all the people shouted and said, GOD
save the King ver. 24.
. Then Samuel told the People the Law and Statutes of the Kingdom, and wrote
it in a book ver. 25.
, and laid it up before the LORD; so dismissed the People; and they whose
hearts GOD had touched, went home with their ver. 26.
King: others, but they were children of Beliall (evermore as deeply in love
with vice, as good men are with virtue: and as overhasty in their choice: so
as quickly out of love with it) despised him saying, This is a King indeed; as
little help can be expected from him, as from one of us; Shall this man save
ver. 27.
us. Saul was so wise as to hold his peace at that time, for he could not value
himself, as yet; he took no notice of their contempt. Then Nahash the
Ammonite came up 1 Samuel 11. 1.
and encamped against Jabesh Gilead; the People there fall presently upon
Propositions for Peace, Make a Covenant with us, say they, and we will serve
thee. Agreed said the Ammonite, ver. 1.
but upon this condition, that I may thrust out all your RIGHTEYES ver. 2.
. (That is the condition of an Ammonite; you must never expect better from
him.) Hard terms indeed! The Ammonite was persuaded no doubt of an advantage
sufficient against Israel: for, 1. He knew that many of the Israelites did not
willingly submit to their new King. 2. He remembered that the Philistines had
not long before slain thirty four thousand of their men of war 1 Samuel 42. 10
. Besides, he had used great care and diligence, that the Israelites should
have no Smithes to make them Swords and Spears 1 Samuel 13. 19.
: Neither was it long before, that the Bethshemites perished by the hand of GOD
more then fifty Thousand 1 Samuel 6. 19.
. These respects, and what else I know not, made the Ammonite so proud in his
Demands; He will have their Eyes, and their right-Eyes. It would lay a reproach
upon all Israel indeed, and utterly disinable them for the War: for, though a
man may do much by the help of the left-Eye, as some did with the Left Hand:
yet these Gileadites, using to carry a Target upon their left-Armes, which
could not but shadow their left-Eyes, should, by loosing their right, be
utterly disinabled to defend themselves.

Better a just War then a dishonorable Peace. Gold may be bought too dear:
so may peace. Had Israel given their right-eyes for peace, they had done then,
as some would do now, purchase peace with the loss of Faith and a good
Conscience. Give Israel peace (Good LORD) but let them not accept of it upon an
Ammonites terms, with the loss of their right-Eyes. We read on. Saul
observes the people weeping; enquires the reason: understands it was, because
the Ammonites had made such a proposition for peace. Mark now; And the Spirit
of GOD came upon Saul. Now there is question about Isreal's parting with their
right-Eyes, The Spirit ver. 6.
of GOD came upon Saul, raised up Saul's spirit to the height of indignation, so
that his anger was kindled GREATLY: ver. ^.
And that his indignation might appear, he hewes his Oxen in pieces; summons
all his people, thereby assuring them, their Oxen shall be served so too, if
they do not, every man of them fit for War, make their appearance presently:
for they must venture the best blood in their veins to preserve their
right-Eyes. The people will do it, for though the blood in their veins is
dear unto them, yet their right-Eyes are dearer: But we must note as
follows; The fear of the LORD fell on the people. What then? And they came
out with one consent. And so the War began, and was quickly ended: for this
unreasonable Demand, put courage into the King and people both. So Saul set his
Army in Battell-aray, Then he put 1 Samuel 11. 11.
the people in three Companies: and they came into the midst of the Host in
the morning watch, and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the Day f. And
they, that remained of the Enemies, were so scattered, that they, who demanded
the two Eyes from the people, were not left, no not two of them together. And
that was notable: for, as Samson said, GOD avenged them of the Ammonites, for
demanding their two Eyes. Judge 16. 28.
And so let all Thine enemies perish (O Lord) who, thinking they have an
advantage against Israel, will not give him peace, unless he will give them
his right-Eye.

Now the People were well pleased with Saul, for they judge of Persons and
things by the issue and success they have (violent lovers of the Prosperous,
are base vassalls to him, that flourishes, and as dispitefully cruel against
those, whom any worldly accident has thrown down) we have a valiant King,
said they, and who are they that spoke so contemptuously of him? bring the men
that we may put them to Death. And Saul said, there shall not a man be put to
Death this Day: for to Day the Lord has wrought salvation for Israel 1 Samuel
11. 13
. He had indeed; he gave Israel courage and glorious victories over that
insolent adversary who delighted in proud wrath, and Saul did his duty in
making acknowledgement, and giving the Glory to GOD.

All this while Saul prospers, for Samuel, a good man, and well experienced in
Government, does all, and all to render Saul Prosperous, and confirmed in his
Kingdom. So, according to Samuells advice, King and people went down to
Gilgall, made Saul King before the LORD there; and there they sacrificed
Sacrifices of Peace Offerings before the LORD, ver. 15.
and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.

In the next Chapter Samuel reasons with the People before Chap. 12.
the Lord of all His righteous Acts; Convinces them mightily touching his own
Innocence and uprightness in judging them; and the Lords Goodness toward
them, from the days of Moses unto that day; Advises them to continue in His
Goodness, and quickens them thereunto with a mighty threat, and so concludes
the Chapter.

Now Saul, the third time is acknowledged King, having Reigned two Years over
Israel (he did Reign many Years; Chap. 13.
but no more in Gods account, He computes him but two 1 Samuel 13. 1
Years a King for a Reason which follows) strengthened himself with a Guard
of Three thousand chosen men, of which he assigned a thousand to attend upon
his Son Jonathan. Jonathan with his small Regiment surpriseth a Garrison of
the Philistines, smites them so, that he did but enrage the Enemies with that
surprise: for presently the Philistines assembled Thirty thousand Charrets, and
six Thousand Horsemen, and ver. 5.
People as the Sands in multitude, and so Invade Judea. This sudden Invasion
strikes such a terror into the Israelites, that some hid themselves, others
fled and went over Jordan, others (for they were all in a strait, and
distressed) went trembling to Saul yet in Gilgal, who feared as much as they.
And now ver. 6, 7.
was the time when Saul should have cleaved fast to GOD, and His Command, for
he was afraid, and then, said David, I will trust in Thee, and wait, for my
hope is in Thee. And this Saul seems to do, and but seems, for, being
appointed to attend the coming of Samuel Seven Days, He did attend till the
last, and till part of that was spent too (But we must keep our selves
precisely to GODS time, and wait-it-out to the last minute, which a faithless
man, a man of an hasty spirit ever, can never do. For he will make haste as
Saul did) And then, seeing Samuel came not, and how the Case stood with him
(for he had pollitick reasons enough, if these might Our Faith is most
commendable in the last Act, It is no praise to hold out, until we be hard
driven. Dr. Halls Contempl.
guide us) He forced ver. 12.
himself, made a breach upon his conscience first, then upon GODS Command, and
an intrusion upon Samuels office, and offered a burnt-offering. Samuel comes
in the Nick of Time, while Saul was upon this holy work with his unholyed
hands; heard Saul's excuse and plea for himself, which helped him not. No
excuse will serve our turn, nor plead our not observance of GODS Command from
the mouth of His servant 1 Samuel 10. 8.
. He that would not hear this charge of the Lord to observe and do it, must
hear the Judgment of the Lord denounced by the same mouth; Thou have done
FOOLISHLY Chap. 13. 13.
; (there is folly in every sin, and the more sin the more the folly.) Thou
have not kept the Commandment of the Lord, therefore thou shall not keep
still thy Kingdom: Thou would not establish thy self in the Power and
Might of the Lord, therefore the Kingdom shall not be established unto thee:
The Lord has sought Him a Man after His own heart, to whose seed the Kingdom
of Israel shall be continued for ever ver. 14.
; And now the Lord accounts Saul a King no longer; he has the Title, the Name
of a King and no more, in Gods account, now that he has not kept the Law, the
Charge of the Lord which He commanded him. If Saul makes no account of the Law
of GOD, the King of Kings, this Great King, will not account Saul His Deputy
King: surely that is notable.

But yet Saul shall see a mighty Deliverance, and therein what the Lord can do
for those, that keep close to Him, and His command, will trust in Him, live
upon Him by Faith, when all means fail, (for there is the trial.) Thus it
was; while the state of Israel stood in these hard terms, and the Philistines
full of hope, that, having parted their Army into three Troops 1 Samuel 13. 17
, they might spoil and destroy many parts at once: Jonathan strengthened by GOD
(in whom there is no restraint to save by many or by few 1 Samuel 14. 6.
:) and followed with his Esquire only, scaled a Mountain whereupon a Company
of Philistines were lodged, (the rest of their Army being encamped in the
plain adjoining) Their coming was discovered to the Adversary, and he plays
upon them, jeeres and mocks at them very insolently, as men use to do a little
before their Destruction; Come up to us and we will show you a THING ver. 12.
. Jonathan and his Esquire took the invitation as a good presage; climbed up
upon their hands and feet, and fell upon the Adversary: so the Enemies fell
before Jonathan; and his Armourbearer slew after him ver. 13.
, then they showed the Enemy a THING, which he little looked for. It is
dangerous to put a scorn upon them, who carry the revenge of God along with
them. Faith and a good conscience are the strongest guard and weapons both: and
the surest policy always is; what? we should not make it a question, To have
peace with GOD: for then He goes along with us, and will be an Enemy to all our
Enemies. It follows; This Allarum on the top of the Hill, quickly amazed the
next Companies, then went down into the Valley, caused such a confusion there,
that they slaughtered one another, instead of Enemies. There was also a
trembling in the Host and in the Field, and among all the People: all trembled
for it was a very great TREMBLING: Psalm. 15. 16.
and the Earth quaked too; and behold the multitude melted away, and they went
on beating down one another. When God appears for His Church, and in His
Glory, He will spoil the stout-hearted; there will be a great Trembling;
mighty men shall Tremble, and multitudes shall melt away, as the Snow before
the Sun. And remember we still Jonathans confidence in his God; Faith will
carry a man over rocks and mountains; no way but is passible to faith, and no
work but is possible. It is Jonathans confidence; what can hinder God said he?
The Lord can do what He will do, and it may be that the Lord will work for
us (else we shall do nothing) for there is no restraint to the Lord to save by
many or few. It is possible, said Jonathan, (it may be, ver. 16.
nay it is very likely) That the Lord will work for us now; They that can trust
in God, can regard Armies of Men no more then Armies of Flis. Dr. Halls Contemp.
for He has put a spirit of fortitude upon us two, and being so few now, He
shall have all the GLORY: That consideration mooves strongly, and so it works;
for thus it was, every man's Sword was against his fellow, and there was a very
great discomfiture. Moreover the Hebrews, that were with the Philistines
(became of their party, fearing to be spoiled by them) took advantage of this
destruction; saw ver. 20.
plainly now, which side was strongest, (the manner of men) fell in there, to
Saul and Jonathan, and slew of the Philistines great numbers: and they that hid
themselves before, came out of their holes now, and, hearing that the
Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in Battle. So the
LORD gave Saul a glorious victory that day, and he ver. 22.
saw the prophecy fulfilled, One did chase a thousand: and two put ten thousand
to flight. And this was a good day, Saul and Deuteronomy. 32 30.
his people found a great spoil, they might have eat and drunk thereof and
have praised God with the more chearfullnesse of heart: for indeed the people
were weary and faint. Saul will not have it so, he will be an enemy to
himself; has a way by himself, pleasing in his own eye, and that way he
takes; he adjures the people saying, Cursed be the man that eats any food
until evening ver. 24.
: so none of the people tasted any food; No, though the LORD (who gave them a
good day, and gave them leave to be cheery and comfortable The voluntary
services of Hypocrites are many times more painful, then the duties enjoined
by God: but their manner is to leave that which is commanded, and do that
which is not required. Contmpl.
on that day) did almost drop meat into their mouths, yet no man put his hand
to his mouth. Why? for the people feared the Oath ver. 26.
. That was well; for, seeing they had charged themselves with an Oath, and
about abstaining from food, a few hours, I think they did well not to be rash
in breaking of it, though it was Saules Oath. But Jonathan heard not the
charge, and so meeting with a sweet commodity, put his hand to his mouth and
found a great comfort from it. It was Honey before, but how sweet it was to
Jonathan now, no man knows but the hungry soul, as was Jonathans, who had
scrabled up the hill, and done such exploits there; surely water out of a Rock
had been honey to him, what was this honey to him at such a time! but he will
hear that anon which will ver. 27.
make him disrelish all. No sooner Jonathan had tasted the honey, but he hears
of his Fathers charge: Then said Jonathan, my Father has troubled the Land,
for see what a refreshing I have ver 28.
had from a taste of honey: how much more, if happily, the ver 29.
people had eaten freely of the spoil: surely then there had been a greater
slaughter. Behold yet a greater mischief: for the ver 30.
people flew upon the spoil; took Sheep and Oxen, and did eat them with the
blood. ver. 32.


They that bind themselves when they need not, will be loose when they should
not; They that will put a restraint We love yoakes of our own making, and can
think them easy.
on themselves where God gives them a liberty; will take a liberty there, where
God gives them a restraint. They might have tasted of the honey, yea and have
eaten of the spoil freely, for God gave them a liberty; They would not take
Gods allowance: they did eat with the bload, and there was Gods restraint.

Saul has a way now to make amends for all. And, truly, were it not that we
must judge of Actions by the line and rule of Gods word and will, we might
think very well of Saul now, and of his Actions: he calls for a great stone,
that shall be an Altar: and then the people shall slay the Sheep before the
Lord and him, (a good way to make the people do things decently and in order:)
then Saul will pursue the Enemy; ver. 36.
but said the Priest, let us draw nearer hither unto GOD. What to do? to
enquire of him. BUT HE ANSWERED HIM ver. 37.
NOT THAT DAY. Mark that; If thou art in earnest, and do expect, That God
shall answer thee, thou must not then go thine own way, according to the
answer of thy own heart, but after the line of Gods word and will. Saul had
done that day as his own counsel had suggested; then he asked counsel of GOD,
but God answered him not that day.

Yet Saul goes on; asks counsel when he pleases, and when he pleases he
forbeareth: he had taken an Oath of the people, he should have asked counsel
before, and then he had not done it; But now it was done, he might have advised
whether he should now do as he had sworn; Though, indeed, I may advise about
the breaking of an Oath taken rashly: but no advise must be taken about the
breaking of an Oath, which I have taken ((...)) wickedly: no question about the
breaking of that. Saul advises neither before nor after, but swears again,
That, as he had sworn so he would do, put that man to death, that had eaten
that day, and so finds him out, that had done it, and it was his Son Jonathan;
and though it was even he, yet since he had tasted Honey, he must taste of
Death too; See how eager we are in pursuit of our own ways and counsels! it is
because these are most pleasing in our own eyes! I did but taste a little
honey, and lo I must die, said Jonathan. Yes answered Saul, that thou shall;
GOD do so and more also, for thou shall surely die. ver. 43.
Jonathan. What! Jonathan die? said the people: he who has wrought this great
salvation in Israel? God forbid! as ver. 44.
the Lord lives there shall not ane hair of his head fall to the ground, for
he has wrought with GOD this Day; so the people rescued Jonathan that he died
not. ver. 45.


Object. How now! now the people commanded, and not Saul (their King) for their
word was the Law.

Answ. It was indeed; and therefore it was the best reason that the peoples
word should stand; for their word was Law: the Law of God given them from His
own Mouth; Thou shall Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 19. 10.
ENQVIRE and be shown the sentence of judgment between blood and blood; that
innocent blood be not shed, and so blood be upon thee; this was Law; Now mark
the judgment upon the man, that shall break this Law; he that does violence
to the blood of any person, shall flee to the pit, let no man stay him. Prove.
28. 17.


Object. What was this to Saul; he could make a Law, and why might not he
break a law.

Answ. He might break a Law of his own making, he might be bolder there; but
he must not be bold with GODS Law?

Object. Let Saul look to that: and the people to their obedience.

Answ. So they will; they will obey the King conditionally, so he commands by
Law, for that is his Book, and his Land-marke, his directory, and boundary
both: Rex nihil potest nisi ia solum, quod de jure potest. Bract. Lex fraenum
est Regis potentiae.
They will obey the KING of Kings absolutely, for so He must be obeyed. And
this is His command; Thou shall rise up for the blood of the innocent, thou
shall not consent to the shedding of it; They must quit their eyes in this
case, as well as their hands; our hands have not shed this blood, nor have our
eyes seen it Deuteronomy. 21. 7.
: Had their eyes seen innocent blood shedding, and not come-in to rescue the
innocent, they had not been innocent; innocent blood had been upon them; what
we suffered to be done and could have hindered and did not, we have done it,
and blood is upon us.

Object. But Saul had sworn.

Answ. What of that? It may be, they were sorry their master had sworn so
rashly: but that should not hinder them to do according to Law; for they swore
too: They had bound themselves a little before with Saul's coards; it was about
matters indifferent, eating and drinking; they might eat, and they might
abstain: Here was another case, the case of innocent blood, a precious thing;
It is not said, you may shed it, or you may forbear: therefore Saul's Oath
should not bind the people now; they will show Saul the sentence of the Law,
that is a binder, and so they resisted Saul, if you will call it so, he shall
not shed innocent blood: and so they did well, and their duty, and he should
have thanked them for that; They resisted (we must hear that word) the
perverse will of Saul, and obeyed the holy will of GOD. A servant must not obey
his Master to the prejudice of his Master; he must not obey his Master against
his Master, his sudden will against his deliberate will. And truly it appears
from the Text, that as the Peoples plea for Jonathan was the same which
Jonathan used for David; [The LORD wrought a 1 Samuel 19. 5.
great salvation for all Israel, thou saw it and did rejoice, wherefore
then will thou sin against innocent blood, to slay Jonathan without a cause:]
So, Saul better bethinking himself, was as well or better pleased with it.
Certain it is, Saul was then much encouraged; then he ceased from following the
Philistines, and fought against all his enemies on every side, and
whethersoever he turned himself, he vexed them ver. 46, 47.
: But he bent the strength of this battle against the Amalekites, smote them
and delivered Israel out of their hands: ver. 48.
yet so, as he strengthened himself still against the Philistines, with whom he
had sore war all his days; and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant
man, he took him unto him.

But yet; ver. 52.


Saul must not leave the Amalekites so; he had smote them, and delivered Israel
out of their hands; that was well for that time: But that is not enough against
Amaleck, an old, subtle Adversary, and as bloody, and GOD remembers him of
old, how treacherously 1 Samuel 15. 2.
he dealt with His people, walking along the way, doing no hurt, would rather
dye then do wrong and pillage: these poor people Amaleck smote, even all, that
were feeble (not able to make any resistance) when they were faint and weary he
smote them; as he does, that seares not Deuteronomy. 25. 15, 18.
GOD. Now this comes into remembrance with the LORD, for the debts of cruelty
(as of mercy) are never forgot, they shall be repaied, and with great
advantage. Saul stands charged with this revenge, he must execute this
vengeance; he must wash the Churches feet in the blood of these slain: GOD has
provided him a mighty Army now for this very time and end, for the execution of
this vengeance; he numbers his Host, finds them to be no fewer then two hundred
1 Samuel 25 4.
and ten thousand fighting men: and now he must power down upon the Churches
treacherous Adversary, The fury of GODS anger, and the strength of battle Esa
42. 25.
; Saul smote Amaleck before: now he must destroy him utterly, and all that they
have; he left Amaleck a name before, now he must blot 1 Samuel 15. 3.
out the remembrance of Amaleck from under Heaven; he must not forget it Deuteronomy.
25. 19.
. The charge is as full from Samuels mouth (and he was the mouth of the LORD)
as could be put into words, and it is the last Proposition of Peace, that Saul
shall receive from the LORD; if he hearkens and does accordingly, a blessing
follows; if not, he shall hear the curse and feel it too, cursed is he that
does the WORK of the LORD deceitfully: (execution of judgment upon the
Churches Adversary, is the work of the LORD) and (when the LORD gives the
Sword a charge) Cursed is he that keeps back the Sword from blood. We have
heard the charge.

The Israel of GOD have the same Adversary now, as Israel Jer. 48. 10.
had then, not in name, but in nature the same: An old Adversary, as
treacherous, as bloody: If their superstition be out of ignorance, (as in part
it may be) yet their cruelty is from malice. Israel stands charged against this
Adversary, as fully now, as Saul then; this I could make as clear as the
Sun. But because I have no space to make paralells here: I must let it pass
and take in three things here more essential to the Text. 1. How Saul answers
this charge; Deceitfully. 2. What his Defense is; weak and fruitles. 3. How
Samuel argues the case, and at length convinces him.

1. Saul heard Samuel in all this, he gave him his ear, but his heart went
his own way; he did not obey, or, if he obeyed it was by halves, and an half
obedience in GODS account is none at all; he did not obey indeed Exodus 23. 22.
, as the expression is often, he did not follow the command FVLLY Numb. 14. 24
; he utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the Sword, and every
thing that was VILE and REFVSE, that they destroyed utterly 1 Samuel 15. 9.
: But the BEST, and all that was good, he would not utterly destroy. Nay, the
chiefest head of all he spares, that delicate person, the King, him he spared,
whose ver. 3.
Sword had made so many women childlesse; him he spared, he ver 32.
would not smite him with the Sword, he was too precious in Saul's eyes being
King; and the more vile in Samuels eyes, as appears afterward, for he hewed
Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgall. A murderer whatever he be, King or
no King, must not be spared, He has Polluted the Land: for blood it defiles
the Land; and the Land cannot be cleansed of that blood, but by the blood of
him that shed it Number. 35. 33.
. Saul spared him, and the sailings, as we heard: (the same partiality is used
still; the greatest sinners and sins escape still; that which is pleasing in
our eye and desirable, we will have spared.) Thus Saul halves out his duty, and
his obedience is in GODS account, as his execution upon Amaleck, VILE and
REFVSE: We must then note once for all, That a right obedience is strait to the
Rule, carries level to the command, and does fully thereafter.

2. And we will take Saul's Defense, and Samuels arguing against it altogether.
Saul has done so contrary, as we heard, and yet he thought in his conscience
(see how unable we are to see our selves; and how blind we in our own ways; how
brawned also the conscience may be by often forcing the same) Saul thought
verily that he had done very well, and so he pleads for himself, and Samuel
against him: and a great while it is (for it is the greatest work in the world,
to convince a sinner, indeed it is GODS work, the hand of GOD must be there)
before Samuel can convince Saul, that in sparing the Enemies of the LORD, he
has committed a sin, which is as the sin of witchcraft. We must hear his
plea (for the heart is cunning, and has a thousand shifts, excuses and
puts-off) this he says first; The people spared 1 Samuel 15. 15
, etc. Samuel fits him there; a Rulers plea has not half the strength he thinks
it has; this excuse will Plus Peccat Author quam. Actor.
aggravate his fault. The people spared, said Saul. No, thou did spare, says
Samuel; the charge was given to thee; it is not considerable, what the people
do in such a plain case, ever. 18.
When thou wast little, wast thou not made the HEAD of the Tribes. ver. 17.
The HEAD, and that sees for the body, and hears for the body, and leads-on
for the body; the head has all the admirable pieces, and powers within and
without, seated there as in a Watchtower, for that very end; That the body
receive no detriment for want of sound counsel and direction: if the head go
aright, the body cannot go wrong; if it do go crookedly the head can quickly
rectify it, if it can do it is office: The people are like Sheep, they cannot
lead, but they will follow. It follows, The Lord anointed thee King over
Israel. Then thou must not tell me, what the people did, That they spared; Thou
have spared, Thine Eye has pitied him, when it had bin mercy indeed to have
shown no pity. Let me tell my thoughts here, and how I was mistaken: I thought
Saul could do no wrong, for he was King; but clear it is, as the Sun, that
wrong he did, and that all the blame of that wrong is charged upon him. Why?
Because he was head over the people, their King.

But Saul is not convinced yet, no not with all this: See! when the conscience
is brawned and hardened in it is own way and work, how hard a matter is it to
make it sensible! Has Saul done wrong! Hear him what he says; Yea, I have 2 Samuel 15. 21.
obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way, which the Lord sent me. I
took Agag alive, and have kept him alive, here he is, do with him what thou
please; he is King, and I thought fit to spare him; for his People, they are
utterly destroyed. True it is the fat sheep and oxen, those chief things should
have bin destroyed too, for that was thy charge: but the people (thinking
themselves wiser) reserved those chief things for excellent purpose: What was
that? To sacrifice unto the LORD thy GOD. As specious a pretense as could be:
Though Saul was lame in his obedience, as all men are, nay he was infinitely
short here, yet his heart was sound to Godward, and toward his Religion, as
hearty a soul as was in the world (if we can believe words) he had reserved the
best things. What to do? To sacrifice unto the LORD thy GOD.

Now Samuel will stop Saul's mouth, and make him speechles presently: For
Religion is his pretense, the established Religion now, a Sacrifice, forsooth,
and burnt-offerings! Does he flash so, with his false light, before the eyes of
a Seer! Now Samuel will thunder.

3. Vain man! Do thou boast of Religion (A binder to God) and walk loose
with Him, or fast, but when Thou please! Speak thou of a Sacrifice before
the LORD, the Great GOD, and art a rebel before Him! Will thou make a show to
comeup to the LORD with the Sacrifice in thy hand; and yet walk every step
contrary to His command! Tell me, for thou shall be witness in so clear a
case; did the Lord, or I from His mouth, speak a word unto thee of a Sacrifice
unto Him? Thy ear is witness, thy conscience also; That the Lord said, OBEY
MY VOICE Jer. 11. 4. ^.
: He said not, Thou shall sacrifice unto me. He loathes a Sacrifice from that
hand, which acts contrary to his mouth: It is an abomination, as Sorcery, or
Witchcraft in the eyes of His glory. Thou have slain an Ox for Sacrifice: it
is, as if thou had slain a man, no better in Gods account, even such an
abomination: Thou will sacrifice a Lamb, and the male of thy flock, that is
thy pretense; go, cut off a Dogs neck; it is all one, one or the other in
point of acceptance, for Thou have chosen THINE OWN WAYS Esa. 66. 5.
. It is the obedient ear, that finds acceptance with the LORD, and his ear
open: and the hand, that acts according to GODS command, from thence a
Sacrifice has a sweet savor.

Saul is now as a dumb-man, speaks not yet, but hearkens, when he shall hear a
word of comfort. Never. If he had hearkened before, he might have heard a
blessing, now he must hear the curse, which still follows a deceitful work,
Because thou have rejected the word of the LORD, He has rejected thy
sacrifice. But that is not all; Saul could have endured that, though nothing
more grievous to a true Israelite, then the casting forth of his prayer. Saul
must hear more, He has also rejected thee from being King. That went to his
heart; The punishment of his sin, rejection from his Kingdom. High place in
the world, credit and esteem in the eyes of men, was Saul's glory: He is
touched there in the tenderest part, and that opens his mouth to confession,
and that is full now and ingenious; Indeed he spoke much better, than they, who
will not be accounted half so wicked; I have sinned, etc. he prays Samuel to
pardon his sin; Samuel cannot. Then to return again with him, Samuel will
not: and he gives him Ver. 24. ver 25.
his reason, puts it upon the file for everlasting record; Thou ver. 26.
have rejected (my word) The word of the LORD: I will not return with thee,
who have entertained me with a complement all this while, not regarding my
word, though the word of the LORD: and that all the world may know how
dangerous a thing it is to reject this word; Samuel adds, what Saul must here
the second time, nay the third time, (if we have observed it) and all that
follow after him, for it is written for the generations to come; Thou have cast
GODS word behind thy back, GOD will cast thee from thy Royal estate; GOD has
rejected thee from being King over Israel. And it is twice repeated in this
place, because it is certain. ver. 26.
As Samuel was turning about to go away, Saul holds him by his skirt; so
desirous he was of the Prophets stay with him, and to have a comfortable word
from him; and he held him so fast, and the Prophet was so resolved to go his
way, that he rent the Prophets mantle, and so received a sad token and sad
words besides, touching the fullfilling of what was threatened. The word of the
LORD was rejected; the threat was denounced from the mouth of the LORD, all
created strength could not hinder the execution of the same word; and now Saul
had the sign in his hand, Thou have rent my mantle, the LORD has rent the
Kingdom of Israel from thee this Day, ver 28.
and has given it to a neighbor of thine, that is better then thou. Samuel
could not give Saul a word of comfort now. Saul's time is past; his season over.
Samuel had spoken to him many words for his Direction, he would have none of
them: Now he shall not have one word of comfort. While the Angel of GOD, His
SPIRIT, or His PROPHETS in His Name, are with us, be we well aware of it, That
we Exo. 23. 20, 21.
obey their voice, and provoke them not: if we do, they will depart from us,
and then woe unto us, we shall hear heavy news at the parting. So when
Samuel had done execution upon Agag (very confident, that having escaped Saul's
Sword, he should escape the Prophets weak hand also, but it was not so, when
Agag said, The bitterness of death is past, when he was at the height of his
hopes, then Samuel laid him ver. 32.
low, and hewed him in pieces) and when he had done so, he left Saul, and saw
him no more, nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul. Indeed it was a sad case;
And ponder it well all we that forget GOD, and reject His word: for if so, the
next news we must look to hear, is, a rejection from the Kingdom: And if it
were from out of a Kingdom, that may be shaken, the news would be more
tolerable, but it is a castingout from that Kingdom, which shall never be
shaken. But as Saul was shaken, so shall we be shaken out of it, if we walk as
he did, so contrary. The LORD does not blame Samuel for this his mourning; but
tells him, he may mourn too long for him, whom He has rejected 1 Samuel 16. 1
: Fill thine horn with oil and anoint him whom I have provided, A man after
Mine own Heart, and most pleasing in Mine eyes, but the most unlikely in man's
eyes, and amongst his brethren, for man chooses by the Eye, and I the LORD by
the heart. The Prophet startled at this, goes a little backward: for the best
Prophet that ever was in the world, had his infirmities, How can I go, says he,
if Saul hear it he will kill me 1 Samuel 16. ^.
. Do as I bid thee, says the LORD, winking at his infirmity; go the way I set
thee in, and be not afraid of a man: if there were a hundred Saul's, and every
hair on their heads a Sword, they could not hurt thee: do thy duty, go as I
bad thee, and fear not; Take all cautious ways, be as wise as a Serpent, for
that allowance is given thee: so thou be as innocent as a Dove. Samuel went
and did accordingly. David designed to the Kingdom before, is now anointed
with fresh oil, (but soft) he is not King yet; he must go as every true
Israelite to his Crown, he shall pass through the straites; he shall fetch
many a weary step, before he comes thither, up and down; then up again, and
then again so low, that he thinks he shall never rise again; he thought
Samuel a very liar Ps. 116. 11. Video Samuelem non Dei spiritu Prophetice,
etc. Jun.
, that told him of a Crown. But more of this in a fitter place.

Saul is in the Throne now; and having turned his back against the LORD, the
Philistines turn their faces upon him: Their late Disasters they impute to
second causes: (A Philistin cannot see the Hand of GOD, unless it be as
plain, as was the writing upon the wall Dan. 5. 5.
, so visible) it was a chance, a mistaken Alarm, whereby their Army, possessed
with a panique fear, had fallen to rout: They have mustered their Army again,
and encamped themselves so near Saul's Army, that they must try it out in a
Battle. But yet to save shedding much blood, they would decide the matter by
single combat: and out-steps Goliath a mighty fellow, that feared neither GOD
nor Man; he under-takes to defy the whole Host of Israel, provokes them with
despightfull words, as a Philistine will do, who persuades himself, that all
power in heaven and earth, is in his hands, and so he blasphemed the LIVING
GOD, David heard all this, and more; for he was come up to the host to spy 1 Samuel 17. 28
there in the PRIDE and NAUGHTINESS of his heart, said his naughty brother,
for he envied David (he shall have as many discouragements from man as may be,
yea from the sons of this Master) Thou should be with thy sheep, that is
thy work, what make thou hear? He came down to enquire of their welfare in
this dangerous time; and he brought them Bread and Cheese, that might have
stopped a brothers mouth, for that was his arrand from their father: But GOD
had another business for David to do; now, he shall make a famous entrance
into public notice of the People: And so David stands out, notwithstanding all
the pull-backs, he will encounter with Goliath that he will, for he remembered
well what GOD had done for him, he had taken a Lion by the beard and a Bear
too, both rose up against him, but he plucked them down and laid them both low
enough. Did David's hand gain this Deliverance? No, GOD with him gave him this
victory ver. 35, 36, 37
, a little before (as an experiment that David must trust him now; and so David
will trust in GOD for ever. So he puts himself in a posture of offense,
buckles his Armor about him: What Armor? Armor of proof it was, I cannot
show it to your Eye, so Spiritual it is. That which was in sight was very
weak (as the Churches Armor is) and contemptible, both his Person and his
Armor; Yet David said to Saul, let no man's heart fail because of this
Philistine: ver. 32.
Thy servant will go and fight with him: Then read the reasonings betwixt
Saul and David, (as are the reasonings betwixt flesh and spirit:) David answers
all with an experience of Gods good hand with him; Learn we of David, to
treasure-up experience from Time past: and promises for the Time to come, and
go he will and fight with the Philistine. Why then said Saul, go and the LORD
be with thee ver. 37.
: (A gracious word,) but go like a Warrior, in complete Armor; take mine,
and on with it, so David did: But he could not go in it ver. 39.
. No indeed; for no Armor will fit David, but Armor of Gods appointing be it
never so contemptible; and that he had provided before: and being well girt
with that, intimated before, he took a staff in his hand, and some Choice
stones cut of the Brook: and when the Philistine thought verily to swallow
David up, he darted a stone, which the Lord carried to the Philistines
forehead, made it sink down therein ver. 49.
; and down he falls upon his face to the Earth. Then David skipt to him, and,
having no Sword in his Hand ver. 50.
(that made the conquest more glorious) drew out the Philistines Sword, and
therewith shaved off his crown by the neck. And having discomfited the whole
Host now, and exposed them to slaughter, away he brought the head to
Jerusalem, but the Armor he put in his Tent ver. 54.
.

Now we must turn back, and look over all this again for mighty reason:
for, as David's slaying the Lion and the Bear, made him confident he should
serve the Giant so too: So, David's victory over Goliath then, gives the Church
assured confidence for ever. We must then behold these two warriors; the
disadvantage in their persons; their Armor and weapons, all which make the
victory more glorious, and tell us plainly, That it is of mighty concernment to
the Church for ever.

1. The Combitants are, Goliath, a Giant, a man of war from his youth; and
David but a Youth, as Saul said, a stripling. ver. 33.


2. Their Armor! there is no comparison there; for David ver. 56.
has none at all; But read I pray you, how Goliath is furnished; When the
Church reads it, and well considers on it, then they think, they shall never
fear their Adversaries any more. Thus you read; An Helmet of brass upon his
head; a Coat of Maile about his body; Greaves of Brass upon his legs; c ver.
5, 6.
and a Target of Brass between his shoulders. 3. The Weapons, as unequal too;
Goliath had a Sword, and a Spear, and a Man carrying his Shield before him;
David is his own Man, well able to carry his Armor himself, for his Armor is
but a Staff, and a Sling, and a Scrip, and a few smooth Stones within it:
There were all the disadvantages in sight; and whosoever walked by sight would
have disdained David as Goliath did, and have given Goliath the victory before
they fought. And yet there were those advantages on David's side, (and some of
them in sight) that it was not possible but David must have the victory; For 1
Goliath was a Philistine; David an Israelite: Goliath hated of GOD; David was
beleved; for the Disproportion otherwise, in the bulkinesse of the body, etc.
that is of no account; This is a man's advantage, and promotes him, which sets
him nearer to GOD. That heightens him, which makes him little in his own eyes,
and great in the favor of God. Goodness is a better safeguard then
Greatness; No matter how big the Churches Adversary is, how stern or how
big he looks, though a man of might and of war, and has a face like a
Lion: What though? Put it down for a conclusion drawn from the experiences of
all ages; what? He is as weak as water; and as a Dove Hose. 7. 11.
without an heart, THAT has PROVOKED GOD. Goe-on, and fear no colors, for
this was written for the generation to come. And; 2, None of all that Armor
before mentioned is of proof: It cannot keep off the vengeance of the Job 15.
25.
Almighty. Goliath stretched forth his hand against God; and strengthened
himself against the Almighty. What then? His Armor shall do him no good; The
LORD will run upon ver. 26.
him even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers. It was so, and it
will be so to the worlds end.

Object. But David seems to be a naked man.

Answ. True, he seemed to be so, but he was in complete Armor from the head to
the foot. The Lord was his Defense; he had said of the LORD, Thou art my shield
and buckler. Psalm. 18.


And,

3. What is a Sword and Spear? vain things, and so is he that formed them,
these shall not prosper against David: But Esa. 54. 17.
are not these instruments as like to prosper in Goliahs hand, as a sling and a
stone in David's hand? No, This stone and this sling must prosper, for it must
do execution upon Gods enemies; and, because these are unlikely things,
therefore more likely to prosper; GOD will do the greatest matters by the
smallest instruments. Why? That He may have all the glory: that is the reason.
Surely the Lord will confound the enemies of His Church by means, and ways
very improbable, and unlikely, as weak as water. We cannot tell, for perhaps
it never came into our thoughts, what means the Lord will use in confounding
the pride of his Adversaries: But thus we have heard and seen, and so we
read; foolish things (in 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29.
man's conceit) shall confound the wise; weak things, the things which are
mighty; base things, and things that are despised, has God chosen, and things
which are not, to bring to naught things that are. Why all this? That no flesh
should glory in His presence. And;

4. We must observe the manner how these Soldiers address themselves to the
Battle. Goliath marched on like a Philistine, cursing David as he went; David
went on with ver. 43.
blessings in his mouth. Goliath makes toward David in his own strength, and
the strength of his gods; David goes against him, not in his own strength, but
in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel. What
follows? Whom thou have defied: And will God help them who have cursed His
children; blasphemed His Name; and defied His Host? certainly God will destroy
them utterly. And this was David's confidence; and touching himself also he
should overcome, and be victoriovs, for he had sought his God, and He is never
sought in vain; he trusted in God, He will never deceive that Trust; he went
on in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, it was not possible then he should return
ashamed. Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so, for His mercy endures for ever.
As David set his foot upon Goliath, so shall the Church, the servants of the
Lord, set their foot upon the neck of their Adversaries; nay, they shall wash
their feet in the blood of the slain; there is the conclusion.

We read on, and find, that after this victory Saul enquires after David;
takes so full notice of him now, that, indeed, he Eyed him continually, from
that day forward; and he bends all the force of his Militia against David; He
cease not to offend David therewith till the day of his death. How David
defended himself, and how justly, will be enquired into, and resolved in a
fitter place: so as he that will understand it may be fully satisfied therein,
and he that will be ignorant let him be ignorant still. Saul did seek the life
of David; from that very day he had the victory over Goliath, in which bloody
mind he continued till he dyed.

We will then turn over, and look upon him in the power of the Enemy, and in
the hands of death; and hear him what he says, for there-out we may pick a
great lesson; To take our season of seeking after God; We read; When Saul saw
the 1 Samuel 28. 5.
Host of the Philistines, his heart greatly trembled. What should he do now?
Let him go to the Prophet; that he cannot do, for the Prophet is dead; There
are other ways to be taken, and whereby to know Gods mind, and other Prophets
also, if not, let him enquire of the LORD; so he does; Saul enquired of the
Lord but no answer now; The Lord ver 6.
had answered him fully and plainly, what His will and pleasure was; Saul
hearkened not, for he obeyed not; Now he asks again and again, all in vain;
He, that would not hearken when he might, and was commanded, shall enquire now
and have no answer; Saul enquired of the LORD, the ver. 6.
LORD answered him not, neither by Dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by Trophets: What
will he do now? He is resolved to enquire of the Devil, to see what he will
say. See here a sad case! That man is in straits indeed, who expects
enlargement from the Devil. But mark his complaint, that he puts up to the
Devil; I am sore distressed: he took a bad way for ver. 15.
help, to seek for it from his greatest Enemy. But what troubles him? The
Philistines make war against me: Nay that was not it; so they did before, the
Moabites too, the Ammonites, Amalekites, the Arabians also, all the world
warred against Israel; therefore the trouble was not in that; No, but here it
was, this was the trouble and sore affliction, which was like a Sword in his
bowels, yea like the gall of Aspes there. GOD is departed FROM ME: This was it,
I-cabod, the Glory is gone: the Nations are angry, they will come upon the Land
from every quarter; Let them come, they shall not distress the Land, with all
their strength; But, does this follow; God is departed from a Land, then all
created strength cannot safeguard the same: if the Enemies were all wounded
men, yet they shall destroy all the Land, and take the spoil. And this was
Saul's case, God is departed from me. The saddest complaint that ever was heard;
Consider well of it, and you will say so too; suppose the Adversary entering the
doors, treading upon the man's heel, pangs are come upon him, the pain as of
a woman in travel; his Soul is upon his lips; he is entering into the
chambers of Death: and his case is the same with Saul's here, GOD is departed
from him, He answers him not. Certainly, neither tears, nor sighs, nor sobbs,
can point out this man's complaint; the grievousnesse of this case exceeds all
comparison. And this was Saul's case then, that it may not be our case anon, Let
us consider with all our hearts, how equal and just it was, that God should
leave Saul at this time, and afford him no answer. God was with Saul, prospered
him exceedingly, gave him glorious victories, Saul was not aware of all this;
God answered him again and again, told him what His express will was; Saul
rejected it; now God departs from him, and answers him no more: A man will
drive hard for comfort at such a time, but he will mistake his way as Saul did
his, goes for the living to the dead, nay worse, from Esa. 8. 16.
God to the Devil, he seeks answer there at the Devils Oracle; And behold
worse and worse, Saul cannot endure to hear it, but falls straightway all
along on the Earth ver. 20.
. When he sought counsel of God, he was always victorious; Now that he sought
counsel from the Oracle of the Devil, this was the answer; Who can be thy
friend now God is thine enemy? Thou did not execute the fierce wrath of the
Lord upon Amalek A dangerous omission not to execute the wrath of the Lord upon
His Churches Adversaries, old, fierce, and treacherous.
, therefore must that wrath be executed upon thee: and to morrow shall thou and
thy sons be with me, etc. And so it was, for answerably it follows; That, both
himself, and his three sons, with his nearest and faithful servants were all
slaughtered by the Philistines: his body with the bodies of his Sons (as a
spectacle of shame and dishonor) were hung over the walls of Bethsan: and
there had remained, till they had found burial in the bowels of ravenous
Birds, had not the grateful Gileadites of Jabes stolen their carcasses thence,
and interred them. This was the end of Saul; such as might tell all the world;
That now the blood of Gods Priests 1 Samuel 22. 19
, which Saul shed; and of David, which he would have shed, was required and
requited. Let us note it more particularly; What was his end? very desperate.
The Battle went sore against him, and he was sore wounded of the Archers. Then
he said unto his Armor-bearer, draw thy Sword and thrust me 1 Samuel 31. 4.
throw therewith, His Armor-bearer refused: Did he well, in disobeying? Yes,
for he disobeyed the desperate will of Saul, which a man may do, and yet do
the greatest right See Child's Patrimony. p. 36.
and justice to the King; Yes, though he had held Saul from falling upon his
own Sword, and so restrained him from being a selfe-murtherer. But Saul was
left to himself, and so he died; he took a Sword and fell upon it. A
desperate execution. He was an Enemy to good men while he lived, and now he
died, he is an Enemy to himself. He lived and died a murderer: he fell upon
his own Sword, and so Saul died. His burial we read before: His life, death
and burial all three well agree together; The greatest part of his life was
spent in persuance of Gods friend, (see the Relation all along) The last Act of
his life was violence upon himself from his own hand. He had driven David (the
head of his Tribes, and after Oil had been powered upon him: and who so
faithful among all Saul's servants as David was 1 Samuel 22. 14.
) from abiding in the Inheritance of the Lord: Saul's head was taken off, and
his body exposed to the weather, fastened to a wall; no more accounted 1 Samuel
31. 9, 10.
of, then a despised broken Idol; or a vessel wherein is no pleasure. Saul
had slain the chief Priest, and all his Fathers Ier. 22. 28.
house, then Priests of the Lord; he had smitten their City with 1 Samuel 22. 16,
17.
the edge of the Sword, and all therein with the edge of the Sword, (it is
twice repeated, to show the bloodinesse of that ver. 19.
execution;) Now his lot shall fall-out unto him, and this the portion of his
measures: All Saul's Sons are slain; he is Ier. 13. 25.
written a Man Childlesse to all Generations; some of his seed remained, but
none prospered to sit upon the Throne, and Rule any more in Judah Ier. 22. 30.
.

We must repeat this once more, for so I find it in the Sacred Writ, because
we may receive from it a sure instruction: That we do not transgress against
the ANGEL of the LORD; nor reject His Word; That we continue seeking Exodus 23.
20.
Counsel at His mouth; and if He answer not, yet wait; if we die, let us die
seeking; while we wait there is hope; depart from Him, there is no hope; go
after other gods, and then certain destruction, as to Saul; So Saul died and
his three Sons, and all his House died together, for his transgression which
1 Chro 10. 6. ver. 13.
he committed against the Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he
kept not, and also for asking Counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to
enquire of it, and enquired not of the LORD: ver. 14.
Therefore he slew him, and turned the Kingdom unto David the son of Jesse.

He succeeds Saul, and him, his Son Solomon (of them in their own place)
Solomon's Wives turned his heart from GOD 1 King. 11. 3
; therefore the greatest half of his Crown must be rent from his head, for the
greatest part of his people turned from Jerusalem: but not in Solomon's days.
He had many Wives, and almost half as many Concubines; yet but one Son, to
whom he must leave (with sorrow enough) all the labor he had taken under the
Sun Eccles. 2. 18.
. At that time Solomon made it a question (though we think he was too well
resolved at that point) who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a ver. 19.
fool? The man that came after him a child in understanding, resolves that
question, and puts it out of doubt before all Israel in the next Chapter.

THE ACTS OF REHOBOAM. CHAP. II.
Rehoboam is petitioned by all Israel about the easing of yoaks. The Petition
is said to want Reason; it is proved to have Reason and Law both: For a yoke
was upon Isreal's neck grievous and servile. Rehoboam advises about it, which
he should not have done, much less have taken the worst counsel; the marks
thereof, the mischief therefrom; His Militia, how he bent the force thereof;
he is warned and desisteth. Who they are that strengthen a King and the
Kingdom: He is strong so long as he kept to GOD and no longer. What his
Adversary did against him; what his confession was to the LORD is recorded,
ingenious, but not full nor deep enough, because not from a prepared heart;
therefore he returned to folly, and teaches us to discretion, touching the
point of preparing the heart to seek the LORD.

REHOBOAM begins his reign well, for he begins with Counsel, which, as it may
be, and be taken, a Chron. 10.
gives safety and establishment Prove. 11. 14.
. But, Pro 20 18.
though he was now forty years old 2 Chr. 12. 13
, (A man in years may be a child in understanding: The Temporacerta virtutem
nec prima negant nec ultima donant.
Word of GOD made his Grandfather wiser then the Ancients Psa. 119. 100.
) yet had he not the judgment to discern of Counsels, (the very test of
wisdom in Princes and all men else). That those are ever best and surest, which
make a Kingdom sure to the King, and the King to the Kingdom, by desiring him
to carry himself so, that he may rather be beloved then feared Sic firmius ei
fore imperium si amari mallet quam metui, Jos. Ant. lib. 8. cap 3.
.

Now I have again hudled-up and thronged together great matters, which
concern us not a little to consider of now: for the not considering thereof,
when time was, lost Rehoboam more then half his Kingdom. With GODS leave, and
we have His leave, and command both, we will lay all our heads together, ponder
the PETITION, which ALL ISRAEL put up to their King, the justice and equity of
it, the Counsels about it, and the determination there. No doubt of it, the
sure WORD of GOD will direct us our way here, and instruct us to discretion;
for, by His grace, we are resolved to keep close to that Guide.

The Petition is (for the King only made it a question) about the easing of
burdens, and TAKING OF THE 2 Chronicles. 10. 4.
YOAKES from Isreal's neck, the freest people in the world, and cannot endure
yoaks, nothing that tends to servitude, THY FATHER PVT AN HEAVY YOKE UPON US:
He made it GREEVOVS, now therefore make our yoke SOMEWHAT easier, and we will
serve thee. There is the Petition. It will appear anon to be a Petition of
Right. Hearken now what is said against it.

An unreasonable Petition, as ever was heard; the people complain, and would
have ease, and cannot tell what aileth them, they were grown wanton with ease
and peace.

What yoke had the Father put upon their necks? What, that they can call
servitude? A grave Divine says, and we will hear him out, none but what were
easy and ingenious; The people are querilous, full of complaints still, they
whine and cry for nothing. It is granted, GODS house and the Kings, and other
magnificent buildings, could not rise without many a shoulder: True, but not of
any Israelites; There were enough of Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites,
and Jebusites, remaining in the Land (too many, the more too blame was Israel)
to ease the Israelites shoulders, and take upon them the drudgery of these
works; the tasks of Israel were ease and ingenuous; free from servility, free
from painfullnesse. But the charge was theirs. Whose-soever was the labor: The
diet of so endless a retinue; the attendance of his Seraglio; the purveyance
for his forty thousand Stables; the cost of his Sacrifices, must needs weigh
heavy: True, if it had laid on none, but his own: But Solomon had rich
supplies from other Countries, so as he made silver and gold as plenteous as
Stones, and Cedars in abundance 2 Chro. 1. 15.
; These are Bishop Halls words, but we have not all yet: The Reader may take
leisure to observe his following words, which lay great blame upon the people.
He has said. I will not say he has spoken like a Bishop, in his own sense; but
this I will say, and make good; he has in all this, spoken nothing to purpose;
and yet not a little to the scorn of Israel.

1. Nothing to purpose; for he has mistaken the time. He speaks of Solomon in
his glory, I mean worldly glory, I shall speak of Solomon (so far is
pertinent to this place) in a most inglorious condition, when his heart was
turned from the GOD of Israel: and then sure enough, from the people of Israel,
and then he might lay yoakes upon the necks of Israel.

2. Nothing to the purpose. He spoke of burdens and servile works, and
restrains them to the drudgery about the Temple-work, and other buildings and
calls it so, a drudgery: I shall account the work there to be honorable, and
prove from Gods mouth, other services to be drudgery indeed, the lowest, the
basest, that can be imagined, and most unbeseeming Israel. I say again, not a
word has he spoken to purpose, for to speak more plainly to the lowest
capacity. What though no true Israelite be employed in the repairing of Paul's:
and they that do their own service there, have a full and fat requital: Does
it therefore follow, That no yokes lie upon the necks of Israel? I do not say,
what yokes there are, but I say the Laborers there may have their wages for
their work; and they that do a kind of service there, may have a full
allowance for that, and yet for all that there may be a greevous servitude upon
Israel. He has not spoken to purpose; but he has spoken,

2. Not a little to the scorn of all Israel. He says the multitude is ever
prone to pick quarrels with their Governors. True, they are so; and I add,
never was there any government so easy, but some have found fault with it, and
counted it a yoke. But yet, he must not lay this reproach upon Israel and upon
ALL Israel; but so he does: Some may complain, nay many even of, their
blessings, and account them burdens; but surely Israel and ALL Israel will not
so do; if all complain, and with one consent (so they did here) charity binds
me not to judge rashly here, for there might be grievances, and but an equal
request to their King, that he would lay them untoheart.

Now let me add this too, and then I will go-on to prove, That it is ordinary
with us, living in prosperity, lightly to pass over Isreal's YOAKES, and
account them feathers; for we have no quick-flesh, but where we are pinched,
sensible only wherein we our selves do feel. This Sympathy or fellow-feeling;
this partner-ship or companion-ship Heb 10. 33. 13. 2.
with others in their misery is a rare grace, and, as faith, scarce found in
the world. But this is the conclusion; He that is prosperous, and lives at
ease, cannot judge of Isreal's yokes.

With GODS help, I will now prove what I did but say before, keeping by His
good Hand upon me, close to His Word, that I may not transgress in so grave a
point, about yoakes; and in so general a complaint about them, put-up by ALL
Israel, and some amongst those All, the best Priests in the world, as will
appear anon.

And what if I should say first, That the magnificence of Solomon's buildings;
The state and glory of his Court; The attendance there might be burdensome to
Israel, might prejudice the private wealth, the attendance of private and home
affairs: And if so, that was a yoke to the people: I am sure such a yoke which
presses them most. It has been said of old, The more state and pride at Court,
(which commonly we call Glory) The better trading in the City, but the more
complaining in the Country. But I pass over this, which yet might be a
Greevance, as not considerable in this weighty business.

I have one Reason so pregnant of proof, That Israel had yoakes upon them in
the days of Solomon, That, though all the Bishops, that were in England, the
two Archbishops also (I know but one, and he has another Name, and of another
institution) do say the contrary, as they have been bold that way, I dare
say, no man, that will read this, will believe them: for with Gods help I
shall prove the contrary to them, from Gods own mouth, and then, I hope,
Isreal's petition then, shall be cleared to be reasonable and just now; and
every such like petition shall be graciously answered by the King of Israel, in
His good time: I must premise first before I prove, and conclude: And it is no
more, but what is legible to all the world; It is this; That

Solomon had married the Daughter of a strange god Mal. 2. 11.
; She brought her god with her to his Court, for it was a moveable thing, it
might be carried in a Cart, or in a Ship, or upon men's shoulders, whether the
Queen pleased; And as legible it is to all the world that there this god was,
and well esteemed of by Solomon, for he worshipped it, and then it stole away
his heart, and turned it from the living God. Nay he had many strange Wives,
and as many strange gods, which they had brought along with them, being, as the
other was, moveable and portable things.

If it was so, and so it was, for he that runs may read it, Then we
conclude, That when Solomon served strange gods, Israel was yoaked; Then they
did do or see such services, as were burdensome unto them, neither easy nor
ingenious nor becoming Israel: Let another think, and say as he thinks, That
the only drudgery is to carry burdens for Templebuilding; which, he says,
Israel was freed from: I must think that it is an honor to an Israelite to
do any work there, though it be but for the remooving, or carrying-out
rubbish thence: as it was to be a doore-keeper there: But this serving of
Idols, humbling before them, the creature before the work of his hands, (an
abominable Idolatry) this is drudgery indeed, a servile work for Israel (by
your leave) not free, (though easy) nor ingenious. And surely such services
were done by Israel now, now that the Queens had turned away the heart of
their King from the true GOD, and were all, King and Queens and all abominable
Idolaters, Then Israel was yoaked sure, not affianced, but married to strange
gods, Now that their King was joined to them, and humbled before them: unless
we are so charitable as to think, that the King and his Queens went alone in
an Idolatrous way, and none or few of Israel with them: but that is not
imaginable; for Kings and Queen's both are leading hands, or as the Ship
Admiral, Two persons so eminent are enough to yoke all Israel and to bring
them under a grievous servitude.
that carries the Lantern, all steer their course after. Such persons
always carry their train with them: look which way they go, though never so
wrong a path, we shall see (anon) companies blundring on in the same way, AND
ALL ISRAEL WITH HIM 2 Chro. 12. 1.
. Certainly then, even in Solomon's days, there were services, if not enjoined
Israel, yet done by Israel, and before Israel, and before the Sun, which were
to Israel (if true Israel) grievous and burdensome; as goad's to their sides,
yoakes to their necks, and pricks to their eyes.

Object. Yes, this might be; But these yoakes are too spiritual for the
people, they can neither see them, nor feel them: It is not their manner to
complain of these: Grant them their outward liberties; take off Hos. 11. 4.
the yoke on their jaws; make them Freemen; free from bodily servitude; then
lay meat before them, they will fall too, like beasts, minding their manger;
let their King and his Queen's worship stocks, and stones, and Devils too (the
sacred Scripture says, so they did, and yet) what care the people, they are in
servitude to none, and Meat is before them, what care they.

Answ. It is true enough, so careless and brutish commonly we are; but Israel
not so; or if some, in name so, yet not All.

Object. But we mistake the purpose of this objection, which is this, That
Israel was a free people under Solomon; he put no heavy yoke upon them, no
grievous servitude.

Answ. The truth is, for I would carry-on the Readers understanding clear in
this point, The sacred Scripture is not express here, It says not in these
words, That Solomon laid a grievous yoke upon his people: That which is
written is not so express, and yet the sacred Scripture, I think, is clear
in this matter, as we shall see anon.

In the mean time I would ask the man that is best read in the Chronicles,
whether ever he read such a thing as this; That the Daughters of strange gods
came into a Land, brought their gods with them; (for that is the manner) their
Lord joined his heart to them, and turned away from the Living God. (So did
Solomon:) And yet notwithstanding all this, the Reader, consulting with the
Records of Time, finds not any Yoke upon the people at such a time; no
services done by them, but what were easy and ingenious. I will not trust to
my reading, though this I can say, I have read the Chronicles, and this is the
result from my reading; That, when abominable Idolatries were countenanced,
were practiced in a Land, I mean Isreal's Land (though I need not restrain it
so, for I have read somewhat in the Chronicles of other Nations also, but
Isreal's Land, where Idolatry is established by a Law, and so it might be said
to be in Solomon's days, for what Queens and their King does is a Law to the
people; But I will say no more but this,) when Idolatry is practiced, is
countenanced in a Land, Queens serve abominable Idols and their King too: It
follows in the Chronicle, not Isreal's only, but English, French and Spanish,
That, at that time, there were grievous Yoakes upon the peoples necks, illegal
pressures, unjust commands, that have neither ground of Law, nor reason, then
neither easy nor ingenious. Nay, let me add this here, from out of the Sacred
Chronicle (that is the Oracle) he that reads shall find it true, That when a
Daughter of a strange god, came into Isreal's Land, she wrought effectually
there, to the destruction of her King, their seed, and the people there. GOD is
a Righteous GOD, Holy and Just. Think we that His Law may be contumeliously
used, trod under foot, and so contemned; and the peoples Law, their just
Liberties, their heritage, their birthright; That this shall be maintained in
honor, shall stand-up in full strength, force and virtue? Surely it cannot be.
Can Israel think he may provoke God to His face, with Images, and strange
vanities, and yet feel no yoke upon his neck; nothing that shall be to him as
Thorns in his side, or pricks in his eye! Consult we with the records of Time,
and we shall be clear in this matter, I mean in point of judgment.

As God has given-up abominable Idolaters unto abominable and vile affections,
as we read Romans 1. 1^.
: So has he given them up unto the hands of their Enemies, to serve a grievous
servitude there. It is Gods manner so, we never read it to be otherwise. And
just it is, That he, who will enthrall his spirit, that Lordlike thing, to
serve vile things, which should not be named, should have his neck brought
under a grievous servitude, that we may know what it is to depart from the
Living GOD; the service also of the LORD, and the service of other Kingdoms 2
Chro. 12. 8
. Israel took the Daughters of strange gods to be their Wives, (read on) and
served their gods (still the strange god was served by Judge. 3.
Husband and Wife both) read on; And the children of Israel did evil, forgot
the LORD their GOD; and served Baalim and the ver. 6.
groves. What followed then; Therefore the anger of the LORD ver. 7.
was hot: and presently there was a grievous yoke clapped upon their necks.
Observe it when you will, and you will observe ver. 8.
it, if you will observe any thing; That the Sons and Daughters of strange
gods never came alone to Israel; they came accompanied, still they brought
yoakes with them for Isreal's necks. They chose new gods. What if they did? Do
you make but a what of it? You may hear and feel what followed at that time,
as the Train of those gods; Then was war in the gates. The new gods brought
Swords with them, as their Train, Judge. 5. 8.
to cut Isreal's throats. And Israel could not defend themselves, a naked people
they, was there a Spear or Shield found, among forty thousand in Israel. The
Lord help Israel, and deliver him from strange gods, for these make Israel
naked, then they bring upon him the Sword; and, oh, what oppression then! You
never read of a Sword, which the strange god has brought, but you Ier. 26. 16.
50. 16.
read OPPRESSING there, and bathing in blood.

Object. But this makes no proof, that Solomon laid an heavy yoke upon
Israel, and made their servitude grievous.

Answ. I confess it does not: therefore we must look better into the Sacred
Text, to see what may be collected thence, by necessary deduction. True it is,
I remember nothing touching the weight of Solomon's hand upon the people; nor
what that yoke might be, which the people said was grievous; but this we shall
draw from the Text plain enough, For this is most legible, Solomon's heart was
turned from GOD (his Wives had turned him: That the LORD glorious in Power, and
abundant in showing Mercy, turned his heart again, shall be cleared in a
fitter place) and then, in what a posture it stood toward Israel, is
imaginable. This I take to be a cleared truth, That, when a Kings heart is
turned from GOD; it is turned also from the Israel of God: And if from the
Israel of GOD, it is probable (to say no more) he did turn his hand upon them,
and laid upon their necks yoakes grievous to be borne. The heart of Solomon's
Queen did cleave to her strange god; The Kings heart clave to her in love;
Then his heart was estranged from the True GOD; nay quite turned from Him. a 1
King, 11. 2, 3, 4.
What then? The intelligent Reader will conclude then; That Solomon, cleaving
in love to strange Wives, and serving strange gods, these Wives and these gods,
turning his heart from Isreal's GOD, turned his heart also from the Israel of
GOD, to put heavy yoakes upon them: so heavy, that, as was said of the Kingdom
of France, we may say now of the Kingdom of Israel, when their Kings heart was
turned from GOD, There is more justice I in Hell (in respect, not of the Plus
justitiae est in in^erno.
habit, but execution of it) then in that Kingdom: for in Hell, the innocent
are not punished; the wicked are not freed from punishment: But in Israel, when
the King there is an abominable Idolater, (there was never any question of his
Queens) his heart turned from the True GOD, and then the true Israel shall be
yoaked, and made to serve a grievous servitude; and the wicked there, they that
do as their King does, serve abominable Idols, they shall be free, so far, as
their King can free them, from that, which is the just merit of their sin.
But suppose, for we may suppose what we please, That King Solomon, in the
goodness of his disposition, (which Israel could never trust, when his heart
was turned from GOD) would not be persuaded to yoke his people: yet GOD will
yoke them; and so we find it in the Text: Rezon was an Adversary to Israel 1
King 11. ^5.
, all the days of Solomon; And what did he do? He abhorred Israel: Hadad
also, another Adversary, (an Idolatrous King shall not want Adversaries) he did
Israel mischief. Put this together, he abhorred Israel: did Israel mischief:
One of these is enough, but altogether made Isreal's voake grievous. And this
was so all the days of Solomon, after his Wives had turned away his heart.

Ob. But this was past, and Solomon was dead and gone, why should his yoke be
remembered, which, by his Idolatrous services he had laid upon the people?

An. Those be things the people cannot forget: They do remember their yokes,
their affliction and misery; the Wormwood and the Gall. Besides, The yokes,
which strange gods bring upon Isreal's necks, will not quickly off, and will
make no small impression there: We must think them grievous to Israel at this
time, specially to the good Priests there, they might see the root and cause of
them (vexation gives understanding) and so move the King to remove the cause
and the evil together. In charity we must think so; That Israel saw now That
corruption in Religion, abominable Priests and their services were the cause of
Isreal's heavy yokes, and grievous servitude: That Solomon, loving strange
wives, and doting upon their gods, turned his heart from the GOD of Israel, and
from the children of Israel: so they would move their King jointly and with one
consent, for the removing of the cause, and of the evil both together. We will
now look over what we have been long upon for great reason.

I premised this, which is so legible; The King of Israel married strange
wives; clave to them in love, and doted upon their gods. The conclusion thence
is; That then an heavy yoke was laid upon Israel, and they served a grievous
servitude; for the heart of their King was turned from the GOD of Israel, his
hand must be turned against the children of Israel, to lay an heavy yoke upon
them, To put a bride into their jaws, causing them to err Esa. 30 28.
: It is a conclusion, drawn from the experience of all ages upward to this
day; That Idols coming into Isreal's land, bring yokes with them; and GOD sends
judgments after them. Charity concludes also, That when Israel and All Israel
Petition their King, then, as David said, is there not a cause 1 Samuel 17. 19
? Sound wisdom and discretion makes no question of it. It remains now, that
we read over the Petition once more, short, easy and ingenious. 1. Then, how
the King entertaines it. 2. The Counsels he takes about it. 3. The answer he
returns unto it: 4. Then how the people relish it. These we will run-over in
order. The Petition we will read first.

Thy Father made our yokes heavy, now therefore ease thou SOMEWHAT the greevous
servitude of thy Father, and 2 Chro. 10 4
his yoke, that he put upon us, and we will serve thee. What answer makes the
King? he will consider of it, take advice, and afterward speak his mind.

1. It was the wisest answer that we shall read from his Jud. 19. 30.
mouth; and yet, no true wisdom in it at all. He will take time to consider of
it; of what? of doing Judgment and Justice to his people. It is a matter, that
admits no question, therefore no deliberation. Some things are not to be
deliberated-on; Not, whither I will worship GOD, or no, according to His Rule.
Not, whether I will turn from Idols to serve the LIVING GOD; I may consider
what it will COST me; but not whether I will do it or no: I cannot make
question there for conscience sake; The word is plain: So, nor might Rehoboam
deliberate on the matter (The manner may admit deliberation) The doing
Judgment and Justice to his people, easing somewhat their heavy yoke and
grievous servitude: This admitted no deliberation; The case was as plain as
the case of the three children, wherein they were not careful to make answer
Dan. 3. 16. Quideliberavit defivit.
And certainly, when a man will deliberate what way to take, when the good way
is plain before him, and the case as clear as the Sun; It is because he is
resolved not to balance the counsels, but to desert the cause, to forsake the
good path, and to turn into a way of his own. We read on and find it just so
here; The Kings way was plain before him, the case was resolved by his good
Grandfather from the Oracle of GOD: The GOD of Israel said, the ROCK of Israel
spoke to me: HE THAT RVLETH OVER MEN MVST BE JUST 2 Samuel 23. 3.
RVLING in the fear of the LORD. And it was written in a book for his Father
Solomon, that he might learn and do thereafter; He shall judge Thy people
with righteousness, and Thy poor with judgment: Thou shall judge the poor
of the people, and break in Ps. 71. 2.
pieces the oppressor. In so clear a case then, and to so just a Petition,
the King might have returned a gracious answer and presently have sent away his
people glad.

2. But he will do all things with Counsel, and there is no hurt in that; for
he will consult with old men, and that was wisely done indeed (if he had not
been resolved before hand to do the contrary, to take his own way) They are
well seen in State matters, and well read in point of government, (the hardest
point) having long studied, both Times, Books, and Men. Surely the Reader
long's to hear, what they will say, what counsel they give to the King. This
it was, and this the purpose of their Counsel.

Be kind to the people; love and kindness gains upon the heart exceedingly.
They are Childeren of Israel, show Thy self a Father unto them (for so thou
art) and then thou keep thy place, and they will keep theirs, and all will
be done in love, the best Commander in the world. Thou art above them by the
head, to lead, to counsel them, to provide for them: do not set them under
thy foot. Be not froward with thy children, for that will teach them
frowardnes, and they will be froward too. Please them, humor them, specially at
the first, and thou shall have their hearts forever. Stoop to them now, and
thou shall not fall, nor hurt thy Crown, for thou shall stoop but to Law and
Right-reason. Be a Servant to thy Servants this one Day, think it not much to
serve them to Day, and they will be thy servants to morrow, and all thy days:
However thou 1 Kin. 12. 7.
do, do not show them the Yoke; for then, so like an untamed 2 Chronicles. 10. 7.
Heiser Israel is, not used to the Yoke, they will show thee the heel. Be kind
to. Thy people, and please them thic once: Put a bridle on thy lips, open thy
mouth and speak softly to them, good words and gracious, these cost a man
nothing; the contrary may cost thee dear, more then half thy Kingdom. Thus
advisedly spoke the old Counselors, such as stood before Solomon. But his
son was resolved of his way before hand, and that he might be more confirmed
in it, he advised with the YOUNG Counselors, like himself, and yet so wise
as to humor him, understanding his mind well enough, and this is their
counsel; so they advise the King to answer the people, even so roughly;

I am King, Then ask you no questions for conscience sake; look not to what I
do, but to your obedience: I am to be accountable to GOD, not unto you: You
complain of Yokes, they are but wood yet, they shall be iron anon. My Fathers
hand was heavy upon you, was it so? you shall find more weight from my little
finger, then you felt from my Fathers loins. You complain of smart from Rods,
you shall smart with Scorpions (...). F^agra ^axi^^ata, nuckle-bones, or
plummets of lead or sharp thorns tied to the ends of the whips. Goodw. Ant.
; your burdens were heavy and increased: These shall multiply shortly, so as
you shall roate like Bears, and groan under them, because of the rigor. Tell
the people so, said these young Counselors. And it was good counsel, and
sounded well in Rehoboams ear, for it pleased him best, who thought he could
not be a free King over Israel, unles Israel were slaves, groaning under Yokes,
and smarting under Scorpions, and crowching, like an Ass, between two burdens.

3. And he did thereafter, going his own way, resolved thereon, as others
after him Ier 42. 20.
, before he asked counsel: So he refused the grave counsel of the Ancients,
took the other, which has two Marks, whereby it is badnesse shall be discerned
to the worlds end; YOUNG counsel for the Persons; and VIOLENT for the matter,
and so, after three days (that was the time allotted for deliberation) the
King returns answer, as you heard rough and boisterous, according as his
witless Parasites had advised him, My 1 Chronicles. 10. 12, 13, 14.
Father made your yoke heavy, but J will add thereto: my Father chastised you
with whipps, but I will chactise you with Scorpions. Read now, and observe how
it takes with the people,

3. The King is short and quick with the people; they are as short with him:
The King was wilful and the people will be froward with the froward. But had
the LORD no hand herein? The Text answers that; So the King hearkened not unto
the People for the CAUSE WAS OF ver. 15.
GOD. Ai The cause was of GOD; The Kings will was free, free to evil and
stubbornely bent that way, but so the just GOD orders it, The Kings stubborn
will shall bring to pass the Decree of GOD It is one of the greatest praises
of Gods wisdom, That He can turn the evil of me^ to the good of his people,
and to His own Glory. Dr. Hall Contemp. l. 12. Page 86.
; it shall serve the good pleasure of His holy Will; That the LORD might
perform His word, which He spoke by the hand of Abijah. Israel in the Days of
Solomon had forsaken the LORD and worshipped Astaroth the goddess of the
Sidonians, and Chemosh and Milchom 1 Kin. 11. 33
: And they said in effect, it was well with them then, and they saw no evil
Jer. 44. 17.
; ver. 21.
But did not the LORD remember them, and came it not into His mind? Surely
Idolaters never escaped unpunished: A 1 Chr. 10. 16, 17.
plague ever followed their abominable services; and now was the time when the
rod of pride must blossom: (In the month of the foolish is a rod of pride Pro.
14. 3.
) when the frowardness of the King shall make himself smart; and a rough word
from his tongue shall rent-off ten Tribes from his Crown: And when all Israel
saw that the King would not hearken unto them, they rent themselves from him,
and went every man to their Tents. Presently after, but too late, the King sent
after his people to whistle them again, and to pacify them; but they were
past call, Besides, he sent as bad an Orator to persuade with the people, as
he could have chosen in all the Land; for he sent HADORAM, who was over the
Tribute ver. 18.
; a man most hateful to all the people, being one of the Taxers of the people,
and so having emptied their purses, he should never gain their hearts. We
read how they entertained the message by the welcome they gave to the
messenger, They instantly stoned him with stones that he died ver. 18.
. Then the King was startled, saw now that no coards or fetters hold a people
so fast, as do those, that are twisted and forged by love only Circumvalla
pijs animum inte^tionibus: honest is vitam artibus; prudentia^ and fortitudine^
ante fores loca: justitiamac mcdestiam in propugnaculis, humanitatem and
mansuetudinem undique in muris: spem and fidem arcis in medio, providentiam
supremo turris in vertice: bona^ denique famam in c^^cuitu: Ego tibi ostendan
tutissimam munitissmamque arcemsine muris, sineturribus, sine ullo prorsus
operoso rerum apparatu: si vis tute vivere been vive: nil virtute securius.
Petrar. Dial.
. So having lost that strong hold in his peoples hearts and affections, he made
speed to another Castle, not half so strong, yet it was JERUSALEM, the
strongest place one of them in the world. *

There he bethinks himself how he might fortify his Kingdom, and complete
his MILITIA 2 Chro. 11.
; I will set this note upon it at the first, he began wrong; the very first
step was out of the way; his first work should not have been about the
MILITIA; much less should he have bent the force of it against his Brethren
ver. 1.
; But thereof he had fair warning, and he was so wise as to obey it ver. 4.
, then the war ceased, and the Soldiers were disbanded, as wonderfully, as
were ours in the North.

But he goes on with his MILITIA, builds Cities; fortifies the strong holds
ver. 5, 11.
; puts Captains in them, and store of victuals; and in every several City he
put Shields and Spears, and made them EXCEEDING STRONG ver. 12.
; How so? HE HAD JUDAH AND BENJAMIN ON HIS SIDE. They were the chiefest of the
Tribes, and best Beloved. Nay, The Priests and the Levites, that were in all
Israel resorted to him out of all their Coasts ver. 13.
; And the reason is given in the Text, Jeroboam and his sons had cast them
off from executing their office unto the LORD ver. 14.
. Aye they were too holy for Jeroboam, and his sons, and their devilish
services; he ordained Priests of his own choosing, for the high places, and FOR
THE DEVILS ver. 15.
. Reader mark that, and FOR THE DEVILS; and carry it home to the idolaters of
our days. But they will never believe you, That when they serve GOD after
their own way, they do not serve Him but Devils; and when they do ordain
Priests for their Mass, they do ordain them for the Devils. They will not
believe you in this; That they do now as Jeroboam did, sacrifice to the
Devils, and make Priests to the Devils. No not they, they are wiser then so,
They make Altars and Priests and Sacrifices too, all of their own making, as
Aaron made a Feast, to Exodus 32. 5.
JEHOVAH, so indeed they say, and they think they have a strong proof from
that, which Aaron said, not weighing what the LORD says a little after, They
worshipped the Calfe, they sacrificed to the Calfe, That they did, says the
LORD. Why then, they sacrificed to the ver. 8.
Devil, and worshipped the Devil, says the Lord. Tell 1 Cor. 10. 20.
them this, though they will not regard it, for they regard not what the LORD
says: but when you have told them so, and bid them consider on it, you have
told them the truth, and done your Duty. Read on, After the forementioned
others also, even such as set their hearts to seek the LORD GOD of Israel came
to Jerusalem to sacrifice unto the LORD GOD of their Fathers ver. 16.
. What follows now? That whereon we must set a Mark. So they strengthened the
Kingdom of Judah; They were the very MILITIA of the Kingdom. Who? such as set
their hearts to seek the LORD: Here we must put the mark; When they come to a
City, Town, or Country, who set their hearts to seek the LORD, they bring a
blessing along with them, They fortify the place exceedingly; they make the
City EXCEEDING STRONG, they are the MILITIA of the City. So it follows, So
THEY strengthened the Kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam STRONG. Yes, Prince
and people, all are STRONG now; why now? Now that Priests and Levites are come
unto them, SUCH AS SET THEIR HEARTS TO SEEK THE LORD. It is notable also to
consider how long the Prince and people continued Strong. How long? It is
answered, THREE YEARS ver. 17.
, for so long they walked in the way of David and Solomon. What way was that?
GODS way sure, an holy way, and we must set a mark there also, The way a
Prince must take to make himself and his Kingdom strong, is, to WALK in the
(first 2 Chro. 17. 3
) WAY OF DAVID AND SOLOMON; when David performed the Wills of GOD Act. 13. 22.
(...)
. We will note no more, but this in this Chapter concerning Rehoboam, that he
did against the Commandment, for he multiplied wives to himself Deuteronomy. 17. 17.
.

After this time, when Rehoboam had established the Kingdom 2 Chronicles. 12.
, and strengthened himself, HE FORSOOK THE LAW of the LORD. What followed that
bad example? Multitudes; what way soever the King takes, he goes not alone, the
people will press, and throng after him, as here Chap. 12.
in this place; And ALL ISRAEL with him ver. 1.
Note we therefore, what a train follows the King. Jeroboam commands a
CALVISH worship; All Israel follow the Commandment, Jeroboam is never
mentioned, but with his train after him. A Ruler hearkens to lies. What if he
does, or what is that to his Servants? Yes, for it follows, ALL HIS SERVANTS
are wicked Pro. 29. 12.
. They will do as their Master does, and think they do well; they will find
a way or make a way, after the Commandment they will go. REHOBO AM FORSOOK
THE LAW OF THE LORD, AND ALL ISRAEL WITH HIM. What then? Then all was turned
upside down. Bury me with my face downe-ward, says Diogenes. Why so man?
Because, said he, the Rulers are naught, and all will be naught presently; now
all will be turned upside down, and then my face will be upward again, in the
fittest posture. Just so with Rehoboam, upside down, a mavelous alteration
presently. He that was strong before, is now weak as water: That, which was
sound, is now become as rottenness; his Strength, which seemed INFINITE Nah. 3
9.
, mouldred away and became rottenness; his MILITIA fainted, his strongholds
were like the first ripe figgs, which fall into the mouth of the Eater Nah. 3.
12.
: See there, Rehoboam forsakes the Law of his GOD; GOD forsakes him, breaks
down his hedges, takes away his DEFENSE from his Cities, and strong holds,
exposes him to the WILL of his Adversary, which yet the LORD sets bounds unto,
and that we must note. SHISHAK (and he was Successor of that Egyptian, whose
Daughter Solomon had married, thereby the better to assure his estate, which
while he served GOD, was by GOD assured against all and the greatest
neighboring Kings: And when he forsook Him, it was torn asunder by his
meanest vassals) This Shishak distressed Judah, for THEY HAD TRANSGRESSED
AGAINST THE LORD 2 Chronicles. 12. 2
; and He left them in his hand. But this helped the King and the people very
much, even their humbling themselves under Gods mighty hand, and submitting,
saying, THE LORD IS RJGHTEOVS ver. 6.
. Therefore the LORD did not stir up all His wrath, He would not destroy them
altogether. Nevertheless because Rehoboam and his people would serve strange
gods, therefore they should be under the yoke of a strange King, SERVANTS UNTO
HIM ver 7, 8.
: And because they would change so good a Master, they should know His service,
and the service of other Kings: Judah should not get his neck from under the
Egiptian yoke: Moreover Shishak pilliged the house of the LORD, and the Kings
house, for he TOOK ALL thence; his Shields of gold also, instead of which
Rehoboam made ver. 9.
Shields of brass: and they were good enough for him, who had embased the
Temple, and impured the service there; and a change fit enough for him too, who
was so ready to change the worship of his God. Notwithstanding the Lord
granted to Prince and people SOME DELIVERANCE; He would not destroy the King
ALTOGETHER ver. 12.
; and also in Judah THINGS WENT WELL. But not long sure; for the KING DID EVIL
ver. 14.
; he humbled himself while the stroke was upon him; he turned himself to the
Lord, till the Lord turned the wrath from him; so long he did seemingly well.
But when the wrath was turned away, he turned to his Idol; HE DID EVIL, says
the Text, and renders a reason withal, BECAUSE HE PREPARED NOT HIMSELF TO
SEEK THE LORD. And he did evil, this is to be noted, with the reason of the
same; The King humbled himself, that is expressed; his heart seemed to be
humbled, so as he could ACCEPT OF THE PUNISHMENT of his iniquiry Lev. 26. 41.
, for he said, The LORD is RIGHTEOUS. And yet thus we read, HE DID EVIL.
Surely his VNCIRCVMCISED Heart (that word is to be noted) was not humbled; that
is, his heart was not humbled for the uncircumcision thereof; he did not
sorrow, after a godly 2 Cor. 7. 11.
sort; not for his sin, but for the punishment of his sin: while the vial
of wrath was pouring forth upon him, he, perhaps, poured forth his prayer, as
the manner is; all that while he humbled himself, no longer; He PREPARED not
his Heart to that great work of HVMILIATION. Certainly there is some
PREPARATORY work to be done, before the heart can be humbled in a right
manner; which work sets the thoughts on work, makes us sad and serious, so to
consider with all our hearts and souls, first;

1. How DREADFVLL GOD is; how vain and abominable Idols are. And;

2. That sin is only and truly evil: but Idolatry (there is a spice of it in
every sin, as there was a spice of the CALFE in every punishment) that, which
is called abominable Idolatry, is above measure sinful, filling up the vial
of wrath brim-full, and then pouring it out. And;

3. How dreadful a thing it is to be under this WRATH now, the wrath of GOD,
which yet is, in comparison to that, which is TO COME, but as a drop to the
Ocean; as a spark to the furnace, which has this ingredient in it, (to make
the flame more scorching) everlasting burning, eternal wrath. And,

4. How dreadful a thing it is To forsake the LAW of GOD; and to be exemplary
thereunto, as Rehoboam did and was, for he carried all his train after him,
there must be a sad and serious consideration thereof. And,

5. So also (and to contract) a serious consideration of the Heart, I mean
all, that is called flesh in the outward or inward man, whether in high places
there or low, as the darkness in the understanding; the rockinesse in the
will; the sinfullnesse, the deceitfullnesse, the desperate wickedness in the
whole heart; All this requires a serious and sad consideration, as a
PREPARATORY work for humbling the heart in a right manner. And,

6. Then this also, which is chiefest of all, The goodness, the kindness of
that God to me, whose Law I have forsaken; His Law before whom our fathers have
walked; His Law, Who fed me all my life long to this day. This consideration,
if serious, melts the heart. And lastly, Genesis 48. 15.


7. How the Lord himself is pleased to ALLVRE His Hose. 2, 14.
people; how comfortably He speaks unto them in their wilderness; He is
Gracious and Merciful; He will multiply pardons; He will abundantly pardon
them, whose uncircumcised hearts are humbled, so as they can accept of their
punishment, can say, in sincerity and truth of heart broken in the sense of all
this; The LORD is RIGHTEOUS in all that is come upon us, and yet He is a FATHER
an EVERLASTING Father, etc.

Such considerations as these, are preparatory to work the heart to a right
humiliation, else the stout heart will not down. It may keep within bounds
for a time, as a beast hedged in with thorns, but it will break out again,
and DO EVIL. And this is the more seriously to be thought on in this place
once for all, Because, when we read, that a King and people, after their
humiliations, have fallenback, have returned to their mire and vomit; or, as it
is here, have done EVIL, after their shows of Reformation: We read in the
same place, this reason given of their so fallingback, which we meet with in
the Text, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord. So also, when we
read, That 2 Chro. 12. 14.
high places, or high persons, eminent and above others in their abominations,
yet are not taken away, nor CVT off; the same reason is given; The people had
not prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers 2 Chronicles. 20. 33.
. But now on the contrary, we shall never read, that a Prince or people
returned back to folly; that they did evil (purposely and advisedly; there are
slips and failings and fallings in the best) That they did work iniquity, Homo
sup.
after they had prepared their heart to seek the Lord. THERE ARE GOOD THINGS
FOUND IN THEE, and this is the chiefest of all; THOU HAVE PREPARED THY HE ART
TO SEEK GOD 2 Chro. 19 3.
. We shall read anon, how mightily that King went-on, and prevailed. There was
indeed some stop in his way, but that the people caused. This is the point;
JEHOSHAPHAT returned not to folly, he did no evil; he wrought no INIQVITY.
Why? for he had prepared his heart to seek GOD. But Rehoboam here, he did
evil; how so? because he prepared not himself to seek the Lord. The heart
must be prepared for that great work of seeking the Lord, else the heart will
not be fixed and resolved upon the work. The Records concerning ver. 15.
Rehoboams Acts are lost, only this we read, That there were wars between
Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually: for friendship once broken is hardly peeced;
and peeced enmity never surely sodered Vt Christalli fragmenta sarciri nullo
modo possunt: Ita difficilimum cos reconciliare, qui ex arctissi^ma
samiliaritate in mutuu^ odiumvenerint. Plut.
. But death came and took off Rehehoboam from that quarrel, laid him and his
thoughts fast asleep, so he slept with his Fathers, and was buried. Abijah his
Son reigned in his stead, a little wiser then his Father, and but a little
better; yet because he ordered his Militia wisely, I reserve him for another
place: Asa also, and Jehoshaphat his Son, the compleatest patterns of
well-posturing a Kingdom that ever were looked upon; I refer these also to
their own place; only making mention of their Names here to continue the Story.

THE ACTS OF JEHORAM. CHAP. III.
JEHORAM strengthens himself against the LORD, and slays his Brethren He
walked-on after a wicked example; In a way contrary to God; and God as contrary
to him. Edom revolted from him; so does Libnah a City of Priests; They will not
be compelled to Idolatry: So they approve themselves the best subjects to the
King. He quite for sakes the Law of his GOD; no man follows him, but the
executioner of Gods wrath: Enemies 2 Chro. 21.
are upon his back; and sore diseases in his bowels: He dies, ver. 4.
and carries the mark of his wickedness to his grave. ver 3.


IEHORAM, a very bad Son of a very good Father, has a Kingdom disposed to
him, because he was the first borne b: That was the only reason that persuaded
with the Father; there could be no other; for no sooner was he risen-up
therein, and knew himself to be King, but he strengthened himself (i. e.) set
himself in a posture of war.

A most unhappy and unnatural beginning; for the first Act of hostility was
against those, he should have tendered as a Father, being King; and as his own
bowels, for they were his Brethren: But he slew his Brethren with the Sword,
besides diverse also of the Princes of Israel. He was of a mischievous nature,
but could dissemble deeply to win the good opinion of his Father and Brethren
for closing with his Wise in her Idolatrous services, and having the r^ines in
his hand, we see how bloody he was. Sr. W R. Hist of the World. ever. 4.
The GOD of recompenses meets with him anon: For the debts of Cruelty and Mercy
are never left unsatisfied: They may lie for a time, but they shall increase;
both Principal and Use shall be paid at once: he has shed blood, blood will
pursue him; he shall be made Pro. ^8 17.
drunk with it; his Sword has made his Mother childlesse: the Sword of the
LORD will make him wivelesse and childlesse at once; this we shall see anon. We
will observe him in his way now: what way goes he? He leaves the good way of
his good Father, traverseth his own way, a way pleasing in his own eyes; the
way of the Kings ver. 6.
of Israel. The King of Judab now does just as the house of Ahab: And the
SPIRIT of GOD is clear at this point, giving us the reason why the Son left
the good way of his Father (a wise King and a better Man,) to walk in the way
of the house of Ahab; for he had (says the Spirit) the Daughter of Ahab
Athaliah Sister to Ahab Son of Omri.
to wife. Truly, when I first read the Chapter (to gather observations from
it) and saw such a slaughter, such an effusion of blood, I verily thought, I
should read this presently; for he had the 2 King. 8. 26.
Daughter of Ahab to wife: A pestilent woman, a very firebrand ordained by God
to consume a great part of the Noblest Houses in Judah, even of those men or
their children, whose worldly wisdom, regardlesse of Gods pleasure, had
brought her in. Jehoram was imped into this wicked stock, the family of Ahab,
he had a notorious murdresse, Idolatresse, and, it was verily thought, an
Aduliresse also to his Wife; Now you may reade-on without the book, And he
wrought that, which was evil in the eyes of the LORD ver. 6.
: It was very likely that would follow, for he that regards not into what House
he matcheth himself, will be as regardlesse how evil his works are, and that
they are wrought in the eyes of the LORD: Indeed he wrought that evil, which
consumed and ruined himself, and his whole family: and yet not all, not every
person there, for the LORD, remembering Mercy in the midst of Judgment, (as His
manner is, and promise was) would not quite put-out the light of Israel,
because of the good word He spoke to David concerning that matter ver. 7.
. But Jehoram shall be vexed, every vein in his heart, and made an example of
wrath to all, that will match in an Idolatrous house.

That we may hate Jehorams way (which was the way of the House of Ahab) as we
do the end of the same, for it was ruin and destruction to him, and his whole
house, and his Kingdom too; we will trace Jehorams stepps in his way, that we
may read with all observation, what those evils were, which he wrought in the
way of the house of Ahab, before the eyes of the Lord: Then we will see how the
Lord meets with him in that way; how gently He deals with him at the first,
and how severely at the last; for patience abused turns into fierce wrath. We
will observe in our passage by what stepps and degrees the Lord proceeds
against him; smiting him in his outward first, afterward in his bowels: we
will observe the order briefly, and then we will treat more largely upon it.
The Lord plucks him by the Crown first, strikes off a piece thence, not very
considerable, and yet not wholly contemptible; then takes away a Flower, the
chief ornament of the same; then holds him up to the wind, his Kingdom also,
and so dissolved his substance: For the Lord took away the hedge, His defense,
throwes-open his gates and bars, and in-came the adversary from every quarter:
yet the Lord has not done, (will ye provoke the Lord to anger: are ye stronger
then He?) Jehoram takes advise of his Wife, follows her way, and stretches
out his hand against the LORD: At the last, the Lord lifted him-up to the wind
indeed, dissolveth his substance, shatters him and his house all to pieces, (he
would provoke the Lord!) slayes his Wives and Children; strikes him in the
bowels; and yet there is not an end. That we may put all due observation upon
all this, we will read it all over again in order.

1. We will pace with him in his way, that we may learn to hate it; It is the
way of the house of Ahab; and he walks in it stoutly, as if he had an arm
like GOD. Whatever concerned his Kingdom, he communicates to his Queen, takes
her counsel (she was the Daughter of Ahab) what she said was Law; then her
Lord offers violence to the Law, changes the Ordinances, breaks the
everlasting Covenant, for thus he does; he for sakes the ver. 10.
Lord God of his Fathers. What follows this forsaking? Moreover he made high
places in the Mountains of Judah, and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to
commit fornication. ver: 11.
Some there were, both Priests and others, to whom the good King deceased,
(observing in his life time, with sorrow enough, what way his Son inclined)
gave special charge both touching spiritual causes and temporal matters: And
these would not yield, (as we shall see anon) to those illegal proceedings of
Jehoram: But he was King, and might do, he thought, as his Wife counseled
him, (she was Daughter of Omri and Sister of Ahab, (for that must still be
remembered, she would counsel him to do) as he listed; he made innovations in
Religion, used compulsion there, and was, if not the very first, the first that
is registered, to have set-up irreligion and Idolatrous services BY FORCE, and
compelled Judah thereto ver. 11.
.

Then the good Priests began to look about them (for their eyes were open and
upon Jehoram long before, but) now they lay their heads together, and consult
what is to be done, and what way they must take, now that they see which way
their King takes. Speak to him they dare not, they durst as well shake a Lion
by his claws: his Queen, a woman of a Masculine spirit, and very wicked, had
so raised the spirit of her King against GOD and good Men, that he was now such
a son of Belial, that a man could not speak to him 1 Samuel 25. 17.
; A cruel persecutor he, for he murdered his own Brethren, and diverse of
the Princes, as we heard, who then durst stand before him, or speak the truth
unto him, or trust him after these bloody executions? Certain it is, the
Prophets durst not stand before him, much less reprove him to his face, but
denounced GODS judgments against him by Letters ver. 12.
, keeping themselves close and far from him: There came a writing to him from
Elijah the Prophet, (how it came the LORD knows, but it came) to give the King
warning before the blow came, (for that is the Lords manner) and therein the
Prophet deals plainly and roundly with the King; That he walked as a man
pursuing a curse; in the way of the Kings of Israel, FORCING Judah to go a
whoring in the same way, etc. Thus plain was the writing, for that could
neither blush nor ver. 13.
be afraid, though in the hands of a murderer; and the penman was safe enough
(I think) he had taken sanctuary at the grave; but the stoutest Prophet of them
all durst not tell the King this to his face, for he hated the reprover, and
was resolved in his way, and to set his foot upon him, that durst withstand
him in his way, though it were to save his Crown: So he goes-on, or rather
blunders, as one before him, upon the drawn Sword. We must note here, as we
shall find it all along, That the Prophets tell the King plainly of his doings;
if he be such a son of Belial as this King was, and will not hear, then they
sent a writing to him; If the King be so fierce, that a good Prophet dares not
stand before him and speak unto him; then he will send unto him; And there
came a writing to him from the Prophet. And so, having done their duty, the
Prophets let the King and the Queen alone joined to Idols, and traversing their
own way, (they had entered upon and made passible by blood, and such seldom
return) The Prophets would not weary themselves about them: In their Mouth
Jer. 2. 24.
they were sound, for then their pangs came upon them. We will now take our eyes
off from beholding Jehorams way, and behold the Lord in the way of his
judgments upon him.

2. The LORD begins with him, as His manner is, lightly afflicting him at the
first, and afterward more grievously. Jehoram will not hear the true Prophets,
nay he will not endure the sight of them, if they be such as will tell him the
truth. Now the LORD will speak to him by his rod, that has a voice, and, after
that, in His sore displeasure. He has been tampering with the Law of his GOD,
and now he has offered violence to it; the LORD will touch him in his Crown; He
will come to his heart anon, but, as was said, He will touch him lightly first;
And, if he considers well of it, it may keep the blow from the heart; we must
observe by what steps the Lord proceeds against him.

1. Edom breaks loose from him; there is one slip from his Crown, which he
should have laid to heart, have searched into the cause of this revolt, for it
was considerable; Jehoram was their King before; now they will have none of
him, for he will have none of GOD, (mark that:) They made themselves a King
ver. 8.
. Jehoram had revolted too, and from the KING of Israel, which was most
considerable at this time; but he considers it not, (for wise thoughts cannot
enter into him, and stay with him, who must perish) He considers how he may
bring the Edomites back again to his Crown. The Edomites are gone from under
his dominion, he goes after, with his Princes, and all his Charets with him ver
9.
; and something he did, but little to purpose, yet so much as lifted him up,
and made him yet more stout against GOD (as we heard and read ver. 11.
) to whom he rendered neither praise nor thanks. But what exploits did he with
his Princes, and all his Charets with him? He came upon the Edomites by night,
and it is like (for he was in a rage) he slew many of them: and so he gained
some dead bodies, and those he might keep under his dominion if pleased him:
But so long as there was live-blood at their hearts, he should never regain
them again; So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this Day
ver. 10.
. Well, they are gone from under his dominion: wiser and better men then they
will follow after; and so a flower, a chief ornament falls from Jehorams
Crown, for,

2. Libnah, a Town of Priests and Levites, who were charged by the Father 2
Chro. 19. 9, 10, 11.
(discerning the way and spirit of his Son) in the fear of the LORD, to do
faithfully and with a perfect heart (a great charge) these give Jehoram the
slip too: They will forsake Jehoram, for he has forsaken the LORD: they will
not be thrust away from the service of their GOD to serve Idols, not they. This
sounds harsh in Jehorams ear; and it is as grievous to his eye.

It is very likely so, but no matter for that; we knew before, so soon as we
read, that he had taken the Daughter of Ahab to Wife, what would follow, that
he must be vexed every vain of his heart. And yet, nothing, not a word or deed
do we find in the Text, said or done against them.

True; but this is clear in the Text, the same time did Libnah revolt from
under his hand. Whose hand? from under Jehorams ver. 10.
hand. Then it may be collected from the Text, that Jehoram counted them
Rebels, and called them so too.

Yes, very likely so, though it be not expressed so; for it is the manner so,
for a Rebel to call others by his own Name, Rebels and Exulem me de suo nomine
vocat.
Traitors all.

Was Jehoram a Rebel then? I do not say so: Hear I pray you what the LORD
says, for His eyes are upon the truth, and He will be heard, Jehoram had for
saken the Lord God of his Fathers. What more? A great deal more follows now;
Moreover he made high places. What more? And caused the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem to commit fornication. What more? and compelled Judah thereto. Look
upon it now, for we can rise no higher; Iehoram forsakes GOD, turns his back
upon Him, the great Potentate, KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords, turns his back
upon This LORD; then provokes Him to His face by his lying vanities, and
abominable Idolatry; and, which heightens his Rebellion against GOD, and puts
an accent upon it, makes it sound very high, Iehoram forces his LORDS Queen
before His face, he compels Judah to do the same, as he had done, very
wickedly. We cannot doubt now, but Iehoram was a great Rebel, the greater,
because he was in high place, a great King, and his wife a great Queen,
daughter and sister of two great Kings, the greater his Rebellion for that.

But these Priests and Levites revolt from their King, are they not Rebels now?

Judge ye! Here are two, Iehoram and his Priests, these go two contrary ways,
and they cross each the other at the highest point, the point of service and
homage to their GOD; It is legible to all the world, that one of these walks as
a Rebel most contrary to GOD and good-men; Then the other do walk as becomes
obedient children. It is not possible, That they, walking cross in the same
way, should meet together in point of Rebellion. But the Text is yet clearer.
The Priests forsake Iehoram (nor the King) And why forsake they Iehoram?
Because he had forsaken the LORD GOD of his Fathers. Gods command makes them
deaf to the command of Iehoram: Disobedience here is the truest obedience: And
the greatest Rebel here is the best Priest.
Look ye! The case is clear, for God has cleared it, He has given us the
clearest account of this matter that ever was given; The King had forsaken his
LORD paramount, LORD of Lords. The Priests must forsake Iehoram in his way, or
forsake GOD; That they will not do, He is the Fountain of their life, their
light, their comfort; He is their praise, their fear, for He is their God, and
He is ALL. They will not forsake Him; A good God, has done them good all their
days, nor can they forget or neglect the charge, their good old Master laid
upon them 2 Chronicles. 19. 9
; Deal courageously in the work and way of the LORD, and the LORD shall be
with you, for He will be with the good ver. 12.
. They durst not follow Iehoram down a precipice. They knew also there was a
pit at the bottom, that had no bottom. Let Iehoram venture his neck, the
Priests would not, much less their eternal souls. Should they follow him,
that had forsaken GOD! GOD forbid.

Thus we see it clear now as the beaten way, that here was no resistance of
the Kings Power, for that is of GOD, and for GOD, holy, just and good: Here was
a resistance only of Iehorams power, unholy, unjust and naught, managed clean
against GOD, and forcing his people to rebel against Him too; A resistance, I
say, not against the official power of the King, but the humane power of
Iehoram, a wicked and Idolatrous man, and as Vxorious (we have not a fitter
word) one that ruled not, but let his Wife do and rule all. The Priests
resisted not Iehorams power, but his wives power, tyranny rather, for she did
all after the Line and Law of Ahabs house, whose Sister she was, and Daughter
of Omri, and that was no Law to Israel, but most cross unto it: They resisted
the FORCEING will of Iehoram, (for it had no Reason) whereby he would force the
freest people in the world, and the freest Thing in the world, which can be no
more imprisoned then can the Sunne-beame; and as much without the verge of
Iehorams juris-diction, as a Starr is above his finger; they resisted this
Will, and obeyed GODS Will. Holy, Holy, Holy, blessed for ever.

Thanks be to GOD, Who has so cleared unto us the practice of these Priests and
Levites in Jehorams days, that he must say, as a bold fellow did, (The sacred
Text is seditious) who will accuse those Priests, and honest men of raising
sedition, because they forsook the way of Jehoram, when he had forsaken the
LORD, and His good way. We must give men leave, who have their eyes open, and
can discern a pit before them, to turn out of the way, that leads to death,
and follow on in the way of the LORD. We read on.

4. The Priests can do Jehoram no more service, he stops his ear to their
word, the word of GOD, and bends his fist, he will compel them to do as he
does; they will not be forced therein; let Jehoram go his own way, as his
wife leads him, they will go theirs, and yet not theirs, it is the way of the
LORD. So now the best flower of his Crown is gone, the honest Priests, a good
Kings best jewels: The supporters of his Crown were gone before, judgment and
justice, his wife made him stamp those under his foot. What will become of
this man? You shall hear anon, and very quickly? Judgment and justice are set
under foot; The Law of GOD is forsaken; a contrary Law is forced: now GOD will
forsake Jehoram, and He will take peace away with Him, His Priests pack-after;
Then vengeance comes pouring down, for all will forsake Jehoram, but the
executioners of GODS justice. The poorest King that was in the world, and more
miserable because the King of Judah. Now the LORD, for He has held His peace a
great while, is returning upon him, will shatter Jehorams Crown, and even
break the man to pieces; He will hold him up to the wind, and that shall carry
away his Substance; He will throw open the gates of his Kingdom, He will take
away his defense; The weak shall come-in upon him, and take the prey. It is
most observable how GOD pursues the quarrel of His Covenant against this man,
no King now in GODS account, and of very small account in all Israel. Iehoram
had forsaken the Fountain, the LORD dashes to pieces all his Cisternes, He
makes holes in them, all the comfort shall run out thence; his Cisternes shall
hold no water, not a drop: I mean, the LORD confounds his strength, and his
counsel both, nothing should do him good; for besides the blood that he shed,
the violence he offered to the Law, his forcing men to break it, his advising
with his wife, a wicked woman: Besides all this, he forsook the Lord, he went
out from the presence of the LORD, as it is said of Cain. Let me ask, how can
that be? A man may forsake Gen 4. 16.
the LORD as Iehoram did; but how can he go out from the presence of the LORD
(as Cain did) Who is wholly in Heaven, and wholly in Earth, not by interchanged
times, but all at once; and so David witnesses, If I be in Heaven thou art
there, if in Hell thou art there also: How then must it be understood, or what
is the meaning, that Iehoram, as Cain, went-out from the presence of the LORD?
This is the meaning, Cain, and so Iehoram, and so every wicked man, hardened in
evil, goes out from the presence of GOD, that is, from out of the King of
Heavens highway, wherein only is safety, and a Commission granted and sealed
for his protection: He is gone from under GODS roof, as I may say, from out of
His Angels hands, he is left to himself, delivered up into his own hands (he
had better be delivered up to the Devil) to be his own Keeper, disfavoured
now, and bereaved of GODS protection. This was Iehorams case, a forlorn and
forsaken man, for he has forsaken GOD, and now no man follows him, but the
Ministers of GODS vengeance. And they come-in upon him from every quarter, for
the Defense is gone, and the doors of his House and Kingdom lie open; in
comes the Adversaries (GOD stirred up their spirit ver. 16.
) The Philistines first, who had no power till now, since David's time, but now
Iehorams sins make them strong Nostris peccatis Barbari fortes sunt: Hier:
Epist 2. (...). Isid Pet. l. 1. Ep. 294.
. The Arabians with them, a naked people, these despicable Enemies take his
fenced Cities, spoil his strong holds, pillage his House, carried away all the
substance that was found therein, and his sons also and his wives: So that ver.
16, 17.
there was never a son left him save one. And then, to make his sorrows
complete, (for when GOD begins, He will make an end, either bend the man, or
break him too pieces,) And that the terrible Sentence in that threatening
Epistle (whose it was, I know not, but it was the word of the LORD) might be
fullfilled to a Letter, he that smit his brethren, is smit in his bowels, which
shortly after fell out by reason of his sickness: so he dyed of sore diseases
ver. 19.
. Surely the wound, and place thereof, commands our observation and our mark.

Iehoram was smitten in his bowels; we must remember whom Iehoram had smitten,
his Brethren, the sons of his Mother: his Sons were smitten too, and he in
his bowels. Our Divines have a saying very notable; Tell me thy punishment, and
I will tell thee thy sin: For the LORD, the GOD of Recompenses Jer. 51 56.
, tenders to a sinner his Measures Jer 13. 15.
: and the very ingredients, which he puts into his sin, GOD puts into his
punishment; That the sinner, smarting under the stroke of his sin and
punishment both together, may be humbled for the one, more then under the
other, and say from his heart, The LORD is righteous; The Retaliation of the
Lord is wonderful here; we must put the more observation upon it, even how He
did return Jehorams recompense upon his own head Jo^l 3. 7.
.

1. He had concealed hatred, he had spoken fair and peaceable words, when war
was in his heart: he is punished openly in the sight of all Israel, and before
the Sun.

2. He had slain All his Brethren, and every one of them better then himself
ver. 4 and ver. 13.
: The Princes also, diverse of them, the worst could not be worse then himself,
only complying with him in his abominable way, all these he had slain. The Lord
does recompense him, He stirred-up the spirit of the Philistines, and of the
Arabians; and they came up into Judah and brake into it: And what did they?
They carried away ALL the substance, that was found in the Kings House, and his
sons also (all save one) and his wives (except Athaliah that wicked woman, she
must be left to recompense All Judah for the bloodshed there, and the
abominable services done there: but) the enemies carried away all the rest,
leaving him but one son, nor that one for his sake, but for David His servants
sake.

3. He did not only countenance irreligious services performed to the Devil,
but established them by a Law, and by compulsive authority did enforce them; he
shall feel force enough; This Adversary did force him, and the other did force
him even in his own house, and carried out thence All his substance, that was
found there with his sons and with his wives. Why? he would FORCE Judah to do
as he did, evil before the eyes of the Lord: he had an Arm like God, he could
command, nay compel the freest thing in the world, and against God to do
wickedly Ezekiel. 6. 9.
, worse then the Heathen! See his recompense: he feels force after force;
breach upon breach, but the last is the forest.

4. He had broken the Lord with his whorish heart Ezekiel. 6. 9.
, like as was the heart of his Queen, for (so the Lord complains, to show unto
us how He is wearied and pressed with those abominable services in Judah) the
LORD GOD of Recompenses breaks his heart with sorrows, for He smote him in his
bowels with an incurable disease, whereof he lay lingering two years, (All that
long time, an hundred years, so they seemed to him lying in extremity (day by
day) complaining night and day, O my bowels!) Then they fell out by reason of
his sickness, and so at once, he died twice, for ought we can gather, the first
and second death together. He committed much sin in a little time (8 years) he
paced over his own way quickly, and more quickly passed the pleasure of it, but
the pain is lasting. Certainly this is written for the instruction of all the
Kings of Judah, that came after him, who, beholding this Recompense, might
abhor the work: And looking through to the end of the way of Ahabs-house,
they might not dare to set their face or foot that way, in taking the daughter
of Ahab to wife, for she will rule all, and give counsel like her self,
wicked counsel, to the ruin of King and Kingdom and all: All this will be
legible in the next Chapter, so soon as I have shut-up this. Iehoram departed
this life without being desired ver. 10.
; as his Subjects had small cause of comfort in his life: so had they not the
good manners to pretend sorrow for his death: Then we read his burial, and
there is all of him; but that he was not buried in the Sepulchers of the Kings
2 Chronicles. 22. 9
. The like is said of others like him; we will set this note once for all upon
his grave; He that walked so contrary to his good Father all the day long,
shall not lodge with him at night: They buried him, but not in the Sepulchers
of the Kings. 2 Chro. 21. 20.


THE ACTS OF AHAZIAH. CHAP. IV.
Ahaziah his short reign; he walked in the ways of Ahabs -house, and after
wicked counsels; the end thereof: The good old King, the grandfather is at rest
in his bed, but in his life time, joining in affinity with Ahab, he made Judah
restless, till all his house and Kingdom was destroyed.

IEhoahaz called also Ahaziah, the youngest of Iehorams sons, (for the
Arabians had slain all 2 Chro. 21. 17.
the eldest) began to reign when he was^^ 42 2 Kin 8. 26.
. years old, and ended his reign within the year 2 Chro. 22. 1, 2.
after. Vid. Tremel.


He had a great example before his eyes, in a sore wrath powered down upon his
Father, his children, his 2 Chro. 21. 14.
wives and all his goods; which bad him look well to his stepps, and yet he was
not warned: He walked also in the ways of the house of Ahab, and was guided by
the same spirits, that had 2 Chro. 22. 3.
been his Fathers evil Angels. His Story is short, but very lamentable, very
exemplary also, to bid others beware they tread not in the ways, nor after the
counsels of the house of Ahab.

The first year of his reign was the last of his life: for he hasted-on in
the most compendious ways to his destruction. What ways? In the ways of the
house of Ahab, ver 3.
and after the Counsels of his Mother (that wicked woman 2 Chronicles. 24. 7
) to do wickedly; So in one year, he lost himself and his Kingdom; I mean,
not Ahaziah only, but the King was destroyed, for the house of Ahaziah had no
power to keep still the Kingdom. ver. 9.
His story is short, but the collection thence is large, and of the same use; I
will make it as short as I can, and conclude it: That all Kings and Princes may
be warned, not to join in Affinity with Ahab, norwalkafter the counsels of the
house of Ahab. Good Iehoshaphat joins in Affinity 2 Chro. 18 2.
with Ahab, matched his Son Iehoram to Athaliah, Ahabs Sister, the Daughter of
Omri 2 Chronicles. 22. 2
, moved thereunto by politic reasons, no doubt, to strengthen his Kingdom by
joining in Affinity with a Neighbor King. Iehoram walks after his Wives
counsels, commits folly in Israel, and compells Judah thereunto; is smitten
with plagues, as we heard, and so died. 2 Chronicles. 21.


Ahaziah his Son walked-on after the Father, and according to the counsel of
his Mother, to do wickedly; Committed the Scepter into his Mothers hands, and
went with his brother King Jehoram, the Son of Ahab, King of Israel, to war 2
Chro. 22. ^.
against Hazael King of Syria, where the Syrians smote Joram (there is a letter
taken from his Name, which ever more implies, that the Lord takes away His
defense from that Person: as the putting to of a letter, notes the adding of a
Blessing) and he returned to be healed in Jezreel, where Ahaziah visits him,
and there meets with his destruction, which was of GOD, by coming to Joram
ver. 7.
: for Jehu, being Anointed ver: 6.
of the LORD, to cut off the house of Ahab, and, while he was executing
judgment, there he finds the Princes of Judah, and slew them ver. 8.
: Then Ahaziah hid himself in Samaria, but they found him out and slew him
there. Look ye there, and then ye look through to the end; Ahaziah walked in
the ways of Ahab: follows after the counsels of the house of Ahab; Now he
must perish in the very same way with the house of Ahab. He thought to outrun
the vengeance, and to hide himself; It cannot be, the executioner of wrath
finds him out, and he is slain. See again, what a slaughter here is;
Jehoshaphat the Grandfather joined house to house, to make his house the
stronger by Affinity with Ahab; It was the means to root out all his Posterity:
here Iehu slew at one blow two and Forty of his Issue Male: And then Athaliah
the Mother of 2 King. 10. 13, 14.
Ahaziah, seeing her Son was dead, hoped to make clean 1 Chro. 22. 10.
riddance, for She arose and destroyed all the seed Royal of the house of
Judah: And yet not all; he that suffered the seed of ver 10.
good Jehoshaphat to be destroyed by her hand, in whose affinity he offended;
will have a branch of Jehoshaphats stock saved, Doct. Contem.
for the sake of so faithful a progenito^; and for His promise 2 Kin 8. 19,
sake: The decree of the LORD must stand; not one word from 2 Cro. 21. 7. 22.
11.
His Mouth shall fail: Athaliah did to her utmost to reverse c Josh 23. 14, 15.
that Decree, and to make the promise void, but it could not be; But she made a
foul way to the Throne, and there she sat till c 2 Kin 8 56.
the appointed time.

We must return once more to Ahaziah, to gather-up one observation from his
burial, and then a short use of all. See what mischief Ahabs house and their
counsels did unto this poor King their Nephew, to whom they wished so well!
They counseled him to do wickedly, and that must needs be to his destruction;
He lived a King not a full year, then he lost himself, and his Kingdom
altogether. A dishonor follows him to the grave also, for when they had
slain him they buried him, says the Text, likely with some such honor, as
was suitable to a King; but not in Jerusalem, nor for his own sake neither; They
said, he is the Son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with all his heart,
THEREFORE THEY BVRIED 2 Cro. 22 9.
HIM.

A fair warning to all Kings and Princes, that they join not in Affinity with
Ahab; if they do, more then probable it is, that they will walk in the ways
of the house of Ahab; after their counsels to do wickedly, and that is the
ready way evermore to destruction. The ways of Ahab, and the counsels from
that wicked house did provoke the LORD exceedingly, they stirred-up the heat
of His displeasure, which did burn to the lowest Hell. Deuteronomy. 32. 22.


Jehoshaphat and his house found it so; A great example to all after him, he
joined in Affinity with Ahab, and thereby hazarded his own life, and kindled a
flame, which consumed his house, and all his posterity.

Ahaziah was his only Grandchild (as was thought) that was left of his house,
and after he was slain, the house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the
Kingdom. The ways of the house of Ahab are the same still, their counsels the
same, against the LORD and against His CHRIST, to do so wickedly: And the end
of those ways are the same, destruction to King and Kingdom: we cannot but be
well aware of that, for GOD Is, and the same Sicut Deus est semper, sic
justit^a Del sent. per, etc. Salv. l. 2. p 60.
for ever; True and Righteous are Thy ways, LORD GOD Almighty Rev. 16. 7.
: Just and True are Thy ways Thou King of Saints: and Thy judgments are made
manifest 15. 3
.

Athaliah, that had the Scepter in her hand before, steps into the Throne over
the shoes in blood now; and there she sat six years, and in the seventh the
vegeance of the LORD overtooke her, and took her away in a whirlwind, when
this 2 Chro. 22. 9.
word was doubled in her mouth, Treason, Treason, who was as foul that way, as
her hands were bloody; you will have a sight of her in the next Chapter, and no
more, and that is enough, for she was the most hated object that ever was seen
in Judah, and so she perished: so we shall read in the Story of Jehojada an
excellent man, of whom in his own place among the Good Kings.

THE ACTS OF JOASH. CHAP. V.
JOASH a good Prince, for he was under an excellent Tutour but a bad King; He
proved himself unthankefull, and so disproved all his best actions: He gave
abloody command for a bloody execution, and has a full cup of blood measured
out unto him.

IOASH had a loving and tender Nurse, Jehorams Daughter, his Aunt; and as
careful a Tutour, her 2 Chro. 24.
Husband, that honorable man Iehojadah the Priest, his Protector under GOD:
It must needs follow, that, youth so seasoned in its minority, will do
something worthy of such a Tuterage; So he did, and the first act, he took in
hand, was the reparation of Fair beginnings give fair hope, but no sound
proof of good proceedings and ending well.
the Temple ver. 4.
, fallen into decay through the wickedness of ungodly Tyrants. There was the
greatest reason in the world, that so he should do, repair the breaches
there, which Athaliah that wicked woman b, with her Sons ver 7.
, had made there, taking the dedicate things of the LORDS House, and bestowing
them upon Baalim; for the Temple, by GODS appointment, had preserved him to
make-up the many breaches made also upon the house of David: And indeed, the
King followed the business with so earnest a zeal, That, not only the Levites
were more slack then he ver. 5.
: but even Iehojada his Tutour, was feign to be quickened by his admonition ver.
6.
. He would uphold that place with the greatest zeal, which he had learnt, by
good information, had upheld him. But his zeal was fained; and the good
precepts his good guardian distilled into him, did not sink down into his he
art: they made no other impression there, but what a short time could wear
out. Iehojada, that good Counselor, dies full of days, and the people buried
him (who had preserved the race of the Kings, and restored the true Religion)
among the Kings of Judah ver. 15, 16.
.

That excellent Priest is gone from the Court to his Crown; he had the gain,
the Court and Kingdom had the loss, a loss unspekeable: for then the Princes
of Judah acted their parts, flattered their King (able enough to flatter
himself) drawed him-on to their side, who stood bent before by his own
inclination; so he hearkened unto them ver. 17.
, and left the house of the Lord, and served Idols. What then? Then wrath came
upon Judah and Jerusalem; WRATH CAME: Ai, ver. 18.
A Land-wasting wrath comes pouring down upon a King and Kingdom, when they
fall down before Idols; then wrath comes and will not spare, for it is the
wrath of the LORD, whose Glory they have given to stocks and stones. They were
served in their kind, for they served Idols; Prince and people, they all chose
new gods; Then was war in the gates; (as we heard before) and their Militia
could not keep it off: yet the Lord appointed means, which could have done
it, for he sent Prophets unto them ver. 19.
; but they would not give care: As a wayward and impatient sick-man they were
angry with the remedy, and at the Commandment of their King (who ever saw an
Idolater that was not cruel) they smote their Physician, They conspired
against GODS Messenger, and stoned him with stones ver. 21.
, What had he done? the best service that is imaginable; he contested with the
King and people (and yet not he, but the Spirit of GOD upon him) saying, why
do you stand in your own light, why go you cross to your own happiness? Why
transgress you the Commandment of ver. 20.
the LORD, that you cannot prosper? All the ways you take to thrive and
prosper in the world, is lost labor, or labor in the fire: You transgress
the Commandments of the LORD, ye cannot prosper: you have forsaken the LORD,
He has also forsaken you. This was all the good man had done; in these words
he had spoke unto the people: And they, after their manner, and lot evermore
befalling faithful Prophets, answer him with stones; They conspired against
him, and stoned him with stones, at the commandment of the King. What a King
is this! ver. 21.
The likest to the ungrateful snake, that ever was heard of: His Son is slain
at the commandment of the King, whose Father (and Mother) was the Kings Nurse
in his infancy; was his Guardian when he was young; his faithful Councellor
when he was grown up; The Son of such a Father, that had done so much for the
King, was stoned at the commandment of the King. What will not that King do,
that has left the house of the LORD GOD of his Fathers! Serves Idols! we see
by Joash what he will do; he will shed blood to his power; but that is not
all; if he can make his choice, it shall be the blood of those, who are most
faithful, and therefore must cross him in his way. Whoever saw an Idolater
that was not a most ungrateful man, to GOD and Man both! I will not add, and
cruel too, for he, that has said, VNGRATEFVLL, has said all. Note withal; A
counterfeit zeal will degenerate into the deadliest hatred; and no such enemies
to the house and Quod later in herba manifestatur in spica, etc. Chrysostom Ser. 97.
p. 342.
household of GOD, as friends once, but now turned adversaries; Such an
adversary was Joash, and the most unthankful man, that ever we read of, I
cannot except one, for his ingratitude did exceed Benhadads King of Syria:
Fight not against small or great, save only with the King of Israel 2 Chronicles 18.
30.
; this was Benhadads charge; A most unkind requital of Ahabs (foolish) pity
to him, giving him his life at an easy rate 1 King. 20. 34
. Benhadad returns that kindness with that bloody charge, touching the taking
away Ahabs life; and it was done accordingly; but according to the threat of
the LORD, because Ahab had: let Benhadad go, whom He had appointed to utter
destruction. I looked into that place to see whether it could be a parallel for
this 1 Kin. 20. 42.
man's ingratitude; but it cannot be; the like is not to be found in all the
Records of Time. Good Zechariah, and the Son of as good a Father, to whom Joash
was more beholding then to all the men in the world; and no less to his Son,
for he told him the truth, which is the greatest kindness a Prophet can do
unto a King: This true Prophet was stoned with stones ^^ the commandment of
the King, whom his Father had done such a kindness unto, saved his life and
his Crown both.

Where was he slain? In the Court of the House of the LORD. Oh! he should have
spared him there, for it was near the place, which was Ioash his sanctuary;
but when a man is resolved to do wickedly, he will make no choice of places;
or, if he does, that place pleases best, which is most before the LORD, and in
the face of the whole Congregation of Prophets, consulting about a way, and
resolving upon it, how they may establish his Crown, and make his Kingdom
sure for ever. This place pleased Ioash best, in the Court of GODS House, the
place for that great assembly. And yet it was well for Zechariah, that he was
slain there, where he had done so much service to God and His people: So he
removed with comfort enough, from one Court to another, from that on earth to
that in Heaven.

I shall be the longer upon this bloody execution, purposely, and, with the
more enlargement, That it may sparckle and flash in the face of him, or them
(for there are such snakes in the world) that would burn down that house,
which has preserved him: would consume them and their houses, who would have
kept his, not from fire only, but from smelling of the smoke: would shed the
blood of those to his power, who lay-out themselves, all they have, and all
they are, for the building-up and establishing of him and his house for ever.

We proceed, So Ioash did, so bloody was his command. How so? the Spirit of GOD
gives us the reason of that unnatural and most unkingly act; Ioash the King
remembered not the kindness, which Jehojada his Father had done unto him, but
slew his Son ver. 22.
There was never any wicked, cruel, mischievous, rebellious, Idolatrous (to
say all in one word) unthankful person in the world, but he was a forget still
person, he remembered not the kindness of the LORD (That great Benefactor) nor
the kindness of the servants of the LORD, that spoke good for him before the
LORD, and did him all the good that was Judge. 8. 34, 35.
in their power: And so, forgetting all this, he will not care how he deals
with GOD; nor how injuriously with the faithful servants of GOD. Oh that we
could consider, not only what defilement, and provocation is in sin: but also
what unkindnesse and unthankfulness against God, the fountain, that fills all
our cisternes; and if we forget this, can make holes in them, so as they shall
hold no comfort; did we remember this, we would be thankful to GOD, and not
forget the kindness of Man toward us, as Ioash did, he remembered not the
kindness which Jehojadah his Father had done to him, but slew his Son.

Not he, the people did it, and that is legible in the same place: True, and so
is this, at the commandment of the King; what the King commands he does, and
so did wrong and violence to the blood of his best servant. And what shall be
done to him now? The word indeed, is gone out against him, though a King; A man
that does violence to the blood of any Pro. 28. 17. Nemo homicidae miseretur,
Iun. Genesis 9. 6. Exodus 29. 14.
person, shall fly to the pit, let no man stay him d; That is, let no man
pity him, saying, It is a thousand pitties such a brave man should die. No, he
has shed man's blood, his blood must be shed, and quickly too; there must be no
delay, in the execution of judgment and justice, he shall flee to the pit. But
it was Ioash the King, that gave this command, and he is accountable to none
but GOD.

Well, be it so; but he finds an heavy reckoning there, he has slain the
faithful servant of GOD, the Son of Iehojada, who was his Nurse, his Father,
his Uncle, his Guardian, his Tutour, his Counselor; he was All to him, next
to GOD: and he has slain him in the Court of GODS House; The Lord has smitten
His Hand Ezekiel. 22 13.
at this, which the people have done, at the commandment of the King: And
there is a prayer put up to Heaven against Ioash the King, just at the time
this blood was shedding; The LORD look upon it, and require it ver. 22.
. The Lord is just, He will do it, He will take the matter into His own Hand;
He will reckon with Ioash for this, and speedily, for blood never continues
long upon the score. Thus it was, and so the LORD began with him, afflicting
him lightly at the first, afterward more grievously, as His manner is. We
pass over now the expedition of Hazael against Judah, when Ioash was sore
afraid, and redeemed his peace at a dear rate 2 King. 12. 18.
; We will fix our eye rather upon this; That the LORD would now over-match him
by a despicable enemy; He sent a handful of Syrians 2 Chro. 24. 24
against him (few or many is all one, if the LORD leads the Host) these made
an in-rode upon his Land, and slew the Princes of Judah: The PRINCES (mark
that) at whose persuasion the King had become a Rebel to the King of Kings;
they slew the PRINCES; they hurried and pillaged the People; notwithstanding
their MILITIA, and left the King in great diseases, to be cured thereof, by his
own merciless Vassalls, who murdered him upon his bed: So, which is
observable also, The end of his time came then upon him, then was the last
year of his Reign, when he thought himself but beginning to live as he
listed, without controlement in the exercise of mere Power: Supposing belike,
That he was no free PRINCE, unless he did what he listed; and, as long as one
durst tell him the plain truth, how great soever that man's deservings were,
that did so; yea, though GODS Commandment required it.

We will gather up some observations from hence, and then conclude; We observe,

1. That Ioash his Militia had no power. The Army of the Syrians come up, a
small company of men, and the LORD delivered a very great Host into their hand.
Was not that ver. 24.
strange? No, there is a mighty reason why it was so, because they had forsaken
the LORD GOD of their Fathers. He that forsakes God is as a man, who, in time
of war, forsakes his Rock, Castle, or strong hold, and exposes himself to the
mouth of the Cannon. This forsaking of GOD, is like the cutting of Samsons
locks, his strength goes presently from him and he becomes weak Judge. 16. 19,
. Forsake GOD, and ye forsake your strength, and become weaker then women, and
shall not do so much as wounded men. Let sinners in Sion be afraid; let
fearfullnesse surprise the Hypocrites; the Church cannot fear an Army of
Papists, though never so great an Host, for they have forsaken GOD; and are of
no power. But yet here is cause enough from this Scripture to make a revolted
Nation bethink themselves, for;

2. Here was more then a bare forsaking of GOD; here was a serving of Idols;
they provoked him with their Images and strange vanities; Then it was not
possible they could be in any better Posture of Defense now, the enemies are
entered upon them, then are so many naked men, for we have read long since,
Idols make a People NAKED Exo 32. 25.
.

3. Nor was this all, the worst is; The guilt of innocent blood lies upon the
people; they had shed it, they were instruments 2 Chronicles. 28. 19
in that horrid execution: Then in-come the Syrians upon Israel, a small
company of Rovers, intending to pillage, and away again; but finding the
doors of the Kingdom wide open (for the defense was gone) this small company
marchon Numb. 22. 4.
against Joash his huge Army, bigg enough to lick up that handful of Syrians,
as an Ox licketh up the grass; But what disaster or amazement happened
amongst the Israelites, I know not, but they had for saken GOD, and blood was
upon them, and these handful of Syrians gave the Army of Judah a notable
overthrow: So that great Host was delivered-up into their hands.

What became of Joash the King? He did not escape sure; He thought it a token
of his liberty, to despise the service of GOD, and a manifest proof of his
being King, because he could command to the block the Son of that Father, to
whom he stood most deeply engaged for singular and unrecountable benefits.
Certainly he did not escape; and so we find it in the Text; These Adversaries
executed judgment against Joash, ver. 24.
IGNOMINIOVS judgment, says the old Translation; It is evident enough, they
had him in their hands, and handled him ill-favouredly, not as Ioash the King;
but as Ioash the murderer: And being not worth the carrying away (for he was a
diseased man, and the worst luggage) they dismissed him, leaving him in sore
diseases, to be cured thereof by his merciless vassals; and they, finding him
on his bed, quickly dispatched him out of the way, and so cured him of all his
worldly ver 25.
pain. But see how GOD meated forth the punishment to Ioash the King!

1. Ioash gave commandment to slay the best servant he had in the world: his
own servants execute judgment upon Ioash, for the blood of the Sons
(whether Ioash had slain more or no, I do not well understand, but so we read,
the sons) of Jehojada the Priest.

2. Ioash slew that Prophet in the Court of GODS House: He defiled that house
with the Priests blood; now his house shall be polluted with his own blood.

3. Ioash slew him near that place of refuge, not long before Ioash his
Sanctuary, In the Court of GODS House: His Servants slay him on his bed, a
place deputed for repose and quiet rest. Have me to bed, says the wearied
sick-man, when he is tired out with pain and sorrows: yet have me to bed,
though he can but count the clock there, yet there he lies, waiting when the
LORD will command sleep for him, and give him some refreshment there. There,
on his bed, Ioash feels the hand of the murderer. Sitting in a chair (says
Austin) is a safe Posture; but we know who fell out thence, 1 Samuel 4. 18.
and brake his neck; He was indeed an old man, and heavy; but the news of the
Arc bowed him down, and brake his heart first. The Father would assure us
thereby, That Death may meet us, when and where we less look for it. I would
Aug. de Civ. 22
add this, more pertinent to this place; A Summer parlour Judge. 3. 20.
seems a safe place for repose, and quiet: And a Brothers feast 2 Samuel 13. 23.
has no show of danger; A Bed seems a safe place also, specially then, when
the Enemy is departed, and there are none about the bed, but a man's own
servants; and yet the hand of Justice has met with the sinner, in all these
places, and meeted forth unto him according to his measures. But that Ioash was
slain on his bed, certainly there the Holy Ghost has set a mark. The good
Priest thought himself safe. Where? In the Court of GODS House; and he
expected no violence to be offered him there, much less from Ioash, who found
that place his Sanctuary. Yet Ioash his hand does execution upon the Priest
there, (for he commanded it) in the Court of GODS House. Now Ioash shall have
his measures; he is lying upon his Bed; The Enemy is departed; those of his
own house, his Servants are round about him: if he can sleep, that has blood
for his pillow, he looks for it on his bed. But behold! instead of sleep, he
sees the Sword reaching to his heart. Ioash expected his own servants were
about him for another purpose; To turn him on his bed, (for he could not turn
himself, being left in great distresses) and to make it as easy for his tired
body, and wasted spirits as they could: But they are there for another purpose,
to execute GODS vengeance for the blood of the sons of Jehojada.

They, that have shed blood to their power, will not consider this, for their
heart is hardened and brawned in villainies, and now they have drunk blood;
their thirst thereof cannot be quenched. But he that is wise lays this to
heart, and stops his ear from hearing of blood, remembering by this example;
That GOD makes inquisition for blood: He finds it out and repayes it, in a full
measure, pressing down and running over: So the just GOD meeted forth his
measures to Ioash: His own Servants flew him upon his bed and he died. Then
they buried him, nothing careful in the choice of the place; They would remove
so unsightly an object from before their eyes, and find out some hole for him
in the City there about; but they were careful not to lay him in Bed with his
good Fathers. They buried him, but not in the Sepulchers of the Kings. And
Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.

THE ACTS OF AMAZIAH. CHAP. VI.
Amaziah begins well, does that which is good, but not with a good heart; He
executes Judgment and Justice; He expects strength by those, from whom the GOD
of Power is departed; and help from helpless things; So he provokes GOD;
invites and hastens his own destruction.

AMAZIAH begins well, for he did that which 2 Chro. 25. 1.
was right in the sight of the LORD. But there was one grace wanting, the chief
grace ver. 2.
of a Christian, that was SINCERITY or truth of heart, which we may call a
Christians perfection in this life; his Perfection is a striving after
perfection, in sincerity, and with an upright heart; This Sincerity the King
wanted, and that is all, which GOD accounts of; He did that which was right in
the eyes of the LORD; no fault for the matter and substance of his work. Where
was the fault then? In the manner of performance, and that is all in all with
the LORD; He did right, but not with a perfect heart. This requires our mark;
Actions may be very fair, and the heart may be foul: Actions may be strait
and right, when the heart stands crooked and perverse: Look we to our hearts,
what sincerity and truth is there: for that is greatly to be regarded; not what
I do, but with what heart I do it. What say we then to those men, who regard
neither the matter, nor manner of their work, neither what they do, nor how
they do it: Mighty Hunters before the LORD, who shed blood to their power, and
with a rage that reaches up unto Heaven: What say we to such bloody men? Not a
word; The LORD will speak unto them in His wrath, and vex them in His sore
displeasure: He will require of them, what they have done, and how they have
done it. We read on.

So soon as Amaziah felt himself strong, and his Kingdom established, He slew
those servants, that had killed the King his Father. A good beginning, in the
execution of judgment, and justice upon such murderers, that had killed the
LORDS anointed, and their Master. I may ask here, as the LORD does in another
place, Did not the Son do judgment and justice Jer. 22. 15.
? We must needs answer, he did so; he slew his servants that killed the King
his Father. It follows, Then it was well with him Jer. 22. 15.
. The note is, The ready way a King can take, to establish himself and his
Kingdom, is to seatter the wicked from his Throne, and to bring the wheel
over them: Then by the rule of contraries, To take the wicked 2 Chro. 25. 3.
by the hand; to countenance them; To delight in them, is the most compendious
way to destroy the Throne, to spread Prove. 20. 26.
confusion over it.

Amaziah does otherwise, cleares his way to his Throne, not only in point of
justice, but of wisdom and found discretion; and that must be noted; The
people might have some jealousies touching the old Kings death; he was a
diseased man, a very burden to himself: he lay languishing, his bones full of
the sins of his youth: might not the servants know their young Masters mind,
who was ready for the Crown, and they looked now upon the Sunrising, for it
was night with the Father? Amaziah now, according to the counsel of the
Heathen (but it is good counsel) will quit himself from the suspicion of
wickedness; all Israel should know, That, what ever Joash the King was, yet he
was his Father; and he honored him as a Father. All Israel should see how his
heart rose up against those bloody villains, that slew his Father, by seeing
him lift up his hand against them to cut them off from the Earth. He was now
stepping to his Throne, and sitting down there: He had had an uneasy seat of
it, had any drop of his Fathers blood bin there for his Cushion: And there
doubtless it had bin, even the blood of his Father, if he had not washed it
clean out, by cutting off such notable murderers: and so he cleared his own
Innocence, his discretion, and his Throne altogether.

And now this is not inconsiderable which follows; he waited for a Crown twenty
five years; and in all that time it appears not, That he was sick of the
Father; And he wore his Crown four years longer then he waited for it. It is
true, The beauty of his Crown withered 15. years before he died, as we shall
read anon, he might thank himself for that.

But this is it, which I would put to the consideration of any man, whether he
has not observed some remarkable blessing accompanying an obedient child, that
had this good in him, if no more, he did honor his Parents. Certainly the
experience of all ages will evidence this truth, That a dutiful child never
went away without a Blessing, nor a child stubborn, and undutifull without a
Curse.

Amaziah has cleared his Innocence and his honor at this point, and how much
he honored his Father. Nor was it possible for him to make all this clear any
other way to all Israel, but by slaying those wicked Servants, who slew their
Master. It follows.

Amaziah orders his MILITIA, gathered JUDAH together 2 Chronicles. 25. 5
, made them Captains over thousands, etc. He hired a hundred thousand mighty
men out of Israel ver. 6.
, to strengthen his MILITIA. But they could not strengthen him, for GOD WAS NOT
WITH ISRAEL ver. 7.
. We must set a mark there; It is GODS being with a people, that strengthens
them; Mighty men out of Israel, could not strengthen JUDAH, for GOD WAS NOT
WITH ISRAEL, no, NOT WITH ALL THE CHILDREN of EPHRAIM: Therefore, if Ephraim
stood with Judah, Judahs King must fall before the enemy ver. 8.
; for GOD does all; He has power to HELP AND TO CAST DOWN ver. 9.
, as the good Prophet said, and so he advised.

Note the words well before we pass them over, The LORD is not with ISRAEL,
not with ALL the children of EPHRAIM. Why not with all them? Because Ephraim
willingly walked after the Commandment. They served Devils; 2 Chronicles. 25. 7.
They humbled themselves before Calves; They liftedup their eyes and hearts to
lying vanities (as we to Crucifixes) Hos 5. 11.
therefore not with ALL the children of EPHRAIM. And therefore said the good
Prophet to the King, Take Ephraim to thee, if thou will; make thy self strong
with Ephraims Arm, if it be thy will to do it, and BE STRONG (in thy own
conceit) FOR THE BATTLE; but know, o King, GOD IS NOT WITH ISRAEL, for Israel
is slidden back, as a backsliding heifer Hos. 4. 16.
: NOT WITH ALL THE CHILDREN OF EPHRAIM; for they are joined to Idols, therefore
shall they be oppressed ver. 17.
and broken in judgment. Do not think then to strengthen thy self with a
broken arm, with those from whom GOD is departed. Remember still, That GOD, He
only, makes a people stand or fall, He has Power to help or to cast down. So
Amaziah harkening to the man of GOD, though not content to loose the hundred
Talents, separated them, to wit, the Army that was come to him out of Ephraim,
to go home again ver. 10.
. So they returned home in great anger, fell upon the Cities of Judah in the
way, smote three thousand of them, and took much spoil ver. 13.
. See how mischievous idolatrous Israel is to Judah! They are a curse to Judah,
if they stay with him; if, according to the charge, they be sent away, they
will pillage Judah, and take away much spoil. You can never come fairly off
from an idolatrous people!

Notwithstanding Amaziah, harkening to the Prophet, and dismissing those
Soldiers, is the better strengthened for the war; he led forth his people,
smites his enemies, ten thousand of them at a blow: and prevails over as many
more, carrying them away captives to the top of a Rock, and thence he broke
them to pieces ver. 11, 12.
. That was a cruel execution.

Then, returning from the flaughter, he brought the gods along with him, and
set them up to be his gods, bowed before such things, which could not deliver
their own out of his ver. 14.
hands, and so he broke himself and his Kingdom; for this the Prophet rebuked
this besotted King, and the King reproached the good Prophet, giving him a
churlish and threatening answer; Asking the Prophet, who made him a ver. 16.
Counselor; and bidding him forbear, else he should feel his hand. See how
mad this King is upon his gods! The Ier. 50. 38.
Prophet reproved him from the Lord for falling down before stocks and stones;
and he rises up against the Prophet, ready Eccles. 4. 13.
to strike him in the face. Then the Prophet forbear: and yet, he will speak
out his words; If thou art such a foolish King, that thou will no more be
admonished: it is because thou must certainly be destroyed: If thy ear be
shut against good counsel, so as it cannot enter: The judgments of GOD shall
enter, and thou shall lay thy self and thy Kingdom open unto them. As the
Prophet said, so it fell out, as the Lord had determined, and the Prophet had
threatened from His Mouth.

The threatening of the King could not make void the threatening of the LORD: but
must hasten the execution thereof, as the Prophet knew very well. Amaziah had
fallen down in his devotions before the Edomites gods, he rose as high in the
confidence of his own strength; as he had dealt foolishly like an Idolater to
provoke the LORD by his devilish worship: so he would deal as proudly too
after the manner, in provoking an enemy: he that could place help in stocks
and stones, the Edomites gods, would put trust also in the companies of men,
Cum completis iniquitatibus suis peccator quis meretur ut pereat providentia ab
eo tollitur ne peri. turus evadat. Salv. de gub. l. 6. p. 29.
for thus he does; he rings the last peale to call in judgment upon himself:
he prosecutes that way, which shall be to his destruction: he rusheth upon his
own ruin, and invites it, saying to the King of Israel (after he had taken
ADVICE from his flattering Counselors, who would flatter him, that was so
wise as to flatter himself first) come, let us see one another in the face.
The King of Israel, more out of scorn then love, bids him forbear, being no
fitter a match for him, then ver. 17.
a Thistle for a Cedar. This was a notable scorn, and sure enough Amaziah
took it so, but it was good counsel, and it had been better if the King had
taken the same. But Amaziahs ear was shut up against sound counsel, he would
not hear. ver. 20.
How so? The reason is rendered, for it came of GOD, that he might deliver them
into the hand of their enemies, because they SOVGHT AFTER the GODS of EDOM: Let
us note this; Amaziah would hearken what Idoll-gods would say unto him; he
would seek help from such despicable and helpless things, that could not wipe
the dust from their eyes; could neither see, nor hear, nor speak, nor stand,
such despicable things this besotted King sought unto, for he sought after the
gods of Edom. Therefore he should be left to his own seekings, to seek and
pursue his own destruction; And so he did, he thrust himself into his enemies
hands; This enemy carried him captive, and in triumph to the gates of
Jerusalem, forces the captive King to betray his own City; to open the gates
of the same, that his enemy, with his Army, might enter-in. When the gates were
opened, the conquering King would not enter thereby: But, the more to despise
his cowardly Brother, and the more shamefully to despite his Militia, he
caused four hundred cubits of the Wall to be thrown down; entered the City in
his Chariot (Note how a proud Adversary will insult over a despicable coward,
who had a mighty Militia now on foot; but had not an heart to use it; his
sins had taken off his spirit, and made him as a silly Dove without a heart)
through that breach, carrying the King before him in triumph over those ruins.
The Reader must mark that, and withal observe what follows; how weak that
Militia is, which has nothing more then Charets, and Horses, Men and
Ammunition to fortify the same. The King of Israel breaks all Judahs strength,
for it became as flax that was burned with fire; he sacked the house of the
LORD, and the Kings house, takes away ALL, that was precious there; then gives
the poor creature the King of Judah, his life for a prey (which he was
exceeding glad of) and then returned to Samaria, ver 2. 5.
but lived not long after. Amaziah outlived his glory fifteen years ver. 24.
, after this miserable destruction: but could not outlive his misery; that
followed him still after he did turn away from following the Lord ver. 27.
. He had Adversaries from without, these spoiled him: and from within, these
conspired ver. 27,
against him: (he that serves the Edomites gods must feel the Edomites
plagues) The King thought to outrun all; so he fled to Lachish: But judgment
was too quick for him, and overtooke him; we cannot outrun the judgments of
GOD: They sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there. You shall never read,
that an Idolater escaped out of the Hand of GOD; sooner or later His Hand finds
him out, and is heavy ver. 28.
upon him. And now being slain, he must be buried; they do him this little
honor, they brought him upon Horses and buried him. I have observed it all
along, that an Idolatrous King will have honor from his people while he lives,
or he will force it from them, as he did an Idolatrous service: but when he is
dead, he shall have no more honor then what is given to a dead Lion; such as
fitts very well that body, which, when that immortal thing was with it, did
humble its self before the gods of the Edomites, those dunghill things; They
brought him upon Horses and buried him; they cared not where; d 2 Kin, 14. 21.
for when time was, he cared not how he did dishonor his body in a voluntary
humility before the Edomites gods; They buried him; and made his Son Vzziah,
called also Azariah, King in his Room.

THE ACTS OF VZZIAH. CHAP. VII.
UZZIAH is very prosperous, so long as he hearkened to the good word of GOD,
and to the good Priests that had understanding in the visions of God.
Prosperity lifts him up; he is stout against the Lord in His own House, The
Lord meets with him there, smote him with an uncurable stroke, to the terror
of all the stout-hearted after him.

NOtwithstanding the hatred borne to Amaziah, his Son Vzziah succeeded him,
when he was 2 Chro. 26.
sixteen years old; he lived a few years a Prince, many years a King; he
reigned 52. years ver. 3.
: He builds and restores what was lost and broken down in his Fathers days;
he strengthens himself exceedingly ver 8.
; he warred, and was very victorious over the Philistines, he dismantled their
Towns, then proceeded unto the Arabians, and Amorites, brought them to pay him
Tribute ver. 6, 7, 8.
: As his victories were far more important then were the achievements of
all, that had reigned in Judah since David; so were his riches and magnificent
works equal, if not superior to any of theirs, that had been Kings between
him and Solomon. He had a Militia, even A-NON-SVCH, so fully furnished with all
provision to verses 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
complete the same, as we read, for I will not make an enumeration of
singulars; he had abundance of all we commonly call good things, to enrich his
Coffers, and to fortify his Kingdom. We have now passed over one or two
remarkeables in this Chapter, which we must recall.

Vzziah had the care of an holy man over him; an honest Priest (to a King, as a
Diamond in his Crown, the glory thereof) was not wanting to Vzziah; a great
blessing to the King and Kingdom: as the contrary, an ungodly man, a vile
counselor, a wicked Priest (though but one) is a plague to both (what are
many?) Vzziah had a good Tutour, a learned man, he had understanding in the
visions of GOD ver. 5.
: and, no doubt, took care, that the young King should understand them too:
for in the days of his good Tutour Zechariah, he sought GOD; and so long as he
sought the LORD, he was no looser, for GOD made him to prosper. That was it,
there goes the blessing; this seeking of the LORD, that made him to prosper.
Let us observe how prosperous he was; Then GOD helped him ver. 7.
, made him victorious against the Philistines, and against the Arabians: GOD
made the Ammorites fall at his foot, and present him with gifts ver. 7, 8.
. God helped him, his enemies should fall before him. He would seek the LORD;
he would advance His Name, as his good Tutour taught him; The LORD would make
him a man of renown, his Name should spread abroad, even to the entering in of
Egypt ver. 8.
.

We have read the best concerning Vzziah, prosperous still; how long? As long
as he sought the LORD GOD of his Fathers. We read no more of his prosperity,
not a word more, for we do not read that he sought the LORD; no? then we must
not look to read of his prosperity; nor what his Militia did, either for
defense or offense; just nothing; Time was when Vzziah sought the LORD, his
success was answerable, GOD made him to prosper; He helped him; He made his
Name to spread; The Priest dies, and the Kings zeal dies. But the LORD had
lifted up the poor man, and the man lifted up his heart so high, that he lost
the sight of himself, and the ground he stood upon, and of the Hand, that
helped and advanced him; he lifted up his heart, not to the Lord but against
Him, to HIS DESTRVCTION, as if he himself had done all this. Ol it is a hard
matter to be lifted up high, and yet with Mordecai to keep his station, and
return, to the GATE Host. 6. 12.
: A hard matter, to be lifted up on high in the world, with the glory of the
same, and yet to keep the heart low; he must be more then a man, that can do
this, an impossible work to this heart within us, to ascribe salvations all
unto GOD. There is a foolish, and a wretched pride, wherewith men being
transported, can ill endure to ascribe unto GOD the honor of those actions, in
which it has pleased Him to use their own industry, courage or foresight.
Therefore it is commonly seen; That they, who entering into Battle, are
careful to pray for aid from Heaven, with due acknowledgement of His power,
who is the giver of victory; when the field is won, do vaunt of their own
exploits. Man, when his mountain is strong, will be so strong, and stout, and
firm upon it, as if it could not be moved; he will cling fast to the Arm of
flesh, forgetting the Arm of the Almighty; and then his Arm prooves it self
flesh, no better, but worse, if worse can be, like an Egiptian Reed, deceives,
and pierces both together. So it was when Vzziah was strong, his heart was
lifted up to his destruction. Note this; He, that lifts up his heart, and not
to the Lord, lifts it up to some lying vanity, and so lifts it up to his
destruction; And the higher he lifts up himself, the lower will his fall be.
Then again, He that lifts up his heart, will transgress against the Lord A
proud heart will be rebellious. It follows; Then he transgressed against the
LORD his GOD; for whereas he should have maintained the Temple, the Laws and
privileges thereof, he did clean contrary, corrupted the ordinances of the
same, and did there most presumptuously. So we read on, and of nothing his
Militia did after he had done so proudly: only this we read; That the Priests
remembered their duty, when their King forgot his, and reprehended his
presumption roundly and roughly. That was enough; the rest GOD Himself
performed, as we may read, and the addition Josephus makes to the Story, not
very material, yet it may be true, and then it is very notable; That while the
King Antiq 9. chap. 11.
was in the Temple profaning the sacred work there, at the same time there
was an earthquake, which did tear down an hill, and that, rouling down,
spoiled the Kings house and his garden. The same time, the roof of the Temple
rent, and, through the cleft, a Sun-beame lighted upon his face, which was
presently leaprous. But thus far only we have assurance; That, while Vzziah was
wroth with the Priests, who withstood him (says the Text) the leaprosie rose
up in his forehead before the people, which assures us first of all;

1. That it is dangerous for a King to contend with his faithful servants,
maintaining their office, which God has entrusted them with. And;

2. That an heart, lifted up to his destruction, will venture upon some
inglorious and unhollowed actions, specially such, which strike at the Law and
worship of GOD; as our Lord-Bishops did, putting a scorn upon the Lords Day.

3. That no Militia, how completed soever, can secure any person, or his
house, when he does deal proudly against the LORD, and His House, the
established Laws and Ordinances there. And;

4. The LORD will lift-up His Hand against that man, who will lift-up his heart
against Him; and, if he will be so venterous, as to do dishonours to His
House, to His Services and Servants there, he shall bear the marks of those
dishonours to his dying day; and they shall not part with him at his grave
neither. It was just so with Vzziah, and so his Story is concluded; Vzziah the
King was a leper unto the day of his death; and, being a leper, he dwelt in a
several house, for, he was cut off from the House of the LORD; Set a mark
upon it all we, that have changed the Ordinances in GODS House, and profaned
the Laws there; he was cut off from the House of the LORD; And, so having
wasted out a miserable life with sighs and complaints, he slept with his
Fathers, and was buried with them in the same burying-place; But yet, as he
dwelt, being alive, in a several House being a LEPER: So, being dead, he must
sleep in a Bed several and apart from the bodies of other Kings, for they
said, HE IS A LEPER Chro. 26. 21 In eodem agro sed seorsim a cadavertibus
aliorum regum. Irem.
. Jotham was over the Kings house, and judged the people of the Land in his
Fathers life time; and when his Father was dead, reigned in his stead. 2 Chro.
26. 23.
Of him in his own place, amongst the Good Kings.

THE ACTS OF AHAZ. CHAP. VIII.
AHAZ. his contrary walking with GOD; and GODS contrary walking with him;
Service to strange gods procures strange punishments; It darkens the mind; It
hardens and brawnes the heart in evil; It hastens a man's pace to his utter
ruin, and destruction: of all this Ahaz is a very great and miserable example.

AHAZ, Jothams Son, and Grandchild to Vzziah, was twenty years old when he
began to reign: 1 Chronicles. 28.
such an Idolater as exceeded all his predecessors, they walked in the ways of
the Kings of Israel; so did he, but in this he exceeded, for he offered that
most unnatural, cruel and divelish oblation (called an abomination which GOD
hates Deuteronomy. 12. 31.
) even the Son of his body, for the sin of his soul; he burnt his Children in
the fire ver. 3.
. Therefore that MUCH, which his Father JOTHAM builded (whereof anon) all those
strong places could not strengthen the Son: Notwithstanding his Militia, the
King of Syria smote him; and the King of Israel smote him, both with a very
great slaughter ver. 5.
. But the King of Israel laid load upon him, the smartest blows, for he was a
neighbor, and a brother offended Pro. 18. 19.
(there the contentions will be bitter and mighty, as here, where they slew
their brethren with a rage that reached up to Heaven Chro. 28 5.
) The King of Israel slew in Judah an hundred Genesis 32. 11.
and twenty Thousand in one day, which were all valiant men 2 Chro. 28. 6.
, because they had forsaken the LORD GOD of their Fathers. There was the old
quarrel, and these Kings were the viols, through which the LORD powered down
the wrath, and avenged the quarrel of His broken Covenant Levit 26. 25.
. And mark we there, Prince and people, all forsake GOD: GOD forsakes them,
breaks down the Hedges, takes away His Destnce (that is done first) after that
He takes away peace; then one Enemy comes in, then another, breach upon breach
like the Sea; smititg upon smiting, one blow after another, and full one
smarter then the other, till all are consumed, and yet ALL VALIANT MEN.

Amongst these slain, was the Kings own Son; the Governor of his house; and
he also, that was next to the Kings ver. 7.
person: The most valiant men were slain; so were they that were nearest to the
King in love and trust. Besides all this, ver. 8.
Israel carried away captives of their Brethren two hundred thousand women,
sons and daughters with much spoil, and brought it to Samaria. ODED, a good
Prophet, speaks to ver. 9.
the Host of Samaria very well; bids them remember and consider on it; That
there were with them, even with them, sins against the LORD GOD, for which
they must look for a day of reckoning, even they, who would show no pity to
ver. 10.
their brethren in the day of their trouble, and treading down. Nay, said the
Prophet, the day of reckoning is come, or as good as come, FOR THE FIERCE WRATH
OF GOD IS UPON YOU. These words, with certain others, The heads of the children
of Ephraim, prevailed for ver. 11.
the sending-backe Judahs Captives warme-clad, and well arrayed ver 12.
with their own spoils: And all the feeble of them ver. 13.
they carried upon Asses, and brought them to Jericho. A ver. 15.
man will remember to show mercy to his Brother, when he well remembers
himself, what his own case and deservings are, and what need he may stand in
of mercy to be shown unto himself.

Thus Israel relents at the stroke he had given Judah, and shows mercy unto
him, which, doubtless, moved Ahaz very much to cease from thoughts of revenge.
But he bends himself against Rezin King of Syria, and that he may be avenged
on him, he sent to Tiglath the King of Assiria, saying, I am thy Servant (SIR)
and more also, Thy Son, Come-up and SAVE ME out of the hand of the King of
Syria. A 2 Kin. 16. 7.
strange speech, but not so strange from Ahaz, for he will, anon, ascribe
salvations to stocks and stones, much rather might he, he thought, ascribe
salvations to a man, Come up and save me: So he calls in a foreign King to
his help, who knew very well how to make profit by the troubles, that rose in
Palestina. But yet Tiglath seems not moved with a complement, Your Servant
(SIR) and your Son; If Ahaz will have him come to save him, he must bribe him
well to his advantage, and so he does, presenting him with the silver and the
gold, taken out of GODS house and his own. Silver and gold is full of
Rhetoric can persuade mightily, and make a man to hearken; so it follows,
Then Tiglath hearkened unto ver. 8.
Ahaz, for he had the treasures of Jerusalem in his hand; and, having there
with prepared his Army, he invaded the Territory of Damascus, won that City,
carried away captive the people there, and killed Rezin the King thereof, who
had so ver. 9.
smitten Judah a little before. Now Ahaz thinks his Treasure well bestowed,
for Tiglath had avenged him of his Adversary: and up Ahaz goes to Damascus to
meet Tiglath there, and to behold the ruin of that King, and his City, who had
so distressed him and all Judah (See how bloody an Idolatrous King is) he feeds
his eyes with rue-full spectacles, thinking now his chiefest enemy was taken
away, not considering, that himself was he. Ahaz being now at Damascus, saw an
Altar ver. 10.
there, falls in love with the form and fashion of it: (more gaudy then was
that of Solomon's, made by the pattern showed to Moses in the Mount) An
Idolater ever is better pleased with that Altar and Service, which he has
devised 1 Kin. 12. 33.
of his own heart, then he is with that, which the wisdom of GOD has
commanded; So is Ahaz here, as Jeroboam before him, and as all like him, much
taken with this Altar and form of it, sends a model of this excellent frame
to Vriiah the Priest, that it may be sampled in Jerusalem according to the
pattern. The Priest was as ready to make it, as the King his Master was to
worship before it: before the King was returned from Damascus, the Priest had
hoisted up an Altar, according to the pattern, and finished it. An Idolatrous
King shall not want an Idolatrous Priest: Thus did Urijah the Priest, according
to all that King Ahaz commanded. 2 King. 16. ver. 16.


Then he was an obedient Servant, you will say. No; the most unfaithful in all
the Kingdom, and the deepest in Rebellion there, next to the King his Master,
who was so stout against the LORD. This Vrijah was indeed a servant of
servants, the basest servant, and did the basest service, that is imaginable,
for he served his Masters lusts, which war against the soul, and so did the
greatest dis-service to his Master, that possibly could be done. That servant,
who obeyes his Masters commands against the command of his Master in Heaven,
(which is to obey the lusts of men) does his Master on Earth the greatest
dis-service that can be, for he helps on his Masters Rebellion against GOD,
and hastens on his Masters ruin, and with him the ruin of all the people,
committed to his Masters charge. Accursed be such unfaithful servants
evermore, that are so pliable to their Lords will, against the will and command
of their MASTER in Heaven; Vrijah did as King Ahaz commanded. Oh well had it
been with the King, if the Priest had disobeyed his Master at that point, for
then he had done as GOD had commanded; but the Priest did as the King
commanded, made an Altar according to the pattern, sent from Damascus, reared
up this strange pile, then thrust it up between GODS Altar and the Temple,
gives it an apparent precedence, saying, in his heart, Let the GOD of JUDAH
come behind the gods of Syria; Then this Idolatrous King lays down his
Scepter, and takes up the Censer, and sacrifices on his new Altar to his new
gods, the gods of Damascus. Why will he do so? He gives us his reason for
that, Because the gods of the Kings of Syria help them. See 2 Chro. 28. 23.
I pray you, the King speaks as a man quite forsaken of his wits! His
abominable Idolatries have taken away his understanding and his sense too,
HELP THEM, said he I Did the gods of the Kings of Syria help them? His eyes
told him, if he could have seen, that they were the ruin of Damascus, and of
the King there; yet, says he, I will sacrifice to the gods of Damascus, that
they may help me. Now we must enquire what need he stood in of help; and how
these new gods helped him.

But first we may observe, That the fashion and manner of worship, which GOD
prescribed Ahaz, does not please him; he will have a way of his own, something
like to that GOD commanded: So he fashioned an Altar, and paterned it. Mark we
now, how GOD paternes him in judgment; a very like ruin shall now befall him,
as had befallen Damascus, whence he took his pattern; and so we shall see
what need he stands in of help. Ahaz brought new gods with him to Jerusalem:
What follows? War was in his gates. He was distressed on every side, the
LORD, against Whom he rebelled mightily, powered down wrath upon him, through
this violl, and through that, both on the right hand, and on the left. As
Israel and Aram vexed him on the North; So the Edomites and the Philistines,
ever more attending the ruin of Judea, entered upon 2 Chro. 28. 17, 18.
his Country from the South, smit Judah, carried away captives, invaded their
Cities, and dwelt there: To whom then should Ahaz have looked in the day of
such distress, when viols of wrath were emptied upon him from every quarter?
That is easy answered; To the GOD of Salvations, yea unto the GOD of
desolations also, for those He makes in the Earth Psalm 46. 8.
, men are but His viols, but rods and swords, and battle Axes in His hand Esa.
10. 5.
: Surely says the LORD Himself Zeph. 3. 7.
(therefore we will hearken) Thou will hear me now, now Thou will receive
instructions. Why now? Because now He has cutoff Nations; Their Towers are
desolate, their Streets waste, their Cities destroyed, their Kings slain, now
Thou will fear me, now Thou will receive instruction; surely it is meet to be
said unto GOD, I have borne chastisement, and I will not offend any more Job
34. 31, 32
; That which I see not, teach thou me; If I have done iniquity, I will do no
more. Surely now in distress, Ahaz will say, (for it is the voice of Nature) O
GOD help me. Should not a people seek unto their GOD? Ahaz does not so; he
will purchase the help of Tiglath King of Syria again with the sacrilegious
pillage of the house of 2 Kin. 16. 17, 18
GOD. Tiglath had helped Ahaz (for so the Scriptures are reconciled) in his
first onset; he had smote Damascus, and slain Rezin the King there; and so
had served Ahaz his turn for that present, and satisfied his thirst of
Revenge. Now Tiglath will serve his own turn, he will not return back
again, but follows his victory to satisfy his own thirst of enlarging his
Dominions; he possesses himself of all Basan, and all the rest beyond Jordan,
which belonged to the Tribes of Reuben, Gad and Manasseh; and then, passing the
River, he invades the Kingdom of Israel, makes them his vassals: And now he is
within Judah, and possessed of a great part there. So Tiglath came to Ahaz
indeed (invited with treasures and a fair prospect of all Canaan besides) He
came unto him, says the Text: And what good did he do him? None at all, but
hurt rather, and DISTRESSED HIM, but 2 Chronicles. 28. 20
STRENGTHENED HIM NOT.

Now Ahaz is in distress, what will he do now? he sees that man is a vain
thing, there is no trusting him; he hoped he would help him, and he has
distressed him. What does he now? Worse and worse, In the time of his distress
he did trespass yet more against the LORD. He was made most miserable, and yet
he remained most wicked, he lost the fruit of all his sore afflictions. Though
he was environed, though his way was hedged Aug. de l. 1. c. 33 Vos neque
contriti ab host, etc. perdidist is utilitatem calamitatis and miserrimi facti
est is and pessimi permansist is.
with thorns round about, yet, like a wild Ass used to the wilderness, he
brake loose and traversed his way; even in his month they could not find him
Jer. 2. 24.
; Though he was fast cooped up in GODS fetters, as with the northern iron and
brass, yet he thought to escape by his own wisdom 2 Chro. 28. 21.
; Ashur would save him, he thought he could ride upon horses Hos. 19. 3.
, therefore his persecutours were swift. Certainly (for the sacred Scriptures
set acertaine note upon him) never was any King more mad upon his Idols, nor
did any King before him, blunder on so against the Angel, and upon the drawn
Sword, as he did; so went looking forward and backward, on this side, and on
that, but the Angel crossed him every way, and yet he went on.

This was King Ahaz. But, whether went he? For the living to the dead: Ahaz had
said before to the King of Syria, Come up and Esa. 8. 19.
SAVE ME. Now he says as much to stocks and stones, Arise and HELP ME; He
sacrificed to the gods of Damascus (which smote him) and he said, THEY MAY
HELP ME. Did they help him? Yes, after their manner, as such gods use to do;
they helped-on an utter desolation; they helped to bring Judah low, to make the
Land 2 Chro. 28. 19.
and her King NAKED. And then having exposed Ahaz and his Land, as a naked man,
to the rage and fury of Adversaries, they were the Ruin of him, and of all
Israel. Some things must be observed from this Story of Ahaz by way of Caution
first; and then for Instruction, here is a great deal; for Caution first;

1. Be well aware, whether high or low, great or small, be we aware, That we
set not our foot in an Idolatrous way; if we do, likely it is we will walk
therein, stand in it, and then sit down there; having made an entrance, we
cannot tell where we shall stay. It were worth the noting, if here were time
and place to set it down, the pedigree of Idols, and then the rise of
Idolatrous services. In one word, the Idolater began with the offering a grain
of incense at the first. What Error minimus in principio fit maximus in fine
Not. Con.
did he offer at the last? The son of his body, for the sin of his soul.
Ahaz himself is a great example of all this; He walked in the ways of the
Kings of Israel: he made also molten Images 2 Chro. 28. 2.
for Baalim: Moreover he burnt Incense in the valley. The ver. 3.
Calves of Jeroboam drew him on to the gods of the Heathen, and now Bulls and
Goats are too little for his new gods, his own flesh and blood is but dear
enough! He that burnt Incense but now, now burns his Children in the fire.
When a man has ver. 3.
set footing in an ill way, he knows not where he shall stop. And,

2. Beware we set not up an Altar, which GOD commands not, though it be but
one, and we can make it a gaudy one, and pattern it, as near as can be to
GODS Altar; yet beware of this one, for this one will draw on a second, and a
second a third. Ahaz is a great example here also; he set up an Altar in the
holy place; Did he cease there? No; Now he gathers all his precious things
together, and all to make and adorn his Altars; he made him Altars in every
corner of Jerusalem; nor ver. 24.
there only, but in every several City of Judah; he made high places to burn
Incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the LORD ver. 25.
GOD of his Fathers. And,

3. Beware we shut not up the eye, against the light. Of all the Creatures GOD
has created, it is not safe to play with the light. I have read of one, who
would not be beholding to the Sun, for it is light to walk, or to work by;
he would close up his eyes and put a cover over. At length he be thought
himself, and was content to see the light, and to take benefit from it; but he
had covered his eyes so long, that, taking off the cover, he found his eye in
the same place, but the sight was gone: He had dallied with light too long. It
is excellent which Augustine says; what good do thou to the fountain, Aug.
10. 5.
when thou drinkest of it? Thou art refreshed from it, and that is thy benefit:
So also, from the fountain of light, thou see by it, thou may walk and
work by it, and that is thy benefit: Be not proud then, do not shut thine eye
against the light; though it be but the light of nature, yet let it in, and
make we much of it, then GOD will entrust us with a greater light; He that is
faithful in a little shall be Ruler over much; but he that improveth not his
little, shall have that taken from him, which he has neglected, or not
improved to his own good, and the glory of the giver. Ahaz is a great example
of this also; he played with light, he thrust it from him; he would not take the
benefit of that common light, which, as a common dole, the LORD gives out to
every man. He put confidence in man, Come, said he, and save me; then in stocks
and stones, abominable Idols, saying, these may help me; he trusted in them.
How then? Then he had eyes and saw not; an heart but understood not; as a silly
Dove without an heart, he was as senseless as the stocks he trusted in; They
that make them are like unto them: So is every one that trusts in them. Psa.
135. 18.
Then, from that time, he sought help from those despicable things, to the day
of his death, he walked in the world, as a man in a Dungeon, groping his way,
as in the thickest darkness. So much in way of Caution; now we must receive
Counsel hence, and sound Instruction. First, That;

Strange gods will blind a King strangely; they will degrade 1.
a man, they take away his Excellency and Crown, his understanding, judgment,
reason, nay his sense also, and leave him in the dark: So as he shall blunder
on in the face of the Angel, and his drawn Sword, to his own destruction,
and to the ruin of his Kingdom. And secondly, That

Idolatry, which is an humbling a man's self before dumb 2.
Idols, is a sore transgression against the LORD, and brings sore judgments
upon a Land, puts it into a forlorn and helpelesse condition; from out of the
KINGS protection, so as no person nor thing can be a cover unto it, whereby to
hide it is filthy nakedness; It brings a Nation low, and makes a people naked.
And thirdly; That,

The whole Host of Heaven and Earth will be our Enemies, till we make GOD our
friend. The King of Israel 3.
said well; if the LORD do not help, neither person, nor any thing can do us
any good. And GOD never 2 Kin. 6. 27.
helps them, who expect help from persons and things, which GOD has cursed.
And fourthly, That,

Wherein we put confidence, whether person or thing, will do us all the
mischief, and so avenge the quarrel of GODS 4.
Covenant. It was so here; Tiglath, from whom Ahaz expected salvation,
distressed him: Israel was a scourage to Judah; Assiria a Scorpion to Israel
and Judah both: but the gods of Damascus, which he thought would help him,
were the ruin of him, and of all Judah.

5. A heart hardened in sin, especially brawned in the sin of Idolatry, is
seldom wrought upon, either by mercies or 5.
miseries; though the mercies be exceeding abundant and sweet, and the miseries
exceeding bitter and sharp. Ahaz was wooed, allured and tried both ways, yet
he continued as hard as a Rock, This is King Ahaz. In the time of his
distress, in that considering time, he considered not, but blundred on, and
trespassed yet more against the LORD. Therefore there is a mark set upon him,
This is that King Ahaz, for he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, he turned
himself to them; from the living GOD to stocks and stones, which smote him,
yet he said, they may help me; This is that King Ahaz; we learn also hence.

6. That stripes and sore strokes will not make a fool wise. No, though thou
should bray him in a mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his
foolishness depart from him. Pro 27. 22.
Afflictions, tribulations may break the bones, and the spirits, and the heart
too with worldly sorrow; but the strokes must be sanctified, else they will
not supple this rocky thing; they will not break the heart with a godly
sorrow. Ahaz had blows enough; because of his transgression, The Lord
delivered him into the hand of the King of Syria, and they smote him; and into
the hand of the King of Israel, and he smote him with a great slaughter; The
Edomites, they smote him, so did the Philistines; he was smitten before and
behind, and on every side; he had blows enough, but they did him no good; his
heart was gone after his Idols, and joined to them, then nothing can do him
any good, for he, that is joined to Idols, is departed from GOD. We learn also
hence, That

8. A man can harden his own heart, and does so daily; he can lie in the grave
of sin, and roll a stone over that grave; that he can do, he can increase
the rockinesse of his heart; he cannot soften it, do he what he can. And that
he must do, he must use the means for the softening of the heart, which GOD
affords unto him. But all is made effectually by the good Hand of GOD unto him,
Who speaks and draws too, for He speaks with a strong hand. The conclusion
is; man is as dead as a door nail to his own conversion; he can no more raise
himself from the death of sin, then a dead man can raise himself from the
grave of his corruption; But GODS voice he can hear; for that is a creating
voice, that called Lazarus out of the grave; and that voice he can hear. We
must take one note more from the Retaliation of the LORD, for that is
remarkable in the pouring out of wrath upon Ahaz.

9. Ahaz sacrificed his Childeren to Molech in the fire, so he 2 Chronicles 28. 30.
took the Children, whom GOD had given him, and offers them up to that
abomination. The LORD will be avenged on him for that; He will give-up one of
his Sons, the stoutest of them, and with him, his chief servant and
favorite also, unto the Sword of his enemy; And Zichri a mighty man of Ephraim
slew MAASEJAH the Kings Son; And AZRIKAM 2 Cro. 18. 7.
the governor of the house, and ELKANAH that was next to the King. Ahaz said
to a man, come and save me. That Man came for his own advantage, distressed
him, but strengthened him not. He sought help from the gods of Damascus: These
smote him, struck out his eye, and took away his heart, were the ruin of him
and of all Israel. So ends the Story of his life; A dishonor follows him to
the grave; how little the people regarded him appears at his death; Ahaz slept
with his Fathers, but not in the same room with them; he was too bad a Son
to rest at night where his good Father lay a sleep: he had brought Judah low;
he had made Judah naked; he had transgressed sore against the LORD; Therefore
they denied him room in the Sepulchers of the Kings; They buried him in the
City, even in Jerusalem, but they brought him not into the Sepulchers of the
Kings of Israel, and Hezekiah his Son reigned in his stead.

We shall read much of his Goodness, in his place, the ver. 27.
next Section, there also of Manasseh a great sinner, but greatly humbled: he
began very ill, but ended wondrously well: he obtained mercy, that in him the
Lord CHRIST (for He was the same yesterday) might show forth, as to his servant
Paul, all long-suffering for a pattern to them, who should hereafter repent,
and believe on Him to life everlasting: But of him, after his Father and his
Goodness. Amon follows here; after 1 Timothy 1. 16.
him, excellent Josiah, in his place; Then a continued succession of wicked
Kings, and a miserable destruction: For Judah half had changed her God, and
she has a change of Kings, one quickly after another; quickly-up, and as
quickly-downe, till they and their Kingdom fell to pieces. The supporter of
the Throne was gone; and they had so heated their seat with their abominable
Idolatries, that quickly after they were sat down in it, they were consumed
with the heat of Gods displeasure.

That I may conclude this section with the more profit, we will look back as
far as to King Solomon, thence recollect the Story, that we may take a short
view of the ways of Israel, and thereby amend our own.

Thus it was. King Solomon in his declining years, declined the true worship
of God: Rehoboam followes-on in the last ways of Solomon, like his Father in
every thing, except the best things, his Wisdom and Repentance; For he doted
upon Idols, joined himself to them, and so rent from himself the greatest
half of his Kingdom. Abijah his Son was wiser, not much better. Asa sets all
to rights again, and has a good Jehoshaphat: He has a bad Jehoram, he walked
in the ways of Ahab, for he had taken the Daughter of Ahab to wife, a wicked
woman, she poisoned her Husbands posterity; their wickedness is propagated to
their Son, and their Sons Son. Unthankful Joash (we need say no more) has
almost as bad an Amaziah, and he an Vzziah. Then there is a good descent in
Jotham, and that is from above; Goodness is not propagated, wickedness is,
for Jotham has an Ahaz: there we are, but I go on; Then there is a descent
from Heaven again; Ahaz has an Hezekiah. Then there is a natural descent
again, Hezekiah has a Manasseh; And the natural descent goes-on, for
Manasseh has an Amon, (he continues the Story:) Then the descent from Heaven,
for Amon has a Josiah. And after him the natural descent holds till all was
broken to pieces. Thus in the Throne of Judah, there was a succession and
interchange of Good and evil: Evil Princes succeed to good, for the exercise
of the Church: And good succeed to evil, for her comfort. And thus the Wise
GOD orders it, that the Church may not look for her Heaven here; but in the
World affliction. Here the Church is afflicted and tossed with tempests, and so
she is spoken Esa. 54. 11.
unto and comforted, with an expectation of an interrupted peace, for a time,
even here below: but of rest for ever in Heaven. We went purposely back to take
a view of Judah's ways, and the rise of her Idolatries; and in short thus we
read; These abominable services were first countenanced in Judah; then
practiced by Judah; after that forced upon Judah, then took fast rooting
there. We shall now reade-on, and this conclusion quickly cleared unto us; That
where Idolatry is rooted-into a Kingdom, it will not be rooted-out till that
Kingdom be rooted out: so it follows.

THE ACTS OF FIVE KINGS. CHAP. IX.
Five other Kings of Judah, as bad as the former, did as ill, and fared as ill
as they; walking after their own counsels, in their own way, to the utter ruin
of themsolves, and the Kingdom.

FIve other Kings of Judah yet remain, which I will but Name, as exemplary for
wickedness and judgment as the former 1. Amon 2 Chro. 33. 12.
, Son of Manasseh, who did evil as his Father did, but was not humbled for it
as his Father was ver. 2^.
: he trespassed more and more, so his reign was short, but two years; then
his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own house.

2. Jehoahaz the Son of Josiah, is made King instead of so lamented a Father:
his reign is very short, but three Months; 2 Chr. 36. 2.
then the King of Egypt deposed him, condemned the Land in an hundred Talents
of Silver, and a Talent of Gold, and made ver. 3.
Eliakim his Brother King over Judah; turned his Name to Jehojakim, ver. 4.
and took Jehoahaz his Brother, and carried him into Egypt.

3. Jehojakim reigned eleven years, did that which was ver. 5. ver 8.
evil, after the abominations of his Fathers: then the King of 2 King. 24. 1.
This was he that cut the R^ll, and then cast it into the fire. Jer. 36. 23.
Babylon came up, distressed Jehojakim, and he became his servant three years;
Then he turned and rebelled against him; broke covenant with the King of
Babell, (which he should not have done, though an Heathen King.)

But see the retaliation of the Lord! Jehojakim, like the man possessed with a
Devil, as those in our days, infamous this way all over the world, breaks
the band of his covenant; That band, though the greatest binder on earth,
cannot bind him; he breaks that sacred band, the Oath of GOD. Does he carry it
away so? does he escape? I pray you mark what follows, and resolve your
self, He shall have bands enough, which shall hold him fast, and break him
too, that will break such sacred bands; It follows, the LORD sent against him
BANDS of the Chaldees, and BANDS of the SYRIANS, and BANDS of the Moabites, and
BANDS of the children of Ammon. Look you there! The Band of a Covenant could
not hold him; these 2 Chronicles. 36.
Bands held him fast. But Nebuchadnezzars Bands were the strongest, they bound
him in fetters to carry him to Babylon; But his burden of sorrow was too heavy
for him, so as his spirits fainted under it, and died in the way; was Buried
with the burial of an Ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem
Ier. 22. 19. Non autem eo usque dedactus est, sed in itinere moriuus. Irem.
. 2 Chro. 26. 6.


The Acts of Iehojakim, and his abominations, that he did, and that which was
found in him, are written in the Books of the ver. 8.
Kings, but more fully by Jeremiah in the forementioned place. Chap. 22. 17.
18.


4. And Jehojachin his Son reigned in his stead, a very short time, three
Months and ten Days; In that time, he did that, which was evil in the sight
of the LORD; And when the year 2 Chro. 36. 9, 10.
was expired, the King of Babylon sent and brought up the young King in iron
bands to him; His attendance thither shall add to his misery; for the Kings
Mother, and his Wives, his 2 King. 24. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Servants, his Princes, his Officers, all the mighty men of valor (none
remained save the poorest sort of the people) accompany him, manacled and
chained, to their perpetual bondage.

5. The King of Babylon made Mattaniah his Fathers Brother, 2 Kin 24. 17.
changing his Name to Zedekiah, King in his stead; taking an Oath of him, That
he should be Tributary and servant 2 Chro. 36. 13.
unto him. Zedekiah considering not (though Jeremiah had put it upon his
thoughts again and again) That he had bound Ier. 27.
himself with the Oath of GOD; he also rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, 2
Chro. 36. 13.
who had made him swear by GOD; he stifned his neck, and hardened his heart
from turning to the LORD, and rebelled against the King of Babylon, to whom he
had sworn obedience. He shall pay dear for this breach of covenant; (Mark
that) An Iron yoke is put upon his neck, and his stiff neck is made to bow to
it; he is brought before Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, where his eyes shall
behold the slaughtering his Sons before him; then those lights are put out,
after they had let in that sight, which would never go out, till his spirits
went-out; so he is left in the dark, to contemplate in his saddest thoughts,
the saddest spectacle, that ever Father looked upon. And it is the complement
of his misery there: That, though his eyes are out, yet he cannot but behold
that woeful slaughter in the dark. No more sorrow can come in by the windows
of his body; more shall come-in at his doors; he hears that, which will make
his ears tingle; That Jerusalem is taken, and Judah cast out from the presence
2 King 24. 20.
of the LORD. 2 Chro. 36. 17.


We can proceed no farther; we are come to the utmost of evils; a casting out
from the presence of the LORD: It is next to the casting into Hell, the very
suburbs, the brim of that bottomless pit. And who is cast out I pray you?
Judah. Give us leave to ask one question more; Why was Judah cast-out;
wherefore did the LORD do so and so unto Judah? The Nations asked this
question some thousand years ago, and where they asked, there they have an
Answer given them, which will satisfy all the world. I profess Deuteronomy. 29 24,
25, 26, 27, 28.
unto you, we had need stand still indeed, and cause enough to stand astonished.
If we read on, we must read a miserable destruction by fire, sword and
captivity. O terrible example of vengeance on that City, which GOD had chosen
to set His Name there! How is it become like one of us, might the Heathen say,
even like the Cities, which God overthrew Ier. 10. 16.
and repented not. It was so, because they sinned worse then the Heathen, when
Judah humbled themselves before Devils, stocks and stones.

This was a City, the Lord had chosen for Himself out of all the world: All
the world were witnesses of their favors, their miraculous deliverances and
protections: All the world should be witnesses, and stand astonished at their
just confusion. Her sister Samaria was not mentioned by her mouth in the day of
her pride: Her Kings also would walk in the ways of the house Ezech. 16. 56.
of Ahab, and after their counsels, to provoke the LORD. Therefore the LORD
has done to her as He threatened; I will stretch over Jerusalem, etc. And now
we have a great 2 King. 21. 13, 14, 15.
example of wrath before our eye, and it strikes sadly to our hearts; that we
may hear and fear, and do no more so presumptuously. If after such a
destruction as this, and beholding of it with our eyes, we do as Judah did,
how great and swift will our judgment be!

The end must answer the beginning; The ways of Israel, and the counsels of
the house of Ahab, were to the destruction of Judah. He that sowes the wind,
reapes the whirlwind. We cannot gather grapes of thorns or figgs of
thistles. Prove. 11. 19.
As Righteousness tends to life: so he that pursues evil, pursues it to
his own death.

The Copy being somewhat scattered, this was omitted which should have been
inserted, page 82. line 32.
Then there was an hot contention; The King striving with the Priests, they
with their King. What incivility is this? Was not Vzziah King? why might not he
meddle with the Priests office? He will do the Priests an honor, if they will
see it; he will stoop so much below his Crown as to take then Censer into his
hand. But if the Priests will not take it for an honor, yet they must not take
it for a wrong; Vzziah was King, he took the Censer into his hand, he might
have taken away their Censer, their Sacrifice, and Sabbath, and all, and have
bidden the people go dance the while, for he was King, and might take the
liberty of a King, so he was persuaded.

He is answered; for God has made answer to him by Himself, as in such cases,
concerning His worship, He uses to do; The Priests had done Ezech. 14.
enough at that time, etc.

FINIS.

