SEVEN SERMONS, PREACHED UPON Several Occasions.

VIZ. 1 The Christians Prayer for the Churches Peace. One Sermon on Psalm.
122.6. 2 One Sermon on 1 Samuel 2.30 3 BARUCHS Sore gently opened; GODS Salve
skilfully applied. In two Sermons on Jeremy 45.5. 4 The Araignement of
Coveteousnesse. In three Sermons on Luke 12. 15.


By JOHN STOUGHTON, Doctor in Divinity, late of Aldermanburie, London.

LONDON, Printed by J.D. for John Bellamie, and Ralph Smith, and are to be sold
at their Shop, at the three Golden-Lyons in Cornhill near the Royall-Exchange.
1640.

THE CHRISTIANS PRAYER FOR THE CHVRCHES PEACE.

OR, A SERMON UPON PSALM. 122. ver. 6.

Preached at Mercers Chapel.

By JOHN STOVOHTON. Doctor in Divinity, late of Aldermanbury, London.

PSALM. 137. 5. If I forget thee oh Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning, etc.

Vult Deus rogari, vult quadom importunitate vinci bona hac violentia est, qua
Deus non offenditur sed placatur: Gregori: in sext. Psalm. Poenitent.

LONDON. Printed by John Dawson, for John Bellamie, and Ralph Smith, and are to
be sold at their shop, at the three golden Lions in Cormbill near the Royal
Exchange, 1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Robert Earl of Warwick^.
THE widow of the deceased Author in Testimony of her humble and thankful
acknowledgement of the respect showed to her Dearest Husband, presents these
ensuing Sermons.

A Methodicall Analysis of the principal things contained in the Sermon upon
the 122. Psalm. 6. verse. as it was perfected by the Author, and left written
with his own hand.
1. Context. 1 Tryumphant joy concerning the Churches, 1 Portion, 2 Chief
perfection.
1 Sublimity. Torrent of affection, r, ^. ver. 2 Solidity. Fountain of Reason,
2. ver.
1 the beauty of it, 2 His propriety in it,
1 It is the place of Gods Worship. 2 There is the company of Saints.
2 Ardens desire. 1 Torrent of affection, 1 Precepts for prayer, 6. ver. 2
Prescript forms, ver. 7.
2 Fountain of Reason, for 1 Brethren, 8. verse. 2 Father, the house of our
God, verse. 9.


2. Text. 1 Amandate, 2 A motive.

Observation. It is the duty of all Christians to pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, and to provoke others to do the like: and all their own good
depends upon it.

1. Explication. 1 Proposition. 1 For whom: Jerusalem. 1 Inclusively. 1
Mystical either 1 general the Church True. Vulversal
2 special: the members Natural. morenoble
3 Singular.

2 Literal.
2 Exclusively. 1 Our own Church. 2 Principals in it Cities. Universities

What: Place. in 1 General Latitude. 1 Protection Preservation, Liberation.
2 Perfection Restoration, Purgation.
3 Propagation to 1 Insidels, Heret^cks.

2 Speceall propriety. Peace, with the Lord, Cities, En^mies.

3 How 1 Sct: to 1 Pray, 2 Ex^ite. 1 Endeavors, 1 Councels, 2 Aides.
2 Wishes.

2 Manner: with 1 Sincerity, 2 Zeal, 3 Constancy.

4 Who: the Christian 1 True, All: of what Station s^ever. Magistrate, subject
Minister, people.
2 Condition. Learned, unlearned Man, woman.



2 Probation. 1. Scripture. 1 Testimonies, 2 Examples.
2 Nature of 1. Jerusalem, the 1 Spouse of Christ. 2 Mother of Christians
2. Peace: The sum of blessings. 1 Mother of Prosperity, 2 Nurse of Pi^ti^.
3. Prayer, 1. Efficacy, 2. Necessity. 1 God rules the world, 2 Prayer God,
for 1 Peace, 2 Jerusalem.


4. Christian. Who is a debtor of all these duties, as he is a 1 Son of 1
Jerusalem, 2 Peace, 3 Prayer.
2 Lord, and so able.



2. Appl^^ation. 1. Convi^tion. Reprehension of 1 Evil doers, 2 Doers of
impertinent things, 3 Doers of nothing. Such as are 1 Not for Jerusalem, but
Babell. 2 Not for peace, but destruction. 3 Not importune heaven, but council
^^ell.

2. Examination. 3. Exhortation.

1 Duties. 1 Act (...) 1 Gen^rall, pray in 1 Faith, 2 Ch^^^tie, 3 ^^pentane^
2 Speci^ll.
1 Pray for Jerusalem. 1 Prosperiti^i^ 1 Protection, 1 Conservation, 2
Liberation.
2 Perfection, 1 P^^gation, 2 Re^^^uration.
3 Pr^v^^^^^^ 1 Gentiles, 2 (...)

2 Peace with 1 Ene^^^^, 2 City^s, 3 (...).

2 Excite others 1 All in^^^^^ly, either by Studies. 1 Councels, 2 Helps.
Wishes.
2 (...)

2 M^^^^r. by 1 Strong faith, 2 (...) 3 Fruitful (...) 4. Instancy. Prayer,
(...) 1 Intention of desire. 2 Vigor of zeal in the wishes of 1 All singular,
2 All conjoined.

5. Constancy.

2 Helps. 1 MM^^^^s. 1 Depose carnal security, 2 Lay things to heart, 3 Take
heed of the world.
2 Motives. 1 Texeuall. in 1. Command* 1 God requires it, 2 Godly ex^^^^^^ 3
The Church inju^^^^^^,
2 Motive 1 Necessity of L^^^^, 2 Society of L^^^^ 3 Community of Honor 1
Certain^ 2 to the (...)


2 Additionall. 1 A ^^ighty matter is agitated, 1 The Church of God, 2
Sy^agog^ue of Satan.
2 Our own good is agitated. 1 Communion of good, 2 Contagion of evil.
3 Article of time is instan^. 1 (...); infirm for Weapons, Courage.
2 En^^^^s (...); Proud of 1 Aides, 2 Policies.

4 Success of work incites. 1 From certain promise made, 2 Joyful from duty
performed.
Ornament of prayer invites. 1 Smallest impense, 2 Greatest compensation, 3
Fonlest offense. 1 Perfidiousnesse, 2 Ign^mie.





THE CHRISTIANS PRAYER FOR THE CHVRCHES PEACE.
PSALM. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prossper that love
thee.

Or as some translations read it:

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love thee.


THE whole Psalm breaths nothing but a sweet perfume of inflamed
affections: to God, and to Jerusalem: such as that only bird, the dying
Phoenix, lying in her bed of spices (all the spices of Arabia) and fired with
the pure beams of the Sun, cannot parallel.

The only Parallel may be the Angel in Revel. chap. 8. verse 3. Having a
golden censer in his hand, and much odours given unto him, to offer with the
prayers of all Saints, upon the golden altar before the Throne.

That which the ancient legends report of Jgnatius, that when he was dead, the
name of Jesus was found written in his heart in golden Characters. And that
which our modern stories relate of Queen Mary: that she should say, if they
did open her when she was dead; they should find Callis lying at her heart:
the loss (it seems) of which hastened her end.

These may be, nay are truly verified in David here. In whose heart you may
see the love God, and of the Church of God; deeply engraven in legible and
indelable characters. For we have here a double torrent of living affections,
each of them fed with a double spring of Reason.

affection of Triumphant joy, and delight; in the apprehension of the perfect
beauty of the Church, and his part and propriety in it. Not long ago (one
psalm only between) his soul was withered within his breast, as the water
trees in the Drought, as it were blasted with the sad thoughts of his
banishment: Woe is me that I dwell in Mese^h, that my habitation is in the
tents of Kedar: but now his joy flourishes again, in the thoughts of an
approaching return: reviueing (as it were) like a dry tree, by the sent of Job
14. 8. 9.
the waters, (as Job speaks) and breaking forth into this extacy of divine
affections, (in the beginning of the Psalm.) I was glad when they said unto
me, let us go into the house of the Lord: our feet shall stand within thy
gates, O Jerusalem.

spring of reason, that fed this strong affection in him: are those Two, that
the Philosophers give, as the just cause of all good affections:

There are two things, that make us love any thing:

1. The beauty of it. 2. The propriety of it.

Jerusalem is built as a City compact together. How ever other men's eyes looked
scornefully upon Jerusalem: as having no beauty, nor comlines in it: yet the
godly man sees, (of all the societies in the world) no such beauty, as in the
Church of God.

his propriety he has in it, or the relation in which he stands to it,
which is Double, 1. Jerusalem (in the fourth verse) is the place of Gods
worship, whether the Tribes go up: the Tribes of the Lord, to the testimony,
to praise the Name of the Lord. There was the beauty, because there was the
worship of God, the fountain of all beauty. And there is his second relation,
and propriety, in that there was the company of all the Saints of God; there
he set thrones for the house of David.

Jerusalem, beginning in the verse that I have read. And this ardent desire
breaks forth, and expresses it self in a double stream. We have.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

prescript form of prayer, for peace in the next verse: Peace be within thy
walls, and prosperity within thy palluces.

springs of reason, that feed this loving affection of desire, and makes it in
continual motion, are answerable to the former.

He looks upon Jerusalem, in the double relation mentioned before. 1 For my
Brethren and companions sake, I will now say, Peace be unto thee. There is the
first relation.

For the house of our God, I will procure thy good, in the last verse.

And so I have given you in brief the whole sum of the Psalm.

But to return to the verse: There be two things observable in it.

A Mandate, and

A Motive.

The Mandate: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

The Motive, to put us upon it: They shall prosper that love thee.

In either of these, there may be 3. things observable:

There cannot be a better employment for Christians then Prayer. Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem.

we cannot aim at a better blessing in Prayer, then Peace. Pray for the peace
of Jerusalem.

There is not a nearer relation we have to any, for whom we should wish all
good, then to Jerusalem, pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

This is the direct gradation of the verse, but I shall handle it in a
retrogradation: beginning at the last.

The nearest relation a Christian has to any for whom he should wish all good,
is to Jerusalem, pray for Jerusalem.

greatest blessing is Peace, pray for the peace.

The most effectual means to gain peace is, Prayer. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem.

There be as many things observable in the second branch of the text. The
motive, that is used. Let them prosper that love thee.

we cannot but pray for Jerusalem, if we love her, it is an argument we love
not the Church of God, and the honor of God; if we will not do so much as set
forward her peace by prayer.

Let them prosper that love thee.

Our praying for the Church, gives us a share in all the Churches prayers, we
have a venture in every ship of prayer, that makes a voyage for heaven, if our
hearts be willing to pray for the Church, and if not, we have no share in it.

All our prosperity depends upon the prosperity of the Church, and our desires
for the prosperity of it. They shall prosper.

It is a certain thing, all that love the Church of God, shall prosper: and
prosperity only belongs to them, and there cannot be more effectual
inducements to persuade men to this duty then these are.

I know there be so many sands in the Text that should I observe them all, the
glass would outrun me. I shall therefore contract all into one observation,
and so prosecute it in many particulars briefly, that so I may comprehend the
maine of the text, and shall propound it thus:



For the opening of the point, to be very brief in it, there be two things
concerning the Object, that I shall give a little enlargement to, (to take the
full meaning of the point.) And also two branches concerning the act, which is
to be performed.

There is a double Object. 1. For whom we must pray for peace, that is,
Jerusalem. 2. And what we must pray for, for Jerusalem: that is, Peace.

I must express briefly what is meant within the compass of Jerusalem. And
what is meant by Peace, which are the objects of our prayer.

I. Jerusalem, (to express it in a word) there may be a double signification
of it, which may come within the compass of the meaning of the text.

Jerusalem Mystical.

Jerusalem Literal.

I. Jerusalem Mystical, is the Church of God, or in General, the common, and
public good, and welfare, which every one should prefer before his own
private, and not mind so much his own cabin as the ship in which all prosper,
or perish together.

But more particularly to express it, you may take it in these three ranks,
or degrees.

the true Church of God, is the object of our prayers, and the whole Church of
God, every part, and po^tion of it: every branch and member of it throughout
the world, a Christian should have an enlarged affection, to reach, and
comprehend, the good of all in his prayers.

members of the Church that are ^mminent, the natural members, and the noble
members. The natural members, that are the living stones of the building of
God, not only in the outward profession of religion, pleasing to God
(Christians in name) but those that are really such. And especially such as are
more noble members; that are more isntrumental, and organicall: the good of
the Church depends more upon them.

Such as are Eminent in power, in place, in worth, and in service, our prayers
must reach to all the Church, and to all the members of it.

our own Church, which we have relation to, and the principalls of it: as
Cities, and Universities; those which we have a peculiar relation to, do
challenge a peculiar share in our prayers.

II. And not only the Mystical Jerusalem, (...) the Literal Jerusalem,
should be no stranger to a Christians prayers; Return, return, O S(...)e* We
should pray for the r^^^^ring of the people of God; even for the (...): and for
the setting up of the new Jerusalem; as God has promised in his word.

I will only add one thing in this. As these are all included in this
Jerusalem, which we are to pray for: So by the same reason by which these are
included, we must also understand there is an exclusion, and collatterally a
praying against them that are against Jerusalem: Against Babel, against all the
opposites of Jerusalem, for it is with Jerusalem and the enemies of it, as with
a pair of balances; when one scale is up, the other must needs, be down; and
when the one is down, the other is up: if Babel get alo^t, Jerusalem lies
low, and if Jerusalem rise, Babel must fall. So that the same prayers that are
directed for Jerusalem, perpendicularly b^^^ that way; will also collaterally
reach against Babel. And so I have expressed as much as I intended in this
first part of the Object, which is comprehended in Jerusalem. Pray for
Jerusalem.

II. But what must we pray for, in the behalf of Jerusalem^ It is expressed in
the (...), in one word, but the word i^ very comprehensiue it is Peace. And
Peace comprehends (...) the bosom of it all blessings, it is the Hebrew
phrase, when they would wish all happiness, whatsoever that comes within the
compass of making happy, then they say Peace be to this house, that is, all
happiness be to it, and in this respect there may be given a double sense of
this word, Peace.

First in the general latitude of it,

Secondly, in the more special propriety of it.

1. In the general latitude of it: all blessings and proprieties: all that is
good and useful and tends to the welfare of Jerusalem, is comprehended under
peace which we must pray for here.

As to give an instance in two or three things. We must pray for the protection
of Jerusalem, that God will protect his Church, delivering those that are in
danger, and preserving from danger those that are out of it: we must pray for
the perfection of the Church: that God will restore those Churches that are
over-runne, and will- refine and purge more and more to all purity, and
perfection, those Churches that stand: we must pray for the propagation of the
Church of God, that God will stretch the bounds, and enlarge the borders of it,
and carry the Gospel further, that he will bring more subjects to acknowledge
the kingdom of Christ, and to submit to his scepter, whether among the heathen
of the world: or among those erring people, that have a name of christianity,
and yet raze the foundation of it, that God would enlarge the borders of his
Church, and inlighten them. So much for the general latitude of the word.

2. To take it in the propriety of it: the word Peace, in it self is an
excellent blessing, and of special consequence, which our hearts should pray
to God, to bestow upon his Church, either preserving peace where it is, or
bestowing it where it is not.

A threefold peace, we should pray for.

Peace with God, in causing his Churches to keep their peace with him, in
walking in the purity, and power of his ordinances, without which though they
were at peace with all the world, yet all will come to nothing, if religion be
defiled and polluted.

As the Cardinal made it his Emblem, a Beach-tree, with this inscription,
Take off the top, and it is the ruin of all the rest: The nature of that tree
is such, that if the top of it be cut off, it will never thrive. So it is true
of the purity of religion, tamper with that, take away that, defile, and
pollute that, and all other blessings will be gone, they will take themselves
to their wings, except there be something to soder us with God, which can be
nothing but our exact walking with him in his ordinances. Except we keep our
peace with God, all other peace will fall a(...).

As that great Artificer, who sometime (...) famous buckler for (...), the
Goddess of the Atheni^^s, ^e contrived it so, that he wrought his own name
in the Center of the Buckler, which was so framed of several pieces, and
m(...)s, that it was impossible to pick out his name, who was the author of
it, but the whole buckler would fall in pieces. So, the name of God, and the
true religion of God, is such a supporter to the world, that if that be
slighted, and trampled upon: if you go about to overthrow that all other
blessings will fall in pieces,

peace among the Citizens, civil peace, free from disse^tion, divisions, and
distractions, that they may think the same things, and go the same way and
unanimously mind the glory of the Lord together, the breach and loss of which
Peace i^ one of the greatest mischiefs, and miseries, that can ^efall us.

foreign peace also, from all opposition without, that there may be no
hostility, no invasion of fo^^ine enemies upon the Churches of God. These I
suppose are the principalls that comprehend the sum of what is meant, and
couched under the name of Peace.

I shall only add one thing in this; and that is: If we think only of
temporal peace, and the blessings upon that, it is not worth the while on
pray: for peace to the Churches of God: (...) may (...) prosper in war, and
misery. For as the Father complains, In the time, when they flourished, they
all decayed, and the vigor of religion was gone, but when they had no (...),
th^^ they flourished in religion. The primitive Church which was persecuted by
the red Dragon, was clothed with the Sun, and crowned with a crown of twelve
Stars, with the M(...) under her foot: but the (...) in the 17. of the R(...)
was clothed with sc^^let, and gold, all ^u^ward riches, but no heavenly
ornament about her.

Thus it may fall so out, that to ask only for a temporal peace may not be
worth the while: therefore you must join in your prayers; Peace that may be
sanctified, that we may make a good use of it, and so it is very useful for
the work of the Gospel, and it is a great blessing to enjoy it.

I shall express brie^^y a^ other b(...)ch of the point, which is the office
of a Christian, in II.
regard of the Act. There is a double Act, intimated in the point, and
contained in the Text.

(...) for this (...) of Peace, for our mother Jerusalem.

(...), and provoke (...) so to do, rouse, and awaken others, to join in
prayer, for the peace of the Church.

Now, when I say we are bound to pray; there are 2. other things included in
that as well as Prayer which is the maine thing.

There is one thing employed inwardly; that our hearts should work to
Jerusalem, our pulses beat that way, our desires, and wishes, should be for
it. For prayers are the expressio^ of the heart, otherwise they are but empty.

There is another thing included too outwardly: they that pray as they ought,
will endeavor to attain what they pray for. It is not to be believed, that a
man prays for the peace of the Church, when he does that which is contrary
to the peace of the Church, our endeavors therefore, must go along with our
prayers, or else it is no way suitable.

Our endeavors in every kind, our counsel should work, we should lay our
heads together to work the welfare of the Church: our examples should be
presidents and patterns to others to provoke them to good works. Every one
that has any authority, his authority should go that way, for the settling,
and furthering the peace of Jerusalem else we do but mock. God in our prayers.

To add one word concerning both the particula^s, we should pray our selves,
and then stir up others in the same way, to perform the same duty.

And both of these must be done in the due manner.

1. Sincerely, not out of by-respects: To pretend God and the Church, and to
look to a man's purse, and to his own private respects, is base and sordid. 2.
We should do this also earnestly, and frequently, not as if we cared not for
it, but put our strength to it, 3. We must do it, constantly, not by fits,
grashopper-like, to skip up and fall down again presently; but to hold a
constant course of prayer.

To mention one thing more, Who is it, that are bound to do all this (I
expressed it in the point) Every Christian, the true Christian, and every one
that is such must know it is a part of his duty.

Be he of what s^ati^n soever h^e will, there may be a greater obligation
upon some then others, but there is an obligation upon all.

The Magistrates in their places, it is a principal piece of their service, to
pray for and to promote the peace, and welfare of the Church: and the people
are not therefore excused, for it belongs to them also.

The Ministers in their places, must be leading persons in their duty, and in
the provocation of others to it: and yet others are not thereby excused, but
every member of the Church as well as those must pray.

Of what condition soever whither l^^ned, or unlearned, whether men or women,
th^ro (...) but may be sould^ers in this servico, women may worko here, their
affections may be strong, and every one has a sharo in it, it belongs to all.

I will add no more for the explication of the point, and I will be also
brief in the prooft of it.

The Scripture is very clear, and does lay many strong obligations upon us,
for the performing of this duty, and we see many presidents for it, of such
affections, that have been in the Saints of God, toward the Church of God,
that they were carried away with the good of it, to the neglect of themselves.

I will only point you to some two, or th^^^ p^^^^ out of the historical part
of the Bible, both testimonies and examples.

I. Testimonies, it is a most incomparable example of Moses, in Ex^d. 32. (...)
me (...) of the (...) this thou ^^st ^^itten, then suffer thy (...) to ^^^ish,
and thy name to be dishonored by it. Moses, was so far tender of the good
of the Church of God, that he could (...) been (...), in a high ext^^^^ll
affection, rather to have lost himself, then God should have lost so much
honor, as would have bin by this means. In the 5. Chapter of Judges, and the
23. verse. The spirit of God, which is the spirit of blessing: yet thunders out
curses against those that had no affection toward to Church. Curse ye Meroz
(says the Angel of the Lord) yea, Curse ye him bitterly, because he came not
out to help the Lord against the mighty. Not to be sensible of the condition
of the Church; and not to put in, with our best endeavors for it; brings a
heavy curse from the mouth of blessing i^ self.

II. And you may see, two excellent examples, of a man and a woman. In the 1 Samuel 4. 19. The wife of Phinehas, had the Church written in her heart more
deeply then the son of her womb. She was newly delivered of a son, but
took no pleasure in him, because the Ark of God was taken. The other is of a
man, that may plead as much exemption as any, he was a soldier, and yet was a
brave president in this case, in the 2 Samuel 11. Chapter, 11. verse. Vriah, one
of David's worthies, would not go home to his house; only upon this
apprehension, the deep thought he had of the estate of the Church. My Lord
Io^^ (says he to David) is in the field, and all Israel in battle, and shall
I go home to take my pleasure? As the Lord lives I will not. All other
pleasures were nothing to him in respect of the welfare of the Church.

And in those Doctrinall parts of the Old testament: Psalm. 20. 5. and 51. 18.
and 53. 6. The Psalmist in the midst of the heat of the prosecutions of his
own welfare, has many out-lets, and breakings out of heart: O send salvation
to Zion, build up the walls of Jerusalem: Even when he was most busy, to serve
his own turn, he cannot forget the state of the Church of God: Remember David
in the midst of all his afflictions. Minding not so much his own particular,
as the whole house of God, and therefore he said, he would not go up to his
bed, till he had found out a place for the Lord to dwell in.

So in Psalm. 102. 13. Have mercy upon Zion, for the time to favor her is come.
Such is the property of Gods servants, that the Church cannot lie in the dust,
but there is a tender pity in the hearts of Gods people: in Psalm. 137. 5. (an
excellent place) If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning, if I prefer not Jerusalem, before my chief joy. And so in the
prophecy of Esaias (that remarkable place) in the 62. chap. for Zions sake I will
not hold my peace, I will not be silent, until her righteousness bud forth,
you that are the Lords remembrancers give him no rest, until he have made
Jerusalem, the praise of the whole earth. It is an office acceptable with God;
and all men that are of the Church, are of that office, to be Gods
remembrancers for his Church, to put him in mind of it. In the 22. of Esaias and
the 12. verse. When God did call for mourning, (in regard of the estate of the
Church) and men ran to madness, and merriment, he was infinitely provoked by it.
As I remember a common wealth, when the kingdom and state was in great trouble
a great many young ruffins being in a tavern, were drinking: and they used to
crown there heads with rushes, which being done one of them looked out at the
window, which did so provoke the state, that they took away his head for it.
And that in Haggai: Is it time for you to dwell in seiled houses, and my house
not built? says the Lord. It is not worth the while, to mind our own houses
whilst Gods house lies in the Dust.

To point at, 2. or 3. places, in the New Testament: Saint Paul's affection in
this kind, that same in comparable affection, in Romans 9. 3. is not to be
expressed, in which he paralelled Moses, if not surpassed him: (...) desire to
be accursed from Christ, for my brethrcus sake. It notes his infinite
superlatiue affection toward them. So in the 2 Cor. 11. 28. Phil. 1. 18. Col.
2. 5. You shall find how Saint Paul expresses, that all the care of all the
Churches, lay upon him. As it was in the old law, the Priest was never to enter
into the holy of holiest, but he must have his ornaments about him, all the
twelve tribes, to offer them up to God. So it was Saint Paul's case, and should
be every ministers, and every Christians in their station, but I forbear.

I shall give the grounds of the point, (in a word) from the several parcells,
which we have touched in the explication. Every one of those make a
contribution, to raise the sum of a sufficient reason, whether we consider.

The Nature of Jerusalem, or The Nature of Peace, or The Nature of Prayer, or
The Nature of a Christian.
You shall find it strongly demonstrated in all these; That it is the duty of
every Christian, to pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Do but

Nature of Jerusalem, what Jerusalem is; the Church of God, and in it there is
a double relation.

1. If you look upward, the relation it has to God, it is the house of God,
it is the Spouse of Christ, and can there be a dearer relation to put a deeper
engagement upon us, then to tender the spouse of Christ.

2. Or if you look downward, in the relation she has to us: She is the
Mother of us all; all the Saints of God, are all the daughters of Jerusalem:
all members of the Church, there is a natural union, and comunion between
them, and there should be a fellow-feeling, of the good or ill, of the whole by
every particular member.

Peace, it is the sum of all blessings, it comprehends all blessings in the
bosom of it. The ancients, were wont to paint peace with a horn of plenty.

1. Peace, it is the mother of all other prosperities, and blessing, arts, and
sciences, trades and every thing, flourish with peace: and all wither, if peace
be gone, war blasts all. And it is not only the mother of all inferior
blessings: but

2. It is a very careful and useful nurse; to cherish religion, religion
receives a great deal of advantage by peace, as in the Acts The Church had
peace, and increased exceedingly; As a General said sometimas, when one came
to him for justice, what do thou talk to me of justice, (says he) I
cannot hear the noise of Law and justice, for the sounds of the drumms. There
is no hearing of the Law of God, the Law of justice, when men have their swords
in their hands, there can be no room for religion to grow up and thrive, if
there be not peace, to give it a station, and a settled place.

Nature of Prayer. What prayer is: (to mention only the efficacy, and
necessity of it) I. It is the most efficacious engine: the sum of all
policies, for a Christian to work by, for Peace. Is it not God that rules all
the world, and has all hearts in his hands? he can make the very stones to be
at peace with a man, he soders men together, Peace and war depends upon him:
and prayer rules God, he suffers himself to be overcome by Prayer, Let me
alone says God: by prayer a Christian ^etcheth all from God, what is in Gods
power, is a Christians by prayer: Yea there is such an efficacy in it, that all
the policies, of all the men in the world is nothing to Prayer, because God is
about all, and can blast all.

II. It is of great necessity also; God will not bestow blessings, but when a
people will seek him, and sue to him for them, and the reason is because he
shall have little honor by it: if it came without our seeking it from God, we
should ascribe it to some other way: God should have no honor by it, but when
it comes begged by prayer, it appears to be the work of God, and God has
the glory of it. So that he does not bestow ordinarily blessings upon any, but
at the request of his people, where he has a people.

nature of a Christian, take him in relation to all these three former: or take
him in another relation we shall add. A godly man, it is the most proper work
for him, that can be imagined, he cannot be excused of it.

I. He is a Son of Jerusalem, it becomes him (at least) to pray hard for
his mother* he is an unnatural child, that will not open his mouth to save
mischeife from his mother. As the Son of Cras^s, that never sp^k^ before, the
dumb child through vehemence of tender affection, seeing one go about to kill
his father, cried ou^, O man will thou kill Crasus? it opened the dumb man's
mo(...) that could not speak before, to plead for his father in a case of
danger. So should it be withus for our Mother Jerusalem.

II. Every child of God, is as a son of Jerusalem, so a son of Peace, we are
the sons of the God of peace; and sons of the Gospel of peace, and have
all the engagements of (...) the spirit is a spirit of Peace: the spirit of the
Dove shall rest upon the spirit of the sons of God, they are the sons of
Peace.

III. He is the son of Prayer, it should be the very Element (says
Nazia^^^^) in which we draw our breath, to run toward God, and toward
Heaven, in the way of Prayer. So that a Christian, that is the Son of God the
Son of Jerusalem, the Son of peace, and the Son of prayer: by all these
necessary ties, is bound to pray for the peace of Jerusalem. And so much the
more, because he is enabled; when others cannot; he has ability, and power, as
he is the Son: it is in his hand, and he is able to be sensible of Jerusalem,
and to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, which others cannot.

There be 3. things in the general, that I desire to commend unto you, from
the consideration of this point by way of application, to set it home upon your
consciences, for the performance of this duty.

First, we have here a clear conviction, and I.
reproof of those that do the clean contrary, that do not observe this, but
fall short of this duty, and do not carry themselves like Christians. There be
3. sorts of men, (says Seneca) those that do evil; those that do nothing
but by things; and those that do nothing at all. I might speak of them in
this form: but I shall comprehend under this notion those which do contrary
to this duty. They therefore especially are to be reproved, that do contrary.
If this be the duty of all Christians to pray for the peace of Jerusalem: then
how are they very Antipodes unto Christians, in a direct opposition unto them,
that are not for Jerusalem, but for Babel.

1. If there be any Jesuitical spirit, that would build Rome, with the
revenge of the ruins of England, as the first was built, this is clean
opposite to the text: if any one be not for Jerusalem but for Babel, they are
clean contrary.

2. Again if there be any Schismatic Spirits that are not for peace and
prosperity: but for the (...), and destruction: of the Church: that trouble
cities and trouble states. Salama^^er-like that cannot live but in the f^re of
c(...)ion, and make disturbances. Like a simple man that cares not to set the
house on fire, to ros^ his e^^^. Such wicked spirits as are not for (...),
(...) for (...), had rather sow discord and make breaches, to r^nd and ^^are
and devou^e, one another in the Church of God, rather then study the union, and
concord of the Church: these are clean contrary.

3. Again they that are not for Jerusalem, nor for (...) ^^e least of all for
prayer: If it be the duty of all Christians, to pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, is go^ to Heaven to help forward the welfare of Jerusalem: Then
what are they? and how unlike unto Christians, that do nothing but p^^^ the
(...). Ier^salem? and go to Hell by di^elish* counsels, and (...) poll(...) to
(...) throw, the Church of God, Jerusalem and set up Babel, and a confused A
(...)? (...) shall end in this, (...) in the day, of, Jerusalem, (...) to the
ground. God will have such spirits in re(...): and ^ ^ (...), but they shall
(...) to (...)* godly man, has these two advantages: The prayers of the godly:
and the curses of the wicked, and both of them to be blessings unto him.

Secondly, we may every one of us make II.
this a touch stone to try our selves, of what temper, and mould we are: we
pretend all to Christianity; we do not doubt, but that we are members of the
Church of God, and of Christ; and we hope to have portion in both. To know
whether this be true, we may try it by our affection to the Church of God. How
does our hearts work toward the Church? are our hearts soft? and do they
melt within us? and do our hearts work toward the repairing of the breaches
of Ie^usalem? This will give a good testimony what we are, if it be not thus,
it is plain we are not true genuine members, but wooden members of the
Church: the living members, that receive true nourishment from the head, have a
fellow feeling, of the mll^ry of the Church, but if we be but as wooden
legs, we shall be cut off, and it is a sign wear but such, if we have no
affection to it.

For Ex(...), which is the principal: III.
that what over we have done hitherto, yet now, to take this as our duty, to
carry the Church (...) our bolom^, and pray^^r the well(...), the good, and
peace of the Church of God, that God would pr^serue us in peace that have it,
and that God would visit in mercy, those that have had the sword drunken in
there blood a long time, we should make this a part of our prayer unto God.
Many things should have been said here: but to omit all other things.

Faith, believe Gods word, and the promises God has made to his Church. Spread
his book before him, and say: Lord, thou have promised to do good to thy
Church, and that thou would confound the beast, and the Dragon, the appointed
time seem^^ to come now, thus pray to God, and press him with his promises,
and pray in ^aith.

sincere charity, in a true genuine love to the Church of God, otherwise it
will not be worth the while.

Pray in repent (...) (...) li^t up pure hands to God* if thou art diligent in
prayer, and negligent in thy life, and conversation, conver^^^g and d(...)ing
thy self with the va(...) of the world, as (...) in it as any body, and
think to come off, because th^n remembrest the Church of God, thou art
deceived. ^ost (...) think, God will hear thy prayers, when ^^ou (...) not
(...) commands: ^e (...)s you (...) your selves, from the vanities of this
world, and you will not hear him, and do you think he will hear you?

instancy and earnestnes of spirit: a fearful beggar, teaches how to give a
denial. God loves a kind of violence, to dash our prayers against heaven,
against the throne o^ grace with a holy violence and zeal of spirit, which
will prevail much with God. The Jews have an old saying, which may have a
good application. Since the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem the door of
prayers has been shut, God would not hear the people of Jerusalem, but yet
the door of tears is not shut, though God seems to stop against the door
of prayers, yet not against tears: if our prayers break forth into tears,
God will regard them. As I have sometimes observed of Pr^^^^s that was wont to
give certain oracles,but it was hard to make him speak, and deliver them, but
he would turn himself, into several shapes and forms, yet if they would
hold out, and press him hard without fear, into whatsoever form or shape he
appeared, they were sure to have satisfactory oracles* So, God gives not
blessings, unless we will wrestle them out: and contend and strive with God
for them, by an earnest and a servent spirit, And (as Ter^^llian says) make
prayers (...) with fasting, which ordinarily, are ^^arved with ^^rmalities.

If God should come and threaten to turn all upside-downe; if we make prayer
^at with fasting, with servency of spirit, with intention, and vigor of zeal,
God would be overruled by his servants: and I know nothing in the world,
would be a more certain pledge of mercy, then if we could see the spirit of
prayer among Christians.

Pray constantly. God may seem to hide himself, and not regard the prayers of
his servants, but we must not give over presently, we must hold out and wait
upon him. A nobleman you will wait upon, if you have any suite unto him, and
you will be glad if he give you an answer at last, and shall we think much
to wait upon the doors of God, to give the great Lord of Heaven, and earth a
little attendance? this is but to serve our own turn, if we do not wait. We
must wait, if God says, as he did to Moses, Let (...) al^^e, why trouble you
me? we must resolve with Jacob not to let God go till he bless us, this holy
violence is good, if modest and constant.

a (...) to help every one of us, to a serious performance of this duty. In a
word lay aside our carnal (...)rity, and lay things to heart: observe the
estate of the Church of God, and lay it to heart, or else we shall never do
it, the saying is that which the eye sees not the heart rues not, if we mind
not these things, and think not upon them, if they do not make an impression
into our hearts, we shall never faithfully make our expressions unto God. Take
heed of the world, least it do with us, as the Ivy with the oak, which twists
about it and hinders it from thriving. So the world twists about many a godly
man, and Christianity dies within him: take heed we be not too busy with
worldly affairs, that theychoak not all thoughts of better matters. There is a
story of King Henry the Fourth, and the Duke of Alva, the King asked whether he
had not observed the Eclipses: No, (says he) I have so much to do upon earth,
that I have no leisure to look up to heaven, A great many men have so much to
do upon earth, that they have no leisure to think of heaven, or any thing
belonging to the Church of God, they have so much to do in the puzzleing
affairs of this life, and have such a roll of them hanging one upon another;
that when one has done, another comes and woes them; that they never have time
to think of Gods Church; to lay to heart their duty in that kind. Many men
while heaven, and earth, are on fire about their ears; and the Church of God
in ruin, and themselves in danger, yet themselves are in the dust, minding
nothing but earth. As Archimides, the great Mathematician: when the city was
besieged, himself did more by his curious art, to hinder the taking of it, then
all the rest of the city could do to defend it, and the General of the enemy,
gave a special charge to preserve Archimides. Now the city being able to
resist no longer was taken.

Archimides, hearing nothing all this while; the soldiers broke into the house
where he was, yet he takes no notice: nay they broke into the study where he
was: and the soldiers seeing him so busy, drawing his lines in the dust, not
once mooving, nor taking any notice of them, one of them seeing him not regard
them, out of a scornful nature thinking him disregarded drew his sword, and
run him through, and killed him, whose death the General of the enemy greatly
lamented. Let us not bury our selves in the dust of worldly thoughts, and
suffer the Churches to perish, but let us shake off this dust from us, and mind
our duty in regard of the Church of God, and contend with God for the welfare
of it.

Motives, besides what I have said concerning Jerusalem: and the nature of a
Christian: and the nature of Prayer: It is that which God exacts at our hands:
It is of that nature that it has been the practice of Christians, and we
should not be like them, but should degenerate from them if we do it not. It
is that which becomes every one: and and it is the injunction of the Church,
there is none that are baptized, but they are bound by their sureties, to be
taught the creed, and the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments, and they do
not love their creed, that will not offer up their prayers for the Church: They
that are of the same faith, should breath out the same breath of prayer, and
they do not keep the ten Commandments that do not say the Lords Prayer,
that do not offer up their prayers for the Church of God: were we of the same
faith, and heart with the Church of God, our affections, could not possibly,
but break out that way.

Observe the motive in the Text, They shall prosper that love thee.

Let no man flatter himself, they that pray not for the Church of God, love
not the Church of God. Let them prosper that love thee, that is, that pray for
thee, the one is the counter-pane of the other: if we do not love it we will
not pray for it, and if we do not pray for it we do not love it. Yea if we
pray not for the Church, we loose our share in the prayers of the Church, you
will say that man has a great estate that has a part in every ship at sea,
and yet to have an adventure in all the prayers that are made to heaven are
better then all the world: all the Churches prayers are for all the living
members of it, the blessings will be to them, for a man to have a venture in
every ship of prayer, of all the churches throughout the world, I would not
(for my part) leave my share in it, for all the world, and that man has no
share in it, that will not afford a prayer for the Church, They shall prosper
that love thee: Certainly, they shall prosper, they that do love the Church,
it shall go well with them, and they shall prosper, and if they do not, they
shall not prosper. As Mordecal said to Hester, if thou do not help, thou
shall perish, but the Church of God shall have deliverance. So the Church of
God, shall in the end prosper, but they that pray not for the Church of God,
shall not prosper, but perish.

In a word the cause is great, and we have great propriety in it, and it
concerns us nearly, though we be remote in place, and the sea part them and
us.

The communion of the good; and the contagion of the evil of the Church,
redounds to every particular member. And the times are such, that a man would
think they are times of prayer. Their enemies are as malignant as ever; and
not only so, but potent, and the Church of God all Millitant, in their warfare
against their enemies; and inferior every way to their enemies; both in arms,
and counsel, their minds are not so sodered together: breaches are made
amongst them which makes way for there ruin, and I know not what can balance
this but only prayer. Joshua though he be the weakest; yet if Moses be a
praying in the Mount, he may prevail. There is nothing can counterpoize the
odds that is between the Church of God, and the enemies of it: nothing can
make the balance even, and cast the scale to the Church, but Prayer. And so
much the more, because God seems to be asleep in all their storms, we
should say therefore, as they to Jonah, Arise and pray, we should go and
awaken every Christian, to Prayer: that so we may awaken God that seems to
sleep, and neglect, and let his Churches be plunged in misery.

Again we may be invited with the consideration of the issue of it: the ship
of the Church may be still tossed and tumbled, but because Christ is in it, it
can never perish. The Romans lost many a battle, and yet were conquerours in
all their Wars. So it is with the Church of God: they have and may loose many
a battle, but in the conclusion the Church will conquer, unless man could
wrestle with God, and beat him out of heaven, they shall never overcome his
Church, or his truth-upon earth. Now he is a mad man, that will side with a
badde cause, when he is sure the good cause will prevail.

Lastly, to close all, do but consider some Circumstances, in the bowels of
the nature of prayer, to invite us to it.

It is almost, the only thing left that we can do for them, when we see them
in compassed round about with dangers, and there is no way to make an escape:
Let us do as Dedalus, that when he could not escape by a way upon earth, went
by a way of Heaven. Let us go by the way of heaven, and that is by prayer,
that is the only way that is left, and it is so easy a thing, and of so
little cost, that no man should stick at it, to give a subsidy of prayers and
sighs this way. Yea every man should do this in his private closet and
family; Pray that God would look upon his Churches, to restore peace where it
is not, and to establish it where it is, this is of so easy a cost,
mee-thinkes no man should stick at it. As a story has it, there were a great
many books of the Sybills, brought by a man to a King of the Romans, and he
proffered them to the King, at such a rate, at a very great price, and the King
would not give it: then the man burnt the one half of his books, and asked
double the price that he did for the whole, the King refused again, and he did
the like with half of them, and doubled the price of all again, and then the
King considering the value of them gave him the price. I am afraid, if we
forbear to bid prayers for the peace of Jerusalem: the time may come we may
be content to bid blood, and our estates, and yet not do them one half
quarrel so much good as we may now by prayer.

Again, consider what a soul blot it will be, and what a brand it will set
upon us, if we be defective in this kind. It is a perfidious thing to betray
the Church, and will leave a great stain, and a shame upon us for ever. It is
high time to pray, and therefore in my apprehension, you should think it high
treason, not to pray, he is a desperate, deadly traytou^ to the state of
Jerusalem, that is not a daily and devout Orator for the peace and welfare of
Jerusalem, and it will leave such a slain and ignomony behind, that will not
easily be recompensed. It is an observation of one that wrote the History of
the Grecians relating what worthy acts many nations had done: the Lacedaemonians
did this valiant act, the Athenians did other noble acts, and many other
countries other worthy acts, and when it was demanded of him what his own
countrymen of Cumin had done? he had nothing to say of them, but that they had
done just nothing.

Consider, that if when we have heard that others have done so much for the
Church: and that in the Story it should be said, we have done just nothing,
we have not so much as prayed thoroughly for them; what a stain would this
be: it will be as great a stain, and brand to us, and as little honor to be
registered in Stories if we should do nothing in this kind as it is for Pilate
to have his name written in the Creed.

FINIS.
A SERMON UPON 1 Samuel 2. 30.

By JOHN STOUGHTON, Doctor in Divinity, late of Aldermanbury, London.

Quanto major Honor datur, Tanto majus Periculum comparatur. August. Ser. 62.
ad frat. in Eremo.



LONDON, Printed by John Dawson, for John Bellamie, and Ralph Smith, and are to
be sold at their shop, at the three golden Lions in Cornehill near the Royal
Exchange, 1640.

A Methodicall Analysis of the principal things treated of in this Sermon, as
it was perfected by the Author.
1 SAMUEL 2. 30.
1. Jntroduction. 1 Context. The Judicial Process of God against Eli, 1 The
sin of Eli. 1 Of his Sons, 2 Of himself.

2 The sentence of God against him: wherein 1 Gods gracious exaltation of him,
2 His just Degradation.

2 Text. Wherein observe, 1 Elies Pattent for Honor, 2 The Revocation of that
Pattent 3 The reason of that Revocation. 1 Elies Sin, 2 Gods Justice.

Observations of his Honor; 1. From 1 The several postures of it: 1 The top
of Honor, 2 The fall of Honor, 3 The rise of Honor,
2 The Charactaristicall nature of it. The State of Honor, Rule of Honor.

2. Tractation. 1 Doct. The service of God in the Ministry is a very
honorable function.

1 Explication. 1 What Ministry, 1 Legal, 2 Evangelicall.
2 How is it honorable:
In respect of the quality of it there is a Double 1 Honor, 1 Civil, 2
Spiritual.
2 Title to it from the 1 Person. 2 Office.

2 Probation. 1 (...): by Scripture. 2 (...): Reason.
All things in their function are honorable. 1 They serve an Honorable Lord,
the King of Heaven. 2 They serve in an Honorable ^mployment, 1 As Gods Legates,
2 As Christ's Colleagues.
3 Their gifts are Honorable 1 Of Knowledge, 2 Of Eloquence, 3 Of Conscience.
4 Their reward is Honorable.
3 Application. 1 Consolation. 2 Instruction. 1 Of the Church, 2 Of the
Magistrates, 3 Of Ministers, 4 Of Candidates, 5 Of the People.
1 The Peoples Duty: 1 Acknowledge their Honor, 2 Carry themselves
accordingly. 1 Jn a due respect, 2 Jn a noble Stipend, 3 Jn a facile obedience.

2 Motives. 1 Equity of the Duty, 2 Greatness of the Sin 1 Against God, 2
Against themselves
3 Sharpnes of the punishment.


A SERMON UPON
1 SAMUEL 2. 30. Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed, that thy
house, and the house of thy father should walk before me for ever: but now the
Lord says, be it far from me: for them that honor me, J will honor, and
they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.
BEsides other things, this is one maine part of the Chapter: The Judicial
process of God against Eli, in which we may observe these two steps, or
degrees. First, we have the sin of Eli against God. Secondly, we have the
sentence of God against Eli.

I. The sin of Eli against God, which was partly, the sin of his sons, in
the twelfth 1. (...) Eli
verse. And partly his own personal sin.

His sons: of them is noted, the looseness of their lives in the office of
the Priesthood, in 1 (...).
many particulars.

For Elies sin in his own person; is noted the loosenes of his discipline,
that he carried himself 2 Ipsius.
too remissely, and indulgently toward his sons, in case of their sinning,
and then

Secondly, as we have the sin of Eli against 2. Sententia Dei.
God: So, upon that, the sentence of God against Eli, wherein we may observe 2.
distinct things.

Gods gracious exaltation of him: ver. 27. which 1. ^.
God mentions by way of introduction, evincing the equity of his proceedings
against Eli: he does it by a commemoration, and taking notice of all the mercy,
which he had bestowed upon him, and upon his family: that he had picked him out
from among the children of Israel, and advanced him to the dignity of the
Priesthood. And this is brought in as an aggravation of his sin. I said
(says God) that thy house, and the house of thy father should walk before me
for ever: how durst thou then do such a thing as to kick at my sacrifice, and
at my offering, which I commanded in my habitation, and honor thy sons
above me.

Now this being clear, and the equity, and justice of the sentence being
evinced, we have

Secondly, (in the words of the Text) his just (...). Iusta Degradatio.
degradation, and the severity of the sentence, wherein you may observe (to give
briefly the sum of it) these 3. things.

In the beginning of the verse, you have a pattent or grant of honor to Eli,
and his family: 1. Concessio Honor^.
I said thou and thy fathers house should walk before me for ever.

Secondly, we have the revocation of that grant but now thus says the Lord,
Far be 2. Revocatio Concession^
it from me.

Thirdly, we have the reason of that revocation: 3. ^
why his pattent and grant of honor was revoked and called in: wherein there
is

Jmplyed, in the sin of Eli, his provoking God 1. Culpa Eli.
by despising and not honoring of him, in the place of honor that God had set
him in.

Directly expressed, the Justice of God and the holiness 2. Iustitia Dei.
of his nature, which would not suffer him to wink at such exorbitancies: it
is incompatible with his nature, to bear with such injuries: he should deny
his nature, if he did suffer it; in the last words; those that honor me I
will honor, but those that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

Before I enter into the consideration of the words read, I shall propound but
one observation out of the history, which though perhaps it may seem something
curious, yet I know it may be exceeding profitable. In the main of the story,
we may, both in regard of every Person and every family, and every State, and
every Church, see a mirrom of the course of honor, and the sleppes by which it
does decline.

I only note thus much out of this story, in one thing.

We have here three generations recorded to us: Eli, Phinchas, and Ichabod.
Eli, he begets Phinchas, and Phinchas he begets Ichabod. Now in Eli God taxes
remissensse, want of zeal: in Phinchas he taxes profaneness, want of
conscience: and Ichabod, (his very name boades no other.) The glory is departed
from Israel. The note then is this.

Let but Zeal in a person, in a Family, in a state or Church; once degenerate
to luke-warmenesse, and then luke-warmenesse will soon beget prophanenes, and
profaneness will not be long before it do precipitate, and bring us to
ruin, that will bring in Ichabod, the glory is departed.

Want of zeal is the first step, from whence there is but one descent to
ruin. This being thus briefly premised, I shall now fall to the words of the
Text.

And the text may seem to be a Charter of the Clergy, or a Calendar for all
manner of dignity: or it is a perpetual prognostication of the course of
honor, though calculated for the Meridian of the high Priesthood, yet such as
may serve (as those men use to speak) for the general latitude of all
eminency, and may concern all.

There be but these 5. things: (though there might be many more) which I will
take notice of, in the whole verse. We have.

The 1. Place 2. Fall 3. State of honor.
4. Rise 5. Rule

And so many things the words imply, and in short, you may easily have them at
your fingers ends.

In the three former, we have the several postures of honor and

In the two latter, we have the characteristicall nature of honor.

In the three former, the several postures of honor: there is

1. Honor Culmenant, in the dignity of the high priesthood. 2. Honor
Occident, in the fall and declining of it. 3. Honor Orient, in the rise of it,
which is from God. There is likewise
The Characteristicall nature of honor.

The whole sphere or the whole globe of honor, hangs very tickle, and it is a
very hard thing, to manage honor well.

And the Horizon, that bounds both the Hemispheares, is the last thing that I
propounded in the Rule, by which the justice of God does weigh (as it were) in
the balance all honor, and that by which it either rises up, or falls, and
declines. One the one side, Grace advances and perpetuates honor, and on the
other side, Sin degrades, and evacuates honor. Observation^^ Honoris.


So that according to these 5. there will be but 5. points I shall take notice
of out of these words.

That the service of God in the Ministry, is an honorable 1. Doct. Titulu.
Illustris
service.

(For I shall propound it thus rather in a generality, then particularly
confine it to the high Priesthood, which was the service of those times) I say
the service of God in the Ministry (how ever men esteem of that rank and
condition,) is an honorable service. I said (says God) thou should walk
before me: it is a walking before God. The scripture makes a Periphrasis of
the dignity of Kings; walking in and out before their people. Kings they walk
before their people, and ministers they walk before God. The ministry, and
service of God in it, is an honorable service.

There is no eminency but is subject to the Epilepsy* 2. Do^^. Status mobilis
there is no honor but may have the falling sickness

There is no pattent God grants of perpetuity to any man. As the Lawyer speaks:
it is not durante vita, but durante been placito. God grants no man a pattent
for honor during his life, but during his own good pleasure, it is not as
some men have it, quoad vixeret, but quoad sic gesseret, so long as as a man
lives, but so long as a man carries himself, toward God as he ought to do.
There is no honor but is subject to mutability, it is an unstable, and
slippery place: The very state of honor, even when it is in the very flower,
and height, and excellency of it, yet then it is a very slippery place.

In the next place;

It is a very hard, and difficult thing, to manage 3 Doct. Munus diffi^^le.
honor without danger.

And then again (though I know that it might have bin martialled otherwise, and
preferred a little higher; but yet here it is more proper for my scope) there
will be another part which is:

All honor is not from the earth, but from heaven, 4. Doct. Ortu^ cal^stis
from God.

It is God that raises to honor and he that ruins: it is he that pulls down,
it is God that rules all, all is from him, the disposing of honor is in the
hand of God: as in Heraldry, it is a received maxim, that the King is the
fountain of honor, it is most true here; the King of heaven is the fountain
of honor.

The equitable rule of Justice, by which God does dispense, or deny honor is
according as men do 5. Doct. (...) Equa^ile.
honor or despise God.

And that is expressed in the last words, for them that honor me I will honor,
and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

For the first Point. That the service of God 1. Doct. ^.
in the Ministry, (howsoever the world account it contemptible, yet) it is a
very honorable function. Briefly to open the point.

There are but two things, and that in a word 1. Expl^^atio proposit. (...).
I shall speak of.

I. What service and what ministry is honorable?

II. How and in what respect it is honorable.

I. What service, and what ministry is honorable. 1. Quod


In a word, that service is honorable, wherein a man is in imediate attendance
upon God, and that belongs to his special family as it were (as Ministers do)
the service of those is honorable.

First, whether it be legal: in those that ^.
lived under the state of the law, it was an honorable place and service then,
to belong to God, even in the legal services, and sacrifices of the Temple.
Therefore in the

Second place, (for the Apostle so reasons) if the services, and employments
that ^.
were legal under the law were honorable, much more those services, that are
Evangelicall under the Gospel. There being so many things that do much
advance, and nothing that does impure that honor; there is no reason to think
that it should suffer disadvantage, in the state of the Gospel: if the legal
service were so honorable, then is the Evangelicall service in the ministry,
for that has not lost but rather gained in point of nour, but

Secondly, How must it be understood? in what sense, and in what respect, is
this service 1. Quomodo.
of God honorable? in one word there may be:



A double right to that honor. 2. Quoad


A double honor. A Civil honor, and a Spiritual Honor, and it is true,
these can 1. Qualitatem: Duplex honor Civilis Spiritualis.
hardly be separated among men, but the thing I speak of, aims, not at
civil honor, that the service of the ministry is honorable in civil
respects: that there is a civil honor due to them, more or less is plain:
for it is impossible that if there be a spiritual honor due to any, but that
men that understand themselves should make some expression of it in some civil
way, but the spiritual honor is that which I aim at, now besides this double
honor, there is

A double right and title to this honor; any 2. Duplex (...) Pers^na Officio
person may be honorable: or, an office may be honorable, honor may be
either in regard of the person, or in regard of the office it self. Some men's
persons are of that worth: as he said sometime, when others were striving who
should sit highest at the feast, place me where you will, I will honor the
place where my self sits. Some men by their worth may obtain, and command
more honor then the eminency of the place does afford. As a Giant being in the
bottom of a well, though he be in a very low place, yet he is a Giant, and a
great man still, and a dwarf though he be upon high upon the top of a
mountain, yet he remains a dwarf still. Personal respects may deserve
honor, may give a man title to honor, and so in that respect, their may be
honor due to an inferior office, but I meddle not now with personal honor
that may belong to this or that Minister, in regard of his personal
excellency, but the thing that I aim at for the present is.

That the very office of the ministry is, ipso facto, honorable: though their
be not in a man personal Eminencies, that may command special respect; yet if
he be in the place of the Ministry, there is an honor due to him in respect
of his place, and in respect of his Office. Not that I entend here to make a
vi^ with honor; as some Papists have done, as one of them said: If he should
meet with an Angel, and a Priest together, he would first do his duty to the
Priest, and then afterward salute the Angel, but I am sure in some respects
the office of the ministry, is not inferior to the Angelical office. I shall
say no more for the opening of the point

For the proof of it, in a word: I shall likewise (...).
be very sparing, but I cannot altogether omit it.

First of all for the (...) of it that it is so, I (...)
shall forbear particular testimonies of scripture supposing the thing to be
plain enough: Those titles and many other things given to them, and those many
records in scripture may make it appear clearly; that the service of the
ministry is an honorable service, but I Scriptura.
will give but a touch of some few things.

In the first beginnings of the world, and of mankind, the Priesthood and
service of God proportionable to those times, did descend to the birthright:
the eldest, and most honorable in the family, did succeed in the Priesthood:
To omit the conceits of the ancient Poets of those times whose speeches were
Rex amicus rex idem hominum at^ sacerdos, it was not strange to have a man a
Priest of the most high God, and a king of regions: but yet in scripture we
know that Melchisedec, was King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God, but
afterward under the Law, though it pleased God to sever these two: Ruben was
the first borne among his brethren, and so had the right of Priesthood by
nature: and so the Sacerdoticall dignity should have rested upon him: yet you
know how God by his father Jacob (the Spirit of God directing him) translated
this, and divided it between two, the honor of the birthright was fastened
upon Levi. As Re^ben lost it for his sin, So Levi got it for his zeal, in
excecuting the commands of God upon vile sinners. God took it so well at his
hand, that he gave him the Priesthood for it, and the other piece of the
birthright, the other dignity, that was translated from Ruben to Judah, so that
became the royal tribe. Now it shows that the office of the Priesthood is a
very honorable office. Levi attaining it by the birthright, being the eldest
adopted son.

And in the New Testament, there is many titles of dignity, and many
intimations of the honor of this office. The Ministers are the seven golden
Candlesticks, and the lights in those Candlesticks; and not inferior lights,
for they are stars in the right hand of God, the Angels of the Churches.

And for the (...), the ground and reason of 2. (...).
the point, why any man in reason cannot avoid it, but must assent unto it;
viz. that the office of the ministers of God is very honorable, to omit
personal respects though that might serve to convince base spirits, that have
a base esteem of them, their education is ingenious, they are bred
ingeniously, in all literature, which all do account, though not one of the
liberal sciences, yet one that is more honorable then all the rest, and many
other things that belong to that, as wisdom, or eloquence, or virtue which
will beautify and adorn and make a man honorable, that has no chinke, or
gold, or purchase, or birthright or blood, but I forbear those, only
whosoever viewes, and considers well, shall find, that all things concerning
Ministers in their place are honourisicable: It is the Lord whom they ^
serve, and he is honorable; the service in which their Lord employes them, is
great and honorable, their work is great and their wages also is great, and
honorable, I will touch but a little thesethings.

They serve a great Lord, and I pray, what 1 Domirus. Rex Cal^.
makes the servants of Kings and Princes honorable, but the honor, and the
greatness of their Masters? there is a reflection from their masters that
guilds over them, and makes them to be in an honorable estate: and shall not
the servants of the king of kings be accounted honorable, that have immediate
dependence and attendance upon him? it is the saying of a great Senator of
Rome, he would willingly (in the great concussions, that had scattered the
whole common wealth) have recovered the liberty, that before they had, but
seeing they were necessitated, and that they must needs lay down their liberty
and choose a Master, he said he would choose Pompey, rather then Caesar, because
he thought him to be more noble, verttuous, and more ingenious, toward the
state of that common wealth and his reason was (...) and may not we say more
truly (...)? to be a servant, and not to be a man's own man is some dishonor
and diminution in it self, but that is such a diminution, that no man can
avoid, we must be all servants, there is no help for that: now this makes an
honorable service, to serve an honorable Master; in that case, an honorable
service is more considerable, then absolute freedom and liberty, for their
master is the King of heaven, a mean servant belonging to the King, in any
office about him, is more honorable, then many an honest freeman: the meanest
of Gods servants, the Ministers, is honorable. But

They are not only servants of a great Master, 2. (...).
but servants in an honorable condition and employment: their employment under
God, and in his service is very honorable. To pitch upon two particulars, and
omit all other things, wherein the honor of their employment is presented to
us:

Gods Legates,

Christ's Colleagues, and companions in that service.

Gods Legates, and Ambassadors, and that is no dishonorable place; nay, it is
by the law of nations counted an honorable service: To be an Ambassador to
represent the person of the king himself, according to the custom of some
kingdoms, though a man of inferior rank be employed for the Kings service
that way, he does obtain the title of honorable as long as he lives, though
he have no other dignity. Now as the Apostle says, we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be
reconciled to God.

But there may be a great deal of difference of Ambassadors, according to the
nature of the Embassage they are employed in: there be some mean ambassages
men may be employed in, and the^e be some other, that are of higher importance
and concernement, that all men are not capable of. Now can there be a greater
employment and ambassy, from God to man, than those arrands and businesses
which the Ministers of God are employed in? (To omit all other circumstances)
they are not employed about petty and inferior things, about quarrels or
brawles, or such like things: or matters of commerce, or trade in general, but
they are employed about the Staple-trade and maine commerce between Heaven,
and earth: they are Ambassadors in things of the highest concernement: not of
things belonging to the body, but to the soul: and of things that belong to
the soul, not in small, and inferior things, but such things as concern the
very vitalls and highest excellencies of the soul, to bring felicity, and
eternity to the soul, to help and further men in the way to heaven; as it
were reducing them to an affinity, to a contraction of a marriage with God
himself, and of all services in the world, and of all Ambassages, those that
are employed by Princes to negotiate their marriages, are accounted most
honorable.

And as their relation is honorable, they are Gods servants, and their
employment is honorable, they are Gods Ambassadors: So they are in this
business, not only Legates of God: But

Colleagues with Christ; in joint commission with Christ himself. Now do you
think that the service, which Christ himself acted the part of, so long as
he was in the world was contemptible? Christ himself was the Minister, and
Ambassador of God, for those same ends, that his Ministers are (though in a
higher degree) he did that which properly belonged to himself as a Mediator,
paying the price of our redemption, yet he did this also as he was a Minister,
to reduce and bring men unto God, I say, it was the office of Christ in which
he spent his time upon earth. Now to be joined with Christ, to be his
Colleagues, to be in joint commission with him, must needs be honorable: nay
the scripture expresses something to adorn them higher, for they are said to
be fellow laborers with God, and that in the greatest work, that is, in the
conversion of men, as it is the saying of the Father, the greatest work of the
Divinity is, in taking care for our humanity, to save our souls, now that God
would make his Ministers fellow laborers with himself, it is a very
honorable conjunction.

Then gifts are honorable, whether they be gifts ^.
of knowledge, learning, eloquence, or conscience.

Lastly, as their master they servers honorable, and then service honorable,
and gifts honorable: So their reward is also honorable. 4. ^.
I cannot speak of the reward they have here in their way, nor is it to be
expected that they should have great matters here, the less they have here,
the more remains for them in heaven: the Papists have a conceit that besides
the crown of glory, and immortallity, that shall be given to every faithful
Christian, there is a Coronate also of glory, which shall give a luster to the
former: and shall be given to 3. sorts of persons, to Martyrs, to Virgins, and
to Doctors, and they give the reason, because there is 3grand-enemies, viz. the
world, the flesh, and the Devil: and these 3. sorts of persons encounter them.
The Martyrs, they shall have a Crown, because they are employed in the front
of the battle against the world, they are set (as it were) at Cannons mouth,
against all the oppositions of the world, and they make their station good, and
maintain Gods cause, and bid defiance to all the world, they defy the
world, and dare it to do them hurt.

The virgins, that live, and continue always so, they bid defiance to the
flesh, and therefore they must have their crown. And the Doctors also, they
must have a crown, because they have the greatest enemy to encounter with, and
stand in the greatest opposition, to bid defiance to the devil himself, and
all his policies, by which he does seduce men: and they are most exposed to
peril, because they are Gods particular instruments which God uses to reduce
men from the jaws of the Devil, and therefore because they go away
conquerors in this, there is a particular Coronet for them. I mention not this
to justify every notion in it, but sure I am the reward of the Ministers shall
be a heavenly reward: It is true, there is but little preferment, or
encouragement, nothing suitable to the honor we have spoken of, that Ministers
have here. As you know Ambassadors have not preferment while they are abroad,
but when they come home in their own country their King will prefer them,
and so God does, he lets it till they come home, and then Those that convert
Da^ 1^. 3.
many to righteousness, shall shine as the sun in the firmament, showing
that there is a peculiar honor belongs to the Ministry.

To come then to the Application of the 2. Applicatio.
point,

1. This may be matter of comfort, to the faithful 1. Cons^^atio.
Ministers of God, against those that condemn their persons and ministry; and
this is matter of consolation, to bear them up against all scorns, and
indignities, that are put upon them in regard of their ministry. As the Poet
reports a story of a certain rich man, that when he went abroad, the people
that met him, would curse him, and call him bite ^igge, he being a very
niggard, yet (says he) very wittily, Populus me sibilat, at mihi met ipse
plaudo domi, When I come home to my counting house, and seeing the angels
smiling upon me, I comfort my self against all those scornful speeches. So
may not the faithful ministers of Christ do in the like case when the world
scoffs at them? that when as it is said unto them, as it was said unto Elisha
Come up thou bald pate, Come up thou bald pate: may not they counterpoize this,
when as they go home and come into their closets and look upon the charter,
and the commission that they have from God, that they have a commission from
the God of heaven, to be his servants, in choice employments may not they say
to themselves, did not God appoint us to walk in this way? did he not set us
in this place and office? and he it is that says, I will honor thee, it is
enough that he says I will do it, he has not promised that the ^ascallity of
the world shall honor them, but that he himself will do it, and laudar^^
laudato viro, ea demum est vera ^aus. i. e. they shall receive honor from one,
which is honorable indeed, and that is true honor. To pass the use of
reproof.

This point may be of good Use for instruction, to instruct all sorts and
conditions. 2. ^.


First, it may be a good Item to those that shall sit at the stern of the
Church, to take care 1. ^.
whom they do give admittance and way to in the entrance into the ministry.
It is a memorable story of Constantius, the father of Constantine the great,
that when he was advanced to honor, there were about him, many Pagans and many
Christians, and he (to discover who were Christians, and who were not) made an
edict: that all those that were Christians, and would not worship the heathen
Gods, should immediately depart from the Court; upon this all the Pagans slockt
about him, and many false hearted Christians also presented their service to
him, to whom he made this answer nay (says he) ^f you will be false to your
God, I will never trust you to be a servant to me. It behooveth the governors
of the Church to prevent this, that no unworthy persons be admitted to the
office of the ministry to be a servant of God in so choice an employment. It
was (...) sin, that he made Priests of (...) of the people, and it is a soul
shame, and sin, that God should be served with base and unworthy persons,
that such should go for his Ambassadors, that cast a disgrace, and dishonor
upon the office it self: the saying is of old, every block is not fit to
build in Gods house, at least to be a builder, a principal builder, to be a
Minister, and dispencer of the mysteries of the Gospel. Therefore this may be
a good Item to the Church, to take heed who they admit into this office. But
humbly, by way of instruction, I shall need say but this:

There is two things required, to make any office warrantable, and authentike
in this case:

1 There must be an External Calling, and

2 There must be an Internal Calling.

Without the External Calling of the Church who can take upon him, and usurp,
such an office as this is?

And without an internal calling, what right has the Church to put any into
such an honorable office? therefore it is the Churches part, to examine
whether they whom they admit into this office, have a commission from God or
no: and the seals of it must be.

Ability, and

Integrity.

Ability, for matter of Doctrine, and Integrity for matter of Conversation; and
they that do not bring with them their commission from God, with these seals,
should not End admission from the Church.

This may be a (...) to Magistrates that ^.
have (though not the acting of any Ecclesiastical business, yet have) the
over-looking of all, and are to have a care of the Church, that all things go
well with them, to fence and hedge about the Ministers that every wild beast
may not tread them down, that it may not be the cheapest thing in the world,
to ba^^le a Minister, who is Gods Ambassador, to suffer them to be evilly
dealt withal, and shamefully entreated: Shall any one? shall a player, have
better quarter, then a Minister? this is a hard thing: it therefore concerns
the Magistrates (if this be an honorable place) to fence it; that there may
not be liberty to dishonor it, by every one that pleases.

It may be a good Item to all Ministers, to maintain ^.
the honor of their place, and not to blemish or evacuate it with their
unworthiness, the place it self is honorable, and some men may cast a luster,
and honor upon the place, and some men may again defile it, and disgrace it,
and expose it to contempt and derision, as he said of the learned Cardinal, he
was a learned man, and for it was advanced to a Cardinallship, but when he came
to that advancement, quo demum major eo melior, he did adorn the scarlet robe
that he wore with more then scarlet worth. Let every one labor to adorn the
place, and advance the honor of the place by his worthiness, and take heed he
do not make the place vile, for his persons sake, but take notice of those
things, that makes the ministry truly honorable, and endeavor after them.
As labor for those abilities, that are required, and necessary to such a
place: there should be in men some competency that way: that they may not be a
shame to the place of the Ministry. And labor to adorn the place with
diligence, and fidelity in the work of the Lord, sloth, and negligence, is a
contemptible thing, and makes men vile and odious. Labor also to adorn it
with holiness of life and conversation; without which the other are no more
but as a pearl in the head of a filthy toade: a pearl in the head, and the
body all poison, for men to have good and able parts, but stinking and rotten
lives, ready to poison every one with the report of them; that is not the way
to maintain the honor of the ministry. Labor therefore for an upright life,
and conversation, which will be a great credit and adorning to the office of
the ministry, it grows to be despicable, when there is a failing in this,
and a man in the want of it, does but degrade himself of the honor due to the
office.

This might also be a caveat to all Candidates, 4. Candidatorum
to those that are to enter upon the ministry: especially to such as are every
way unfit and unworthy for it: do you despise the honorable place of the
ministry, that you will be ready to thrust your selves into it, before God
calls you, and their be worth in you to fit you for it? take heed of this, for
else it will be your great sin, and your exceeding shame.

This may be a good Jtem to the people, in a word, to teach them what
apprehensions, ^.
they should have concerning the Ministers, that they would acknowledge this
honor, and carry themselves accordingly, and there be 3. things I will mention.

First, It is fit, that the people should give ^.
them honorable respect, in such a proportion as is meet, an honorable
countenance is due to them that are in an honorable place.

Secondly an honorable maintenance is as due, ^
it is a vain thing to set a man high in respect, and to starve a man in his
means.

There is an honor of Maintenance, as well as of Countenance, and it is
impossible the repute of the Minister should be kept up, without an honorable
maintenance. It has been said of some of the City, that their manner is to
deal with their Ministers, as Carryers do with their horses, to lay heavy
burdens upon them, exact work enough; but they shall have but easy commons,
and then to recompense this, they shall have bells hung about their necks, they
shall be commended and applauded highly for excellent Ministers, and great
paines-takers, but good words will not fill hungry bellies, nor cover naked
backs, nor fit a scholar with a Library. But that no man may mistake me. I
know there is no worthy Christian but abhor^es the thought of this, there is no
noble Citizen, but is far from such a kind of carriage, yet you know there
may be unworthy cullions whose practice is such, Ignoble, hoggish Gaderens,
that will be ready to grutch and grumble at the expense of a penny, for the
maintenance of the divine candle, that wastes it self to give light unto
them, that will rather die to save charges, then spend money to save their
lives. It is a saying, that he that needs the lamp will not grutch to give
oil to preserve it: but yet many there are who had rather live in the shadow
of death, then be at cost to preserve the light of life. I have heard it has
been observed by some, as an unquall carriage in Ministers, who will plead
earnestly, for their own dues, and yet deny God his: Some have observed this
as an unequal kind of carriage, but I may tell you it is unequal to force
Ministers to plead for their right until they be hoarse, even then when they
should be giving of God his due, and the people theirs: but I suppose there is
no reasonable man, but will think that an honorable maintenance is due to an
honorable service.

Lastly. There is an honor of obedience, and ^.
service, which is the chiefest of all, if they be in an honorable place, then
whatsoever they do by virtue of their commission, such as they have good
warrant for from God, take heed how any man kick or spurn against them, but
let us say as Cornelius said to Peter, Lo we are all here ready to hear all
things that are commanded thee of God. We must look up unto God therefore as
he lays the charge upon the ministry and so we must take our charge from
them, and yield obedience answerably.

To add a word or two by way of motive. It is not because I would plead my
own cause 2 ^.
or the cause of others, that are of my coat, for I do not frequently harp
upon these strings, neither do I complain; for honor, God has given me
more then my expectation, and for maintenance, sufficient according to my
desire. So that it is not for any private respect to my self. But the motives I
desire to commend unto you, are in respect of your selves. Two things I shall
but mention.

First of all consider it is a great sin, not to give the ministers of God,
those honorable respects of observance, and obedience, as is meet to do. It
is a sin against God. And a sin against a man's self.

A sin against God, the injury and dishonor 1. ^.
that is done to any of the messengers, and ambassadors of God, reflects upon
God himself, God takes it as done to himself, it being done to his ministers
and messengers. So that in this respect, we shall be found (...) to be fighters
against God himself. And as it is a sin against God;

So it is a sin against our selves, you are herein most injurious to your
selves, for by this means you hinder the efficacy, and powerful working of
the Ministry of the word upon your own souls, there is no greater
impediment, and checking business to hinder the receiving of good from any
minister, then when a man is anticipated with base, and mean, and low conceits
of him, if men contemn their persons or their callings, and give them not the
honor in their hearts which is due to them, it is a mighty let and impediment,
of their improvement and advantage in goodness, by their ministry. So that it
is a sin against God, and a sin against our selves, but then

Do but consider, what will be the end and issue of sin, sin owes a man a
spite, and will pay 2. ^.
him home one day. God w^ll not suffer sin unpunished: Especially a sin of
this nature, that strikes, and reflects so upon himself, he has said, touch
not mine anointed, and do my prophets ^o harm, if we therefore fail in this
duty, God will not fail to meet with us for it another day. It is reported,
that Rome was destroyed to the ground, for some abuses that were offered to an
Ambassador that was sent unto it. And David we know never played any such
harsh play in all his life, as he did to the Ammonites, that despitefully used
his Ambassadors, which he sent unto them, when they shaved their herds and
cut their coats, let us take heed of abusing the messengers of God, of cutting
their coats in any kind, of cutting them short of their tithes as some do
that allow not them needful maintenance, even so much as is for necessity,
that if the ministers themselves should cut their coats according to their
cloth, they must be forced to go in part naked. Let us take heed of this, as
also give unto them, all due respects of observance, and obedience as is meet,
for if we do not do it, we sin against God, and God will not put up at our
hands the indignities we offer to those who are under his own protection, that
are his messengers, and Ambassadors, God will take it highly, and punish it
hainously.

FINIS.
BARUCH'S SORE GENTLY OPENED: GOD'S SALVE SKILFVLLY APPLIED: In two SERMONS.

BY JOHN STOUGHTON, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Immanuel College
in Cambridge, late of Aldermanburie, LONDON.

AMOS 5. 14. Seek good, and not evil, that you may live.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for John Bellamie, Henry Overton, John Rothwell, and
Ralph Smith. 1640.

(...)

(...)


